 
YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MARKET SYSTEMS 
DEVELOPMENT  IN AGRICULTURE AND 
SUPPORTING MARKETS  
 
 LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  AND CASE S TUDIES 
REPORT  
FEED THE FUTURE ADVANCING WOMEN’S 
EMPOWERMENT ACTIVITY  
July 7 , 2020  
PHOTO | DAI GLO BAL LLC   
 
This publication was made possible through support provid ed by the Bureau for Resilience and Food Security, U.S. 
Agency for International Development (USAID), under the terms of Contract No. 7200AA18A00010, Call Order No. 
7200AA19F50034 . The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessari ly reflect the views of 
USAID or the U.S. Government. 
i  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Advancing Women’s Economic Empowerment  
Advancing Women’s Economic Empowerment (AWE) Task Order 7200AA19F50034, Intended and 
Unintended Consequences of Market Systems Development Approaches to Youths’ an d Women’s 
Inclusion in Agriculture and Supporting Markets, which was funded September 30, 2019. AWE provides 
consulting services for the Bureau for Resilience and Food Security  (RFS) , Feed the Future Focused and 
Aligned Missions, an d Global Food Security Strategy Target and Aligned Missions worldwide in the areas 
of gender integration, gender -sensitive design, implementation of agricultural programming, b uilding 
gender capacity of personnel and programming, and knowledge management a nd learning.  
The AWE Activity enhances gender equality and women’s empowerment in agriculture programs by 
providing targeted technical assistance to missions, implementing par tners, Bureau for Resilience and 
Food Security, and other USAID operating units to increase women’s participation, productivity, profit, 
and benefit in agricultural systems. AWE is implemented by EnCompass LLC with ACDI/VOCA, 
MarketShare Associates, and FH I 360.  
Recommended Citation  
Cassinath, N. and M. Mercer. July 7 , 2020. Youth, Women, and Market Systems Development in Agriculture 
and Supporting Markets: Landscape Analysis  and Case Studies Report . AWE Call Order 7200AA19F50034. 
Rockville, MD: EnCompass  LLC. 
   
ii  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  CONTENTS  
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ IV 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... V 
HOW TO READ THIS REPORT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  X 
Glossary of Terms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  x 
SECTION A: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ . 1 
INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  1 
Defining Market Systems Development  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  1 
Audience  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 2 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  3 
Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  3 
Research Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  3 
Learning Questions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  3 
Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
Limitations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  6 
FINDINGS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  6 
1. Planning for Inclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  7 
2. Implementation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 14 
3. Adaptation: Who and What Drives Inclusion?  ................................ ................................ ................  28 
4. MEL: Approaches and Tools  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  31 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ .........................  36 
Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  37 
Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  43 
SECTION B: CASE STUDIES  ................................ ................................ ................  46 
CASE STUDIES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  46 
Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  47 
Limitations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  47 
Select Findings from Across the Cases  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  48 
Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  49 
ÉLAN RDC: ADVANCING WOMEN’S ROLES IN AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEMS  ..............  1 
FACILITATION INTENSITY IN YOUTH MARKET SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT IN UGANDA  ...... 1 
RISIALBANIA: INCLUSIVE PARTNER ENGAGEMENT STRATEGIES  ................................ ....................  1 
PRISMA: DEVELOPING AN EFFECTIVE BUSINESS CASE FOR INCLUSIVE PRIVATE  SECTOR 
PARTNERSHIPS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
ANNEXES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  1 
  
iii  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This report was designed, researched and written by Team Lead Natasha Cassinath and Technical 
Research Specialist Morgan Mercer of ACDI/VOCA.   
For their guidance and support in managing the ambitions of this study, the authors wish to th ank Jane 
Lowicki -Zucca, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Bureau for Resilience 
and Food Security’s ( RFS) Senior Youth Advisor and Activity Manager for this Feed the Future 
Advancing Women’s Empowerment  (AWE) Call Order; Susan Pologruto, the USAID Contracting 
Officer’s Representative (COR) for the AWE Program; Aslihan Kes, US AID RFS Gender Advisor; Krista 
Jacobs, the former USAID  COR for the AWE Program; and Kristin O ’Planick, the USAID RFS Market 
Systems Specialist.  
We acknowledge the essential guidance and support of  Jenn Williamson, AWE’s Gender in Agriculture 
Systems A dvisor; Katie Cheney, the AWE Call Order 6 Team Lead; Lyn Messner and Samantha 
Croasdaile, the former and current AWE B lanket Purchase Agreement  Project Manager;  Avery 
Ouellette, Anna Garloch, and Melissa Schweisguth, Market Systems Development Experts; N atalie 
Petrulla, Encompass and Johana Cruz, ACDI/VOCA.  
This landscape analysis and accompanyin g case studies were entirely dependent on the learning, 
reporting, and guiding documents each of the selected Activities generously provided. We are 
particularly  thankful to implementation teams who shared their failures, challenges, and hard -fought 
insigh ts so these learnings may benefit us all. These individuals shared their time while managing 
emergencies and their personal lives during the COVID -19 pandemic to  support this important theme.  
This includes Marcos Moreno  and Winnie Kalyesubula (Chemonics/ YLA); Maryam Piracha 
(Palladium/PRISMA); Julia Hakspiel (MarketShare Associates/F eed the Future  Inova); Holly Krueger 
(Canopy Lab/PRISMA and ÉLAN RDC); Lucine Le  Moal, Arnaud Galinie, and Lucie Bahati (Adam Smith 
International/ÉLAN RDC); Steve Morris (ILO/ Yapasa); Netsaleem Gebrie, Julian Nyachwo, Hem Roy, 
Justine Yikiru , and Maurits Servaas (GOAL/DYNAMIC); and Clara Garcia Parra and Besnik Ligaci 
(Helvetas/RisiAl bania). Sincere appreciation goes to the multiple market actors and service providers 
who gener ously contributed their time, experience , and insights to the case studies.  
   
iv  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATION S 
AWE  Advancing Women’s Empowerment (Activity)  
AWEF  Arab Women’s E nterprise  Fund (Activity)  
BDS Business development services  
BEAM  Building Effective and Accessible Markets  
RFS Bureau for Resilience and Food Security  
CLA Collaborating, learning, and adapting  
CN Consolidation network  
DCED  Donor Committee for En terprise Development  
DEC Development Experience Clearinghouse  
DFAT  Department of For eign Affairs and Trade (Australia)  
DFID  Department for International Development (UK)  
DFS Digital financial services  
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo  
DYNAMIC  Driving Youth -led New Agribusiness and Microenterprise in Northern Uganda  
(Activity)  
FSD Financial  Sector Deepening ( Activity )  
GESI Gender equality and social inclusion  
MEL Monitoring, evaluation, and learning  
MSD Market systems development  
MDF Market Development Facil ity (Activity)  
NGO  Nongovernmental organization  
PE Peer educator  
PEEP Punjab Enablin g Environment  Project  (Activity)  
PRISMA  Promoting Rural Incomes through Support for Markets in Agriculture  (Activity)  
PYD  Positive youth development  
RAIN  Revitalizing Agri culture Incomes and New Markets  (Activity)  
RDC Rice and Diversified Crops (Activity)  
SDC Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation  (Switzerland)  
SEEP Small Enterprise and Education Promotion Network  
SIDA  Swedish International Development Agency  (Sweden)  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
WEE Women’s economic empowerment  
WEinSPIRE  Women Empowerment in South Punjab through Investment in Rural Economy  
WINDS  Women Investment in Networking of Dairy Sector  
YLA Youth Leadership for Agricul ture (Activity)    
v  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Attention to the inclusion of youth  and women in market systems development (MSD) is gaining 
traction around the world as part of efforts  to strengthen inclusive , agriculture -led growth, food 
security, poverty reduction , and improved employment. In recent years, at least 15 agriculture -related 
MSD Activities valued at a combined half a billion U .S. dollars have targeted women and increasingly , 
youth. Although the context for this work varies greatly, establishing the busi ness case for youth’s and 
women’s inclusion has been central to these efforts. Until now, however, little has been known about 
the breadth of tactics, successes , and pitfalls of this emerging work.  
To bridge this knowledge gap and inform further research a nd practice, in 2019 -2020, the Feed the 
Future Advancing Women’s Empowerment (AWE) Program undertook a groundbreaking landscape 
analysis  and four case studies  to explore the intended and unintended consequences of MSD 
approaches to youth’s and women’s inc lusion in agriculture and supporting markets . The goal of this 
research was  to understand more about:  
• What gender - and youth -specific constraints and opportunities MSD programs in agriculture 
and supporting markets have identified  
• Whether and how  MSD appro aches have been able to address  gender and youth issues  
• What have been the impacts or outcomes of gender - and youth -targeted MSD approaches, 
including results, shortcomings, and positive and  negative unintended consequences  
Results reveal evidence that MSD  programs can: (1) meaningfully include women and youth in MSD 
through both mainstreamed and targeted approaches, (2) overcome constraints and pursue 
opportunities that foster win -win benefits for and with women, youth, the private sector , and other 
marke t actors; (3) promote at least some social norms change to close gender and age gaps within the 
scope or related to the specific objectives of the projects, including by pursuing non -traditional (adult -
male-dominated) opportunities; and (4) involve risks that programming  should anticipate and address as 
power relations and markets shift with inclusive MSD trial and error.  
While inclusion is implied as a pillar of MSD, some programs are more intentional or targeted in their 
efforts to generate benefits for youth and women. Consequently, implementers must take care to design 
programming to prevent potential negative unintende d consequences, including to avoid inadvertently 
strengthening dominant market actors in ways that further neglect marginalized groups o r put women 
and girls at increased risk of gender -based violence . Moreover, it is clear that MSD programs alone  do 
not satisfy the breadth of youth developmental needs ; however, they may be sufficient to meet pressing  
economic  ones. This has impor tant normative implications for planning youth -inclusive MSD.   
Notable gaps in MSD programming include the inadequate  focus on the intersections between youth and 
gender , and a lack of approaches specific to young women’s inclusion. Further, younger youth  cohorts 
are not well served by MSD Activities —market actors lack clear incentives to facilitate opportunities 
that resp ond to younger youth ’s developmental needs. Where implementers attempt to facilitate 
opportunities for younger youth to develop skills and assets, they tend to use higher -intensity  facilitation 
tactics to achieve this.  
Methodology. The landscape analysi s aimed to identify the universe of cases based on a set of 
criteria. The research team reviewed 324 documents from 15 agricultural and supporting MSD  
vi  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Activities. Documents were sourced directly from implementing partners and complemented with 
online resear ch. Implementing partners reviewed and validated the findings and conclusions.  
AWE further undertook four case studies  to delve deeper  into key issues and questions that arose 
during the landscape analysis. Activities were selected based on the opportunit y to explore key learning 
themes, representation of at least two youth Activities and one Feed the Future Activity, and a range of 
locations and markets, distinct gender and age challenges, and intended and unintended consequences of 
the Activity, among ot her criteria. The case studies focus on four learning themes examined through 
document review and key informant interviews with 18 impl ementing partner staff and market actors 
across the five Activities  featured . 
KEY FINDINGS : LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  
The 15 sel ected Activities represent a diverse array of approaches, influences, budgets, and geographical, 
cultural and economic contexts: four U SAID Feed the Future, three  UK Department for International 
Development (DFID), two Australian Department of Foreign Affa irs and Trade (DFAT), one other 
USAID, one Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), one Swedish International 
Development Ag ency (SIDA), one join t SIDA and DFID, one joint USAID and the Walmart Foundation, 
and one from the Mastercard Foundation.  Individual budgets for these Activities vary from $7 to $125 
million. They represent interventions in 1 7 countries with a concentratio n in Sub -Saharan Africa and 
Southeast Asia. The countries represented were 54 percent -lower -middle -income , 27 per cent low -
income , and 18 percent upper -middle -income . The full list of selected Activities for the landscape 
analysis is incl uded in Annex 1. 
AWE collected the findings from a wide variety of Activities in terms of geography, facilitation intensity, 
and inclusion intentionality ; between them, these Activities represent early and promising  learning from 
MSD interventions . The selected findings be low are organized around the Activity life cycle (planning, 
implementation, adaptation, and monitoring, evaluation, and learning  [MEL] ) to guide implementers on 
the decisions and action points to in tegrate gender and youth intentionally throughout implemen tation.  
PLANNING FOR INCLUSION  
• In reviewing initial planning and design of women and/or youth inclusion in MSD activities, the 
research team found that intentionality at inception is important to ac hieve more 
rapid outcomes for women and youth , and drives internal buy -in for women’s and 
youth’s commercial importance.  
• Less knowledge exists on the use of MSD approaches to engage youth. Generally, youth -
inclusive MSD lags behind women’s inclusion . This  is potentially because dynamics that 
underlie  women's inc lusion have been studied extensively and have evolved over a longer 
period; resources for integrating youth in MSD are largely nonexistent.  
• Conducting youth and gender assessments and analyses garne rs valuable, generic 
insights  for partners into women’s an d youth’s opportunities and constraints to access 
market opportunities. More targeted, participatory youth - and women -focused market 
research at the outset of planning supports more sensitivity amon g staff to get behind MSD 
approaches that target inclusion .  
• In terms of approaches that can be used to determine the constraints and opportunities in 
specific agriculture and supporting market systems, MSD programs ten d to start with 
opportunities in sect ors and roles where women and youth already are.  Over time, and with  
vii  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  analysis and reflection, opportunities can be explored in non -traditional (adult male -
dominated) sectors and address root causes of women’s and /or yout h’s exclusion . 
This includes support  sectors that are not typically included in MSD Activities, roles with low 
female participation, and functions in the value chain with limited representation of women and 
youth.  
• Flexibility, iteration, and innovation  are required for implementers and thei r partners to 
identify and facilitate opportunities for youth and women , because  market shift s and pivots are 
needed when tactics for inclusion in specific contexts are tried and need adjustment. This 
means starting with  a theory of change and other tradit ional planning tools , and being prepared 
to test and adjust assumptions.  
IMPLEMENTATION  
• Establishing a business case for youth’s and women’s inclusion is the most 
commonly cited tactic to develop market opportunities for women and youth; yet, 
Activities st ruggle to make the case for women and, to a greater extent, youth. However, few 
Activities reported on the scale or efficiency of business case tactics across sectors to achieve 
widespread and systemic m arket changes for women’s and youth’s inclusion.  
• Implementers constantly make  choices about the intensity of the facilitation approaches  
to employ . In a few cases  reviewed , a combination of approaches, including direct provision 
and facil itation, is used as a “hybrid approach.” The use of  high-intensity facilitative approaches 
is more common in Activities that target both youth and women, or when women are 
targeted in a sub -project.  
• While many interventions add ress key constraints, it remains challenging for Activities to 
undertake improvements at the systems level  and tackle root causes that drive the gaps 
between dominant and marginalized groups.  
STAFFING AN D ADAPTATION  
• Collaborating, learning , and adapting  (CLA) drives iteration and inclusion , not only 
in program design and implementation, but also in shifting who drives change over time. Pivots 
due to adaptive management approaches have an outsized impact o n inclusion of youth and 
women . Evidence of adaptive management was found across most programs and 
could be the catalyst for either the launch or expansion of youth’s and women’s 
inclusion .  
• While most Activities started off with the intention  of including women at the outset, if they 
could not reach women’s inclusion targets under mainstreaming approaches, they often 
developed women -specific initiatives as a response tactic . Organizational structures 
frequently  evolved over time in assigning r esponsibility for inclusion, which reflect s the need 
for increased level of effort at levels closer to market actors.  
• Implementer staff who interact with market actor partners need to use key soft 
skills to effectively make the business case —for example, k nowing how to approach 
incentives , and negotiate and articulate core concepts and principles of MSD and inclusion.  
MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND LEARNING (MEL)  
• Market actors are essential to MEL efforts in MSD programming.  Most Activities in 
this study reli ed on market actors and partners to collect and repor t data relevant to Activity 
indicators and results. Activities that allowed market actors to own data  
viii  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  management and decision -making processes accelerated buy-in and win -win 
outcomes.  
• In addition to adaptive management approaches, ongoing monitoring and specialized 
learning studies  conducted throughout implementation allowed Activities to observe system 
shifts, quickly perceive trends associated with known risks, and tweak approaches to  deliver 
better results. Activities that employed ongoing monitoring a nd learning tactics were often 
aware of the benefits, indicating that they gave “ much-needed clarity as to the efficacy and impact 
of the intervention .”  
KEY FINDINGS: CASE STUDIES  
Key findings below were common to some or all the Activities examined in t he following case studies: 
(1) ÉLAN RDC: Advancing Women's Roles in Agricultural Market Systems, (2) Youth Leadership for 
Agriculture ( YLA) and Driving Youth -led New Agribusiness and Mic roenterprise in Northern Uganda 
(DYNAMIC ): Facilitation Intensity in Y outh MSD in Uganda; (3) RisiAlbania: Inclusive Partner 
Engagement Strategies; and (4) Promoting Rural Incomes through Support for Markets in Agriculture 
(PRISMA ): Developing an Effective  Business Case for Inclusive Private Sector Partnerships.  
Approaching the partnership as a business venture is effective for implementing partners 
working with private -sector partners to generate win -win opportunities with women and 
youth.  The private sector is unlikely to engage in inclusion interventions or activities out side of the 
scope of their business activities at the outset of the relationship, but may look to local civil society 
organizations to fill gaps in the sector that facili tate inclusion.  
MSD programs are not comprehensive women’s empowerment and youth deve lopment 
programs. Donor s’ influence on program design and expectations of desired outcomes 
beyond women and/or youth market participation targets must be reconciled with MSD 
approaches . Some components prescribed in donor solicitations (sexual and reproduc tive health, 
vocational skills, life skills, formal education) may not respond to preexisting or potential services in each 
market and, therefore, encourage higher levels  of facilitation to comply with contractual obligations. 
However, t his higher -intensi ty facilitation  could  be needed to trigger women ’s, youth ’s, and businesses ’ 
uptake of market opportunities and can be tapered off over time. More study on the combinatio ns of 
tactics is needed.  
Selecting the right sectors, particularly in supporting mark ets, to achieve outcomes for 
women and male and female youth is highly important during Activity design . This often 
goes beyond looking at where  women and  male and female  youth currently participate , and requires 
assessing end markets and value chain upgra des that can bring about specific opportunities for youth.  
Consistent and strategic use of data is needed to prove and improve the business case for 
upgrading youth’s and women’s roles in market systems , and facilitate improvements in 
program performance a nd impact.  
Monitoring intervention outcomes and sharing results with private sector and other 
partners allows them to see the benefits in concrete , quantitativ e terms . This often solidifies 
partners’ belief in the intervention and ultimately, builds their accountability for inclusion results.  
Internal capacity development and staff ownership are critical for operationalizing 
successful gender strategies and appr oaches . Staff buy -in and ownership need to happen before 
partners can be expected to buy into inc lusion interventions.   
ix  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Youth are willing and eager to work in the agriculture s ector , including off-farm, market -led 
roles as agents or salaried employees , and as on -farm produ cers and suppliers . For off -farm work, 
Activities focus interventions around d iscounting inputs, linking youth to markets, and incentivizing off -
farm market -driven skills development and opportunities . For youth  engaged in production (which offers 
significant opportunities to absorb large numbers of young people) , Activities attempt to align 
opportunities with yo uth preferences, including finding the right incentives and expanding access to 
training, tools  and techn ology, and linkages to markets to make opportunities profitable.  
KEY RECOMMENDAT IONS  
1. Donors and implementing partners should dedicate resources to better understanding the 
constraints a nd barriers specific to young women and men in MSD in agriculture and supporting 
markets, and the ways in which MSD and broader youth development programming are 
combined to achieve young people’s market inclusion at scale. This has important normative 
implications for both donors and implementing partners. Achieving the impacts and benefits of 
MSD approaches with young people at scale m ay, at times , require high -intensity facilitation to 
support youth development objectives synergistic to  those of  the achi evement of MSD , and that 
need to be planned for and evaluated.      
2. Donors should develop guidance to support implementing partners’ d evelopment of tools for 
planning, measurement, and reporting of youth’s (the most needed) and women’s benefits, risks, 
and challenges in MSD.  
3. Implementers of MSD interventions  should either recruit staff with skills for women’s and 
youth’s inclusion in ma rkets or train staff early on. When staff have the responsibility and 
capacity to design and “sell” inclusive intervention s, the Activity develops effective, sustainable 
partnerships that can equitably benefit women and men.  
4. Donors should develop a minimum  requirement of formative analyses for women’s and youth’s 
inclusion, and expect Activities to use adaptive management app roaches to deepen women’s and 
youth’s inclusion on an iterative basis over a long period of time. Amid dynamic markets, 
monitoring is essential to confirm that the business case holds true, determine how well 
expected results are realized, gauge potential sustainability, and adapt strategies and tactics to 
optimize results and sustainability.  
5. Implementing partners should aim to use MSD n ot only as a means to facilitate win -win 
opportunities involving women and youth in traditional sectors and roles, but al so to pursue 
those in non -traditional sectors and roles , as well to leverage their Activity as a means for 
transformative norms change.  
6. Implementing partners need to ensure risks are anticipated and planned for. This includes risk 
identification in both fo rmative research and ongoing monitoring, and risk mitiga tion planning 
that is well  articulated and integrated into results chains, intervention plans, and other planning 
documents. Specialized learning studies and complexity -aware MEL methods can help Acti vities 
harvest unintended consequences (those not origin ally anticipated and planned for).  
 
    
x  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  HOW TO READ THIS REPORT  
Although it can be read from top to bottom, this landscape analysis report not es that certain themes 
reemerge throughout. These icons a re used to allow the reader to quickly identify other areas where a 
key theme has implications:  
    
Leadership and staffing 
concerns contributing 
to a culture or capacity 
for inclusion  Adaptive management 
or CLA catalyzing 
improvements or 
learning to ward 
inclusion  Varying levels of 
intensity allowing 
implementers flexibility 
for inclusion  More analysis available 
on women’s than on 
youth’s inclusion (male 
or female)   
GLOSSARY OF TERMS  
This landscape analysis looks at Activities across agriculture and  supporting markets, funded by a range 
of donors that use different naming conventions. The authors selected terms to maintain consistency, 
and promote clarity and ease of reading thro ughout the report. The following terms  are used , many of 
which were sour ced from the Beam Exchange  glossary:  
Activity:  An Activity carries out an intervention, or set of interventions, typic ally through a contract, 
grant, or agreement with a donor.  
Facilitation:  Implementing partners’ attempt to work through local actors to stimulate more 
sustainable change, minimizing an Activity’s direct role. Activities employ facilitation with varied leve ls of 
intensity, ranging from low (no or minimum subsidy  and low levels of direction) to high (heavy subsidies 
and ample direction).  
Gender Mainstreaming:  A strategy to achieve the goal of women’s equality by ensuring that women’s 
perspectives are central  to all activities throughout the project cycle.  
Note on use of terms women and gender  in this report: While the original intention was to address gender and 
youth intersectionally, the activities  more often  reviewed group participants as “women and/or youth”. Partners 
use the terms “gender ” and “gender mainstreaming ”, yet mo st Activities refer only to women in relation to 
implementation and targets, without reference to age and gender in terms of strategy an d analysis .  
Inclusive  MSD : Market systems development approaches that engage and benefit a range of actors , 
including t he poor, women, girls, boys, men, ethnic minorities, and/or other marginalized groups who 
are often excluded —or even exploited —by tradit ional market systems.   
Non-Traditional:  Used to describe (1) roles underrepresented by women in traditional sectors 
and/or the household,  based on the intervention, and  (2) any role in a sector  underrepresented by 
women. The U.S. Department of Labor defines a non -traditional sector as  that where  25 percent  or less 
of those employed across the field are women.   
 
xi  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Supporting ma rkets:  Include a broad range of financial and nonfinancial products and s ervices that 
provide viable sources of assistance to value chain actors. These include financial services (e.g. lending),  
cross -cutting services (e.g. business development services), and sector -specific services (e.g. veterinary 
services). While supporting  markets are important for value chain growth and competitiveness, they are 
not always a component of a value chain project, but rather  can be  sectors in need of strengthening in 
their own right .  For example, an Activity in Pakistan targeting the livestoc k value chain may choose to 
focus much of its efforts on creating a competitive veterinary industry that is responsive to the needs of 
small-scale female livestock producers.  
Targeted : Activities that intentionally include youth and/or women in isolation from another group, or 
as a standalone sub -project for reasons that include demographics, political imperative (e.g., concern for 
increasing rates of youth unemployment), and/or the pr esence of disproportionate barriers in the 
agriculture market system.  
Women:  Females of child -bearing age and older. Age is not specified by implementing partners, but 
references to pregnancy and maternity are found.  
Youth:  Young women and men within an ag e range defined by the Activity, country, or donor. The age 
range can extend from 10 to 35 years of age.   
1  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  SECTION A: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  
INTRODUCTION  
DEFINING MARKET SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT  
The market systems development (MSD)  approach involves targeting the ro ot causes of poor 
market system performance to enable market actors to achieve inclusive growth. The MSD approach to 
strengthening agriculture and supporting markets is becoming a new standard means to improve food 
securi ty and address unemployment and pov erty. Using this approach, implementation partners do 
not intervene directly in the market system , but prioritize working through market actors . MSD 
Activities seek to achieve high -level changes by fostering more competit ive, inclusive, and resilient 
marke t systems .1 Within these three broad areas, Activities define more specific targets and goals, 
tailored to donor priorities and the implementation context. Local actor s’ ownership is key to systems 
change using this appr oach.  
The MSD theory of change is : 
If the poor depend on markets as both consumers and producers, then  strengthening 
markets —especially the agriculture sector —will help secure higher incomes and access to goods 
and services, and ultimately , provide a susta inable pathway out of poverty.  
To achieve this, an implementing partner incentivizes market actors of all types (private, public, 
nongovernmental organizations [ NGOs ], and community -based organizations) to develop a commercial 
interest in a market -strengt hening change or initiative.  This pr ocess is called market  facilitation2—a 
key feature of MSD programming.  
 
1 Campbell.  2014. USAID’s Framework for Inclusive Market Systems Develo pment  
2 For more on facilitation, see https://www.marketlinks.org/good -practice -center/value -chain -wiki/facilitation  and 
https://beamexchange.org/guidance/vision/facilitation -role/.  
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 1: A Spectrum of Market Facilitation Tactics  
  
Working through local actors to stimulate more sustainable change  minimizes  an implementer's direct 
role over time. Activities employ facilitation with var ying levels of intensity, ranging from low (no or 
minimum subsidy, low levels of Activity direction /oversight , etc.) to high (heavy subsidies and pr oject 
direction). Facilitation involves creating a busines s case for investment , and engaging market actors in co -
creating strategies and interventions that align with both the Activity ’s and the market actor’s objectives. 
The result of this collaboration is called  a win-win opportunity.  
Inclusive  MSD  intention ally considers  marginalized populations , such as youth, women, ethnic 
minorities, people with differing  abilities, and other groups. Individual Activities may have objectives (or 
intended consequences)  for inclusion that are shaped by donor expe ctations, solicitation objectives, 
and the intervention context (e.g., sectors, market actors’ relevant knowledge and percepti ons, current 
participation and results among marginalized populations, etc.) as well as implementers’  institutional 
policies for f ostering i nclusion. Consequently , implementers must take care to design programming in a 
way that prevents potential negative unintended consequences  – for example, strengthening dominant 
market actors in ways that further neglect marginalized groups or p ut women at  increased risk of 
gender -based violence.  
This landscape analysis report and accompanying case studies and visualizations seek to improve 
understanding of how the promise of MSD has been delivered to date for youth and women in the 
agriculture sector and supporting markets in various geographical and economic contexts, and on behalf 
of implementers with different theories of change.  
AUDIENCE  
The report’s primary intended audiences are implementers and donors of MSD projects, and all 
implementer s of youth ’s or women’s economic empowerment programmi ng in the agriculture sector 
and/or supporting markets.  
 
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
BACKGROUND  
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Bureau for Resilience and Food 
Security ( RFS) engage d the Feed the Future Advancing Women’s Emp owerment (AWE) Program to 
conduct a landscape analysis of MSD Activities to examine the degree to which Activities have taken age 
and sex into account separately or through integrated approaches. The pu rpose of th is research is to 
increase knowledge on the  strategies MSD Activities have employed to intentionally target female and 
male youth and women in agriculture and supporting markets, either within a targeted Activity or 
through mainstreaming efforts . There is no known compilation and analysis of inform ation on the 
prevalence and nature of emerging youth - and women -targeted MSD within existing literature on MSD, 
and thus this work begins to bridge that gap. Whereas the landscape analysis meant to capt ure the 
universe of Activities implementing inclusive MSD, case studies were further undertaken on a number of 
the Activities identified to delve deeper into the modes of age - and gender -sensitive market facilitation, 
factors that influence them, and relat ed outcomes  (see Section B ), and to develop suggestions for further 
research ( see Annex 3) and programming recommendations to improve inclusive MSD approaches ( see    
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Recommendations ).  
RESEARCH DESIGN  
The AWE team applied a "market systems lens" to the landscape analysis , which means  analyzing where 
Activities engaged key market actors (NGOs, the public and private sectors, male and female youth, and 
women and m en) and where  market actors facilitat ed or hinder ed market inclusion of women and youth 
in agriculture and supporting markets . This entailed determining where incentives were aligned  between 
women and youth participants and market actors , catego rizing diff erent approaches relative to market 
actors, and detailing achievements and challenges. The landscape analysis focused on wome n and youth 
(males and females of different ages, ranging from 10  to 35) as distinct populations in agriculture -focused 
MSD Activit ies.  
LEARNING QUESTIONS  
The specific learning questions are:  
KEY QUESTION  SUB -QUESTIONS  
1. What opportunities and 
constraints have MSD 
programs identified for 
women and/or youth in 
agriculture and supporting 
markets?  
 a) What tools and approaches were used t o determine the constraints and 
opportunities that exist in specific agriculture and suppor ting market 
systems, and in particular, for youth and women within these systems?  
b) What collaborating, learning, and adapting (CLA) approaches (e.g., 
adaptive manage ment) or other mechanisms were used to determine 
constraints and opportunities based on pro ject learning?  
c) What are the constraints and opportunities for youth and/or women 
within market systems?  
d) When did MSD programs identify women - and youth -specific 
opportunities and constraints over the life of the project, and how did 
that affect learning and application?   
2. In which ways have MSD 
program approaches 
attempted to facilitate 
win-win market 
opportunities with a focus 
on women and/or youth?  a) What MSD appro aches did programs implement to address 
opportunities and constraints to youth’s and women’s market inclusion, 
and why (where information exists)?  
b) What limitations were documented in MSD approaches to address 
youth’s and women’s needs alongs ide those of t he private sector and 
other stakeholders?  
3. What were the impacts or 
outcomes of MSD 
approaches that focus on 
women and youth (e.g., 
achievements, 
shortcomings, and positive 
and negative unintended 
consequences)?  a) How do MSD programs measure imp act and out comes related to youth 
and women?  
b) To what e xtent are non -financial outcomes and impact on women and 
youth measured?  
c) What examples of MSD approaches appear to be effective or ineffective 
at addressing specific youth’s and/or women’s issues?  
d) Which MSD app roaches with youth and/or women demonstrated  
potential to reach scale and sustainability (as defined within the report)?  
e) What positive, negative, or other trends did MSD programs report in 
measuring impact and outcomes related to youth and/or w omen?  
f) What  examples of unintended (positive or negative) outcomes and 
impacts on women and/or youth did MSD programs capture?   
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  METH ODOLOGY  
ACTIVITY SELECTION  
In December 2019, the AWE team harvested an initial pool of 32 potential Activities for the land scape 
analysis that were sourced through:  
• The Building Effective and Accessible Markets (BEAM) Exchange’s program index and evidence  
map 
• Expert -led recommendations (including direct email outreach to several well -connected 
leaders in the market systems sp ace) 
• Activi ties harvested by an AWE research study focused on women’s roles in agriculture 
beyond production  
• Direct consultation with  USAID youth, gender, and market systems specialists via a jointly 
populated spreadsheet, and an in -person Activity harvest ing and pri oritization workshop  
The AWE team and USAID staff jointly curated the selected 15 Activities out of the initial pool based on 
the following criteria:  
• Relevance to learning questions  
• Availability of s ufficient information to determine whether the approac h aims to benefit and/ or 
empowers women and youth  
• Use of diverse approaches (direct or indirect) to engage youth and women  
• Currently implemented or has ended within the past 10 years  
• Representation of geographic diversity  
The 15 selected Activit ies represe nt a diverse array of approaches, influences, budgets, and geographical, 
cultural , and economic contexts: four USAID Feed the Future, one other USAID, three UK Department 
for International Development (DFID), two Australian Department of Foreign  Affairs an d Trade (DFAT), 
one Sw iss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), one Swedish International Development 
Agency (SIDA), one join t SIDA and DFID, one joint USAID and the Walmart Foundation, and one from 
the Mastercard Foundation . The total b udget of th is collection of Activities is half a billion dollars; 
individual budgets vary from $7 to $125 million. They represent interventions in 1 7 countries with a 
concentration in Sub -Saharan Africa and South east Asia. The countries  represented were 54 percent 
lower-middle -income, 27 percent low -income, and 18 percent upper -middle -income. The full list of 
selected Activities for the landscape analysis is included in Annex 1: Project List .   
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 2: Landscape Analysis Activity Selection  
 
DATA COLLECTION  
Between December 2019 and January 2020, the AWE team contacted implementing partners and 
carried out an online search to source documents  related to the 15 Activities selected . The scan 
includ ed the BEAM Exchange, the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development (DCED), the USAID 
Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC), the Agrilinks, Marketlinks, and Small Enterprise and 
Educatio n Promotion Network (SEEP) websites, and Activit ies’ and impleme nting partners’ websites. 
Selected documents reviewed are found in Annex 2. 
DOCUMENT REVIEW  
The AWE team reviewed and categorized 324 documents, using an Excel -based data an alysis proc ess of 
extracting and tagging document content corresponding to the learning questions. The team  updated 
and modified the Excel spreadsheet as information was uncovered to highlight unexpected findings. 
Tagged content was analyzed across and wit hin Activit ies to determine the prevalence of a phenomenon 
and attribute the outcomes of actions to an Activ ity, respectively. Analysis of the data in the spreadsheet 
formed the basis of the findings and conclusions.  
 
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Following the tagging phase, the team transcribed  secondary data into a research collection sheet and 
reviewed data to bring forth trends tha t cut across projects and note any  outlier activity. The research 
team discussed these trends, then extracted illustrative examples. The research te am shared p reliminary 
trends with the USAID Activity Manager during an initial finding debrief in January 2020, and gauged 
interest in specific areas for deeper analysis. Finally, findings (based on the facts and trends collected in 
response to learning questions),  conclusions (summation of the findings ), and recommendations (course 
of action in line with find ings and conclusions) were developed.  
LIMITATIONS  
The most significant limitations to the study were: 
• Availability of required documentation during the researc h period; the existence of data 
relating to the learning questions; and based solely on documenta tion, the ability to determine 
the extent to which specific groups benefitted from a given intervention, due to poor 
disaggregation of data by age a nd/or sex  
• Lack of opportunity to make quantitative comparisons because of differing Activity timelines, 
uneven reporting formats, and non -standardized monitoring and evaluation systems  
• Lack of opportunity to deeply analyze trends across MSD tactics becaus e there was  often a 
lack of detail  about why Activities chose to employ tactics, how they implemented those  
tactics, and how successful the tactics were at achieving outcomes related to women and 
youth . while the AWE research team highlighted reported MS D tactics u sed to engage youth 
and women in this analysis, this is not a comprehensive inventory  
• Difficulty in determining how an MSD approach was specifically related to or shaped by 
inclusion goals , because Activities span diverse contexts and donors wit h differing  mandates 
for MSD and inclusion  
• Difficulty in generalizing or capturing trends because of small sample size and implementation 
time periods. Activity  start dates span an 8 -year period, during w hich there have been many 
changes in donor mandates for MSD and  inclusion, and in the context affecting inclusion and 
MSD uptake and outcomes  
FINDINGS  
The landscape  analysis  report findings are organized in four sections related to project cycle phases: 
planning, implementation, adaptation, and monitoring,  evaluation , and learning  (MEL) . While researching 
the learning questions, available data overwhelmingly clustered around these themes , and further sub -
grouped around programs that mainstreamed gender or those that target women and youth specifically. 
Each finding be low includes a brief description, followed by illustrative and explanatory examples. 
Although t hese examples do not represent the entirety of the data reviewed to support findings , they 
were se lected as the most illustrative and representative i n relation to each finding .  
1. PLANNING FOR INCLUSION  
This section reports on the type and quality of initial planning methodologies and analyses used to 
inform design to include women and/or youth in MSD Activities. The findings in this section 
demonstra te that int entionality at the outset  is important —it leads to more rapid outcomes for women 
and youth , and drives internal buy -in that women and youth are of commercial importance .  
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  
 Not all Activities commence with an implementer - or donor -led vision 
and/or rational e for youth ’s and women’s inclusion in MSD.  
While a few Activities, such as Market 
Development Facility ( MDF) and RisiAlbania, 
had a strong vision and rationale for inclusion 
of youth and/or women in MSD from the start , 
this was not the nor m. Most art iculated a 
strategy in the implementation stage, following 
significant pivots, or not at all. Where 
Activities lacked a strong, pervasive vision, the 
research team identified that they also lacked a 
corresponding understanding of the confluence 
of MSD and women and/or youth. Activity 
reports indicated that this gap in understanding 
leaves staff adrift and, ultimately,  has an impact 
on the depth of inclusion. In a few cases, it was 
reported that commercially  oriented staff did 
not understand why a n MSD appro ach is used 
to improve incomes, access to opportunity, 
and agency of youth and women, nor did they 
necessarily vie w the approach as appropriate 
for the purpose of youth development. One  
Activity stated that the deeply entrenched perception of wo men’s inclu sion as being socially, not 
commercially, driven gave these staff the license to do the bare minimum.  
This situati on is very different from that of an Activity that has clearly articulated and woven their vision 
through a variety of documents, s uch as a ge nder or youth assessment or analysis, a guiding strategy, or 
a discrete monitoring and evaluation framework. For e xample, in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, ÉLAN RDC I.2’s  Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) strategy is referenced across 
program documents and states how the program will be able to reach women’s advancement beyond 
increased income. It sta tes that “a n important aspect of facilitating systemic change is shifting discriminatory 
social norms to create a more enabling env ironment fo r women’s economic empowerment. While this does not 
form part of the programme’s mandate, its importance is clear;  all impact level indicators require behavioral  or 
social norm change […] .” DFID, ÉLAN RDC’s donor, similarly places emphasis on so cial norms change as  
a key driver of women’s economic empowerment  (WEE) . 
In Indonesia,  Promoting Rural Incomes through Support for Markets in Agriculture  
(PRISMA)  found that before they could build the capacity of staff to understand and articulate the 
importance of women’s inclusion to their work, they needed to demystify women’s inclusion . Confusion 
about what women’s inclusion looks like reemerged at each stage of the project life  cycle. They kept asking 
themselves: What does it mean to be doing WEE and why does it  matter?   
The data revealed that gender mainstreaming Activities , such as  ÉLAN  RDC and PRISMA , were more 
likely to have developed a comprehensive rationale for including women, and even youth, in market 
systems  at the outset . In contrast, youth - and women -targeted programs did not start off with a  vision 
for using an MSD approach  to call out, for example, that literacy, reproductive health, and livelihood 
skills gains require facilitation, and that these gains are critical to their theory of chan ge.  
Exhibit 3: The intersection of youth development, 
women’s economic empowerment, and MSD   
9  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  One Ac tivity articulated that they found there was a lack of instruments to targe t youth, in particular 
young women. They reported that had they performed a better initial gender analysis and female youth 
targeting, they felt they would have had a gre ater impact  on young rural women.  
 Results chains are critical for MSD activity planning, but they often fail to 
mention youth’s and/or women’s constraints and opportunities.  
Most of the reviewed MSD interventions were designed based on a value chain, cau sal logic, or results 
chain analysi s, but few implementing partners articulated youth’s or women’s constraints and 
opportunities within these planning tools. While gender responsiveness was frequently cited as an 
approach to plan for inclusion, it was not clear from the results chains wheth er it was employed. In 
many instances, results chains included general statements about “women and men.” In the case of 
youth -specific Activities, intersectionality with gender and age -range bracket (younger vs. older you th) 
was rar ely addressed in results  chains; however, anecdotal examples based on CLA or MEL  learning  
were available. One exception to this was Feed the Future Inova ’s results chain, which included a 
development impact section that looked at multiple indica tors of imp ortance to women’s devel opment, 
such as increased participation or potential for participation, contribution to improved food security, 
and opportunities for backward  (or upstream)  linkages3 and job creation.  
ÉLAN RDC ’s results chain includes W EE outcomes , but only where there is also a purposeful WEE 
objective. They also noted, pragmatically, that the rapid Activity planning and partnership pilot phases 
hampered the effective integration of gender -responsive outcomes in results chains.4 
 Youth and gender assessments and analys es, when performed, provide 
valuable insights into women’s and youth’s opportunities and 
constraints.  
The landscape analysis established that w hen performed, formative research yielded the most 
comprehensive identification of women’s and youth’s constraint s and opportunities.  
For gender mainstreaming or women -only Activities, the landscape analysis found that formative 
research such as gender analyses, strategies, gender -specific sector analyses, rapid gender assessments, 
and WEE asse ssments  had been condu cted. In these documents , constraints were more plentiful and 
specific than opportunities. Risks specific to women —gender -based violence, displacement from value 
chains, health and safety, and unpaid care/domestic work —were cited, but  the extent to which 
interventions attempted to address these risks was unclear. In all cases, gender and youth formative 
analysis was rarely translated into inclusion elements in  or annexed to  results chains.  
RisiAlbania  is notable among the yo uth-targete d Activities , because  they performed comprehensive 
formative research that married youth and sectoral analyses during the planning phases. Formal lessons 
learned from Revitalizing Agriculture and Incomes in New Markets  (RAIN)  stressed the 
 
3 Backward linkages encompass subcontracting, supplier contracts, input service collaborations and  hence can 
create employment and offer potential for enhanci ng domestic production capacity.  
4 As described on page 16 in the DCED’s 2017 Synthesis Docum ent titled “How to Integrate Gender and 
Women’s Economic Empowerment into Private Sector Development Pr ogrammes.”   
 
10  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  import ance of usi ng the gathered analysis data: “Gender analysis findings should be more explicitly included in 
results chains […]. There was a great deal of useful information that did not get incorporated.”  
Exhibit 4 and Exhibit 5 present inventories of the specific youth’s and women’s constraints and 
opportunities in the market system referred to in the landscape analysis document  review . The following 
constraints are common to both youth and women:  
• Poor access to education, land, finance, and transport  
• Poor access to mechanized equipment  
• Poor access to entrepreneurship training, business development, and support services  
• Poor skills that relegate them to production and processin g roles  
• Poor networks and market linkages  
• Risk of gender -based violence and harassment (women and girls were the only groups 
specified)  
Overall, gender mainstreaming Activities seemed to have  performed deeper analysis during the pl anning 
stage. For youth Activities in particular, the range of formative research tools was more limited and 
tended to offer generic guidance on youth engagement, instead of context -specific youth considerations. 
Several Activities developed bespoke tools and guidance to ensure intervention s are planned in an 
inclusive manner. A list of these tools and links are found in Annex 2. 
Exhibit 4: Inventory of commonly identified women’s constraint s and oppor tunities5 
WOMEN'S OPPORTUNITIES  WOMEN'S CONSTRAINTS  
Workplace improvement:  
• Improved health and safety  
• Childcare provision  
• Labor rights enforced  
• Schedule and location flexibility  
• Upward mobility and recognition  
Finance:  
• Access to mobile money  for decisi on making and 
control  
• Access to information on their own account  
• Increased men's participation in savings groups to 
improve household saving capac ity 
As consumers:  
• Improved marketing to reach women  
• Access to goods that serve women  
At the first line of agr iculture:  
• Higher awareness of farm needs due to women’s 
roles in farming, harvesting, and processing  Domestic role and social norms:  
• Diversion of resources from business to 
household   
• Limitations due to childcare  
• Educational and repr oductive barriers  
• Gendered division of labor  
• Responsibility for time -intensive tasks  
• Exposure to gender -based violence/harassment  
Employment:  
• Bias/social barriers in certain occupations  
• Fewer chances for participation and decision 
making  
• Lower wages compared to men  
• Poorly recognized and rewarded labor  
• Little access to capacity building and other 
growt h opportuni ties 
• Less powerful social networks  
Legal/Social norms:  
• Limited human rights protection  
 
5 This table represents aggregate constraints a nd opportunities from all reviewed Activities. It is important to note 
that on the whole, the re was little duplication besides generic points related to lack of transport, land, and access 
to jobs  and finance. This indicates that with a few exceptions, the  assessments performed at the outset were often 
broad and did not generate insights specific enough to inform alternative approaches.   
11  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  WOMEN'S OPPORTUNITIES  WOMEN'S CONSTRAINTS  
Impact on household well -being:  
• As women’s co ntributions to household food 
supply and finances increase, they tend to have 
more influence in ho usehold dec ision making  • Limited access to land/land ownership  
• Major decisions m ade by men  
Transport:  
• Restrictions due to cultural norms (e.g., 
husband’s permission)  
• Reliance on int ermediaries  for access to the 
market (husbands, younger siblings, or children 
and adolescents)  
Control of financial resources 
(household/personal):  
• Limited access to formal and informal financial 
products and services  
• Inability to access or make business d ecisions 
regarding mechanized equipment  
Exhibit 5: Inventory of commonly identified youth constraints and opportunities  
YOUTH’S OPPORTUNITIES  YOUTH’S CONSTRAINTS  
Sectors:  
• Information and communication technology 
services  
• Agricult ure sub-sectors with high youth 
employment or enterprise potential, such as agro -
processing  
• Agriculture s ub-sectors where youth output can 
be higher than that of adults (e.g. rice, sunflower 
seeds)  
Education :  
• Managerial and technical positions that are s carce , 
but high in demand (e.g., food technologists or 
quality controllers)  
Needs :  
• Youth gain comfort with committed buyer for 
their products  
Assumption :  
Young entrepreneurs are attractive employees 
because they are more inclined to take risks in 
respons e to emergi ng market demand, and can access 
market information through new communication 
technologie s  Education : 
• Poor employment outcome of technical training 
programs in agriculture and related fields (poor 
educational quality)  
Employment/Self -employment : 
• Poor job application outcomes due to 
competition with adults (especially adult 
women)  
• Occupational gender segregation (e.g., women 
in caretaking and processing roles)  
• Occupational age segregation (e.g. , relegated to 
processing and production)  
• Limited acc ess to land , finance, transport, 
mechanized equipment, training , and business 
development services  (BDS)  
• Poor networks and market linkages  
Legal/Social norms:  
• Lack of information on employees’ rights 
(increased likelihood of accepting unfavorable 
working a rrangements  and low wages)  
• Competing opportunities  
• “Fast money”  
• Rural -urban migration  
Health : 
• Availability of sexual and reproductive health 
information, products and services, including 
gender -based violence and harassment  
 
   
12  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  
 Initially, most Activitie s identif ied target sectors based on where youth and 
women were already found in high concentration. This change d with 
increased reflection and experience to involve non -traditional sectors and 
leadership roles, including within su pport sectors not typical ly included  in 
MSD Activities.  
While a few Activities started off looking for non -traditional roles for women, most identified 
opportunities that could benefit women and youth by starting with sectors and roles where women and 
youth were already present in  large conc entration. There are numerous examples of Activities that 
pivoted from this starting point. For example, during the implementation phase, one Activity realized 
that focusing on women in traditional sub -sectors only reinf orced the status quo and “further em bedded 
women into their current roles .” They later established that they should give greater attention to 
moving women into new functions within the value chain and roles with low female participation, 
particularly in no n-traditional jobs (which  can be in traditional sectors).   
Feed the Future’s Youth Leadership for Agriculture Activity (YLA)  identified an opportunity 
to incentivize an NGO to train young women as tractor operators in areas where there was a driver 
deficit. The contracting farms recognized the young women’s capacity as  generally  reliable and careful 
drivers  who were attentive t o maintenance. They were keen on retaining female drivers in the future. 
This represents a transformational shift in the perception of young women’s role an d capacity in rural 
Uganda.   
MDF recognize d that the choice of sector —traditional vs. non -traditiona l—influence d the Activity’s 
capacity to actively promote women’s equality  and/or reach scale.  In Exhibit 6 below, MDF 
demonstrated their learn ing with respect to the sec tors that represent the most substantial depth of 
impact at scale; they are in men - and jointly -led sectors (non -traditional sectors).  
 
13  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 6: The MDF WEE continuum  
 
Source:  MDF. 2018. “ Beyond Income  – A Critical Analysis of Agency Measurement in Economic Programming ” 
There are also Activities that identif ied supporting markets not directly linked to target goods/value 
chains to overcome gender  and youth constraints to participation in econ omic activi ties. RisiAlba nia 
established that young women did not have equal access to employment because of unpaid childcare 
responsibilities. They are developing  a pilot intervention to promote sustainable and affordable models 
of childcare services to i mprove empl oyment opportu nities for women through a public -private 
partnership model.  
 Flexibility, iteration, and innovation are required to identify and develop 
opportunities within market systems; however, to include youth and women 
at the outset, som e elements of traditional development planning are critical.  
The approach to planning an  inclusive MSD intervention can take a number of different forms. To bridge 
the gap between women, youth, and MSD planning approaches, some Activities blended planning  tools, 
then relied on CLA to course correct when new information became available, parti cularly related to 
new market opportunities and the behavior and incentivization of market actors. When Activities 
blend ed these tools at the initial stage  (see Exhibit 7), they were more likely to weave their inclusion 
strategy through the business case, MEL approach, CLA, learning agendas, and/or other planned means 
of reflection. Some Activities put more  stock in  learning gain ed through experience , noting that  
 
14  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  exposure, trust, and time could bring forth important learning that an  extensive, expensive, rapidly 
outdated gender and youth assessments  could not . 
MSD results chains, embedded within theories of change, depend on CLA for 
proving  and refining, but gender and youth strategies are not necessarily as 
readily revised. They are based on gender and youth assessmen t and analysis, 
which may or may not include market actor s’ and other stakeholder s’ 
perceptions , or involve the ri sks, constr aints, and opportunities that should be 
represented in the results chain.  
PRISMA  used information on men and women to make the bus iness case to 
companies for the need for a gendered marketing strategy.  For example, they 
suggested marketing stra tegies to p artners informed by gender analysis to resolve 
challenges in marketing products stemming from gender -related constraints. 
They deve loped an evidence -based approach to gather data on women’s roles 
and decision making, then strengthened the feedba ck loop fro m baseline and 
impact assessments to prove and improve the business case to partners to 
include women.  
An innovative outlier, YLA , took a “design in reverse” strategy, where they 
worked with market actors to co-create interventions by identifyin g potential  
pain points in the engagement of youth. They then co -design ed value-add 
propositions to allow partners  to benefit from YLA support to maximize profit 
and achieve sustained growth. Reportedly, this approach eliminated the need to 
chase funding t o comply wi th YLA indicators —a challenge that could result in 
excessive direct delivery (see Case Study 2). Instead, YLA aligned market actor 
business performance indicators to meet contractual deliverables.  
2. IMPLEMENT ATION  
This section reviews MSD strategies and tactics used to engage market actors to include youth and /or 
women, and the degree to which this facilitated change related to inclusion in MSD programming.  
  
Exhibit 7: 
Integr ation of 
planning resources  
 
15  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  
 Activities use d a vast array of MSD ta ctics to en gage and benefit women 
and youth in agricultural market systems, including intervening in critical 
supporting markets that either directly or indirectly influence agricultural 
markets.  
The range of MSD tactics used to include women 
and youth  in agricul tural market systems and 
supporting markets make for a diverse landscape. 
While there were two standout MSD tactics 
commonly cited across Activities (discussed 
more in Exhibit 9: and Finding 8: ), the remaining 
MSD tactics Activities used responded to 
context - and sector -specific dynamics. MSD 
tactics for women and youth arose most strongly 
in agriculture and eight supporting markets,  
including entrepreneurship support services,  
input and equipment supply, extension and 
advisory services, finance, childcare services, 
media and communications, labor market 
information services, and technical and vocational 
training.  
Activities recogniz ed the necessity of working in a variety of s upporting m arkets to improve women’s 
and youth’s participation and benefit in agriculture. This includes working in supporting markets that 
directly  link to a range of agricultural commodities and sectors (e.g ., finance, entrepreneurship support 
services, extension a nd advisory services, and input and equipment supply) , as well as those  that indirectly 
influence and affect women’s and youth’s engagement in agricultural systems (e.g ., childcare services, 
labor mar ket information systems, media and communicat ions, and t echnical and vocational training)  
(see Exhibit 8). While not a supporting market per se, about ha lf of the Activities also reported 
interventions designed to facilitate changes in the broader enabling env ironment gi ven the significant 
impact it has on creating and enforcing formal and informal rules and norms that transect a variety of 
agricultural an d non -agricultural sectors.  
In agricultural sectors,  more than a quarter of  implementing partners employed MSD approac hes 
focused on facilitating inclusive outgrower and ingrower schemes, whereby women suppliers and 
producers were supported to expand their roles , production capabilities, and incomes . In addition, 
implementing partners  reported efforts  to expand  access to input supply , with a focus o n female agent 
models as a means to increase the  number of women as sales agents, distributors , and agricultural 
advisors and extensionists , as well as to expand access to productive resources among  women 
producers, i ncluding ag ricultural technology and in formation. There was also evidence  of implementing 
partners  using an agro -dealer or agent model as an entry point for youth  in agriculture, but many of 
these models failed to take challenges for female youth into cons ideration.  
Nearly all Activities interv ened in supporting markets with direct links to agriculture as part of 
approaches to facilitate greater engagement of women and youth in agriculture. By far, the input supply 
sector was the most common entry point for  introducin g inclusive business models focused on women , 
 Exhibit 8: Supporting markets with direct or indirect 
influences on women’s and youth’s engagement in 
agriculture  
 
 
16  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  and to a lesser extent , youth .6 The AWE team also found i nclusive entrepreneurship support services  
models , including BDS, across s everal Activities . Implementing partners often  used higher-intensit y 
tactics t o supp ort these models , with limited  evidence of scalability . The exception is the  work the 
Arab Women’s Enterprise Fund  (AWEF)  does in Jordan (see Exhibit 9 below for more details). 
Interesting work is also done in  the financial sector around opportunities for digital financial services to 
expand w omen’s access to financial products and services and increase control over income. Market -led 
approaches to improving youth’s access to finance , however,  are st ill limited . In this review, f inance  is a 
sector  where development actors tend to heavily incentivize or even replace market actors  (i.e., 
financial service providers)  in an attempt to trial innovations,  promote mo re inclusive models, and 
reduce risk . As o ne Activity  stated : 
While these instruments [ credit guarantees] , used judiciously, can have catalytic 
effects, they need to be clearly justified by the partners’ own vision and substantial 
investment or ‘skin in the game ,’ and further backed by technical a dvice, link ages, 
mentoring and other facilitatio n from the project . 
Far fewer Activities (less than a quarter) described engaging in supporting markets that indirectly  
influence women’s and youth’s engagement in agricultural sectors. For women, Activities tended to  
focus on influen cing gender , social no rms, and childcare services  as critical supporting markets . Where 
Activities prioritized social norms, there were notable challenges around getting market actors to fully 
lead these interventions , which resul ted in higher-intensity involvement from the Activity.  Two Activities 
mentioned f ocusing on the care economy and childcare services as a critical supporting mar ket for 
women’s market inclusion and participation in paid work . They reported limitations arou nd high -
investment costs for market actors, which made it difficult to be completely market -led. For youth -
focused programs, several Activities identified labor market information systems, finance, and technical 
and vocational training as critical supporti ng markets to youth’s participation in and benefit from 
agricultural market systems.   
Exhibit 9 presents a classification of common ly reported sector -specific tactics Activities employed to 
benefit women and/or yout h, includin g details on how  they designed and implemented interventions . 
These are not exhaustive , but provide much -needed context around how Activities use a variety of high -
intensity and light -touch MSD tactics to engage and benefit women and youth in ag riculture a nd 
supporting markets.  
 
6 Of the 15 Activities included in the Landscape Analysis Repo rt, only four had an explicit focus on youth, which 
influenc ed the finding around what MSD tactics are the most commonly used to benefit women and/or you th. 
Because the landscape of Activities is highly skewed toward programming that has an explicit focus on women or 
integrates gender as a cross -cutting component, it is more likely to have richer insights around MSD tactics used 
to benefit women than youth .   
17  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 9: Classi fication of sector -specific tactics used and illustrative interventions  
TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
AGRICULTURE – PRODUCTION, EXTENSION , AND AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES, INPUT AND EQU IPMENT SUPP LY 
Co-invest in inclusive 
business models and 
demonstrate the business 
case [Women/Youth]  • ÉLAN RDC partners with a coffee cooperative and an NGO in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC) and co -invests 
in an inclusive business pilot focused on developing a line of coffee produced by women that is sold to consumer -minded 
end markets. The cooperative is supported by the partner NGO to develop an internal control system to ensure full 
tracea bility of cherries, market women -only produced coffee thro ugh clear m essaging on social impact to exporters and 
process ors, and improve coffee quality through information and training to female producers.  
• ÉLAN RDC partners with a commercial maize farm in t he DRC , and co -invests to pilot and scale an out -grower sc heme 
on con cession land that prioritizes the recruitment of women as contract farmers, including supporting the commercial 
farm to conduct small -scale comparison tests between males and females who have access to the same productive assets 
and information.  
• ÉLAN RDC c aptures business performance indicators before and after implementation of the pilot interventions to 
demonstrate that targeting women and improving the terms of their engagement in coffe e production and contract 
maize farming can also increase private -sector revenue.  
• RisiAlbania identifies sectors with potential to absorb considerable numbers of youth while also generating higher  skilled 
job opportunities. RisiAlbania selects exporters in  the medicinal and aromatic plants and fresh fruits and ve getables 
markets who share the same vision and co -invest with them in inclusive business pilots for youth employment.  
Work with and through 
women’s groups, 
associations, and producer 
networks to f acilitate 
expanded roles for women 
in agriculture [Women]  • Naatal Mbay  identifies women’s producer groups engaged in cereals in Senegal and integrates them into local 
consolidation networks (CNs) to gain access to productivity training, seed system strength ening, contract linkages, 
agricultural insurance and clima te informat ion services, ICT support, and mechanized post -harvest services .  
• Naatal Mbay and CNs co -develop gender quotas to increase the number of women in leadership roles , where they are 
underrep resented (e.g. , database managers, field agents) . 
• Naatal M bay convene s participatory diagnostic sessions to reflect with CNs on the positions of women in the respective 
networks, identify challenges, and co -develop solutions to improve integration of women  in decision -making bodies . 
• AWEF partners with leading dai ry processo rs and retailers in Jordan , and builds their capacity to formalize linkages with 
networks of women producers and processors and strengthen quality assurance. AWEF -supported processors and  
retailers sign commercial agreements directly with women’ s associati ons, incorporating products under company brands 
and indicating they are sourced from women, which results in a significant increase in sales.  
Expand gender - and youth -
sensitive input distribution 
networks, including 
promoting women and 
youth as agro -dealers and 
agents  
[Women/Youth]  • Feed the Future  Inova conducts research in Mozambique to make a business case for women’s inclusion in the input 
supply sector. Th e research finds that (1) female farmers represent an untapped market opportunity for  input 
distributors ; (2) female agro -retailers, agents , and extension workers can help input distributors reach male and female 
farmers more effectively ; and (3) a better understanding of women’s consumer preferences can help input distributors 
deliver pro ducts and s ervices tailored to their needs.   
18  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
• Feed the Future  Inova uses this research to support gender -sensitive marketing practices among input suppliers, 
including inte grating incentive structures for reaching more female farmers as customers and using gender -disaggregated 
data tracked through Customer Relation Management systems to monitor effectiveness of marketing strategies.  
• Feed the Future  Inova uses research to su pport gender -sensitive distribution practices among input suppliers, including 
encour aging model s that reach women directly on their farms (e.g. , mobile inputs shops and village agent networks) and 
promoting female -friendly packaging of inputs (e.g. , mini-packs of input  and visual application instructions).  
• Feed the Future  Inova supports i nput suppli ers to engage more women as agro -dealers and agents by developing  career 
progression programs that help female agents advance to agro -dealer and retailer status , and adopting  gender -sensitive 
recruitment and human resource practices to hire and retain more  female talent.  
• PropCom Mai -Karfi advises local input distributors in Nigeria on packaging and marketing to female consumers who 
grow horticultural produ cts, including developing micro -packs of fertilizer that are more affordable for women who own 
smaller  farms and want to experiment before committing to a larger purchase.  
• Yapasa pilots  a last-mile distribution of inputs model by working with local input suppliers to set up shops in rural areas, 
run by youth farmers or entrepreneurs as communit y agro -dealers. Yapasa scales the model based on documented 
success from the pilot —the model is profitable, expands last -mile distribution, and is attractive to yout h because it 
provides year -round income and diversifies the farm enterprises.  
• YLA and Driving Youth -led New Agribusiness and Microenterprise in Northern Uganda ( DYNAMIC ) work with 
partners to expand  access to seeds and other inputs for youth  by providing them on credit during the planting season 
and allowing youth to pay  back the credit through  produce af ter harvesting. The level of default is high due to 
inexperience, loss, drought, pests , and other shocks; however, youth who are successful see their busi ness grow 
substantially.  
Expand  access to skills , 
information , and market 
linkages  for you th 
[Youth]  • YLA uses grants and subcontracts to engage dynamic private -sector firms, associations, NGOs, community -based 
organizations , and youth -led organizations  in Uganda . These actors establish local agent models, whereby local agents  
provide fee -based linkages (i nformation, advice, and support services) between youth farmers and other market actors . 
This includes issuing grants to  partners  (with l everage requirements)  to develop  training and job placement  programs  
through a fee -based and cost -sharing me chanism wit h youth trainees and potential employers. It also includes the  
develop ment of  community -based facilitators who can train youth out -grower farmers to produce and sell maize, bean, 
and sesame seeds .  
• DYNAMIC facilitates the training of peer educat ors (PEs) i n business and life skills, and financial literacy  in collaboration 
with local market actors . PEs, in turn, supply training service s to groups of youth at a fee  (paid by youth themselves, 
employers , or financial institutions) . Some PEs  become sa les agents , based on their knowledge and contacts with local 
products and services .  
Create joint -partnership 
initiatives to provide 
comprehensive services to • Punjab Enabling  Environment  Project (PEEP)  analyzes incentives o f local act ors in the livestock service market in Pakistan 
and address es their pain points in providing inclusive services to women. P EEP convenes partners from the public and 
private sectors, associations , and academia to exchange information and forge co mmon action  plans, including brokering 
a partnership between the Livestock and Dairy Development Department, University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences,  
19  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
women livestock farmers 
[Women]  Women’s Chamber of Commerce and Industry Bahawalpur, National Rural Support Program Microfinance Bank , 
Telenor P akistan, and livestock breeder associations. These partnerships are built on shared value and common 
incentives for empower ing women in the dairy sector , and deliver comprehensive services at a local level to female 
livestock farmers, including access to c redit, veterinary services, animal husbandry and feed services, and market 
information.  
FINANCE – DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES, FINANCIAL LITERACY AND CREDIT GUARANTEES  
Strengthen supply and 
demand of fintech services 
and products in Jordan and  
Egypt [Wom en] • AWEF partners with a digital financial services (DFS) company (an e -wallet provider) to improve the number of female 
customers (many of who  in Jordan are unbanked). AWEF co -invests in a 12-month pilot to establish a female agent 
network , where the pri vate-sector partner invests in training and continuous support to female agents and AWEF 
provides techni cal assistance and shares the cost of a marketing campaign to expand e -wallets outreach among women in 
underserved areas in Jordan. In the fi rst year of  the partnership, the DFS company registered more than 12,000 female e -
wallet users (9,000 more than the  target).  
• AWEF conducts a financial sector mapping in Egypt to identify the constraints to women’s access to, and use of, financial 
services . AWEF shar es insights from mapping with DFS providers in Egypt, including that around 23.2 million adult 
women in Egypt are unbanked or underbanked , and that DFS providers (either via a mobile wallet or an e -payment 
agent) can provide an entry point to fi nancial ser vices for underserved segments, particularly poor women. The study 
was an eye -opener for a number of DFS  providers, and AWEF collaborates with large e -payment network providers and 
mobile wallets providers to introduce gender -smart outreach stra tegies.  
Create sustainable entities 
to ensure access to finance 
for women in  
Zambia  
[Women and youth]  • Using experience with broad -based financial market development programs in other countries, DFID design ed Financial 
Sector Deepening ( FSD) Zambia projec t to transi tion to a legal entity (referred to as a special purpose vehicle) to 
continue improvements in finan cial inclusion for women and youth.  
• FSD Zambia establishes a Women and Financial Inclusion sub -project to (1) educate financial service providers on value 
of reaching women and youth as customers ; (2) design consumer -centric, cost -effective, and safe produ cts for women 
and youth ; (3) expand provision of financial education and literacy ; and (4) develop assessments and learning tools for 
partners to use to driv e inclusive business models.  
Incentivize financial 
institutions to develop 
women -friendly financial 
services  
[Women ] • MDF encourages private -sector partners (i.e., financial service providers ) to identify women -specific challenges and co -
invest s in bottom -up approaches to improve the number of female -friendly financial products an d services, expand access 
to financial literacy, and introduce mobile banking models.  
• ÉLAN RDC demonstrates the commercial case for targeting women, an underserved cons umer segmen t in financial 
services to a large financial service provider in the DRC. ÉLA N RDC and the financial service provider co-create a pilot 
to test the attractiveness of rural agency banking among male and female consumers, and adapt the business mo del to 
further increase uptake among women. Adaptations included increasing the number o f female agents based on evidence 
that women prefer to buy and sell from other women and ensuring that marketing messaging explicitly targets women.   
20  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
Create credit gua rantee 
scheme to support youth’s 
access to finance in Zambia  
[Youth]  • Yapasa tests a vari ety of financial intervention mechanisms to expand access to finance for youth -owned enterprises 
engaged in production and marketing of fish. This includes service cont racts, dire ct grants , and input credit guarantees. 
Yapasa pilots credit guarantee scheme s (up to 50 percent) to encourage financial institutions to experiment with new 
products and new markets in rural areas focused on youth -owned enterprises. This interve ntion links  to a challenge fund 
where Yapasa co -invests in youth entrepreneurs to de -risk entry costs and attract more young people to the sector.  
ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUPPORT SERVICES – BDS, ACCESS TO INFORMATION , AND LICENSING  
Opportunistically target 
partners who c an help  
expand women - and youth -
focused BDS provision  
[Women/Youth]  • RisiAlbania selects partners and co -invests in pilot activities to expand BDS provision to male and female youth involved 
in agribusiness, including integrating pay for results milestones in partnership agreements. RisiAlbania gathers information 
from the pilots to develop a business case for youth.  
• PRISMA identifies BDS providers that already work with female farmers/entrepreneurs or are interested in targeting 
these segments t o introduce  productivity -enhancing agricultural products and help grow female a gent networks in 
Indonesia.  
• Bangladesh Rice and Diversified Crops ( RDC) Activity  partners with the private sector to launch a business scale -up 
program (accelerator) to help fe male entrep reneurs in the rice and diversified crops sectors gain access to ski lls and 
supports necessary to grow.  
Develop multi -sector 
service networks for 
women entrepreneurs in 
Jordan [Women]  • AWEF partners with local municipalities in Jordan to establ ish WEE uni ts, where women engaged in livestock and dairy 
sectors can obtain ge neral information on how to set up a business, access licenses and permits for their businesses, and 
obtain links to other skills development, marketing , and finance.  
• AWEF build s capacity of a few local municipalities to respond to new home licensing instructions the Jordanian 
government issued, including helping them develop guidelines for simple and affordable ways to issue home -based 
vocational licenses. The Jordania n Ministry  of Local A dministration approves and adopts t hese guidelines and in 
partnership with AWEF, disseminates to 45 additional municipalities in Jordan. WEE units raise awareness among 
women -owned, home -based businesses on the licensing process to gen erate dema nd.  
• AWEF p artners with the Jordan Food and Drug Administration to deliver training on improved production practices, 
food, health , and safety guidelines, and ways to fulfill municipality requirements for the licensing process. AWEF also 
partners  with the Jordan Inco me and Sales Tax Department to co -develop a national communications strategy to raise 
awareness on tax laws and provide guidance for home -based businesses.  
• To date, this collaborative approach has catalyzed home -based vocational licen sing in li vestock and  dairy sectors across 
20 municipalities within Jordan and more than 300 women have obtained vocational licenses. AWEF continues to 
facilitate linkages with women who were licensed with large, national buyers.  
LABOR MARKET INFORMATION SERVICES  
Engage new  actors to 
facilitate upgrades in labor • RisiAlbania generates awareness among media actors on the profitability of reporting on labor market issues, including 
attracting the interest of the private  sector to sponsor these programs. RisiAlbania issues an open call for proposals and 
establishes three media partnerships , where RisiAlbania provides cost share and capacity -building support. These  
21  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
market information services 
in Albania  
[Youth]  partnerships develop  TV and radio programs, where they rep ort on in -demand skills and professions targeted at youth 
and their parents. This intervention had a significant impact on more than 78,000 young people and their parents with 
regards to improved understanding and awar eness of vocational training, promotin g self-employment, and changing 
perceptions around desirability of careers and skills in -demand from employers. It also affected training service providers 
and employers —using surveys and interviews, the Activity found  that 32 percent of young people who w atched, lis tened, 
or read the media programs had altered their behavior by either changing decisions around education and training, 
changing the way they looked for a job, or establishing their own businesses.  
Support  the development of 
a job-matching and  
informatio n service market 
in Albania [Youth]  • RisiAlbania supports the upgrade of an already existing model in the market to make it more commercially viable, 
including assisting with the development of business plans , co-financing to mitigate risks in in troduction of new services, 
and introduction of monitoring and knowledge management system.  
ENABLING ENVIRONMENT – RULES, NORMS, AND CONSTRAINTS -TARGETED INTERVENTIONS  
Identify and embed 
constraints -targeted 
interventions in partnership 
agreements [Women ] • PRISMA id entifies recurring constraints that hamper women’s ability to participate in and benefit from livestock, 
horticulture, aquaculture, and other agricultural markets in Indonesia through formative research and monitoring, 
determines which potential  market act ors can be engaged to address these cross -cutting constraints, and assesses 
potential impact and outreach . 
• PRISMA integrates constraints -targeted interventions in par tnership design, including optimizing access to labor -saving 
tools to reduce wo men’s workl oads and working with the private sector to ensure transfer of wages to bank accounts 
controlled by women to improve their control over income .  
Promote visibility o f GESI 
innovations among market 
actors [Women]  • MDF convenes the private sector in Women@Wo rk sessions in Pakistan, sharing business models for hiring women in 
the livestock and horticulture sector, and hosting panel discussions with MDF partners, other bus inesses, and 
government and civil society to exchange knowledge . 
• MDF works with  the Sialko t Chamber of Commerce to devise strategies for encouraging female inclusion in the 
livestock and agricultural labor market , and identify access points for interested firms to learn about GESI opportunities 
and connect with relevant market actors  that can s upport the adoption of the GESI business model . 
Promote opportunities for 
firm- and network -level 
social norms change 
[Women]  • RAIN engages Mango Tree, a Ugandan curriculum design expert , to co -design gender curriculum with a large contract 
farming company , input and output dealers , and other private -sector actors in the Acholi sub -region of Uganda to 
support norms change at the company  level and within the  company’s network of agents and farmers. Having the private 
sector involved in the co -design process ensured they felt confident in their ability to roll out the training. A key 
component of the design process involves development of the business case aro und why gender dynamics matter to a 
private company.  
• MDF identifies corporate -level behavi or change t hat transcend s a single intervention/sector and embeds them in 
partnership design, including integrating WEE considerations in a company’s national and sa les marketing plans, co - 
22  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  TACTIC  INTERVENTIONS  
developing human resource s policies related to female distribution networks, a nd incorporating WEE -related business 
metrics into companies’ management information systems.   
Identify challenges to paid 
work and support business 
models that promote 
workplace enabling factors  
[Young Women/ Women]  • RisiAlbania identifies th at young wo men do  not have equal access to employment across tourism, agribusiness , and ICT 
sectors because of unpaid care work responsibilities , so they help incentivize public -private collaboration models 
between local government and businesses by co-investing in sustainable and affordable models of childcare services 
offered by a greater diversity of market actors (local government, private sec tor, NGOs).  
• MDF uses a WEE framework to identify “triggers” that limit women’s access and agency in tourism, r eady-made 
garments, horticulture, livestock , and leather sectors ; childcare services surfaces as a limiting factor to female 
participation in pai d work. MDF integrates childcare solutions and other workplace enabling factors in partnership 
design, includin g supportin g businesses in Fiji, Pakistan , and Sri Lanka to set up daycare facilities on  site and segregated 
workspaces as culturally appropriate , and works with local advocacy organizations to drive gender -responsive changes in 
labor laws.   
23  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  
 When engagin g market ac tors to drive systems change for women and youth, 
Activities build on MSD partnership tactics.  
Across Activities, there was significant mention of engaging market actors to achieve desired outcomes 
related to women and youth, and rich learning a round tools  and tactics. Reported tactics for engaging 
market actors were generally organized around partn er selection, incentivizing partner involvement, and 
facilitating multi -actor partnerships.  
PARTNER  SELECTION.  In reporting, nearly half of Activitie s describe partner selection processes that 
incorporate and evaluate  discrete inclusion criteria. These se lection processes are usually informed by 
an analysis of market opportunities that align with impacts for women and youth . Potential partners are 
assessed on  their willingness and/or ability to promote inclusion of women and youth within and across 
sectors , and concepts put forth for co -investment are evaluated  based on the  ability of the  proposed 
innovation or model  to achieve inclusion results.  Activi ties that i ntegrate women and youth in their 
selection criteria are the most likely to do it at the design or early implementation stages, and often s ee 
it as an integral piece of achieving their vision for improved participation and benefit of wome n and 
youth. For e xample, AWEF  focuse s on working with partners that recognize both the commercial and 
wider social benefits of making changes in their business model.  Similarly,  DYNAMIC  select s partners 
according to their willingness to see the benefit of  inclus ive busines s models that situate youth as key 
drivers of change, or change agents, in a variety of market -based and non -market -based  activities.  
While not all Activities have selection criteri a related to gender and youth , most recognize the need t o 
make the busines s case or build capacity to promote more inclusive business practices among market 
actors they partne r with. 
INCENTIVIZING  PARTNER  INVOLVEMENT.  In MSD programs, partners are usually incentivized to 
participate in shared objectives through  offers  of financi al support, technical assistance, and potential 
benefit s realized  as a result of broader systems change. While these same tactics are employed for 
engaging partners to work with women and youth in market -based activities, about half of Ac tivitie s 
explicitl y mention or allude to the importance of understanding stakeholders’ interests and incentives to 
appeal to them. RisiAlbania  noted that :  
Explicitly identifying stakeholders’ interests and incentives vis -à-vis gender and social 
equity is hugely relevant, y et too often ignored. Indeed, it is essential that they are 
understood in order to find the ‘gender leverage ’ and build a convincing busine ss 
case for women.  -- RisiAlbania  
More on RisiAlbania’s private -sector partner engagement tactics and bus iness case for inclusion can be 
found in Case Study 3.  
Moreover, Feed the Future Inova  conducted a  gender a ssessment to better understand how to 
encourage women’s participation in performance clubs and ou t-grower an d in-grower schemes. Findings 
from this assessment suggest ed that Inova introduce  additional  incentives  that appeal to women , 
including non-financial performance -based incentives (e.g., clothes, school fees, school materials, 
construction materi als, bicycl es, and credit) and casual labor on credit to reduce limitations around 
female farmers ’ ability to pay for contract labor during harvest. Exhibit 10 presents a full list of non -
monetary performance -based incentives,  with incentives marked in  red as particular ly relevan t to 
women and those with blended coloring (red/blue)  both relevant to women and provided on credit .  
24  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 10: Non -monetary performance -based incentives offered by I nova 
 
Source: Rapid Gender Assessment to Support Supply Chain Management Market System Activities in Nampula 
and Zambezia Provinces, PowerPoint presentation produced by Julia Lipowiecka, WEE Specialist, Inova 
(MarketShare  Associates)  
FACILITATING  MULTI -ACTOR  PARTNER SHIPS.  A few Acti vities explored opportunities for multi -
actor partnerships to drive systems change benefiting women and/or youth beyond one actor or sector 
function. For example, in the PEEP Women Empowerment in South Punjab through Investment in 
Rural Ec onomy (WEinSPIRE)  initiative, the Activity identified public and private -sector actors that 
entered into a joint partnership agreement to provide a comprehensive set of services to women 
livestock farmers, including access to finance and veterin ary service s, and informatio n on animal 
husbandry, livestock rearing , and feed services. This approach resulted in more than 2,000 women 
trained on animal husbandry best practices, 6,000 women who accessed veterinary services, and 35,000 
who received micro loans.7  
The project steppe d back to analyze the incentives of the market system actors that 
touched the livestock sector —many of them already project partners —and 
addressed their pain points in providing more inclusive services. USAID PEEP’s role 
was to c onvene and align the incent ives of all its partner market systems actors for 
achieving women’s economic empowerment. Most critically, these actors entered a 
formal joint -partnership with one another, not just the project. These partners, now 
engaged with o ne another through an initi ative dubbed WEinSPIRE, provided well -
rounded services to women livestock farmers in southern Punjab. – PEEP 
YLA also used a facilitative, multi -partnership approach to meet workforce demand and support 
increased youth incomes al ong multipl e value chains b y working with private -sector actors, producer 
 
7 These are results under the first phase of WEinSPIRE implemented in the Bahawalpur region of South  Punjab. 
PEEP received a 2 -year cost extension and has been expanding WEinSPIRE to the D G Khan area of South Punjab.  
 
25  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  organizations, and workforce institutions, and linking the groups to create productive partnerships. For 
example, when a YLA partner scaled up to 24,000 out -growers and more than 40 youth coope ratives, 
the Act ivity developed a $64,000 value -add proposition (with the partner leveraging $1.3 million) to 
expand the partnership to include a digital payment provider, which gives the opportunity to trace youth 
farmer production and process mobile and cash payments th rough single -entry transactions that reduce 
risks and costs. YLA credits the success to finding the “right partner” and being able to pivot from 
funding the actor for one objective to quickly adding value where a business link was broken.  
 The business cas e was a common tool used to justify the inclusion of women 
and youth; however, few Activities reported on the scale at which business 
case tactics were used across sectors and/or on the efficacy of this tactic to 
achieve widespre ad and syst emic changes in markets for women’s and 
youth’s inclusion.   
Nine of the Activities in the landscape analysis reported using a business case to explain the financial and 
social benefits of greater inclusion of women and youth to market actors. M aking the b usiness case oft en 
involved some type of financial or in -kind support to an organization or enterprise to help mitigate the 
risks associated with taking on new market functions with groups they had not traditionally served or 
engaged. Business c ases tended  to focus on mor e women - and youth -friendly supply chain services, 
training, and engaging women and youth as suppliers, consumers, distributors, sales agents, and 
employees. In some cases, the business case centered on improved job quality. In a ll nine Act ivities, the 
implementer made the business case to individual or multiple market actors. Interestingly, four Activities 
noted the need for ongoing data collection to prove and improve upon the business case for WEE over 
time. This means more rob ust data co llection and mon itoring systems owned by market actors to justify 
the benefits of market inclusion of women and youth for their bottom line.  
Bangladesh RDC Activity developed a  set of business cases to address private sector perceptions 
about i nclusion of  women as viable market actors, including : women are not decision makers; women 
produce less and cannot be contracted as product suppliers; women have limited knowledge about 
production practices, and so on . To counter these perceptions and oper ationalize business case insights 
into partner co -creation processes, RDC developed a partner motivation assessment tool to evaluate 
the commercial incentive, feasibility, scale, and susta inability of integrating women within proposals. This 
tool has been instrumenta l in helping RDC staff better align company incentives with impact for women. 
For example, in the mung bean sector, RDC partners focused on export markets have significant quali ty 
and quantity constraints. Furthermore, women are predomina ntly involved in h ousehold farming of 
mung bean , but largely low -skilled and relegated to secondary or “helper” roles. RDC identified an 
alignment of incentives, where the companies can enhance t heir brand value and benefit from high -
quality products by improving  access to technology and negotiating sales contracts with female farmers. 
Both parties in this scenario realize improved quality and quantity of mung bean and see corollary 
increases in p rofitability.  
Using information gleaned through this tool, RDC short lists partn ers and enters into a co -creation 
phase , where they work with partners to co -develop and refine concepts. As part of co -creation, RDC 
also worked with firms to set and report on  appropriate sex -disaggregated targets to begin to build 
evidence ar ound how in volving and empowering women as service providers, retailers, and other 
remunerative leadership actors can create “a reinforcing cycle of economic benefits to a company, the 
women it employs, and the communities in which they exist.” The tool wa s streamlin ed over time to 
reduce the amount of time required for proposal reviews. By integrating women in most business  
26  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  models under each Market Actor Agreement, RDC has been able to go beyond the target of 15 percent 
female participation to 20 percent . In the sele ction process, RDC uses questions such as those found in 
Exhibit 11 below . 
Exhibit 11: Selected questions from the Bangladesh RDC Partner Motivation Assessment Tool  
• Do women repres ent a new m arket segment for the firm?  
• Would working with women lead to greater profitability for the partner?  
• Could the partn er realize increased efficiency by working with women?  
• Will the partner have access to higher volumes of raw materials?  
• Can the pa rtner expec t improved quality from engaging with women suppliers?  
• Does working with women represent a “doubling of options ” for the partner?  
• Does the model affect the condition of women’s engagement at the cost of increased business?  
• Does the partner consi der the soc ioeconomic status of women in the value chain or sector as a prior 
requirement to developing strategy?  
• What potenti al impact might the model have on the economic empowerment indicators? And what is the 
partner ’s incentive, if any, to have on WEE  domains?  
Source: USAID Feed the Future Bangladesh Rice and Diversified Crops’ Partner Motivation Assessment Tool  
However, while Activities cited making the business case in programming, they rarely reported on the 
scale at which it was used across secto rs and on i ts outcomes to drive widespread and systemic change 
in markets for women and youth. In reporting, Activities described examples of making the business 
case with individual partners in discrete sectors, often as a part of co -creation processes, p ilot projec ts, 
or through data collected in mid - or end -line assessments of the intervention. Ther e was very little 
detail  around how applicable business case insights were across a range of actors or sectors and to what 
extent these tactics were adapted o r scaled ov er time. This makes it difficult to assess  which Activities 
employed business case tact ics as a core and to diffuse effort to drive inclusion outcomes for women 
and youth across their programming , or which applied the tactics  more ad hoc and rel egated to d iscrete 
actors and sectors within their programming.  
Although there were some  cases of  reported success in using the business case with discrete private -
sector partners ,8 far more Activities did not fully document results or reported lackluster  results. F or 
example, RisiAlbania  aimed to support youth to serve rural areas as business develo pment service 
providers by making the business case to agribusinesses. However, they were not successful in making 
the business case , because agribusinesses di d not trust  young people were capable of advising them, and 
young people were new players in the market and did not have enough incentives or networks to make 
a business out of their advisory services.9 These challenges caused the project to shift tactics , and focus 
on established urban BDS providers and linking them to rural agribusinesses (see Case Study 3).  
AWEF  noted the importance of building a strong business case to “effectively ‘sell’ the benefits of new 
innovations and encourage private sector partners to test and change their business pract ices so that they are 
more inclusive of women .” They went on to demonstrate there was no one right way to make the 
business case for women’s economic empowermen t, noting t hat it need ed to be tailored to the country 
context, constraints women face, the sector, and specific interests of private -sector partners. AWEF 
was able to operationalize these guiding principles in their own programming . At the environment lev el, 
 
8 As an example, see ÉLAN RD C’s WE E Learning Series in  Annex 2.  
9 As documented in the Promoting Business Development Services fo r Rural Entrepreneurs Concept Note  developed by 
Gramos Osmani, Agribusiness intervention Mana ger, on October 30, 2018. Page 2 .   
27  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  they used disseminat ion events  to share business case challenges, opportunities , and innovative models 
to demonstrate the commercial and wider social returns of adopting new business practices. This helped 
to scale interventions in several sectors , including the citrus sector s in Egypt and the digital financial 
services sectors in Egypt and Jordan. AWEF found that the business case needs to be concise and 
relevant, so that it resonates with the commercial and social interests of market actors.10 
 The use  of high -intensity appr oaches is more common in Activities where 
there is no clear mandate or business case for a local actor to address 
constraints specific to women and youth.  
There are many philosophies around the intensity of market facilitation appro aches when it comes  to 
foster ing broader inclusion of women and youth. Some Activities t ake a more “purist” approach, 
indicating that they d o not intervene directly with women and youth, but stimulate existing market 
players to take on more proactive roles  in the mar ket system t o benefit women and youth. Others note 
that a mix of low - and high -intensity market facilitation  approaches is necessary to address imbalances in 
women’s and youth’s inclusion in market systems , and incentivize markets to address wom en’s and 
youth’s constraints and facilitate more inclusive opportunities. High-intensity  approaches11 are the most 
often  used with:  
• Soft skills and empowerment activities (most notably with youth)  
• Literacy, employment , and entrepreneurship skills to fill cr itical gaps  in youth -targeted 
programs  
• Social norms change activities (delivered by a local partner)  
When employed, high-intensity  approaches are used to fill gaps where market actors are perceived to 
be nonexistent  or lacking a clear mandate. Furthermore , many repo rt a progression of tactics, where  
Activities start out with high-intensity  approaches  and progress to “lighter touch ,” more facilitati ve 
tactics over time. In some cases, high-intensity tactics are used as a pivot triggered by an understanding 
that sustai nability or gender transformation would be unlikely using the current model. As an example, 
PRISMA supported businesses more intensely in the initial stage s to mitigate risks and present 
evidence for adoption and scaling , and moved to more light -touch appr oaches as the partnership 
progressed . Prop Com in Nigeria acknowledged that cost, time, and overcoming of social and cultural 
barriers were fundamental hurdles  to an Activity’s capacity to reach women through gender 
mainstreamed MSD interventions . They were  challenged to make the business case to partners to 
overcome these barriers using facilitative means.  
  
 
10 As an example, s ee AWEF Practitioner Learning Briefs in Annex 2. 
11 This is a best estimate due to th e lack of available information that documents the extent to which the partner 
wholly or part ially subsidized or directly implemented the activities. It is possible that some were highly subsidized 
rather than delivered di rectly; however, the result is the  same in that there is no win -win case for these Activities.  
 
28  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  3. ADAPTATION: WHO AND WHAT DRIVES INCLUSION?   
This section deals with evidence of iteration prompted by adaptive management approaches , such as 
USAID ’s CLA. Findings show that adaptive management can  not only positively drive changes in program 
design and implementation, bu t also shift who drives the change.   
 If Activities could not reach women’s inclusion targets under 
mainstreaming appro aches, a re sponse tactic was used to develop women -
specific initiatives.  
While most Activities (80  percent ) started off with the intention of including women at the outset 
(whether or not there was a robust strategy to do so), there were often challenges  around mee ting 
women’s inclusion targets , as evidenced in a few Activities’ reporting. Where challenges to achieve 
female targets were persistent, a few Activities developed women -targeted initiatives to help bolster 
women’s participation. As an example o f this, PEEP progressed in its gender initiatives during 
implementation by introducing a matching grants pro gram in Year 2 of the Activity to “support 
entrepreneurs/businesses who otherwise shy away from such opportunities due to perceived high risk or 
challenges per taining to non -enabling policy or regulatory regimes…  special emphasis is laid on encouraging 
women entrepreneurs to be benefited from the program ,” and moving to a women -specific initiative called 
WEinSPIRE in Year 3 of the Activity. The WEinSP IRE initiat ive “align[ed] incentives for inclusion,”  whereby 
local actors12 took the lead on valuable servic e delivery that benefitted  women and enabled PEEP to 
expand their women’s empowerment work to another women -specific initiative —Women Investment 
in Networks of  Dairy Sector (WINDS). In Year 4, PEEP developed the WINDS initiative, which 
improved distributi on networks for dairy (milk collection, handling, and transport) and provided valuable 
training to women business owners, including entrepreneurship,  micro -business planning, and 
productivity enhancement training.13 Three Activities mentioned piloting yout h initiatives in non -youth -
focused MSD programs to bolster youth participation, but many of these are or were in a pilot phase 
and lack results and de tails on wh ether they were or will be scaled over time.  
 Adaptive management pivots due to reflection and deliberate learning 
processes have an outsized impact on youth ’s and women’s inclusion in many 
cases .  
Evidence of adaptive management is found acro ss most Activities and can be the catalyst for either the 
launch or expansion of youth’s and women’s inclusion. While Section 1. Planning for Inclusion  speaks 
to the need for planning to i nclude traditional gender and/or youth plan ning activi ties, there is evidence 
that Activities use CLA to make both large and small critical improvements all along the project cycle, 
regardless of the extent of planning. These improvements take the shape of  major pivots or minor 
 
12 Local actors in this multi -actor partnership model consisted of the Livestock and Dairy Development 
Department, which provided veterinary services and delive red training through mobile school  buses, the University 
of Veterinary and Animal Services, which prepared training content and  modules, the Women Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry Bahawalpur, which trained and prepared women livestock farmers on becoming c redit-
worthy, the National Rural S upport Program Microfinance Bank, which provided access to finance, Telenor 
Pakistan, which s upplied mobile access to information, and livestock breeder associations that provided access to 
markets for the purchase and sal e of livestock.  
13 All information  related to the progression of PEEP’s gender and women’s empowerment initiatives during the 
project life cycle came from annual reports, specifically those spanning the April 2015 -March 2016, April 2016 -
March 2017, April  2017-March 2018, and April 2018 -March 2019 timelines.  
 
29  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  tweaks. Activities u se CLA to i nvestigate the grey area between the youth, women, and MSD silos, and 
iterate to uncover opportunities and means to engage market actors. Examples of major pivots, as well 
as slight but significant impr ovements to tools, staff capacity and struc ture, and M EL to the benefit of 
youth and women are described below.   
PRISMA  started from a “do no harm” approach in 2013 and , over a 4 -year period, evolved to a gender 
mainstreaming approach. The Activity urges others to “get it right from the start,” st ating that 
organizational behavior change can be extremely challenging, time consuming, and resource intensive.   
They added that the “program should aim to have less gender analysis tools by the end of the program  since 
staff should have internalized WEE p ractices an d demonstrated more independent WEE thinking by that stage”  
(See Case Study 4).14  
RAIN’s  women’s inclusion journey  is a turnaround story that acknowledges  important course 
corrections along the way. RAIN  was an MSD  Activity that pivoted to a gender mainstream ing focus  
mid-project. In 2013,  the Activity chose to address the low representation of  women  on staff, which  was 
corrected through targeted hiring. The new female recruits mentioned they did not feel  like they had a 
voice. Male champions were enlisted to support women’s integration. Then,  a mid-term evaluation 
revealed that while farmer income targets were surpassed, wo men and girls were not necessarily better 
off, and unintended consequences were “an escalation  of intra -family conflict,  which culminated in domestic 
violence, divorce and  a drop in productivity .”15 The Activity  was immediately responsive  and developed a 
gender strategy,  raising funds  to support their mainstreaming efforts. This continuou s process 
of learning, reflection,  and adaptation  resulted  in an intentional  gender approach  that would not have 
been possible without  a critical mass of  empowered  women on  staff and a receptivity to change.  
YLA  found that mindset change and fear of failur e were the biggest obstacles in implementing a CLA 
approach, and the skills required by staff did not come naturally. One of their key lessons was to iterate 
and improve ge nder analysis tools so they work for the project.  
Other Activities made smaller piv ots, which included changing the means of measuring poverty from the 
household to the individual level so that gender dynamics could be more closely observed  or 
engagement strategies altered  to improve the achievement of beneficiary targets.  Yapasa ’s early  
sectoral a nalysis did not reveal the difference between what young people said they wanted to do and 
the opportunities available to them. Yapasa discovered mid -project tha t while solid opportunities 
existed in single -harvest main -crop commodities, like so ya, these w ere ultimately less attractive to young 
farmers than crops with short production cycles and regular year -round sales. Yapasa shifted their 
approach to concentrat e on opportunities in high -value horticulture (such as input supply and 
aggregation services) t hat promoted more diversified farm enterprises and generated year -round income 
for youth.  
 
14 As detailed in the timeline graphic from AIP-Rural’s Confronting Or ganizational Challenges to Mainstreaming 
Women’s Economic Empowerment in Market Systems Development Programs  authored by Linda Jo nes. Page 4.  
15 According to RAIN’ s report on Gender Responsive Agri -Business Models in Northern Uganda  (2018).    
30  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  
 The organizational structures used to assign the staff responsibility for 
inclusion , primarily of women , often evolved over time to reflect the need 
for increased e ffort at levels closer to market actors.  
There are many models for gender and youth expertise to be either dispersed, siloed, or strategically 
guided or advised by specialists. The chosen model was found to be reflective of the strength of the  
vision for  integration, the ability to execute the vision at the market actor level, and overall buy -in on 
behalf of the organization and partners.  
Technica l gender specialists have various levels of effort dedicated to gender (15 percent or more) and 
are generally  responsible for the review of all intervention concepts and plans; review of all tools 
(questionnaires, focus group discussion guides, etc.); part icipation in all review processes; and ensuring 
that gender -related recommendations are taken forw ard. Roughl y a third of  Activities were launched 
under the understanding that a technical gender specialist or external consultant(s) would be 
responsible for  making sure a gender lens was applied. When these efforts were unsuccessful, programs 
often pivot ed to assig n the responsibility for inclusion to a program or implementation team member(s) 
to increase the likelihood that recommendations were followed, and  accountability was assigned in a 
more impactful manner. In some cases, these team members became gender foca l points and 
responsibility for gender was further devolved to increasingly frontline staff. Activities mentioned that 
fostering this type of cultu re change start ed from senior management and leadership, without which 
gender -related efforts woul d struggle,  regardless of what specific management structures existed to 
address GESI.  
ÉLAN RDC  mainstreams  women by making it “everyone’s business.” Ultimat e responsibility for gender 
equality is with team leaders with support from the program manager an d a full-time GESI lead. Team 
leaders recruit gender champions who are competitively chosen and incentivized. Their learning in 
transitioning to this structur e suggests that the one focal point model is unsuccessful due to the difficulty 
and enormity of th e task, par ticularly with geographical diversity and larger Activity sizes. There is a 
need for technical expertise to undertake analysis, and design activiti es and robust gender -sensitive MEL. 
They have noted challenges such as champions being well -meanin g but under -skilled; underestimated 
time and resources required to perform tasks; and ultimately, leadership fail ing to make effective use of 
the information generated to improve outcomes for women, girls, and vulnerable groups. On the 
positive side, there  is a demys tifying of the practice , development of local expertise, and the engagement 
of men in an area traditionally dominated by women.  
PRISMA originally had one full -time GESI specialist, who received short -term technical assistance from 
an external g ender advis or with a strong background in WEE in MSD. The learning document states that 
“… due to a low -resourced set -up, the program guidance documents and strategic recommendations to improve 
WEE mainstreaming failed to gain traction. Over time, the lack  of movemen t in mainstreaming WEE led to the 
increased marginalization of the GESI specialist .” 16 To address this challenge, PRISMA recruited an 
additional specialist to provide more tactical support to staff, including coaching and introducing tools 
that emphasized ownership of data collection , increasing the relevance and meaning of WEE in terms of 
the program’s work with business partners , and developing a WEE vocabulary. Over time, WEE gained 
more visibility, acceptance, and prioritization within the or ganization and began to yield results. The 
 
16 As well -described in AIP-Rural's Confronting Organizational Challenges to Mainstreaming Women’s Economic 
Empowerment in Market Systems Development Programs  authored by Linda J ones. Page 7.  
 
31  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  program leadership recognized the need to allocate it even more resources, including a head of 
portfolio, three business consultants, and one part -time results measurement specialist.  
 Team members who interact wi th market a ctor partners need to 
communicate effectively —including  convey ing MSD, inclusion principles of 
MSD, and inclusion generally —to make  their business case.  
There are essential soft skills needed to engage the private sector, such as knowing how to approach 
and align with incentives and negotiate, and articulate the core concepts and principles of both MSD 
and inclusion in broadly underst andable ways to make the business case.   
A common practice is to “walk the talk” by hiring staff representative s of the tar get group, in this case 
youth and/or women. In many cases, this requires capacity building to ensure responsibility for inclusion, 
and/or improve understanding of MSD and business development. A further requirement for inclusion is 
to be able to  translate it into the language of the market actors. For example, YLA and DYNAMIC, who 
are committed to hiring young staff,  invested consider able time and money to improve their basic 
capacity in terms of performance, time, and relationship management, as  well as ef ficient deal making 
through market systems thinking, including making the business case for inclusion with market actors.  
Feed the Future  Inova  found that when staff were able to articulate the need for inclusion, the 
business case was stronger . The Activ ity carried out research on input needs of female and male 
smallholder farmers, agents and information sources that play an influencing role, an d social norms that 
influence these decisions and preferred marketing channels. The y used the  finding s to genera te interest 
of input distributors in the female market segment by strengthening the business case for adoption of 
gender -sensitive marketing pra ctices.  
PRISMA found a need to formally address the different vocabulary staff and partners used to d escribe 
the same intervention.  Their GESI Strategy17 includes a guide to assist team members and partners’ staff 
with the translation of GESI into simple b usiness terminology to simplify the task of articulating the 
business case. It also  provides a tool to  assist tea m members and partners’ staff with the translation of 
GESI into MSD to simplify the task of articulating the business case (see Case Study 4).    
4. MEL: APPROACHES AND TOOLS  
This section addresses findi ngs related  to the MEL systems the 15 Activities use.  
 There is a significant amount of gender and youth data that are captured 
and used to drive learning; however, limited standardization of indicators 
and inconsistencies in reporting makes it difficult to draw con clusions 
around MSD impacts on women and yout h within and across Activities.  
Activities use a diverse range of indicators in their reporting on women and youth in market systems. 
Very few Activities in this review consistently sex -disaggregate standard in dicators (e.g., participation, 
jobs, incomes,  yields, and capacities), with most (80  percent ) of Activities selectively sex -disaggregating 
their data instead. This makes it difficult to fully assess whether inclusion elements and impacts are ful ly 
 
17 https://aip -prisma.or.id/data/public/uploaded_file/2019 -11-05_10 -05-21am_GES I_Strategy_(Version_1.6_ -
_October_28_2019).pdf  
 
32  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  diffuse d across the Activity or relegated to a set of  discrete partners and interventions. It is also 
challenging  to draw conclusions across Activities , because the data being reported are not comparable. 
Furthermore, very few Activities (less than 20  percent ) report on age disaggregates, making it even less  
likely that cross -Activity comparisons can be drawn.  
In addition to variation s in the way Activities report sex and age disaggregates of standard indicators, 
reporting showed a broad range of custom  gender - and youth -specific indicators. The custom indic ators 
ranged from individual increases in access and agency to broader norms change at a systems level. These 
indicators were not standardized across Activities , and were often left to the discretion of the Acti vity 
to determine how to measure gender - and youth -specific outcomes. A sampling of custom indicators 
organized by unit of analysis and theme is presented in Exhibit 12 below.  
Exhibit 12: Custom indicators by unit of analysis  
UNIT OF 
ANALYSIS  THEME  EXAMPLE INDICATORS  
Enterprise  Inclusive business 
practices and benefits  • Number of Activity partners that adopt or improve practices 
that enable women to enter more beneficial roles  
• Private sector r ecognizes and rewards women as valuable 
employees, suppliers, distributors, and consumers  
• Number of business models where inclusive recruitme nt and 
employment practices are adopted  
• Number of goods and services designed to meet needs of 
women  
• Number of wome n in leadership/management positions 
within firms and producer networks  
Enabling 
environment  Norms and rules  • Percentage of target participants  who perceive changes in 
household and business attitudes regarding women’s 
participation in markets  
• Percent of h ouseholds reporting buying supplies, services, 
and products from women  
• Change(s) in p erceptions of women’s wor k outside the 
home  
• Reductions in perceived risk of violence  
• Degree of comfort in dealing with women community 
leaders  
• Number of public  policies r egarding youth employment  
• Number of market actors engaged to make changes to 
formal (policy, laws, regulations , procedures) rules that 
address market constraints for poor women  
• Changed perceptions around employment among youth, 
their family memb ers, and em ployers  
Sector or value 
chain  Economic 
opportunities 
supporting jobs and 
small and medium 
enterprises, including 
expansion of service 
markets, networks, 
and market linkages  • Number of youth -led input and output agents   
• Percentage of target participants  who expanded their 
business networks and relationships  
• Number of new investment opportunities that benefit 
women and other socially excluded groups  
• Number of new media products that provide young people 
and their families with access to market inf ormation  
• Number of private -business service providers who offer 
gender and/or socially inclusive servi ces  
33  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  UNIT OF 
ANALYSIS  THEME  EXAMPLE INDICATORS  
• Percent of private job -matching and career guidance services 
that integrate GESI measures  
Individual and/or 
household  Access and agency  • Access to agr icultural i nputs, land, formal and informal 
finance, and business development services  
• Increases in e ducation, and technical and vocational, business, 
and digital skills  
• Percent of interventions that specifically aim to provide more 
beneficial roles to po or women  
• Decision making and control over income  
• Well-being, including reduced time and labor burdens, 
manageable workload, and increased happiness  
• Leadership  
Activities also reported using a diverse range of monitoring and evaluation methods to capture results 
and drive learning, even if the results of these methods were  not always fully reported  in project 
documents . Almost all Activities noted employing routine  practices to capture and analyze Activity 
results related to women and youth. This typically  entailed a  mix of qualitative and quantitative methods, 
including annual surveys, focus group discussions, in -depth interviews, and company records. Beyond 
routine practices, more than half of Activities were able to demonstrate progress toward more robust 
methods t o measure intended and unintended consequences of market systems approaches on women  
and youth. Robust methods typically included more complexity -aware methods, lean data approaches, 
impact assessments, and tracer studies, among others. These me thods were usually employed in two 
ways: (1) to help monitor and support ongoing learning and a daptation during implementation, and (2) 
to evaluate impacts of Activity approaches and interventions on women and/or youth. A grouping of 
monitoring and evaluat ion methods  used, including the progression from routine to more robust 
methods, can be found i n Exhibit 13 below .  
Exhibit 13: Routine to robust MEL methods  
 
Despite the range of data Activ ities collect through a variety of monitoring and evaluation methods, 
these data are inconsistently reported on and appear to be limited to discrete partners and 
interventions within Activities. There are many examples where outcome data are selectively sex-
disaggreg ated—some Activities ’ interventions are sex-disaggregated while others are not. There are also 
examples of specialized learning studies done on specific sets of youth - or women -targeted 
interventio ns, which provide great learning on how effectiv e these int erventions have been in reaching  
 
34  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  women and youth , but are limited in what they can say about the broader portfolio of interventions 
being implemented.  This makes it difficult to fully understand impacts of MSD approaches on women and 
youth both within and across Activities. Notably missing is evide nce of systemic change specifically 
related to inclusion. Where Activities use tools like the Adopt, Adapt, Respond and Expand framework  to 
design a vision of systemic change for inclusive business mode ls, measure ments to capture evidence of 
this are lacki ng and/or un reported.    
 Ongoing monitoring and specialized learning studies conducted throughout 
implementation help Activities tweak approaches to deliver better results.  
While not widespread, ther e were  exam ples of Activities conducting ongoing monit oring and prioritizing 
specialized learning studies throughout implementation to track positive and negative consequences, 
improve approaches, and deliver better results for women and youth. This allowe d Activitie s to observe 
system shifts and quickly perc eive trends associated with known risks. In the case of RisiAlbania , they 
use a monitoring tool to observe known challenges they may encounter, including potential 
displacement from job formalization an d job susta inability for youth. They also organize reg ular learning 
and evaluation field visits to assess qualitative changes that occur at the partner level and triangulate 
these data through market surveys. In other cases, Activities used monitoring tool s and studi es to make 
scale, adapt, or exit decisions around interventions or approaches.  
MDF  conducted research to prove their hypothesis that agency and access were critical to WEE. 
Unable to identify a device to measure and crucially assess changes in a gency, they  created their own . 
Their tool looks at sev en domains of change to determine the effectiveness of an intervention to 
improve WEE. Exhibit 14 from Papua New Guinea represents agency reported before and aft er a hybrid  
pig rearing intervention. These pigs required more care and attention than conventional pigs, resulting in 
higher wor kload. However, the other agency improvements offset the heavier workload and women 
continued to rear the hybrid pigs. A measur ement tool looking primarily at income and household 
income decision making would have missed the important dynamics at play.  
 
35  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 14: Example of MDF’s WEE change tool  
 
Source: MDF. 2018. Beyond Income  – A Critical Analysis of A gency Measu rement in Economic Programming  
Activities that employed ongoing monitoring and learning tactics were often aware of th e benefits, 
indicating that they gave “much -needed clarity as to the efficacy and impact of the intervention.” However, 
they a lso noted t hese methods were expensive, thus limiting the set of interventions or learning 
priorities that could be more fully monitored and evaluated.   
 Market actors are central to MEL efforts in MSD programming . Activities 
that allow mark et actors to ow n data mana gement and decision -making 
processes show promising  evidence of accelerat ing buy-in and win -win 
outcomes.  
Most of the Activities in this study rely on market actors and partners to collect and report data 
relevant to Activity in dicators and re sults. Whil e little was mentioned in Activity documents about the 
interest and capacity of firms to collect and report on data relevant to women and youth , and challenges 
associated with this, several Activities reported on the transformativ e effect on the ir programs  of having 
firms own data management and decision -making processes.  
In the case of Naatal Mbay,  the Activity helped establish database monitoring systems in each of the 
CNs (or producer networks) facilitated through the program. These systems a llowed for each network 
to track and monitor their own data, including, for example, women’s differential access to resources. 
As a result, some of the CNs  now set higher targets for women’s participation and benefit within their 
network.  
 
36  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Feed the Future  Inova  works  with input firms to introduce a customer relationship management 
system that allows them to capture sex -disaggregated customer data and monitor effectiveness of 
different marketing strategies. When paired with stakeholder feedbac k surveys and p artner cust omer -
centricity scorecards, the Activity “shifts data gathering from a transactional, top -down mindset to a 
transformative, bottom -up one that aligns the M&E [monitoring and evaluation] function with a facilitation 
approach.”  
CONC LUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATION S 
Value chain Activities have made considerable progress in understanding and shifting social norms to 
close gender and age gaps, reduce constraints , and increase opportunities and benefits for women, 
youth , and other marginalized  groups. While many value chain interventions address key constraints, it 
remains challenging for them to undertake improvements at the systems level, tackling root causes that 
drive inequalities  between dominant and marginalized groups.  
MSD seeks to make  the entire mar ket system more competitive, resilient,  and inclusive through 
facilitated interventions. It aims to multiply impact and amplify change at the system level , including 
addressing  the biases and inequalities inherent within economic and non -economic spheres . Because 
MSD strives to address root causes and facilitate systemic change, it has the opportunity to sustainably 
improve market functions and shift paradigms that currently maintain social and economic inequality. 
This is new territory with profound implic ations and opportunities to promote inclusion, equality, and 
resilience for all members of a community. Many implementers are learning how to better understand 
these dynamics and incorporate them as an integral part of MSD approaches.  
The re searchers belie ve that one  of the most interesting outcomes of these Activities is the ability to 
facilitate new and innovative opportunities in non -traditional roles and sectors for youth’s and women’s 
inclusion. For example, when childcare services are m ade available a nd address the significant and often 
unacknowledged issue of women's unpaid care work  and labor burdens, additional development benefits 
can arise. These benefits range from increased time for mothers and, more specifically, single mothers 
and grandmothers  (who may b e raising grandchildren), to earn money and spend time with their 
families . When women defy social norms by driving tractors, they change local perceptions of what 
work or roles women can do, which can have impacts that extend far beyond the act ual job of tractor 
operator.  
The gaps, omissions , and limitations of the landscape an alysis shed light on  the present  state of youth ’s 
and women’s inclusion in MSD. The selected Activities vary in the level of development of their gender, 
youth, and inclus ion strateg ies, models , and interventions . Because the universe of MSD Activities is  
small, there  is often a limited pool of gender and youth experts  who contribut e to this area of practice , 
which result s in shared expertise and approaches. For example, ÉLAN RDC and PRISMA share the same 
GESI lead, allowing for experience from one Activity  to inform the other. This extends to  WEE 
frameworks, implementation tools , capacity -development resources for staff, and learning across 
Activities. However, t he diversit y among  these Activities (e.g., different contexts, sectors, donors, and 
objectives) challenges “apples -to-apples ” comparison and , unfortunately, makes it difficult to draw cross -
Activity comparisons , thus weakening  conclusions. An area largely missing in this analys is is the focu s on 
the intersection of age and gender within  MSD approaches and interventions. Regardless of whether 
programs target ed women and/ or youth  or mainstreamed them , approaches specific to young women’s 
inclusion were largely absent. The authors stress that th is landscape analysis is a starting point from  
37  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  which more fulsome study should spring. A list of additional research questions inspired by this study is 
found in Annex 3. 
Over all, MSD represents an important evolution in the development of economic opportunit ies for 
women and youth. MSD approaches have shown promising evidence of delivering  benefit for adult 
women when mindful of their  needs , the market opportunity,  and unantic ipated risks . For youth, it is 
unclear whether MSD, as currently practiced, can provide a comprehensive answer to the challenge of 
their development over other programmatic entry points. The youth  Activities included in this analysis 
were able t o develop m arket -led income generation and employment opportunit ies at scale , which  may 
be sufficient to meet youth ’s immediate  needs , but is likely not sufficient to deliver on comprehensive 
youth developmen t.  
CONCLUSIONS   
Conclusions drawn from the find ings are or ganized according to the learning question they seek to 
address. W here multiple conclusions  address one learning question, a brief summary  is provided  to 
further explore how conclusions address sub -questions.   
What opportunities and constraints  have MSD p rograms identified for women and/or 
youth in agriculture and supporting markets?  
This question  is answered directly  with a list found in Finding 3: , Exhibit 4, and Exhibit 5. This list is 
comprehensive when aggregated , but when assessed at the Activity -level, the  opportunities and 
constraints presented  vary in quality and quantity . The varia nces in identif ied opportunitie s and 
const raints  are due to  differing viewpoints on when and how this information  should be  generated , and 
what to do with th e data once collected. There is a tension between starting with what women/youth 
need as opposed to  focusing on market constraints  and opport unities.  While these are not mutually 
exclusive, there is a need for reconciling  to paint a full picture of the strategy  within an evolving 
document , such as a theory of change  or results chain.  
In general , approaches to include youth  in MSD Activities  lag behind  those to facilitate  women’s 
inclusion. Activities use CLA and adaptive management techniques to identify  and reframe  women’s and 
youth’s  constraints and opportunities , and apply insights into programmatic decisions that fuel inclusion 
efforts . CLA  is critical to sharpen youth - and women -focused  interventions , but cannot solely be relied 
on to reveal opportunities and constraints . Extensive gender and youth formative analysis seemed to be 
an indicator of how rapidly inclusion was embraced , and how q uickly staff were trained and/or bought 
into inclusion efforts.   
Conclusion 1:  
Using MSD to engage youth appears to lag behind women’s 
inclusion in MSD. Youth in MSD is arguably more complex and a 
less explored area of practice.  Associated Find ings 
● 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9  
As the findings illustrated, while there is a growing collection of resources (tools, guidelines, and learning 
documents) to aid Activities in integrating women in MSD, they are largely absent for youth. A reason 
could be that dyn amics behin d women's inclusion have been studied extensively and have ev olved over a 
longer period. Women’s and adolescent girls’ opportunit ies are largely dictated by social norms, which 
include their educational attainment, reproduction  rate, and role an d position within the family. MSD 
 
38  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  approaches have presented some strateg ies to overcome this. Women -targeted and mainstreaming 
Activities reviewed did not differentiate the  opportunities and challenges of women based on age 
differences.  
For female and male  youth, the re are equally complex but less understood challenges to incl usion. Some 
parameters for youth are related  to their gender, developmental stage, and legal and social norms 
regarding how and when they enter the workforce. Overcoming traditional ro les and res ponsibilities of 
young people in agrarian but modernizing com munities, where their parents and community still heavily 
influence them, is a unique challenge. Based on the Activities reviewed here, the tools and methods to 
address these challenge s using an MSD approach ha ve not yet been clearly articulated and remain  a 
work in progress. There have been real, tangible gains in the development of jobs and income -
generation opportunities. However, these gains remain anecdotal in comparison to those f or women 
and require further study to fully understand the ir potential a t scale.  
Conclusion 2 
MSD can create transformative opportunities for youth and 
women, in both traditional and non -traditional sectors and roles. 
This process can take years of partner s’ engageme nt. Associated Findings  
● 3, 4, 5, 9, 14  
There are few but promising examples of transformational roles for women and youth found within this 
cohort of Activities. Most Activities used approaches that focused on identifying end -market -oriented 
and demand -driven opportunities for inclusive growth.  This included aligning supply with profitable 
unmet market demand, and development  of input and service networks responsive to producer and 
consumer  demands. This is often the starting point for MSD progr ams, and al l Activities had some 
element of this approach  in their programming.  
When Activities employed more robust MSD tactics, transformational benefits for youth and women 
emerged, although they are still anecdotal and/or found in small clusters of activities  that may be only 
attributable to a narrow selection of market actors. These tactics include:   
• Looking beyond entry points in specific sectors to supporting markets as key opportunities to 
address women - and youth -specific constraints (including n on-traditio nal supporting markets, 
such as childcar e and labor market information services)  
• Having analytical tools to identify not just symptoms of women’s and youth’s exclusion, but 
actual root causes that hinder participation and benefit in multiple sec tors 
• Active  CLA culture, including ongoing monitori ng of approaches and iteration , responsive ness 
to market dynamics , and constant trying of new things  
• Articulating clear rationale in causal logic documents around how MSD tactics were specifically 
to lead  to the pro motion of women’s and youth’s participat ion and benefit  
• Improving upon typical MSD tactics to engage partners, including building in different ways to 
identif y the “gender or youth leverage” and structuring incentives  
• Clearly articulating when  there is a  need for higher -intensity facilitation  tactics with distinct 
target groups and market actors; also, having a plan of progression over time to more light -
touch support   
39  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Taking a long -term approach (2  to 3 years or more) to engage market actors in inclusio n 
activities over business and market wi ns  
A better understanding of how to specifically develop and incentivize non -traditional opportunities is 
missing from reviewed literature. There are signs and signals that it is possible and, when succes sful, 
there  is potential for systemic change. However, there are insufficient data to determine whether other 
factors may have been responsible for success . If so, this would challenge the ability to reproduce 
outcomes.  
Conclusion 3:  
CLA and other adaptiv e-managemen t techniques, coupled with 
leadership buy -in and empowered staff, fuel inclusion efforts, but 
not on their own.  Associated Findings  
● 4, 8, 10, 11, 13, 
14, 15  
While technically part and parcel of MSD, use of CLA varies. When Activity leadership e mbraces CLA  
and finds bold, innovative staff able to confront the status quo, there is an increased ability to rethink 
systems and forge win -win relationships. Regardless of how deeply youth and/or women were included 
at the outset, Activities that practi ced CLA mad e incremental or significant improvements to program 
design, implementation, and measurement based on learning. Making the business case for youth ’s and 
women’s inclusion where market opportunity exists requires experimentat ion to determine the 
appropriate  incentives or other support.  
CLA was often mentioned as influencing staffing and the overall approach to inclusion. In other words, 
the team culture with regards to inclusion of women and/or youth frequently changed over t he course 
of an inter vention. Pa rtners integrated principles of inclusion within their own internal staffing by hiring 
more women, training men to be gender champions, and making sure female staff had voice within the 
workplace. The CLA mindset, coupled wi th competencies relat ed to inter sectional thinking, accelerated 
staff’s capacity to reach broader goals. However,  CLA resources do not explicitly call out the 
importance of the CLA mindset to extend to inclusion writ large. USAID’s 2017 literature review 
entitled What Difference Does CLA Make to Development?  and USAID’s 2019 Guide to Hiring Ad aptive 
Employees  make no mention of gender, women, youth, or inclusion.  
While adaptive management has a critical role to play in imp roving inclusion outcomes or even launching 
them, on its own, it will not ensure that youth and women are meaningfully incl uded or that gaps will be 
addressed. Activities that performed significant participatory research at the outset seemed muc h better 
informed about women and youth’s issues and prioritized sensitivity to the needs among staff earlier. 
This is not meant to mi nimize the power of pivots, but rather, flag that some of these can be avoided 
with appropriate levels of research. For ex ample, at l east two Activities pivoted based on experiencing 
challenges in women’s mobility. This is a common problem that may have be en understood in the 
course of a light -touch gender analysis.  
N.B. This conclusion is based on the bulk of the Activities  reviewed. The authors recognize that YLA’s 
“design in reverse” strategy is in contradiction with this conclusion, although the interv ention has 
yielded some exceptional opportunities for youth. See Case Study 2 for more detail.  
  
40  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  In which ways have MSD program approaches attempted to facilitate win -win market 
opportunities with a focus on women and/or youth?   
MSD Activities and those employing MSD approaches that are included in  this analysis attempted to 
facilitate w in-win opportunities for women and youth in agriculture and eight supporting marke ts: 
entrepreneurship support services, input and equipment supply, extension and advisory services, finance, 
childcare services, media and communications, labor mar ket informa tion services, and technical and 
vocational training . A classification of sector -specific tactics used is presented in  Exhibit 9. However, 
details  and explanation  were missing from the documents reviewed,  which created an incomplete 
picture in most cases of how Activities : (1) identify where  market constraint s and women ’s/youth’s  
constraint s intersect , creating potential for aligned incentives , and/or (2) leverage  opportunities that 
satisfy both a market prospect  and the ability to positively affect women and youth.  The information was 
the most robust around the business case, a commonly cited MSD tactic used to clearly align incentives 
and demonstrate “proof” of the financial and social benefits of greater  inclusion of women and youth to 
market actors. This was the most effective at acceler ating buy -in and win -win outcomes when market 
actor s’ own data collection and reporting efforts  directly  affirm ed and reaffirm ed the business case , and 
could be used to  inform  their decision  making . 
Calibrating partner s’ incentives and aligning those incent ives with the needs of women and youth is 
foundational to ensuring that MSD approaches can achieve sustainable inclusion results at scale. In 
addition , Activities  also need to guide market a ctors using varying levels of facilitatio n to experiment 
with innovations and new models, sensitize them to the benefits of inclusion, and develop their capacity 
to make informed decisions that benefit their bottom line and prom ote development outcomes. 
Moreover, a commonly cited challenge to fin ding win -win opportunities was that constraints  for women 
and/or youth were  not always immediately something that a market actor had a clear incentive to 
address  (e.g., women’s unpaid ca re work) . This is where Acti vities looked to  partners within the public 
sector , civil society organizations, NGOs, media partners, and academic institutions  to more clearly align 
objectives and incentives. In some cases, Activities facilitated multi -actor partnerships to make sure  
results were not only sustainable, but that each actor had a defined role that clearly aligned  benefits for 
women and youth with the set of incentives that appeal ed directly  to that actor.   
Conclusion 4  
A well -conceived business case is the most commonly ci ted tactic 
to develop  market opportun ities for women and youth; yet, 
Activities struggle to make the case for women and, to a greater 
extent, youth.  Associated Findings  
● 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13  
There are a wealth of tactics Activitie s use to engage market actor s as partners, which differ by context 
and opportunities presented in the agri cultural and supporting market system. “Making the business 
case” is largely reported as a critical element of partnership building ; yet, the many steps involved in 
building convincing  cases that clearly align  business incentives with development outcomes  are not well 
outline d.  
The barriers to making a successful case as reported are:  
• The slow pace of mindset change with regards to social norms, and r ealizing the market value  
of including women and/or youth  
• The business case itself not being viable   
 
41  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Perceived risk (requiring offset through market facilitation)  
• The need for traditional development actors to acquire an understanding of businesses and 
“speak their language ”  
Typical ly, the business case offers benefits to market actors that are financial (revenue growth or cost 
savings) or non -financial (brand or reputation). Identifying partners who are less financially motivated, 
require little buy -in, or are already champions, suc h as social enterprise , seems to be the low -hanging 
fruit. Finding the commercial win -win scenarios can be much more time and resource -intensive. 
Opportunities in non -traditional sectors can require more time, effort , and sophi sticated negotiation 
skills to broker as norms and  new considerations are taken into account (such as community perception 
and safety).  
Because it is a challenge to develop a successful business case, particularly in non -traditional sectors and 
roles, ther e is a risk of creating perv erse incentive s among  implementing partners by requiring strict  age 
and gender targets. To demonstrate early success and reach targets, implementing partners could re sort 
to higher -intensity approaches without clearly identifyi ng and convincing market act ors of the win-win 
opportunity.  Businesses , in turn,  may take advantage of donor interest and funds to employ inclusive 
business models that , ultimately , are not adopted, sustained, or scaled due to  limited buy -in and 
ownership  from the beginning .   
What  were the impacts or outcomes of MSD approaches that focus on women and 
youth (e.g., achievements, shortcomings, and positive and negative unintended 
consequences)?  
The impacts or outcomes of MSD approaches that focus on women and youth were reported 
inconsistently by Activities  and across Activities . Activities that took a more intentional approach were 
more likely to have developed MEL frameworks or learning report series that allow ed them to 
disaggregate outcomes for youth an d women. Without MEL fra mewo rks that respond to more than 
generic indicators , such as jobs created or increased income , data on youth and women are too general 
to draw conclusions.  
Conclusion 5  
The outcomes of youth and women in MSD programs are 
inconsist ently reported. Therefore, i t is difficult to draw solid 
conclusions related to the consequences of the approach to serve 
their interests.   Associated Findings  
● 2, 4, 9, 14, 15  
A major challenge to this landscape review was the ability to determine how an d to what extent women 
and y outh benefited from the intervention at an aggregate level and in comparison , with other (adult 
male) cohorts in any specific instance . It was similar ly challenging to determine the extent to which the 
intervention  offered the p romise of sustainability or scale.  
While some Activities consistently collected and reported sex -disaggregated data, the way they 
presented this information helped to either clarify or obscure impacts on women and youth. One 
Activity noted that across the  program, their numbers for women lo oked excellent, with 80 percent of 
participants  with increased economic opportunities being female. However, when looking more closely 
at the distribution of benefits across program objectives, the concentration of these  impacts was largely 
 
42  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  attribu ted to o nly one project component. In other component areas, women were only a quarter of 
the participants  reached. Other examples of potentially obfuscating data involved reporting only 
disaggregates on individual -level indicat ors (as opposed to including  enterpr ise-level indicator 
disaggregates) or only disaggregated data on indicators tied to women - and youth -targeted 
interventions, which impede d the ability of the program or donor to know whether women and youth 
were included  in and benefitted from broa der prog ram activities.  
Conclusion 6:  
Being intentional about gender integration in planning, 
implementation, staffing and leadership, and MEL approaches leads 
to increased evidence of positive impacts related to women in MSD 
programs  Associated Findings  
● 1, 2, 3,  6, 11, 14, 
15, 16  
Because impact data were not available for most Activities , the research team has defined a 
comprehensive MSD approach to include  youth and/or women as those that have facilitated 
opportunities and an alyzed them with a gender - or youth -specific lens , resulting  in pivots or minor 
improvements  as required.  These Activities have the following characteristics:  
• Clear vision for inclusion  and buy -in (from staff and leadership)  
• Well-articulated starting poin ts informed by assessments a nd analyses, which may or may not 
be elaborated in the form of a strategy; they could use generic or bespoke gender assessment 
tools  
• Inclusion of  developmen tal outcomes for youth and/or women in results chains  
• Developed gender inclusion frameworks and gui delines  
• Iteration on strategies to make a business case and otherwise incentivize market actors  
• Embrac ing of  a learning culture and use of adaptive manageme nt approaches to rapidly respond 
to constraints and opportunities th rough pivots  
• Employ ment of  distinct youth and gender MEL practices  
The only identifiable commonality between programs with these characteristics was the existence of a 
strong CLA culture and the ethos of devolving responsibility to all staff. Making gender e veryone’s 
business has some downside (such as assigning accountability to lay people), but overall ensures that 
responsibility sits close to market actors and translates into an organiz ation-wide culture that permeates 
down from leadership.  
Donor requirem ents do make a considerable difference. In the case of  DFAT -funded programs, 
implementing partners noted that while they were  independently  committed to gender inclusion, the 
directive  for their Activity ultimately  came from the donor (see DFAT’s Market Systems Development 
Operational Guidance Note ). USAID’s guidance on inclusion is not as strongly articulated.  
   
43  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  RECOMMENDATIONS  
While the following recommendations speak broadly to both implementers and donors, 
recommendatio ns that are donor -specific  are noted at the end of each section . 
Dedicate resources to better understanding youth in MSD and limitations of the MSD 
approach to meet youth developmental needs more broadly. The authors consider youth in 
MSD a distinct practi ce that should have clear ru les and standards  that drive the  market’s ability to 
bridge the range of deficits that affect youth , particularly rural youth. Speci fically , consider MSD 
approaches in all youth development programming and as complement ary to positive youth 
development ( PYD) programs focused on economic opportunities. It  may be more practical to apply an 
MSD approach to facilitate access to jobs, self -employment, and finance in youth programming, without 
being beholden to facilitating all program  interventions through marke t actors  and, most notably, 
education for younger youth. See Case Study 2, for specifi c examples of how skill deficits in youth have 
been addressed through various means of facilitat ion. 
Additional recommendati ons include:  
• Ensure youth -targeted activities employ a separate gender and age lens (particularly where 
gender and age intersect) . 
• As an innovative outlier, further study YLA’s “design in reverse” approach to engaging youth 
by working with market actors . 
• Further study  on the limitations of MSD to overcome gender inequality where conservative 
social norms exist , and identify where fund s should be earmarked for high -intensity facilitation 
in these contexts. For both youth’s and wom en’s economic empowerment, t here seems to be 
a global recognition that MSD has limitations, but this is not well understood and defined.  
• Determine the limitat ions of MSD to serve youth across all their needs and conceptualize how 
MSD complements PYD.  
Donor recommendations:  
• Further study is required to shed light on the limitations of MSD to overcome gender 
inequality where conservative social norms exist, and identify where funds should be 
earmarked for high -intensity delivery in these contexts. For both youth’s and women’s 
economic  empowerment, there seems to be a global recognition that MSD has limitations, but 
this is not well understood and defined.  
• Contin ue to build the evidence base and create a roadmap to illustrate how MSD 
complements PYD.  
Furthe r develop tools for planning , measurement, and reporting of youth and gender 
benefits, risks, and challenges in MSD. Specific recommendations are:  
• Planning:  Include women and/or youth developmental outcomes in results chains, or append 
them to ensure  they are not lost in siloed docum entation and that accountability is assigned to 
program (not technical) staff. There are many tools and examples for doing so ( see Annex 2). 
Do not assume market  assessment specialists will  apply a gender and/or youth lens. Formative 
research should shed light on risks (e.g., potential for increased gender -based violence) and 
programs should inte grate measurement practices to capture unintended results.   
44  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Measuremen t: Standard MEL approaches f or MSD need to be developed to better 
understand how and whether MSD works for youth, particularly at scale. These should use 
gender -/youth -sensitive research methods to measure changes along the results chains and 
permit the as sessment of the contribution  of MSD tactics to resulting change in women’s or 
youth’s participation or benefit.  
• Additional Study:  Perform a comparative review of currently used market analysis, 
measurement tools, and program frameworks that integrate youth  and/or gender lenses in 
MSD to establish best practices in this space.  
Donor recommendations:  
• Guidelines:  Donors should issue guidelines for inclusion of women and/or youth in MSD 
(perhaps based on the comparative review recommended above). This could inc lude the 
minimum analysis an d planning requirements , a guideline for MEL frameworks (particularly for 
youth) , reporting requirements demanding sex and age disaggregation for all program activities, 
and emphasis on MSD tactics vs. MSD outcomes. These should  ensure inclusion of indicat ors 
specific to gender and youth, and establish sex - and age -disaggregated baseline and set targets. 
Despite this recommendation, implementers cannot be hamstrung by overly prescriptive 
standards. Donors  need to allow implemente rs to fail, while building i n accountability 
mechanisms.  
Recruit staff prepared to work toward inclusion, even if the organizational structure is in 
flux. Most programs end up devolving responsibility for gender. Staff recruitment should attempt to 
identi fy individuals with the beli ef system and personal characteristics that favor gender and youth 
inclusivity; responsibility for inclusion should be built into staff performance indicators. This could 
require capacity building, incentivization, and formal re cognition. The “CLA mindset”  (at least for these 
types of Activities) should be broadened so the curiosity it values is also steered toward effective 
inclusion. This will permit making “gender and youth everyone’s business” easier.  
Donor Recommendations:  
• Donors can consider integrati ng inclusion into key personnel responsibilities and qualifications , 
and revisit the “CLA mindset” guidance to include a basic proclivity toward inclusion.  
Use CLA as a tool to deepen women’s and youth’s inclusion.  A healthy bal ance of early planning 
and C LA-driven reflection and improvements is key to inclusion. The practice should not replace or 
assume that a woman - or youth -only program requires less or no gender/youth assessments at the 
outset, nor should it delay calling out  targets for youth’s/women’s  development.  
Donor recommendations:  
• Because of the tremendous value of CLA as a means to dramatically improve inclusion efforts, 
donors should continue to promote the practice , while ensuring implementers perform critical 
formative analyses to minimize u nnecessary pivots.  
Use MSD as a means to identify win -win opportunities in non -traditional sectors and roles.  
Broader social norms change needs to complement business case tactics to be impactful and extend  
45  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  systemic change beyond individual partnership ag reements. Transformative impact is possible when 
partners:  
• Identify lead firms with strong leadership and knowledge of social norms and significant clout 
among sector actors, and get them to buy  into inclusion of women and y outh. This can have 
significant impacts on changing the attitudes and business behaviors of other firms (e.g., 
crowding -in, replication).  
• Recognize that the best opportunities may be hidden gems. Opportunities in non -traditional 
sectors and roles require time and investigation to develo p, because they  may respond to 
constraints in a manner less direct tha n typical opportunities.   
• Take a step -by-step approach to inclusion. Partners could be more comfortable with piloting 
and reaching proof of concept to mitigate investment  risks before m aking a more fulsome 
commitment.  
Donor recommendations:  
• When transformative gender objectives are sought, ensure that (1) proposals and 
implementation plans specifically call out how non -traditional opportunities (roles and sectors) 
will be investigated, a nd (2) MEL frameworks include indicators or qualitative research to 
measure the domains of gender transformation beyond income (social norms, gender roles, 
empowerment, agency, systemic improvements , or other).  
 
Implementing par tners need to ensure risks a re anticipated and planned for . This includes 
risk identification in both formative research and ongoing monitoring, and risk mitigation planning that is 
well-articulated and integrated into results chains, inter vention plans, a nd other planning documents.  
Specialized learning studies and complexity -aware MEL methods can help Activities harvest unintended 
consequences (those not originally anticipated and planned for). 
46  |  YOU TH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE:  CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  SECTION  B: CASE STUDIES  
CASE STUDIES  
This sec tion highlights overarching learning drawn a cross multiple projects, as well as critical themes for 
further exploration that may provide even greater insights into effective methods and results to address 
gender and youth inclusion in market systems develo pment (MSD) prog rams. Four case studies zoom  in 
on interventions, approaches, and tactics implementing partners use to illustrate the opportunity, 
dynamism, flexibility, risk, and limitations of and within MSD practices to address the inclusion of youth 
and women. Through  these cases, the research t eam explore s how MSD approaches can deliver on 
impacts for women and youth and the necessary conditions to achieve the results, derived from a range 
of implementing partners’ and market actors’ iterative learning  and testing of what does and does not 
work in their contexts.  
The landscape analysis and case studies were limited in their ability to determine conclusively whether 
inclusive  MSD approaches alone  can meaningfully address and facilitate women’s and youth’s 
empowerment, or stimulate systemic change  to reduce gender and social gaps. However, the landscape 
analysis and these case studies provide important evidence that MSD programs can: (1) meaningful ly 
integrate the inclusion of women and youth as part of MSD, (2) ensure w omen and youth experience 
benefits of MSD interventions, and (3) promote at least some social norms change within the scope or 
related to the specific objectives of the projects.  
The case studies focus on four learning themes examined through project docu ment review and key 
informan t interviews with 18 individuals : six directors, four gender equality and social inclusion 
(GESI)/gender advisors, six market actors, and two staff . 
CASE STUDY  1: ÉLAN RDC: Advancing Women' s Role in Agricultural Marke t Systems  addresses 
how implementing partners identify non -traditional market opportunities and leverage them to promote 
greater inclusion of women. The case study explores which analytical tools ÉLAN RDC applied to 
identify op portunities, specific gender  constraints they targeted, and tactics they used to facilitate 
women’s empowerment.  
CASE STUDY  2: YLA and D YNAMIC:  Facilitation Intensity in Youth MSD in Uganda  explores two 
program s in Uganda that approach yo uth engagement through MSD in different ways. The case explores 
how facilitation —working through market -actor partners to provide services and activities —affects the 
range of youth development components that can be addressed wi thin an MSD program.  
CASE STUDY  3: RisiAlbania: Inclusive Partner Engagement Strategies  focuses on strategies for 
identifying and e ngaging private -sector partners that can stimulate job creation for male a nd female 
youth in agricultu re and support markets programs. This case offers a good example of how sector 
selection with a heavy focus on youth impact as a criteria, and youth -sensitive market analysis, can help 
Activities identify enterprises to co -invest with.  
CASE STUD Y 4: PRISMA: Effective Business Cases and Engagement Approaches for Women’s 
Inclusion  describes tested, context -appropriat e tools and approaches PRISMA developed to engage and 
build the capacity o f market actors to integrate  gender considerations and promote women's inclusion 
into interventions. This approach centered heavily on developing evidence -based, targeted business  
47  |  YOU TH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE:  CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  cases that demonstrated how businesses could improve performance by better u nderstanding and 
addressing gender gaps and dynamics that affect their operations or business models.  
METHODOLOGY  
The Feed the Future Advancing Women’s Empowerment (AWE) program team conducted a desk 
review of program documents, including gender and youth assessments, analyses, and s trategies; gender - 
and youth -sensitive market systems analyses, maps, and diagnostics; theories of change; annual and 
quarterly performance re ports; relevant evaluation or learning studies; and other applicable documents. 
To com plement the document review,  AWE conducted key informant interviews and direct email 
correspondence to clarify information, fill in key gaps, and gather additional insigh ts for a sub -set of 
projects. Both the primary and secondary collected data informed t he data analysis, conclusion s, and 
recommendations. The Landscape Analysis report identified emerging insights and areas for potential 
deeper learning, which apprised the selection of case study themes.  
The AWE research team shared recommendations with the United States Agency for I nternational 
Development ( USAID ) and collaborated in the final selection of case studies. In addition to exploring key 
learning themes, the re search team and USAID agreed on the selection criteria that included 
representation of  at least two youth Activiti es and one Feed the Future Activity. The research team also 
considered a range in locations and markets, distinct gender and age challenges, a nd intended and 
unintended consequences of the Activity, among other criteria. Once se lected, the AWE team 
conduct ed tailored interviews via Microsoft Teams and Skype with at least three key informants per 
Activity, including at least one market actor for the majority of cases. To ensure accuracy and 
completeness of notes, the team recorded  and transcribed all intervi ews in addition to researchers’ own 
notes. The team analyzed the data, then verified findings and conclusions through several rounds of 
emails  and reviews with implementing partners , followed by sharing a courtesy draft of the case study 
report. The case s tudy learning questions are found in each.  
LIMITATIONS  
The team originally planned to conduct in -person interviews and field visits to collec t the information 
for the case studies. Travel and social distancing restrictions due to the COVID -19 pandemic req uired 
adjusting this methodology, so the team organized key informant interviews through videoconferencing 
platforms. Although discussions wer e rich in context and insights, the interviews, which averaged about 
60 minutes per pa rticipant, were limited in t he amount and type of information that could be conveyed. 
Due to COVID -19-related constraints, the research team was also unable to interview women and 
youth participants of the programs. However, the team identified key informa nt interview participants 
based on their ability to provide a broad spectrum of viewpoints and designed interview questions to 
address youth perspectives. These factors m ay have contributed to information gaps that could have 
affected some conclusions and recommendations. To address some of these limitations, the research 
team provided each  implementing partner  with the opportunity to fill gaps through case review, discuss  
and validate findings, and add context and detail, as necessary.  
The bulk of the prog ramming —and the reporting ab out it —occurred in a pre -COVID -19 environment. 
The analysis contained in this report, therefore, maintains that lens. However, the research te am 
acknowledges that the pandemic will heavily affect the conditions and contexts wher e the programs 
work, and fut ure interventions will likely need to account for COVID -19 recovery efforts and the 
impact of the pandemic on households, communities, and soc ial, economic, and food systems globally.   
48  |  YOU TH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE:  CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  SELECT  FINDINGS  FROM ACROSS THE CASES  
Follow ing is a  selection of “top” findings:  
On partnership engagement:  ÉLAN RDC, Promoting Rural Incomes through Support for Markets in 
Agriculture (PRISMA), RisiAlbania, and Y outh Leadership for Agriculture ( YLA) all noted that 
approaching the partnership as a business venture is effectiv e for implementing partners  working with 
private -sector partners. The private sector will not likely engage in inclusion interventions or acti vities 
outside of the scope of their business activities at the outset of the relation ship, but may look to local 
civil society organizations (CSOs) to fill gaps in the sector. For youth specifically, the Driving Youth -led 
New Agribusiness and Microenterpr ise in Northern Uganda (DYNAMIC) and YLA case s show that 
employers, buyers, and financ ial service providers will i ncrease their understanding and willingness to 
support youth and some of their developmental needs, but this happens over a long time period. When 
it comes to younger youth (aged 10 -17), private -sector partnerships are less fru itful. Younger youth 
require  developmentally appropriate support (i.e. , parent and community engagement, life skills , and 
financial assets) that may be best facilitated through high -intensity private -sector partnerships.  
On donor influence: ÉLAN RDC, DYNA MIC, and YLA, and cases demo nstrate how donors influence 
initial program design and set expectations of desired outco mes beyond women and/or youth 
participation targets. Some components prescribed in donor solicitations (sexual and reproductive 
health, voc ational skills, life skills,  formal education) may not respond to preexisting or potential services 
in each market an d, therefore, encourage higher levels of facilitation to comply with contractual 
obligations.  
On design:  The PRISMA and RisiAlbania cases h ighlight the importance of s electing the right sectors, 
particularly in supporting markets, to achieve outcomes for m ale and female youth. This often goes 
beyond looking at where male and female youth currently participate, and requires assessing end 
marke ts and value chain upgrades that can bring about specific opportunities for youth. The ÉLAN RDC 
case adds that an eas ily accessible framework helps Activity staff understand and operationalize gender 
and women’s economic empowerment strategies in MSD proje cts. Consistent and strategi c use of data 
is needed to prove and improve the business case for upgrading women’s role s in market systems and 
facilitate improvements in program performance and impact.  
On monitoring, evaluation, and learning (MEL):  The PRISM A case stresses the importan ce of 
monitoring intervention outcomes and sharing results with partners so they can see the benefits in 
concrete quantitative terms. This allows for solidifying their belief in the intervention and ultimately, 
builds their acco untability for inclusion res ults. DYNAMIC, RisiAlbania, and YLA used different 
approaches, but ultimately highlighted  that a mix of tools and methods is required to capture nuanced 
unintended consequences, such as gender -based differences in training outco mes.  
On staffing and capaci ty: Although a common theme, it is most explicit in the ÉLAN RDC and 
PRISMA cases that internal capacity building and staff ownership are critical for operationalizing 
successful gender strategies and approaches. Staff buy -in and ownership need to happen b efore partners 
can be expected to buy into inclusion interventions.  
On engaging young people: DYNAMIC, RisiAlbania,  and YLA demonstrate that when presented with 
off-farm, market -led opportunities as agents or salaried employees,  youth are willing and eager  to work 
in the agriculture sector. Discounting inputs, linking youth to markets, and incentivizing off -farm market -
driven skills development and opportunities are the primary intervention areas. Youth engaged in  
49  |  YOU TH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE:  CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  production comp ose the bulk of Activity participants and will continue to do so , and finding the right 
incentives and supports for these youth to participate in on -farm work is importan t. These youth 
require a wide range of support, from basic education and technical ski lls to access to land and fi nancial 
services. The engagement of younger youth is a challenge to implementers for reasons primarily related 
to their developmental stage, such as low levels of maturity and poor access to assets, land, and skills.  
CONCLUSIONS  
While the areas of inquiry varied, the team identified a few common threads across the cases. 
Principally, encouraging market actors to lead inclusion efforts is a long -term process. The success of 
this process is dependent on the implementing partner’s d evelopment of a convincing b usiness case and 
a step -by-step relationship -building approach. As stated in the landscape analysis findings, business 
development staff need to h ave specific skills and mindset to perform these functions. The case to 
promote gr eater inclusion may not be i mmediately evident and could require that Activities start by 
investing in developing relationships with market actors that would , over time, evol ve to allow the 
possibility for greater inclusion. The time it takes to achieve th is process will vary and is dependent on 
factors such as availability of data, capacity of staff, and partners’ willingness, as well as what is happening 
in the market; Activ ities will need to be willing to invest time and resources in cultivating a partne r 
relationship before it can  move to the greater inclusion phase, which means this strategy might 
represent a certain level of program risk.   
Sector selection is also a key consideration for women's and youth's inclusion. Effective sector selection 
involv es not only identifying sect ors where women and youth currently participate, but also 
opportunities for upgrades and role expansion that can facilitate greater market inclusi on of women and 
youth. Paying attention to the roles of youth and women can result  in “multiplier” effects. Fo r example, 
empowered youth agents can recruit other youth agents and seek out youth producers to bring in more 
peers into the market. Success of y outh in markets inspires additional youth engagement.  
Unfortunately, market incen tives and women’s and youth’ s needs are not always in alignment. Some key 
needs, such as education, sexual and reproductive health, and life skills, do not figure within the interest 
of the private sector, or the  private sector  does not have the will/skill  to take them on. In some ca ses, 
the perception of misalignment with market -based interests can change over a period of years, as a 
partner begins to see linkages between con sumer, employee, or supplier well -being and personal 
development and their bottom line. In other cases, MSD Activities may shift to less facilitative tactics or 
engage other actors (such as local CSOs) to fill in critical roles. This challenge is especiall y heightened 
when addressing the needs or promoting the inclusion of younger youth , which represents an import ant 
limitation of the MSD approach. The limitation is not necessarily restrictive, but flags that a different 
level of expectation and an openness  to innovation are required to create new pathways to serve the 
younger cohort and  their developmental needs , in addition to their livelihood options.  
Effective MEL that incorporates targets and measures of women's and youth's participation and benefit is  
essential to develop an understanding of project impacts on youth and women along  the project cycle. 
However,  due to their evolving and flexible nature, MSD Activities are challenged to develop and 
implement effective measurements. It is important to stre ngthen MEL practices to not only make the 
business case to staff and partners for greater inclusion of women a nd youth, but also understand what 
is or is not working.  
Finally, project data demonstrate limited early evidence of systemic change in some of t he inclusive 
business models, typically in smaller markets, where it is easier to exert influence. However,  
50  |  YOU TH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE:  CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  intentionally inclusive interventions depend on a slowly  acquired level of  private sector’s  buy-in, which 
might not be possible to obtain and scale across a broader Activity or market. In the case of youth -
targeted Activities, the  results are scattered and l argely in a pilot phase. In short, there are strong signals 
that MSD can work for youth and women, but gaps remain. Donors and implementers have p arts to 
play in further exposing the gaps to achieving systemic, inclusive change and determining whether 
additional support is required, such as complementary programming designed to address the enabling 
environmental and social norms in which a market sy stem operates.  
  
This is one of four ca se studies produced as part of a larger review of how MSD Activities  include women and youth, entitled Youth, Women, 
and Market Systems Development in Agriculture and Supporting Markets: Landscape Analysis and Case Studies Report . The study was conducted f or 
USAID by the Feed the Future AWE program and is available on the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC).  
CASE STUDY  1 
ÉLAN RDC : ADVANCING WOMEN’S ROLES IN 
AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEMS  
 
Photo C redit: ÉLAN RDC  
INTRODUCTION  
This case study focuses on how ÉLAN RDC identifies non -traditional18 opportunities in agriculture and 
supporting markets, and leverages those opportunities to promote greater market inclusion of women 
at scale while also driving bu siness growth. Informed by interviews with staff, it explores the analytical 
tools used to id entify these opportunities, specific gender constraints ÉLAN RDC targets, and tactics 
they use to facilitate women’s entry and expansio n into new or upgraded roles . It also explores the 
measurement tools put in place to document results around women’s empo werment and elicit valuable 
learning. Detailed in this case is ÉLAN RDC’s vision and strategy for how they intend to facilitate 
changes  in women’s roles through th e use of a role -change framework, and complementary and aligned 
monitoring, evaluation, and l earning ( MEL) processes that measure results, help tweak approaches, and 
generate learning around what is and is not working.  
 
18 Traditional  and non-traditional  are terms the research team introduced. Th ey classify distinct types of 
opportunit ies afforded to males and females according to predominant gender and social norms. What is c lassified 
as a traditional  or non-traditional  role or opportunity varies across contexts, because gender and social norms d iffer 
greatly across geographies and env ironments. Traditional opportunities refer to sectors or roles where there is a 
large, or maj ority, share of women employed or participating; they are generally deemed “acceptable” or 
“appropriate” for women to perfo rm as determined by prevailing gender an d social norms.  Non-traditional sectors 
are defined by the U.S. Department of Labor as sector s where 25 percent or less of those employed across the 
field are women. In this case study, non -traditional opportunities are defined as both (1) atypical gender roles in 
traditional sectors and/or the household, based on the intervention, and (2) any rol e in a non -traditional sector.  
Activity  Highlights  
Name:  ÉLAN RDC  
Lead Institution:  Adam Smith 
International (ASI)  
Country:  Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC)  
Donor:  DFID  
Value of Award:  $65 million  
Period of Performance:  2013-2018 
(Phase1); 2019 -2020 (Phase II), with 
possible 1-year extension   
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV   
KEY FIN DINGS  
1. Focus on both the term s and nature of women’s participation, and the benefits derived 
from it, to facilitate more meaningful changes to women’s p ositions within the market system. 
Clear and aligned expectations from donors are critical to achieving d esired outcomes beyond 
the number of women who participate in market systems development ( MSD) Activities or 
interventions.  
2. Use accessible tools and p rovide staff capacity -development opportunities  to help teams 
operationalize gender and women’s economic empowerment (WEE) strategies  in MSD 
Activities. In ÉLAN RDC, a role -change framework gives staff a vision of where and how 
changes can happen, as well as a sector -specific understanding of role chan ges that particular  
partnerships and interventions  target . 
3. Ensure staff buy -in and own ership  of a gender strategy , because this is critical to getting 
partners to buy into inclusion as a business concept.  
4. Provide a clear value proposition or business case to garner interest from private -sector 
partners to engage in concepts around gender.  
5. Consistently and strategically use data  to prove and improve the business case for upgrading 
women’s roles in market systems , and enhance an Activity’s performance and imp act.  
ABOUT THE ACTIVITY  
ÉLAN RDC is an MSD Activity that aims to reduce poverty in fo ur geographical regions in the DRC by 
increasing the incomes of more than 1 million poor smallholder producers, entrepreneurs, and 
consumers by the end of 2020. The Activ ity does this by tackling the root causes of market failur es and 
constraints, in partn ership with more than 150 private -sector actors in finance, energy, transport, and 
agriculture,19 through more than 100 interventions that offer technical advice, mobiliz e funds, and 
encourage networks to change their business pr actices. Cross -cutting secto rs include Markets in Crisis, 
Business Development Services (or BDS), Business Enabling Environment, and WEE. At the end of 2019, 
ÉLAN RDC benefited more than 855,0 00 Congolese (31 percent women) through net positive income 
change (32 pounds, or approximat ely $40, per person per annum on average) and has seen changes in 
business practices benefiting over 1,306, 000 Congolese (30.5 percent women).  
CONTEXT   
Women in the DRC experience high rates of poverty, insufficient access to ba sic services including 
educa tion and healthcare, restricted access to and/or control over economic assets, and limited 
influence over decision making at all levels. Harmful practices such as child,  early, and forced marriage, 
female genital mutilation, dom estic and intimate partner v iolence, and marital rape are widespread, and 
deep-rooted cultural norms and practices have hindered progress on gender equality. Women work 
 
19 Transport was only included in Phase I. Agricultural commodities consist of coffee, cacao , maize, and rice.  This case explores a cor e learning question : What formative analysis tools were used to identify non -
traditional mark et opportu nities, and how were these opportunities leveraged to promote greater market 
inclusion of women?   
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  primarily in the informal se ctor, in low -skill, low -wage roles with limited potential f or upward mobility. 
Addition ally, women tend to take on multiple roles in the DRC —they function as principal income 
providers within a household , and also take on unpaid and “invisible” duties, suc h as caring for children 
and domestic tasks . This results in women’s triple burden and time poverty. While women are essential 
to the labor force in the DRC, they are also highly marginalized within it —participation does not 
necessarily mean that women der ive benefit from their work.20 
From 2013 to mid -2019, ÉLAN R DC has heightened their focu s on integrating WEE into their market 
systems programming. For the first two years of implementation, ÉLAN RDC centered on devising 
approaches necessary to obtain the ambitious goal of reaching 1.7 million people,21 half of who m should 
be women. This targ et prompted discussion with the Activity team about whether focusing simply on 
participation would be enough, given what they knew about women’s constraints to realizing the full 
benefit s of their labor. In 2015, in dialogue wit h the UK Department for Inte rnational Development 
(DFID ), the Activity committed to revising their gender strategy and focusing on both the terms and 
nature of women’s participation.  
Starting in 2016, ÉLAN RDC beg an piloting a role -change framework that s ought to promote WEE 
through  six role changes as a vehicle for greater gender equality. These role changes were an attempt to 
apply traditional WEE domains to sector -specific opportunities that relate to women’s ad vancement into 
upgraded roles or functions . Now, in its second phase o f implementation, ÉLAN RDC 1.2 has deepened 
its focus on fewer interventions in a smaller geographic area, with an emphasis on drawing in market 
actors to promote more systemic change. T hey continue to use the role -change framew ork to amplify 
their WEE wor k, including getting greater market actors’ buy -in and ownership. ÉLAN RDC 1.2 has also 
expanded their gender equality and social inclusion ( GESI) work to include disability.   
STRATEGY A ND LEARNING  
ANALYZING SECTORS AND IDENTIFY ING MARKET OPPORTUNITIES  
In the inception phase of the project in 2013, ÉLAN RDC carried out rigorous analyses of every 
economic sector in the country, and developed criteria for shortlisting the sectors they would  work in. 
A component of the sector select ion criteria was the extent to which the sector would generate 
opportunities for female participation, including looking at sectors where women were already 
participating and where upgrades would facilitate greater  entry and expansion of women’s roles. 
Throughout the inception phase,  DFID provided more clarity on their gender expectations, including a 
desire to reach 50 percent of men and 50 percent of women in Activity beneficiaries. This information 
strongly infor med sector selection . Activity staff noted  that, without that directio n from the donor, the 
initial sector selection likely would have moved toward more economically attractive sectors, which 
tend to be dominated by men. While competitiveness was still a f actor for ÉLAN RDC’s sector 
selection, it was not the only one, giving  equal weight to potential for economic inclusion.  
It’s very hard to go back and try to bring in sectors that have more representation 
and opportunities for women, and so if your starti ng point is a bunch of sectors that 
 
20 More information a vailable at : 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5bc4882465019f632b2f8653/t/5ca61 5109140b74b435d77e0/1554388254679/
ELAN_WEE_Learning_Series_Case_Study_1_FINAL.pdf  
21 The targ et was subsequently scaled back in discussions with the donor.   
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  are do minated by men, the window, the room for maneuverability , is already 
weakened.  – ÉLAN RDC staff  
ÉLAN RDC also conducted political economy analysis (PEA) and gender analysis at the regional levels, 
which were tied to the selected sectors. Sector - and conte xt-specific constraints and opportunities for 
female participation were used to inform sector strategies. Staff noted that while insights from these 
analyses were valuable, they were not always fully integrated in to Activity -level strategy due to pressure 
to move interventions forwar d upon sector selection, not fully allowing time for the gendered insights 
to be well integrated. Furthermore, focusing on reaching 1.7 million people, half of whom had to be 
women, infl uenced how the analysis was structured —it looked primarily at sectors with high female 
participation or opportunities for female participation. The analysis focused on where the numbers were 
and what it would take to reach 850,000 women. Staff felt that th e analysis lacked an assessment of the 
social norms that affected roles and responsibilities of women and men, which would be critical in later 
stages to fully understand how to influence movement around role change within these sectors.  
Now, in the secon d phase, ÉLAN RDC 1.2, DFID defined sector s in the solicitation and th e Activity 
team validated them during the inception phase, which included looking at expanded opportunities for 
women.  
Learning from Formative Research Processes: How to Gather the Righ t Information at the 
Right Time to Build I nformed Strategies Activity Staff Can Operationalize  
At the beginning of the project, ÉLAN RDC conducted preliminary research into male and female roles, but it 
lacked the depth of insight necessary to understand h ow these role change processes come about,  what they 
consist of, where  they align with market -based incentives, and how they need to be contextualized for 
different populations. While the Activity conducted further research to understand these dynamics, th e 
pressure to move ahead with intervention s, coupled with low GESI cap acity of staff , made it difficult to 
integrate insights from the PEA and gender analyses into the intervention design  and partner engagement 
strategies and approaches. This resulted in WEE efforts that were focused in a few sel ect sectors and led by 
the G ESI advisor, ra ther than diffused across the Activity with leadership and ownership from all Activity staff. 
Fuller analysis at the beginning would have allowed the team to dig deeper into gender constraints and 
opportunities, p roviding more nuanced unders tanding of the different market segments and ways to better 
advise businesses to reach women. Furthermore, having Activity staff understand how and why to use these 
data would have equipped them with necessary information to mov e approaches forward and  set the tone 
for the Activity’s WEE efforts. (See Annex 2  in Youth, Women and Market Systems Development in 
Agriculture and Supporting Markets Landscape Analysis and Case Studies Report for ÉLAN RDC GESI 
Strategy, Guidance and Tools,  and MEL Resour ces.)  
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES TO PROMOTE WOMEN’S ROLE CHANGES  
To help Activity staff and the donor better 
understand and operationalize WEE work 
within the Activity, ÉLAN RDC devised a 
role-change framework (s ee Exhibit 15 
below) that consists of six role changes 
specific to the DRC context and based on 
traditional WEE domains. These role changes 
apply to different market systems, span both 
supply and demand, and allow f or spillover 
between economi c, household, and 
community spheres. ÉLAN RDC believes this 
is a significant departure from many MSD 
programs because it goes beyond women’s 
participation and incremental income 
increases toward more meaningful changes to 
women’ s positions within ma rket sy stems, 
and defines gendered results as: a woman’s 
role having been upgraded or expanded to 
derive more benefits. Under this model, a 
woman’s role is considered to have 
progressed when as a result of an 
intervention, she experie nces one or more of 
the foll owing six changes over a sustained period:  
• Women’s labor recognized and rewarded   
• New position  acquired or role upgraded  
• Access to capacity development   
• Improved working conditions   
• Improved status   
• Access to goods and services catering to women’s n eeds  
These role changes vary by intervention (e.g. , consumer - vs. producer -focused) as shown  in Exhibit 15. How the Role -Change Framework Can Be an 
Effective Strat egy and Communication Tool  
• Communicates to Activity staff where there are 
opportunities to im prove women’s positions in 
market systems in language that resonates with what 
they know and connect with.  
• Engages Activity staff in dialogue around WEE, 
overcomi ng biases that lead to the reluctance of 
Activity staff to buy into WEE , and focuses on where  
role changes make commercial sense.  
• Depicts where women currently participate and a 
vision of role change to show a whole pathway of 
opportunities that can be gen erated if an Activity can 
shift gender norms, align approaches with market -
based incentives, and convincingly make the case to 
market actors.  
• Demonstrates to the donor how the Activity goes 
beyond merely counting women to shifting women’s 
roles within the  market spaces where the Ac tivity 
operates.   
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 15: Descrip tions of the six role change types  
 
To op erationalize this framework,  Activity staff develop a role-change sector sheet  for each of the sectors 
ÉLAN RDC operates in. The sheet includes descriptions of women’s current roles in the sector, a vision 
of how women’s roles will change as a result of ÉL AN RDC’s engagement, whether  it is a targeted or 
desired outcome, and suggeste d indicators and guidance on how they can be measured. Exhibit 16 offers 
an example excerpt22 from the coffee and cocoa role -change sector  sheet Activit y staff filled  out. 
Exhibit 16: Excerpt from women’ s role change sector sheet – coffee and cocoa  
Gender Constraints : While women are present and active in the coffee and cocoa sectors, both are 
considered “male crops,”  with men perc eived as “genu ine farmers” and women as “helpers” engaged as unpaid 
labor. This is largely due to customary law around land tenure —men own land and women work it, and 
entrenched gender norms where men are income -earners. Where women are activ e, they are pr oducers and 
processors, and are absent from trading —the point at which information and re muneration are exchanged.  
 Current Roles  Vision for Role 
Change  Targeted/ 
Desired  Suggested 
Indicator  Measurement  
New 
position  Women are rarely 
recrui ted as lead 
farmers or agric ultural 
instructors, and are 
absent from leadership 
positions within 
cooperative structures. 
Women’s participation 
in higher value roles —Women increasingly 
take on leadership 
positions at farm level 
(e.g., as lead farmers and 
agricultural instructors) 
and at the cooperative 
level (e.g., as cooperative 
board members).  Targeted  # of women 
with new 
positions:      
Women le ad 
farmers and 
female 
agricultural 
instructors  
 Baseline 
establishe d 
through partner 
key informant 
interviews and 
retrospective 
data 
 
 
22 This role change sector she et is from phase one of ÉLAN RDC. Changes have been made to streamline  the role 
change sheet in phase two of the Activity.   
 
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Gender Constraints : While women are present and active in the coffee and cocoa sectors, both are 
considered “male crops,”  with men perc eived as “genu ine farmers” and women as “helpers” engaged as unpaid 
labor. This is largely due to customary law around land tenure —men own land and women work it, and 
entrenched gender norms where men are income -earners. Where women are activ e, they are pr oducers and 
processors, and are absent from trading —the point at which information and re muneration are exchanged.  
 Current Roles  Vision for Role 
Change  Targeted/ 
Desired  Suggested 
Indicator  Measurement  
cupping and laboratory -
based roles in coffee, 
and trading and 
packaging roles in 
cocoa —is minimal;  
however, these are 
roles women aspire to.  Women are 
on 
cooperative 
boards  Annual survey 
data 
Labor 
Recognized 
and 
Rewarded  Given the cooperative -
based organizing  
structure for coffee and 
cocoa, women do not 
have employme nt 
contracts, and 
cooperative 
membership tends to 
be organized by 
smallholding and in 
their husbands’ names.  
 
Women typically work 
as unpaid laborers on 
their “husband’s  farm” 
with few to no rights , 
and husbands control 
decisions around 
income. Female coffee 
producers have little 
leverage in negotiating 
better pricing.  Women either 
previously focused on 
subsistence activ ities or 
already engaged in 
coffee/cocoa in an 
invisible capacity have 
been able  to enter/ 
become visible in the 
sector and are 
recognized as genuine 
farmers, through direct 
membership in 
cooperatives.  
 
As registered 
cooperative members, 
women increasingly sell 
their own product and 
receive a direct income .  Targeted  # of women 
whose  labor 
is 
rewarded: 
Female 
members 
directly 
selling crops 
to 
cooperatives 
and/or other 
buyers  Baseline 
established 
through partner 
key informant 
interviews and 
retrospective 
data 
 
Annual survey 
data 
Most of the role changes ide ntified in the framework are  those that are feasible within the business 
case—there is clear alignment between impact for women and incentive -driven, commercial models. 
Examples of inclusive business models demonstrated through ÉLAN RDC are presented in Exhibit 17.23 
 
23 See ÉLAN RDC’s brief on Promoting Ge nder-Responsive Business Models in DRC at: 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5bc4882 465019f632b2f8653/t/5ca61698e2c4832b7065ea12/1554388643835/
ELAN+RDC+WEE+Lessons+Learnt_Final _digital1.pdf   
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 17: Inclusive business models that demonstrate alignment between impact for women and 
private -sector incentives  
SECTOR  MODEL  PRIVATE SECTOR 
INCENTIVE(S)  WEE IMPACT(S)  ROLE CHANGE  
Access to 
Finance
 Rural 
agency 
banking 
model  Rural agency banking leads 
to gains for financial service 
providers by capturing an 
underserved consumer 
segment (low -income 
women), including higher 
loan repayment and savings 
rates. Expanded number o f 
female agents are more 
profitable than men and help 
reach broader female 
consumer base.  Women have increased 
access to formal banking 
services, which provide 
greater opportunity to save, 
borrow, and have a bankable 
history —a prerequisite for 
accessing l arger forms of 
finance. Wome n take greater 
control over  their own 
income, spending, and saving.  Improved access to 
goods and services 
that cater to 
women’s needs, 
new position 
(female agents), and 
improved status, 
including decision 
making over income 
and household 
finances  
Maize  
 Gender -
responsive 
contract 
farming 
model  Gender -responsive contract 
farming leads to increases in 
quality and productivity, with 
female contract farmers 
having demonstrated equal 
or greater productivity 
levels, and a reduction  in 
side-selling.  More women  are recruited 
as contract signatories, given 
concessionary land for 
production and/or granted 
land by their husbands (55 
percent), earn more income, 
have an increased influence 
over its use, and 
demonstrate greater 
economic res ilience.  Labor is recognize d 
and rewarded, 
improved working 
conditions, and 
improved status, 
including decision -
making power  
Coffee  
 Gender -
impact 
product 
line model  Female product line ( café 
femme ) drives up quantity 
and quality that lead to 
increased revenue and 
income for membe rs, 
secures high -value contracts 
between cooperative and 
end markets, taps into 
growing and lucrative “social 
impact” product market, and 
accesses new buyers and 
exporters.  Women enter a new, high -
value sector, increasing value 
capture. Wom en increase 
their income and have 
greater influence over how it 
is used. Women take on 
leadership roles and men 
grant plots to their wives, 
registered in their name.  New position, labor 
is recognized and 
rewarded, 
improved working 
conditions, access 
to capacity 
developme nt, and 
status  
To further describe how these WEE impacts were achieved using market -driven approaches, the 
gender -impact product line called café femme  was developed through a partnership with Muungano, a 
coffee cooperative ba sed in South Kivu, and TWIN,  a nongovernmental organization (NGO) focused on 
strengthening producer organizations and helping them foster long -term trading relationships in the 
DRC.  This partnership aimed to pilot an inclusive business model, whereby femal e-produced coffee is 
quality -controlled, exported, marketed, and sold to Western markets willing to pay a premium. While a 
third of Muungano’s members were women, they had limited a wareness of the commercial value in 
“social impact” end markets and the eco nomic gains that could be re alized by improving conditions of 
women’s participation. Using a range of market facilitation tactics, ÉLAN RDC and TWIN supported 
Muungano to improve co ffee quality, develop an internal control system that enabled full traceabi lity of 
coffee cherries to f emale farmers, and generate and share a convincing business case for the café femme  
model. ÉLAN RDC also helped to build capacity of local institutions, such as TWIN, to cultivate female 
leadership and address harmful gender nor ms. The pilot showed that by  specifically investing in and 
targeting improvements in women’s production practices, Muungano could increase coffee cherry 
quality by 23 percent, selli ng approximately 42,300 pounds of women -produced coffee for a 120 
 
9  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  cent/pound premium versus non -special ized coffee. The benefits for women were also substantial, 
including increases in women’s incomes by nearly $70 per annum, 55 percent of married women in  the 
cooperative receiving plots from their husbands, nearly 30 percent of cooperative leadership posit ions 
being occupied by women, and 70 percent of Muungano’s female members now involved in trading.  
While the café femme  model has been highly successful  under ÉLAN RDC, ongoing challenges that limit 
the scalability of the model  include: (1) limited absorp tive capacity of female -produced coffee , because it 
represents a relatively small market share ; (2) high upfront investment costs involved in setting up a 
traceability system and upgrading coffee quality ; and (3) potential risks  in focusing on an exclusive ly 
female product, including exacerbating women’s time poverty and social and inter -household tensions. 
Under ÉLAN RDC 1.2, the Activity will look for wa ys to share the evidence on the commercial viability 
of the café femme  mode l with market actors across sectors.   
MEASURING, EVALUATING, AND LEARNING FROM WOMEN’S ROLE CHANGES  
To measure targeted or desired outcomes in women’s role changes, ÉLAN RDC incorp orates log -frame 
indicators at the output and outcome levels, which align w ith the six role changes lis ted above. The 
Activity does this by developing Intervention Guides24 that include gender -responsive results chains and 
relevant role change(s) the ÉLAN RDC sector lead and the partner (i.e., market actor) jointly identify 
and di scuss. Working closely with the MEL manager, the sector lead also ensures that in discussions 
with partners, the appropriate measurements for that targeted role change(s) are developed, and that 
targeted role change(s) and reporting requirements are integr ated in the partnership agre ement.  The 
MEL manager pointed to the necessity of integrating these  role changes in the results chains because 
“that’s what is ultimately leading the measurement plan and all the measurement activities,”  ensuring the 
Activity r emains committed to achievin g outcomes around it.    
ÉLAN RDC uses a series of qualitative and qu antitative SMART ( specific, measurable, achievable, 
realistic, and timely) proxy indicators to measure role changes at different moments in time and better 
estimate the number of women exp anding or upgrading their roles. These types of indicators are 
espec ially important in dynamic and complex market systems, whereby women’s roles can progress and 
regress in a non -linear fashion over time. Indicator data are coll ected from a variety of sour ces to make 
sure the full picture of women’s role changes is capture d by validating outcomes and soliciting insights 
from sector leads, partners, beneficiaries, association representatives, and so on. Data are collected 
through partner reporting, beneficia ry and partner interviews, market actor scoping, and annual surveys 
on women’s role change(s), which include questions on what women do, how they use their time, and 
decision -making power over income and household budgets. This information is analyzed and reported 
out to the donor, staff, partners, and market actors, when relevant, through analytical reports, 
Intervention Guides , partner reports, newsletters, and success stories. Three (3) years after the 
introduction of the fram ework, ÉLAN RDC facilitated upgraded roles for nearly 55,000 women.   
Additionally, the ÉLAN RDC Monitoring and Results Measurement team undertakes ongoing and ad -hoc 
observational research to capture and understand unintended consequences , and/or how chang es were 
facilitated and why.  An example of this are the three qualitative learning studies prior itized under Phase I 
of ÉLAN RDC to develop a richer understanding of gender -differentiated impact, individual pathways to 
change, and intended and unintended o utcomes of women’s engagemen t in these business models. This 
 
24 Intervention Guides  are detailed resources developed a nd refined by and for Activity staff to guide interventions. 
They include the intervention re sults chain, the measurement plan, and results, among other things.    
10  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  research elicited unintended outcom es around the potential of these models to exacerbate women’s 
time poverty (and potential displacement of care and domestic work on children) and ongoing challe nges 
related to deeply entre nched norms that limit WEE despite the fact that they were able to m ake 
important advances in shifting the normative environment through these pilots. Information gathered 
through these studies was compiled into a Women’s Econom ic Empowerment Learning Seri es, intended to 
help ÉLAN RDC improve its own programming for women and build the evidence base around “what 
works” to economically empower women in the DRC using market -driven approaches.  
DEVELOPING GREATER STAFF BUY -IN, OWNER SHIP, AND CAPACITIES TO 
OPER ATIONALIZE GENDER STRATEGY IN ÉLAN RDC  
A critical component of oper ationalizing the role -change framework, and the WEE strategy more 
generally, is building staff capacity and ownership. The GESI lead for ÉLAN RDC noted that MSD  
interventions place a lot o f emphasis on partners, and building their interest and capacity to change 
attitudes and practices; while this is important, it needs to be preceded by staff ownership and capacity 
development to fully operationalize and realize  the benefits of these chang es.  
I know everyone wants to see th is transformation at the partner  level, but I honestly 
feel like in most cases, we put the cart before the horse, where we overly focus on 
what’s happening at the partner level without recogni zing that the advocate for t his, 
the mouthpiece for this change, isn’t yet really comfortable in  advocating for it fully.  
– ÉLAN RDC staff  
Tactics to build gender capacity, ownership, and buy -in of role -change framework among Activity staff in 
ÉLAN RDC co nsisted of:  
• Establishing GE SI champions in each region25 to provide advice and support to intervention 
leads (e.g., assess and evaluate the  activities to determine whether they meet criteria and 
understanding of gender)  
• Helping sector teams understand tha t WEE/gender is not above ot her priorities, but is core to 
any kind of value proposition given to partners  
• Making sector teams responsible  for gender integration in partnerships, leading to greater 
ownership over WEE work among staff and more meaningful i ntegration  
• Ongoing staff tr aining on women’s role changes; early introduction of role -change concepts 
and strategy so that staff can align , define what can be done, and determine roles and 
responsibilities   
• Coaching programs with senior managers   
• Monthl y newsletter featuring role changes to reinforce the concepts and make them practical  
• Guidance note to staff around what role changes migh t look like in the context of COVID -1926 
 
25 This approach was emp loyed under Phase I of ÉLAN RDC. Under Phase II (or ÉLAN RDC 1.2), the  Activity has 
not used this approach, because the geographic scope and Activity team are much  smaller.  
26 For more information see: https://w ww.elanrdc.com/latest -news/2020/5/5/measuring -progression -in-womens -
roles-special -covid -19  
11  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Pause -and-reflect sessions focusing exclusively on GESI and role changes with in specific sectors  
• Conduct ing stock -taking exercises to elicit areas for further staff capacity development on 
gender and areas where gr eater ownership and buy -in are needed  
As a result of the diverse tactics ÉLAN RDC employed to build staff capacities a nd ownership of gender 
work,  the GESI team lead noted that their role changed from convincing staff of the need for gender 
integration in their work to equipping them with the tools and resources they needed to operationalize 
the work.  
With ÉLAN, that the re’s [sic] more people on th e team that are genuinely bought 
into the concept and are excited about it, and so my role shifts to, instead of 
pleading with them for the case, it’s now shifted towards, “Oh, here’s resources… 
[sic] Let me just arm you with mo re guidance and how to do it  well,” which is an 
exciting role to play. – ÉLAN RDC staff  
CONCLUSIONS   
ÉLAN RDC’s role -change framework was effective in articulating a vision of women’s empowerment in 
market systems that focused on upgraded and expanded role s for women beyond where the y currently 
participated and incremental increases in income. The visu alization in Exhibit 18: ÉLAN RDC: 
Opportunities to Progress Women’s Roles in the C offee and Maize Sectors  shows key points at which 
ÉLAN RDC prioritized, analyzed , and responded to constraints that limit ed both market actors and 
women , as well as o pportunities to progress wom en’s roles in agricultural sectors.   
12  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 18: ÉLAN RDC: Opportunities to Progress Women’s Roles in the C offee and Maize Sectors  
  
 
13  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV   
As Exhibit 18 shows, market analyses and formative research helped contextualize these role changes,  
including the targeted cons traints and pathways by which changes came about. This information then fed 
directly into the de sign of sector -specific strategies and role -change sheets that clearly articulate d 
current roles and constraints, vision for change,  and measurements to monitor  and evaluate progression 
to those changes. While there were some highly successful examples of employing MSD tactics to 
stimulate changes in women’s roles, including making a convincing business case, this has not been fully 
operationalized across ÉLAN RD C’s broader portfolio, with many citing the private sector not being 
convinced of the business c ase and not always having the data necessary to convince them. Activity staff 
are working on tackling this under ÉLAN RDC 1.2. Measu rements on women’s role chan ges and 
associated MEL tools are critical to understanding not just the extent to which women pa rticipate, but 
also what the terms of that participation look like according to the six role changes.  
One unanticipated learning fr om this case study is the de gree to which internal capacity -building efforts 
and greater ownership and buy -in among staff ar e critical to fully operationalize strategies focused on 
WEE. Many ÉLAN RDC staff interviewed for this case study felt that the capa city development efforts 
underpinned all of the GESI work, with one staff member indicating it was  paramount to:   
Get your h ouse in order. You need to have the full power of your technical and 
program management teams behind the integration of gender consi derations in 
everything you do, both represented in your project makeup, but as well as [sic] in 
the technical and operation al aspects of the project, your tool design, your systems, 
 
14  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRI CULTURE: CASE STUDIES   WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  and at the end of the day, the data that your team members are presenting  to 
business partners.  – ÉLAN RDC staff  
While ÉLAN RDC has had great success in identifying sector -specific market opportun ities where 
women’s roles can be upgraded or expanded, there are still challenges to fully realizing robust gender 
results, includin g: 
• Business partners continu e to have low interest in engaging in concepts around gender without 
a convincing business case or value proposition given high upfront investment costs, perceived 
riskiness of investing in inclusive business models, and deeply entrenched gender and social  
norms. Examples in the maize, coffee, and financial services sectors detailed in this report 
show there are opportunities to generate localized commercial cases for targeting women, and 
they are highly influential in getting ma rket actors to adopt more in clusive business models and 
practices. More evidence is needed on to what extent these commercia l cases made with 
discrete Activity -supported actors influence other market actors to adopt similar models 
(described more in the po int below).  
• Data, figures, a nd clear results speaking to the benefit of women’s upgraded roles are needed 
to influence attit udes and behaviors of market actors (i.e., businesses), program participants 
(i.e., male and female farmers) , and Activity staff. On going monitoring, reflection , and learning 
can help sustain momentum and move away from any “check -the-box” attitudes. This 
information needs to be widely disseminated and discussed with partners to generate curiosity 
and influence market actors to adopt m ore inclusive business model s. Working directly 
through Activity staff to communicate this message is one way to do this , but there are likely 
also opportunities to build greater champions within the network of partners ÉLAN RDC 
works with to be mouthpiece s for advantages of more inc lusive business models.  
I feel like for ÉLAN as a program, it’s rather understood how it[s] [ro le changes] can 
be valuable. At the partner level, often, it remains a tick -the-box exercise. Also, if 
they are not told to do so , they will not do because basi cally, they don’t see the value 
in it. – ÉLAN RDC staff  
CONTACT  
For more information on ÉLAN RD C, contact Lucine Le Moal at Lucine.LeMoal@elanrdc.com.  
  
This is one of four ca se studies produced as part of a larger review of how MSD Activities  include women and youth, entitled Youth, Women, 
and Market Systems Development in Agriculture and Supporting Markets: Landscape Analysis and Case Studies Report . The study was conducted f or 
USAID by the Feed the Future AWE program and is available on the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC).  
CASE STUDY  2 
FACILITATION INTENSITY IN YOUTH M ARKET  
SYSTEMS  DEVELOPMENT  IN UGANDA   
 INTRODUCTION   
A market systems development  (MSD) approach is 
increasingly used to develop market -driven 
employment and entrepreneurship opportunities for 
specific populations, including young women and men. 
A core feature of an MSD approach is facilitation27—
working through  market actors to stimulate mo re 
sustainable change, minimizing an Activity’s direct role. 
Activities employ facilitation with varied levels of 
intensity , ranging from low (no or minimum subsidy, 
low levels of project direction)  to high (heavy subsidies 
and project direction).  
Several  important components of youth 
development —life and business skills, knowledge and 
competencies, healthy family and community 
relationships, and sexual and reproductive health (SRH) 
awareness —may be  targeted in youth -inclusiv e MSD. 
Addressing this wider ra nge of youth development 
needs is critical to the achievement of sustainable decent livelihoods , because youth need support to 
take advantage of the opportunities generated. However, facilitation re lies on leveraging market -based 
incentives for change, and  this can challenge the range of youth development components an MSD 
approach can address. For example, the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) 
Feed the Future Youth Leadershi p for Agriculture (YLA) and Mastercard Foundation’s Drivin g Youth -led 
New Agribusiness and Microenterprise in Northern Uganda (DYNAMIC) both  facilitate youth -inclusive 
MSD, but address the challenges from different angles, which are analyzed below.  
 
 
27 For more on facilitation, see https://www.marketlinks.org/good -practice -center/value -chain -wiki/facilitation  and 
https://beamexchange.org/guidance/vision/facilitation -role/. Through the experience of these two Uganda -based programs, this case study explores a core  learning 
question: How  does facilitation intensity affect th e capacity of an MSD  approach to address 
critical components of young women’s and men’s devel opment ? Activity  Highlights  
Name:  YLA 
Lead Institution:  Chemonics 
International  
Country:  Uganda  
Donor:  USAID  
Value of Award:  $21.5 million  
Period of Performance:  2015-2020 
Name:  DYNAMIC  
Lead Institution:  GOAL  
Countr y: Uganda  
Donor:  Mastercard Foundation  
Value of Award:  $21.5 million  
Period of Performance:  2015-2021  
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  KEY F INDINGS  
1. Employers, buyers, a nd financial service providers can increase their understanding and 
willingness to support youth and some of their needs, such as parental outreach, services closer 
to home, and safety considerations. However, it takes time for implemen ters to develop the 
business case and for market actors to understand and be open to it and then engage youth 
independently, regularly, and without facilitation.  
2. Donors prescribe youth development components, such as life skills, SRH, and parental  and 
community engagement in  solicitations. These components may be challenging to facilitate 
through MSD approaches , because appropriate market actors may not exist or Activities may 
not be able to incentivize  them to respond to these gaps. Therefore, to address some youth 
component s, implementers may have to resort to intensive facilitation approaches , such as 
heavy subsidies. A higher -intensity facilitation approach allowed DYNAMIC to more reliably 
address a wide range of key youth development needs. At  the tim e of writing, the su stainability 
of DYNAMIC’ s market -facilitated youth mobilization and empowerment approach, delivered 
through peer educators, is unknown.  
3. When Activities provide youth with substantial input subsidies, adult parents and other 
comm unity me mbers can react nega tively toward the companies providing the products. These 
are the same types of tensions that exist in traditional development aid projects.  
4. Without a commitment to track the dimensions of change in female youth’s opportunities 
(norms change, role change, and other non -monetary indicators of well -being) through 
formative gender analyses and comprehensive monitoring, evaluation, and learning ( MEL) tools, 
outcomes for women remain either anecdotal or too high -level to glean specifi city. This was the 
case rega rdless of the level and intensity of project interventions.  
5. Neither MSD program was able to address youth SRH in a comprehensive manner. Ther e 
remains a question as to whether the programs are suited to address SRH based on a ra nge of 
factors: the limitati ons of facilitation, the ability to deliver blanket coverage given the range of 
entry points, the distraction from other core activities, and  the inability to provide the service 
sustainably.  
6. Younger youth (aged 10 -17) are not  well served using low -intensity facilitation. While it is 
possible to facilitate asset -building opportunities, these interventions are more akin to highly 
subsidized youth development or education programing.  
ABOUT THE A CTIVITIES  
Feed the Future YLA focuses on leveraging the privat e sector to unlock opportunities for Ugandan 
male and female  youth aged 10 -35 in agriculture -related fields to increase their incomes and build 
entrepreneurship, leadership, and workforce readiness. YLA strives to strengthen th e capacity of 
selected workf orce institutions and value chain actors to secure sustainab ility of innovative youth 
engagement approaches. By Activity end, YLA aims to reach 350,000 youth (of which 70 percent are 
women) with income and skills in agriculture.  
DYNAMIC  is a Mastercard Fou ndation -funded Activity strengthening key agricultural syste ms to create 
and sustain employment and self ‐employment opportunities for economically disadvantaged youth. The 
program focuses on tillage and improved inputs through a gents, facilitates access to  markets and financial 
services, and provides  a wide range o f training —from formal technical and vocational education and  
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  training to financial literacy through peer educators. By Activity end, DYNAMIC will reach 110,000 out -
of-school youth aged 15 -24 (or iginal target 125,000) who live in peri -urban and rural area s in northern 
Uganda.  
THE C ONTEXT   
Uganda is home to the world’s second youngest population —75 percent  of Ugandans are under 30 
years old —with more than a million young  people entering the job mar ket each year ( World Bank 
2019). While the labor force expands exponentially and the economy has been growing at a steady 6 -
percent  annual rate, job creation and labor produc tivity have not increased co rrespondingly 
(International Monetary Fund [ IMF] 2019). As a result, 83.5  percent  of the Ugandan p opulation aged 15 -
29 work in informal jobs (10  percent  higher for young women than men). Informal jobs are often 
insecure, poorly paid , and unsafe.  
Women and youth are disproportio nately represented in the in formal economy and disadvantaged. The 
“youth b ulge” will likely expand the informal economy as young people enter the labor market and 
young women struggle to benefit equally from work opportunities. Uganda has one of the highes t rates 
of teenage pregnancy : 25 percent  of girls aged between 15  and 19 years have had a baby or are pregnant 
at the time of the study ( World Bank 2016 ). Pregnancy , motherhood, safety, home o bligations , and 
harmful social norms limit wom en’s ability to take advantage of  economic opportunities .  
The agriculture sector is underperforming compared with the rest of Uganda’s economy and its growth 
has not kept up with th e population expansion, repr esenting ripe market opportunity ( Overseas 
Development Institute [ ODI] 2017). In this sector, Uganda ns are underemployed  and engaged in 
unstable or precarious work with poor incomes, particularly in subsistence agriculture or working for 
informal, low -productivity household enterprises. Modernizing  rural economy requires the formalization 
of employment, decreased fertility rates, a nd increased educational attainment , among other challenging 
and costly reform s. With a high capacity to absorb workers and meet youth where they are, facilitating 
win-win opportunities for youth in the sector could contribute to this goal.  
   
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ACTIVITY  STR ATEG IES AND LEARNING  
ACTIVITY 1: FEE D THE FUTURE YLA  
 
SOURCE: YLA  
STRATEGY  
YLA used a market -led approach to expand economic opportunities through increased incomes, skills, 
and competencies of a targeted 350,000 young men and  women. The Activity provide d business 
development support, investments, and incentives to encourage private -sector actors to provide youth 
with t echnical assistance, training, mentoring, and greater  access to input and output markets. YLA 
defined youth as  aged 10 -35 years old and f ocused on a younger age cohort. Atypical for an MSD 
intervention , USAID required YLA to emphasize life skills for heal thy living and reproductive 
health/family planning. In accordance with USAID’s Youth Policy , it was acknowledg ed that young women 
in parti cular are unable to gain skills necessary to earn  sustainable income , often due to unplanned 
pregnancies, child care , and other responsibilities in the home. YLA’s process of change is represented 
in Exhibit 19, underpinn ed by the support to partners through business development services.  
Exhibit 19: YLA’s process of change  
 
 
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  LEARNING  
YLA embraced USAID’s collaborating, learning , and adapting (CLA) approach,28 which values pivots in 
response to  ongoing learning. YLA’s rapid learning cycle (mid -year strategy sessions and quarterly all -
staff reflection events) focused on better understanding failures, constraints, and the ability of staff and 
interventions to address th em through programmatic shif ts. Key pivots included:  
Partnership design : As an essential  implementation vehicle for YLA, partnership design was an area 
where YLA made a critical pivot. YLA initially started partnership designs by looking at youth’s needs 
and determining where partner ships could address them. Firms and nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs ) brought partnership ideas to YLA that met contractual outcomes (such as training youth), 
rather than their own business objectives. However, because the in centives for these outcomes were 
ultimately prescriptive and project -driven, not partner -led and business -based, YLA worried they were 
not win -win interventions and  were, therefore,  unsustainable. To avoid this pitfall, YLA reengineered the 
design process  to start with private -secto r partners’ needs: They worked with partners to identify their 
own business problems and opportunities, and then demonstrated how gender or youth are esse ntial to 
the solution or opportunity (i.e. , “the pitch ”) (See Equator Seed s Limited [ESL] text box bel ow as an 
example). YLA calls this process design in reverse : it aims to facilitate business results first to 
strengthen the potential for youth engagement , sustainability, and value for money (through co -
investment).  To reach yo uth, YLA had to prioritize t he critical question of improving the partners ’ 
business model to catalyze the growth that would, eventually, result in increased labor needs and 
market d emand. The gender and youth analyses performed at the beginning of the Act ivity provided 
information t hat, at first, was too theoretical to market actors. When the time was ripe for market 
actors to engage in youth needs and constraints as they became more  clearly linked to their business 
needs, the analysis was outdated or too general to be useful.  
Learni ng from ESL: Evolving Pivots to Deepen Youth and Women’s Inclusion  
Before engagement with YLA, ESL procured seeds from contract farmers, large commercial farmers, and 
farming cooperatives or associations. Through an evolving YLA  partnership, ESL gradually introduced a new 
procurement model and layered additional features that both addressed core business concerns and increased 
youth engagement, while also i mproving women’s working conditions.  
Procurement : To address the  challeng e of producing sufficient qu ality seed, ESL’s leadership, 
with YLA ’s support, piloted a new procurement model that allowed them to more efficiently source seed 
from smallholder farme rs who were not members of farmers associations or cooperatives, which all owed 
them to directly engage  youth. YLA helped ESL generate a training curriculum for community -based 
facilitators (CBFs) —many of whom are female youth —in land preparation, crop mana gement, and 
harvesting; CBFs then trained 6,500 youth seed growers and ser ved as ESL aggregators. ESL saved time 
and money by working through CBFs who lived in the same villages as the seed growers.   
Payment : The CBF model involved transporting large sums  of cash to designated rural buying 
centers to pay producers: YLA supporte d ESL to convert to mobile m oney payment methods by 
providing a cost -assessment , then facilitating a relationship with MobiPay, which trained youth to use the 
payment platform. This platform improved issues in ESL’s decentralized accounting system.  
Marketi ng: As the CBF model grew,  an opportunity existed for improved community sales 
through village -level marketing kiosks. In partnership with YLA, 300 women -operated input kiosks 
 
28 For more, see https://usaidlearninglab.org/node/14633 .  
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  were established with credit from ESL. Each of these kiosks employed an addition al five women who 
worked on  commission. ESL describes this model change as “revolutionary” for their last -mile distribution 
and for bringing extension services closer to farmers through kiosk operators.  
Women’s working conditions : YLA identified early on t hat the conditions of women ’s work in 
seed processing were poor.  While YLA raised the issue, addressing it was not ESL’s priority, and it 
took ESL 4 years to conclude this was a business issue that if resolved, would bring benefits. Through an 
in-kind gran t, YLA furnished and traine d care assistants for a nursery, while ESL provided the space, labor, 
and materials for construction. The childcare allows women to focus on their job in safer conditions, and 
children to access stimulating early child developmen t in a safe environment.  
Ultimately, ESL has seen a strong business case emerge for youth to participate at different levels of the value 
chain: production, extension services delivery, input distribution , and market processes. This allows ESL to 
increase the production of quality a nd affordable certified seed, and expand the outreach and monitoring of 
seed producers.  
Education : With in -school youth, YLA planned to accelerate skills by contributing to the public -school 
curricula while older youth, legally able to be employed at 18, c ould be more directly inserted into the 
labor pool. However, YLA was unable to secure permissions to work within the public -school system 
and ultimately, came to see that basic education was beyond their scope.  
Age-based cohorts : Given that 10 -35 years is  a wide range, YLA originally planned to modify activities 
for different age cohorts. However, seg menting, engaging, and targeting youth presented a problem for 
YLA’s facilitation approach. Young men and women were in and out of  school, taking care of chil dren at 
home, or working on various economic activities that did not lead to obvious engagement en try points. 
Ultimately, younger youth (aged 10 -15) were reached in extracurricular programs through NGO 
partners such as Aflatoun  (financial literacy) and Faith Agro (school gardens) ; however,  without tracer 
studies, the outcome is unclear.  
Vocational Tr aining Institutes ( VTIs): VTIs are typically structured toward traditional skills in 
carpentry, sewing, and hair care, among other s, which did not match the s kills agricultural firms were 
looking for (e.g., accounting, warehouse management, and machinery r epair). YLA recognized that 
market actors needed to invest in the skills relevant to the specific business needs that allow them t o 
sustainably grow. Rather t han invest in VTIs, they supported market actors to develop specialized 
training related to the co re business model (accounting, quality inspection) , which ultimately serve to 
provide youth with a n occupational growth -oriented s killset.  
Young women’s incl usion:  Although YLA performed a gender analysis, they took the view that 
women (most of whom are “ youth” in Uganda) need employment  and can be trained to lead, and 
so, if YLA can unlock the opportunity through facilitation, youn g women will be engaged. The re 
are examples demonstrating that this approach has yielded impressive role -change opportunities, 
such as through women’s tractor main tenance and driving training, and specialized employment 
(see video Sing W ith Me Happily ). By their last year, YLA had reached hundreds of thousands of 
young women participants (just below 50 percent/157,000 of an ambitious target of 70 
percent/245,000 women) —a scale within the bounds of a 5 -year Act ivity that is considered a 
success by typical MSD program standards. Most often, they are in the 10 -14 age bracket, 
participating in financial literacy or other s kill-based interventions (28 percent), followed by the 
30-35 years group who accessed employ ment and production opportun ities (20 percent). As the 
scale of the YLA project was ambitious, it was limited in the data it could collect on gender  
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  outcomes, beyo nd employment and income data. As such, the degree of inadvertent harm, 
hardship, or insecuri ty posed by improved livelih oods is poorly understood, because specialized 
studies to assess negative unintended consequences are currently not common practice in most 
agricultural development programs.  
SRH:  With co -funding provided by the USAID Bureau of  Education, YLA committed to  improved 
provision of Life Skills for Healthy Living  through low -intensity facilitation: engaging a variety of 
partners (suppliers and  buyers, business advisors, saving and credit cooperative societies 
[SACCOs], and NGOs) to in tegrate SRH training and/or messages within young farmer training. 
For example, in 2018, YLA partnered with an NGO called Kulika  to train youth in good 
agronomic practices and promote SRH by strengthening life skill s for healthy living. Kulika  
formalized  memoranda of understanding with community health centers to provide access to 
comprehensive health services to its farmers , and worked with the centers to disseminate health 
information to farmers through training se ssions on nutrition, family planning, proper child 
spacing, early pregnancy prevention, and testing and prevention of HIV/AIDS and other sexually 
transmitted disea ses.  
Targets were repeatedly missed due to the private sector -driven approach (18 percent of  target 
reached in 2018; 21 percent in 2019). YLA observed that market players did not prioritize the activities 
because they drained time and resources, and fell short of addressing critical adolescent SRH needs. 
YLA acknowledges that the high birthrate h as a disproportionate effect  on young women’s 
opportunities, yet concludes that a market -responsive program is not best placed to address this 
challenge. The USAID  mission in Uganda is now exploring how a portfolio approach within a region 
(e.g., multiple programs with more intention al coordinating and layering) can respond to multifold needs 
and leverage partners’ respective expertise.  
YLA’s theory of change evolve d to rely entirely on strengthening the market system, so that market 
actors themselves could  engage youth in ways that f it their current and  future business needs. Youth 
represented 70  percent  of the people residing in the areas of implementation, so their participation was 
ultimately dependent on the success of the business, rather than incen tives to include them.  
At the end of the day, if the business is successful, you can be sure that engaging 
youth at scale will happen – partner growth will trigge r that. – Marcos Moreno, 
Former YLA Chief of Party   
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ACTIVITY II: DYNAMIC  
 
STRATEGY  
DYNAMIC u sed a Making Markets Work fo r Youth (M4Y) approach, referred to by staff as a hybrid 
(MSD and development programming) approach that addresses both supply - and dem and-side 
opportunities and barriers to youth engagement in agriculture and animal industry ma rkets. In this 
context, yout h engagement refers to the development of youth -inclusive businesses where private -
sector actors leverage commercial incentives to prov ide important products, services, support, and 
market access to youth producers and consumers  in their value chains. DYNA MIC was the first project 
in the Mastercard Foundation’s portfolio to focus on facilitating MSD to engage youth in economic 
opportuniti es. They targeted youth aged 15 -24, living on less than $2/day , and out of school, 
unemploye d, or underemployed and seek ing quality employment or the opportunity to start their own 
businesses.  
DYNAMIC had a 1 -year design phase, during which results chains (including crop, animal, financial, and 
education markets) and youth analysis and engagement  strategies were developed. DYNAMIC 
considered the growth potential of markets, and opportunities for youth with low upfront costs and 
near-term returns, so that youth could reinvest earnings and continue to engage in agribusin ess.  
 
9  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 20: DYNAMIC theory of cha nge 
 
DYNAMIC embraces a mix of facilitation via partnerships with the private sector. Skills training are 
facilitated through peer education (PE) model and vocational training institutions. Changes in youth 
capacity and t he external environment in t he ovals in Exhibit 20 illustrate the hybrid nature of the 
program. Overall, 60  to 70 percent  of the Activity’s budget (technical , in-kind, and financial) is allocated 
to building skills of youth, creating or expand ing access to input/output market, and increasing access to 
financial services to youth through PEs, vocational training, private -sector partners, and financial 
institutions. Upfront investment in yo uth skills is meant to improv e youth ’s ability to act as potential 
clients of stakeholders as producers and consumers.  
LEARNING  
DYNAMIC intervened in facilitating youth -led microenterprises and access  to markets, training, and 
financial services. DYNAMIC d eveloped a skills curriculum for youth and a cohort of yo uth educators 
and agents . They developed other curricula with education authorities and VTIs to strengthen 
agriculture -related subjects through public institutions and private education service provi ders, which 
are high -intensit y activities. Using an adapt ive management approach developed over time, the Activity 
has focused on improving partner engagement. A learning agenda exists for each pillar and is regularly 
visited to inform program improvements . Although there have been mo dest pivots, the original de sign is 
largely the same blueprint.  
Key program elements and learning include:  
The peer educator/agent model: Based on a youth analysis, DYNAMIC determined that the high rates 
of school dropout req uired a skills -based interven tion. DYNAMIC believed that commercial partners 
could only provide training that served their specific commercial interests , so life skills, business skills, 
 
10  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  and financial literacy were delivered through a PE model at scale.  The concept was that PEs would 
mobilize youth and offer tra ining for a fee, and facilitate youth engagement in shared -value market 
opportunities.  PEs should reach 90 percent of out -of-school youth participants who are then put in 
groups of 30 youth aged 15 -24 years. They are trained in  four skill sets: life skill s, financial literacy, village 
savings and loan associations (VSLA) methodology, and business skills. These are complemented by 
technical skills private -sector actors provide to both PEs and youth gr oup members. At select stages , 
PEs and staff of DYNAMIC’s  youth engagement team mobilize parents, spouses, and caregivers in the 
youth group training sessions. This process helps the team gain participation consent from the spouses 
and parents (required fo r youth below 18 years) and e nsures youth are relieved of  their daily chores 
and commitment.  
Learning from this intervention showed that the skills youth learned were relevant and valued by the 
private sector (see box below). Some PEs were able to earn eno ugh to support themselves in part or 
completely. Others h ad difficulty getting youth or market actors to pay them for their services, because 
market actors had some experience with NGOs providing such support at no cost.  
 
VTIs: Youth  also had many constraints with regards to accessi ng formal education beyond p rimary 
school system. To facilitate workforce development and job competitiveness, DYNAMIC subsidized the 
cost of youth attending VTI courses on various agriculture and livestock  topics. DYNAMIC also built 
capacity of VTIs in ma rket assessment to make trai ning courses market -relevant; co -developed 
agricultural curricula to be relevant and meet certification standards; and created linkages for graduates 
with the private sector to f oster access to market opportunities up on completi on of technical training , 
including links to opportunities leveraged through cost shares with businesses . Most of the graduates 
were male (70 percent) and had not completed primary school.  They found employment in commercial 
agriculture (45 percent), as se lf-employed (31 percent), an d in formal employment (12 percent).  Learning from TruTr ade Africa: Upskilling Value -Add  
TruTrade was set up to transform the way smallholder farmers access markets. They do this by pooling 
small-scale producers and placing them on their market connect platform. This offers  farmers an alternative 
to the usual buy -low sell -high practice of middlemen, and allows them to more easily meet local, regional, 
and international market demands. TruTrad e regularly engages youth as agents and women are encouraged 
to take on the agent role.  
Work ing with DYNAMIC presented TruTrade with  unique efficiencies, such as pre -screening and a strong 
work ethic. TruTrade requires agents to have official documentatio n and records as critical parts of due 
diligence. Youth have been functionally pre -screened. They routinely visit  parents and require  police 
clearance. Additionally, youth do not want to let DYNAMIC down. They have a sense of duty to put the 
skills they ha ve acquired into practice and be the “top flying agents.” While TruTrade trained youth agents  
in its technology and business practice s, the company would prefer to hire DYNAMIC -trained over other 
youth . This indicates that DYNAMIC creates value (the traine d youth) through the PE model.  
They (youth from DYNAMIC) are really much, much easier to wor k with 
compared to the ones that we sele ct. – TruTrade  
Additionally, DYNAMIC trade agents have opened up their personal social networks to TruTrade to 
source other  potential agents, representing an opportunity to expand the number of available, trained 
youth, independent of DYNAMIC.   
11  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  An important advancement was the establishment of outreach or satellite centers, where youth are 
trained within their communitie s—especially young mothers who were unable or unwilling to mov e 
because VTIs were out of r each. This has led to increased enrollment of young women at the outreach 
training centers (i.e., there is a 60 -percent enrollment rate for young women in Karamoja). DYNAMIC 
recognized  there were multiple streams of vocational t raining opportunity to be pu rsued and that the y 
would reach scale differently, involve different types of education, and result in different opportunities. 
Partner Homa Farms, a private agricult ure business, provided technical training like a VTI , because they 
offered start -up suppor t for young farmers.   
Access to finance and inputs:  DYNAMIC research showed that a key barrier to youth’s ability to 
profit from agriculture is their access to produc tive resources, particularly inputs. DYNAMIC took long - 
and sh ort-term strategies to addre ss this gap. Many youth are engaged in informal savings, but are 
limited by their earning potential. In order for youth to be able to access improved inputs, DYNAMIC 
supported input suppliers to discount the price of high -qualit y seeds for youth ’s first ha rvest by 70 
percent as a means to bridge the financial burden until the first crop could be monetized. This 
represented high risk: many youth businesses were not resi lient enough to survive a poor initial harvest, 
drought, and/o r pests, and were unable to continue their businesses. They often lost their 30 -percent  
share of the investment, not to mention emotional and physical labor costs.  Overall, the seed discount 
approach was considered successful in that thousands of youth rec eived vouchers the companies  
provided, both individually and in groups. While many youth were ultimately unsuccessful, others earned 
enough to buy the seeds again at full price , which was the in tended outcome. An unintended 
consequence was the high demand the discounts produced —there  were not enough high -quality seeds 
available in the market during the following planting season, which was an important lesson learned 
around market adjustment.  One market actor noted that the subsidy created tension in the mar ket, 
because  parents could t ake advantage of the subsidy in lieu of their children or parents demanded that 
the subsidy be passed on to them as well.  
In the long term, to stimulate new players i n the formal financial markets to enter DYNAMIC’s 
geographic t argets, DYNAMIC took a more facilitative approach —incentivizing financial actors to 
provide financial literacy training and education about financial products and services. For example, 
DYNAMIC has worked with financial service providers to extend the Bank  Agency network from urban 
to rural areas. This has resulted in more accounts  being  opened. Additionally, mature VSLAs have been 
linked to the banks so that they can, in time, build sufficient banking  history to be eligible to apply for 
formal loan products. DYN AMIC has supported the digit ization of VSLAs to improve their visibility and 
attractiveness to banks.  
Young women’s inclusion:  DYNAMIC did not have a gender target  or gender components, nor was 
there an initial gender rapid analysis or assessment. However,  the Activity operated based  on a set of 
gender principles. In the final years of the program, once data were analyzed and adaptive methodologies 
were more firmly ing rained, a number of gaps for women were identified. Some examples are the better 
managemen t of stereotypes, physical a ccess and timing of training sessions, parental consent and family 
obligations, and management of gender dynamics in youth groups. DYNAMIC  has been able to make 
provisions for some of these —for example, making childcare availabl e for young mothers so they can 
focus on training. They have also been able to celebrate some good practices, such as the benefits of 
social cohesion and opportunity for empowerment nurtured through group membership and leadership. 
DYNAMIC has identified t hat partners require more su pport to integrate gender balance in their 
recruitment of private -sector agents and implement gender -sensitive outreach methods to reach m ore 
female youth, among others . They plan to mitigate this through a gender equality train ing specifically for 
market actors.   
12  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  DYNAMIC similarly reached just under 50 percent of women (out of 125,000). They believe they may 
have come further had the progra m been designed intentionally for gender inclusion at the outset.  
SRH facilitation:  DYNAMI C’s peer engagement curricul um covered some SRH topics. These topics 
were introduced later in the DYNAMIC program, so most PEs who started as a self -sustaining servic e 
provider may not have been able to offer SRH training . The approach where  a PE offers se rvices against 
a fee has wor ked for providing life skills training for VTI students or  specific components such as drafting 
a constitution for VSLAs , but not (yet) fo r SRH.  
It was noted that without health services in many of the communities, or referral pathways, there was 
insuffic ient potential to take a market approach with regards to SRH.  
CONCLUSION  
How  does facilitation intensity affect the capacity of an MSD  approach to address critical 
components of young women’s and men’s development?  
The YLA and  DYNAMIC cases demonstrate t hat the level of facilitation intensity, flexibility with regards 
to when and how youth are to be engaged, and the program logic mode l play a large part in the capacity 
of MSD Activities to address youth’s —male and female —develo pment. Advantageously, the r esponse to 
the needs of youth and/or the market can change over time depending on whose needs implementing 
partners listen to the most intently (youth or the partner). The fundamental difference between these 
two Activities is t he emphasis they placed on y outh development for inclusion in the market vs. market 
development for youth inclusion , which, to a certain extent, dictates the lev el of facilitation intensity.  
Higher -intensity interventions, such as DYNAMIC, can address man y components of youth 
develo pment —life skills, financial literacy, business training, parental engagement, leadership, community 
involvement, and SRH —while engag ing youth as agents of change and addressing constraints in the 
market and enabling environment  using MSD tactics. DYNAMIC’ s PE model and discounting of inputs 
dealt with some of youth’s largest challenges —education and access to finance. The program emplo yed 
an innovative method of putting youth in the facilitator position as agents who would not o nly provide 
services to othe r youth, but recruit them for companies and their own education services.  DYNAMIC 
worked in fewer districts and achieved high levels of concentration of engagement (high percentage  of 
youth reached) in each.  
YLA was originally c onceived to be able to inter vene in some areas typically outside of an MSD Activity ’s 
realm  (basic education, health). The Activity quickly came to realize that these barriers to youth 
inclusion were not the  ones they could address well. They pivoted to fo cus squarely on the market 
system actors who could, over time, provide not only employment but also technical skills, non -
traditional opportunities, and non -farm opportunities. YLA relied on the will of the marke t actors to 
address youth engagement, traini ng, and improved work condit ions. YLA’s lower level of facilitation 
characterized by business development services, data provision , and facilitati on of  partnerships was able 
to secure opportunities for youth, mal e and female, in high numbers and at a lower  cost per person. 
YLA’s inte rvention was more expansive geographically and , therefore , achieved less penetration in the 
youth market. Understanding the relative merits of these two programs in terms of youth deve lopment 
should be complemented by a study of  the cost and sustainability  of the models.  
In youth development approaches, youth inclusion means youth of a younger age and of all genders. In 
these MSD Activities, most —but not all —staff from the two Activiti es agree that the youngest age  
13  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICUL TURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  cohort is not  well served by the range of  tactics and partners available to develop opportunities that 
respond to their developmental stage. It is not yet proven to what extent younger youth interventions 
that largely build a ssets and exposure will result in improved l ivelihoods. In both cases, e qual gender 
representation was achieved, although nuances of gender integration were made clearer due to 
experimentation, learning papers, and incidents. An adaptable outcome reporting  system is warranted t o 
deepen the understan ding of the impact for young  women in both cases and understand the extent to 
which facilitative approaches, intensive or not, affect harmful social norms, disempowerment, and 
unequal gender roles. This would all ow responses to new opportunities and barrie rs—superb Activity 
additiona lities—to be captured as project outcomes, as opposed to anecdotally.  
Finally, this case attempted to determine whether youth MSD programs could not only fulfill 
employment and income -generation objectives, but myriad youth deve lopment needs. This may be a n 
unfair expectation. A 2020 USAID randomized control tria l in Bangladesh  showed that youth exposed to  
reproductive health topics in the workplace “may not leave the program with substantially improved 
knowledge on family planning or reproductive health topics, but they leave better equipped to identify when they  
need more knowledge and are to seek it out. ”29 Donors who grant to facil itated interventions may need to 
revisit expectations and recognize the limitations of an MSD approach to address youth development 
components , such as education and health. Perhaps t he key is understanding where risks lie in no t 
addressing the broad range  of youth needs, prioritizing the m, and identifying where little gains can be 
achieved without compromising the intent and sustainability of the intervention.  
CONTACT  
For more infor mation on DYNAMIC, contact Netsaleem Gebrie a t nbgebrie@ug.goal.ie . For YLA, 
please contact Kelly Cronen at kcronen@ftfyla.com . 
 
 
29 Omoeva, C., Nanda, G., Gates, S., Cunha, N ., Hatch, R. and Thomas, R. (2020). Integrated Workforce  
Development and Family Planning and Reproductive Health for Youth in Bangladesh. Washington, DC:  
USAID’s Y outhPower: Implementation, YouthPower Action.   
This is one of four ca se studies produced as part of a larger review of how MSD Activities  include women and youth, entitled Youth, Women, 
and Market Systems Development in Agriculture and Supporting Markets: Landscape Analysis and Case Studies Report . The study was conducted f or 
USAID by the Feed the Future AWE program and is available on the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC).  
CASE STUDY  3 
RISIALBANIA: INCLUSIVE PARTNER 
ENGAGEMENT STRATEGIES  
 
Photo Credit:  RisiAlbania  
INTRODUCTION  
This case study focuses on how RisiAlbania, a youth employment Activity using a  market systems 
development  (MSD) approach, partners with the private sector to facilitate inclusive economic 
development and drive systems change that  results in sustained impact s for male and female youth. 
Informed by interviews with staff and two privat e-sector partners, it explores the tools and approaches 
RisiAlbania uses to identify, select, develop, monitor, grow, and analyze impactful partnership s. This case 
study highlight s effective strategies to engage partner organizations that have received lim ited or no 
previous donor support, tactics that go beyond “making the business case” for inclusion, critical points 
(e.g., project co -design, pilots) a t which partners’ buy -in and  capacity can be strengthened, and 
monitoring approaches and analytical frame works that support the Activity’s efforts to drive more 
inclusive business models at scale.  
 
KEY FINDINGS  
1. Select the right market sectors  to achieve outcomes for male and female  youth. This often 
goes beyond looking at where male and female youth current ly participate, and assessing end 
markets and value chain upgrades that can bring about specific opportunities for them.  
This case expl ores a core learning question : What tools and approaches are used to identify , select, 
develop, sustain, and evaluate impactful private -sector par tnerships  to redu ce barriers and improve 
opportunities for male and female youth’s inclusion?  Activity  Highlights  
Name:  RisiAlbania  
Lead Institution (s): Helvetas, 
Partners Albania  
Country:  Albania  
Donor:  SDC 
Value of Award:  $13.3 million  
Period of Performance:  2013-2017 
(Phase I); 2018 -2021 (Phase II)   
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  2. Employ multiple strategies an d avenues to attract more di verse partners,  including having 
comprehensive partnership guidelines and var ious entry points for inclusion.  
3. Approach the partnership as a business venture : Use the business case as opposed to the 
social case, employ business language, co -invest, pay for  performance, and be sensitive to how 
smart partnership design can influence shifts in business behaviors that may limit inclusion.  
4. Use pilot activities to refine models and demonstrate proof of success  in inclusive business 
models, especially in small mar kets; these can be used to attract/crowd -in others.  
5. Use analytical tools and  mixed methods  to capture unintended consequences and maintain 
the focus on progress toward systemic impact.  
ABOUT THE ACTIVITY  
RisiAlbania is a n inno vative  youth employment Acti vity supported by the Swiss Agency for Development 
and Cooperation ( SDC) and implemented by a consortium of Helvetas and Partners Albania , in 
partnership with the Ministry of Finance and Economy of the Republic of Albania . It fo cuses on job 
demand, skills supply, career guidance and intermediation, and mainstreams gender and social  inclusion  
throughout its interventions . It takes a market systems approach, partnering with Albanian and 
international private -sector actors to encour age innovative solutions tha t foster job creation and 
provide more employment opportunities for young men  and women in Albania, aged 15 to 29. 
RisiAlbania works in tourism, agribusiness, and information and communication technologies (ICT). In 
the agribusi ness sector, they focus on m edicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs), fresh fruit and vegetables 
(FFV), and business development services ( BDS).  
CONTEXT   
A quarter30 of Albanians between the ages of 15 and 29 are unemployed. Due to household 
responsibilities, y oung women have a much lower  labor force participation rate (35 percent )31 and 
higher inactivity rates than young men. Young women also tend to experience poor employment 
conditions, are concentrated in low -paying sectors and roles, and work in unpaid famil y jobs. Agriculture 
employs two-fifths of the workforce, but only represents a fifth of the gross domestic product and is 
characterized by low job creation and  poor job quality. Youth are around 20 percent of employees (10 
percent of the 20 percent are fem ale youth) in FFV, and almos t 60 percent in the MAPs sector (70 
percent of the 60 percent are female youth).32 
Nevertheless, RisiAlbania sees potential to enhance young women’s and men’s access to quality 
agribusiness jobs through several strategic areas : stimulated market access for agribusinesses, better 
functioning BDS provision market that serves rural business es, and a shift toward in -country value -added 
products. Through this strategy, RisiAlbania targets young men and women who are:  
 
30 Based on a 5 -year average from the Albanian I nstitute of Statistics, yout h unemployment in Albania is around 26 
percent. In 2019, it was 21.4 percent.  
31 More information available at: http://www.instat.gov.a l/en/themes/labour -market -and-education/employment -and-
unemployment -from-lfs/#tab2  
32 From Ris iAlbania Project Document 20 13-2017, Annex 11:  First sub -sector analyses – Agro processing , pp. 17, 21.   
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Low-skilled and cu rrently working in agricultu re in low -quality, precarious33 jobs that are highly 
vulnerable to market shocks  
• Recently graduated from university and unaware of the possibilities for quality employment in 
the agribusiness sector  
• Unemployed, but can be interes ted in working in the agribu siness or agro -tourism sectors  
STRATEGY AND LEARNING  
FINDING THE RIGHT FIT: SECT OR SELECTION FOR YOUTH EMPLOYMENT  
RisiAlbania began with a series of market screening and sector selection analyses34 to prioritize sectors; 
they lo oked at sectors that: (1) al ready employ young people, (2) have the potential to employ more 
young people, a nd/or (3) present potential for growth (e.g., upward export trends). From this, FFV and 
MAPs were identified to be particularly youth -friendly in th e agribusiness sector. The s ub-sectors also 
presented opportunities to absorb considerable numbers of low -skilled, intensive labor (increased 
number of jobs), while also generating higher skilled job opportunities (improved quality of jobs). BDS 
was also i dentified as a supporting ma rket necessary for agribusiness development. This process was a 
critical step in  setting the project up for success, noting that:  
...[W]e’re not trying to fit a square into a circle, we’re just trying to make sure that 
the poten tial that there is for youth  employment is actually exploited by supporting 
the private sector to grow and c reate opportunities for young people. – RisiAlbania 
staff 
LAUNCHING A BUSINESS VENTURE APPROACH TO PARTNERSHIPS  
RisiAlbania prioritizes working thro ugh local stakeholders, espe cially private -sector actors, that are key 
to executing their strategy in each s ub-sector and generating decent jobs for male and female youth. 
This includes agro -exporters and producer associations, input and equipment provider s, certification 
bodies, sup ermarkets, BDS providers, and post -harvest and processing businesses. In approac hing 
partnerships, RisiAlbania see themselves as partners in a business venture, observing that:  
Often , when we’re talking to people who have no ide a about how the donor 
commun ity works, we... use the language of  venture capitalists or impact investors, 
just really trying to emphasize that we’re not going to give out a grant, but we’re 
going to co -invest in a business idea and our expected return on i nvestment is jobs 
for young people.  – RisiAlbania staff  
Having partners perceive them as a business instead  of as donors or an NGO helps staff talk to firms so 
they can see the benefits of incorporating gender, youth, and social inclusion considerations i nto 
 
33 “Precarious” includes insecure jobs that are often the first to disappear when markets experience shocks, and 
jobs that are not guaranteed through f ormal employment contracts.  
34 RisiAlbania uses a variety of secondary and primary data collection tools to analyze markets and sectors. This 
includes sourcing seco ndary data from public and private institutions as well as end market data, and collecting 
primary data from stakeholders (e.g., male and female youth, businesses, associations, etc.) through focus gr oups 
and semi -structured interviews.   
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  business plans from a bu siness rather than an equity or social inclusion perspective. This trust and 
shared language allow RisiAlbania to introduce these concepts and present a convincing value 
proposition for including women and youth.  
In identifying  and designing these partner ships, RisiAlbania tailors several steps to enhance inclusion, as 
presented belo w. 
PARTNER IDENTIFICATION AND SELECTION: ENGAGING MORE THAN THE USUAL 
DONOR -DRIVEN ORGANIZATIONS   
RisiAlbania uses two main strategies to identify and select partners, includi ng eliciting stakeholders 
during sector studies and market research to develop s hort lists of potential partners  leading to 
direct outreach by staff,  and creative design and marketing of open calls for co -investment 
proposals. Sector studies provide an ove rview of the marketplace and suggest entry points for 
RisiAlbania staff to spend  time and efforts on engaging with potential partners.  Furthermore, because 
traditional “open calls” tend to attract many organizations that have re ceived donor funding in the 
past,35 RisiAlbania adopts strategies to get the word out to actors less aware o f the donor universe, 
including private -sector firms that may not be as familiar with applying to or obtaining donor support. 
This includes being ver y targeted and intentional i n the terms of reference so as not to dissuade actors 
less familiar with this p rocess from submitting  proposals , and securing wide dissemination among 
networks more diverse actors are tapped into. It also includes ongoing engage ment with the private 
sector  to ensure support to firms less familiar with the application process in language they understand.  
Once RisiAl bania identifies36 or selects37 partners, the Activity screens them against criteria set out in 
Helvetas’ partnership guidelines ,38 performs legal and financial due diligence, and checks their reputation 
before proceeding to co -design an intervention. This  process also includes an assessment of partners’ 
gender and social inclusion capacities:  
 
35 Donor -driven orga nizations in Albania traditionally have experience in and are well -positioned to secure fundi ng 
from donor organizations. Often, these organizations comprise a majority of the entities applying for do nor funds 
or open calls, and are well positioned to secu re partnership agreements because of their experience and capacity 
with these types of funds.   
36 Partner identification refers to direct contracting with partners typically elicited through sector stu dies, market 
research, and direct identification process es.  
37 Partner selection refers to competitive procedures with partners typically generated t hrough open calls for co -
investment proposals.  
38 This process is facilitated using Helvetas’ Quality Crite ria for Partnerships : https://www.helvetas.org/Publications -
PDFs/Switzerland/Partnership%20Approach/Quality%20Cri teria%20Partnerships_English.pdf   
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV   
CO-DESIGNING THE PARTNERSH IP  
RisiAlbania works with partners to negotiate and co -
create a business plan prior to signing a contract. 
Partners need to think their  idea through. In the 
narrative and financial business plan, they must show 
they have the willingness, vision, and fina ncial capabilities 
to make t he idea work (indicating commercial 
sustainability  even after the project support ends ). They 
must also show how their idea is inclusive. Gender, 
youth, and social inclusion considerations are discussed 
as a means to encourage p rivate-sector partners to se e 
the market potential of working toward more inclusive 
outcomes, rather than communicating it as a directive 
or requirement. Co -design sessions focus on job quality 
and job creation, using information from the sector 
analyses a nd pa rtners’ own experience to discuss 
upgrades within sectors that will catalyze more inclusive 
labor practices, including decent working conditions and 
standards. RisiAlbania also seeks to understand 
business behaviors , including why businesses act in 
certain ways, to craft tailore d rationale and value 
proposition statements. For example, RisiAlbania found 
that not only small, but medium -sized businesses tend to 
employ family they trust over qualified external hires, 
which constrains their ability to prof essionalize their 
services a nd exports. Equipped with this information, they are able to go into co -creation with 
businesses with a pitch for why hiring skilled young women and men will benefit them , and a plan to 
address issues they may have around trust when bringing external resou rces into their management 
teams.  
Once the idea and business plan are fully fleshed out, RisiAlbania enters into a partnership agreement. 
Partnership agreements have minimum inclusion requirements , including (1) a minimum perce ntage  of Assessing the G ender and Social Inclusion Capaci ties of Partners  
RisiAlbania has a suite of tools they use to identify, select, and work with partners, including a gender and soc ial 
inclusion partner assessment tool, which includes questions such as:  
• Do they have gender  and social inclusion  in their vision or mission s tatement?  
• Do they have equitable numbers of male and female staff?  
• How many women are in management positions?  
• Do they have capacities to work with women and other disadvantaged groups?  
Over time, RisiAlba nia has adapted these tools to fit the specific pa rtners they work with, understanding that a 
right-sized approach gets them farther with partners in terms of incl usion outcomes. RisiAlbania has customized 
and shortened the tools to only include topics rel evant to the individual partners. All calls and pa rtnerships are 
developed with inputs from RisiAlbania’s gender equality and social inclusion l ead. 
“What Works” to Engage the Private 
Sector for Male and Female Youth  
• Have minimum gender requirements, with  
opportunities to  expand and present the 
requirements as part of a business case  
• Approach the partnership as a business 
venture, where the expected return on 
investment is jobs for male and female 
youth  
• Act like an investor or venture capitalist, 
not a don or 
• Pay for result s, tie payments to jobs 
created for male and female youth  
• Adapt to fit the needs of partners instead 
of taking a one -size-fits-all approach  
• Unders tand what drives business 
behaviors and attitudes  
• Evaluate the idea as opposed to keeping 
strictly to scoring criteria; if an idea for 
inclusion is there, it is worth continuing to 
develop  
• Focus on influencing rather than directing   
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  the business es39 that partners’ target for services must be owned or co -owned by women; and (2) when 
capacity building activities are anticipated, training participants must include an equitable number of 
males and females , including having both spouses of a household attend training . In partnership 
agreements, RisiAlbania’s support ranges from capacity building, linkages and networking, to financial 
support where p artners are also expected to co-invest  with RisiAlbania, typically 50 percent or mo re of 
the requested amount. In partnerships more focused on gender and social inclusion, RisiAlbania may 
decrease the co -investment requirement for partners that are less commercially stable or risk -averse. 
Staff expressed not wanting to limit the pool of potential partners and ideas , noting:  
You have this idea; we believe in it. We know it’s risky. So, we’re going to buy off 
part of the risk. – RisiAlbania staff  
RisiAlbania employs a pay for results approach , whereby partners have milestones they must ach ieve 
to be paid. Typically, the last payment milestones are tied to key performance indicators, which toward 
the end of a contract, include job creation for young women and men.  
PILOT IMPLEMENTATION: TESTING APPROACHES AND LEARNING BY DOING  
In keeping wit h an MSD approach, RisiAlban ia starts its partnerships with pilots to test out ideas, probe 
partner commitment, and demonstrate to other firms “the how and why” (e.g., benefits) of more 
inclusive business models. If pilots prove successful, the Activity su pports expansion either thro ugh pilot 
partners widening their outreach and/or by adding additional partners to the intervention to support 
them to copy the innovation ; however, in general, RisiAlbania requires that partners demonstrate in 
their business pl ans a clear vision for the b usiness change they want to introduce and how that will be 
sustained beyond their partnership with RisiAlbania. As an example pilot, RisiAlbania links  private -sector 
BDS providers with rural agribusinesses to increase agribusine ss capacity in developing bu siness plans 
and proposals necessary to obtain European Union (EU) grants. The pilot intervention strived to show 
BDS providers that currently target services to businesses in the capital that rural businesses can be an 
attracti ve client, and to rural busi nesses that it is worth investing in consultancy support not only for EU 
grants, but also for other services, such as accounting or marketing. The tex t box below profiles AZ 
Consulting’s experience piloting an inclusive business  model through a partnership  with RisiAlbania.  
AZ Consulting Assesses Commercial Viability of Focusing on Women and Youth  
RisiAlbania supported a pilot with AZ Consulting, a fema le youth -led BDS provider largely operating in Tirana, 
Albania. AZ Consulting served 84 clients last year,  with a staff of nine (100 percent youth, 89 percent female). 
Prior to working with RisiAlbania, AZ Consulting had not considered targeting female -owned rural businesses 
and had a small share of youth clients focused on start -ups in their portfolio. Their traditional customers were 
well-established companies with high visibility in the market, most owned and operated by adult men. 
RisiAlbania worked wit h AZ Consulting to explore youth - and female -owned agribusinesses as a potenti al high -
growth market, suppo rted by data from the Ministry of Agriculture on number of youth - and women -owned 
agribusinesses and statistics from the Albania Investment Developmen t Agency. Effective approaches and 
learning include:  
Effective approaches:  
 
39 In some cases, this m eans farmers or harvesters who enter into buyer -supplier relationships with  exporters .  
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Targeted marketing strategies, including tapping into networks and attending events where youth are 
present, are more effective than waiting for youth to find you. Marketing campaig ns should appeal to youth 
interests —for example, AZ Consulting developed anima ted social media ads, which would not appeal to 
their usual customers, but were highly successful with youth.  
• Lowering co -financing requirements for youth customers in general, a nd for female youth more specifically, 
can help overcome obstacles and accommo date female youth who tend t o be more risk -averse, while 
setting a foundation for longer term commercial relationships.   
• Online marketing is a good way to influence the industry , showcasing a more inclusive business model and 
tactics for targeting male an d female youth. AZ Consultin g noted that they had influenced the decisions of 
two to three competitors in the industry to adopt similar marketing strategies to attract more youth .  
Learning:  
• AZ Consulting’s status as a youth -led business mainly staffed by  women attracts other youth and women 
clients , and helps understand women - and youth -specific needs.  
• Youth attract other youth, which is a potential value proposition. AZ Consul ting observed that youth peer 
and referral networks were robust, often leading  to two to three or more you th customers per every 
youth -led business they serve d.  
• Male and female youth -owned companies are often quicker to pay and save the company costs on c ontract 
drafting and negotiation than more well -established customers.  
• While the results of the pilot wer e successful, AZ Consulting recognizes that it will still take time to shift 
to a more balanced portfolio, comprising many more rural youth and female  customers.  
Through this pilot, AZ Consulting not only learned how to serve r ural clients and expand thei r customer base, 
but also saw the value of including male and female youth in their business model. By the end of the pilot, they 
served significantly  more youth and female customers, with 30 percent youth and about 5 percent fe male now 
comprising their br oader portfolio. While 5 percent may seem small, given the overwhelmingly low amount of 
female -owned businesses currently operating in the Albanian ag ribusiness sector, it is a substantial milestone. 
AZ Consulting was also able to show that they could sust ain their win rate —100 percent of grants applied for 
were won, with no changes as a result of taking on new and potentially “riskier” clients.  
 
MEL: CHARACTERISTICS OF IMPACTFUL, SUCCESSFUL, AND SUSTAINABLE 
PARTNERSHIPS   
RisiAlbania characterizes impact ful, successful partnerships in several ways: (1) quantity and quality of 
jobs; (2) increased buy -in and incentives of partners as a result of the  partnership experience; and (3) 
contribution of the partnership to the project’s overall goal of systemic cha nge via copying and crowding 
in of other actors into a business model.  
Job quality —defined by three main International Labour Organization’s indi cators around working 
conditions, decent pay, and job security —and number of jobs  are assessed through partner  reports and 
triangulated through surveys, impact assessments, and qualitative field assessments. RisiAlbania assesses 
job quality through qualita tive indicators, including improved security through contract farming and 
career p rogression opportunities lin ked to the professionalization of export practices and expanded 
access to markets. The project assesses  the number of jobs through quantitative in dicators linked to the 
number of new full -time equivalent (FTE) jobs created, job placement through private an d public 
intermediaries, and improved skills, among others. These metrics align with the three programmatic 
areas of emphasis in RisiAlbania, incl uding a job demand component, a skills supply component, and a  
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  career guidance and  intermediation component. T o this end, under Phase I (2013 -2017) of the Activity ,40 
RisiAlbania created 950 jobs for young people (53 percent female) by increasing demand for new jobs 
for youth in the private sector  and placed 5,400 people in jobs (53 per cent female) through public and 
private intermediaries under the career guidance and intermediation component of the Activity. In 
addition, 9,700 young people (48 pe rcent female) improved their skills and 390 businesses have invested 
Euro 6.4 million ($7.2  million) in food processing , tourism , and ICT sectors.  
The qualitative field assessments are particularly 
valuable in obtaining insights around intended and 
unintended impacts. For example, one survey 
among newly employed women found they 
experienc ed increased time poverty and lab or 
burdens , because they had not seen any 
reductions in their household responsibilities 
despite taking on the paid job. The Activity 
reflects on learning elicited through these 
assessments, including exploring what aspects  of 
their programming need to be adapted or 
expanded to address constraints to male and 
female youth’s employment. For example, 
RisiAlbania is exploring adding childcare services 
as a cross -market function they support as key to 
alleviating women’s time po verty and labor 
burdens. Other ap plied learning has resulted in 
ensuring that exporters understand the 
importance of including both husbands and wives 
in all training and information sessions as a means 
to reduce gender gaps in access to information 
and ch allenge gender stereotypes. Partn ers see 
the benefit of this practice, mainly when it comes 
to applying and obtaining standards and 
certification, because women have shown better 
aptitudes for record -keeping and good 
agronomic practices. In addition to con ducting 
qualitative field assignm ents, RisiAlbania regularly reviews interventions, triangulates data sources, shares 
knowledge with partners, promotes best practices, and uses information and learning to improve 
engagement strategies with future partners.   
A successful partnership also g ives partners the incentive and ability to sustain and scale 
interventions . Bioalba Group and AZ Consulting both expressed a strong commitment to maintain and 
build on the interventions they initiated with RisiAlbania becau se they saw clear benefits to the ir 
businesses through participation in the pilots. AZ Consulting rapidly  expanded their customer base while 
maintaining service quality (a 100 -percent success rate in securing funds through AZ Consulting’s 
support). They al so br ought the business model tes ted under their pilot with RisiAlbania into their 
broader business operations, and have plans to scale to new areas with new actors (e.g., municipalities 
 
40 Mid-term results for Phase II (2018 -2021) of the Activity were being calculated at the time of drafting of this case 
study.  Bioalba Group, one of R isiAlbania’s partners working 
in the MAPs sector on certification, traceability, 
processing, and exporting to high -value end markets, 
approaches youth inclusion from a business 
perspective, noting that they aim first and foremost for 
their business model t o be profitable and sustainable. 
They view youth as compatible with this vision 
because they are innovative and quick learners, and 
see advantages to driving down high labor costs if the 
sector as a whole is able to retain more youth in 
Albania. Bioalba Gr oup sees their role as intervening 
to facilitate changes in the market by identify ing end 
markets with demand necessary to drive profitable 
upgrades in the sector that lead to better quality jobs 
for male and female youth. Bioalba Group also aligns 
and wor ks with local NGOs that are better equipped 
to address social issues that need to be simultan eously 
worked on for male and female youth to access 
economic opportunities generated. This includes work 
on women’s empowerment, and addressing women’s 
labor burd ens and entrenched gender and social 
norms.  
 
It’s kind of a synergy on the needs…  so, it’s a  
project where everyone is winning. – Bioalba 
Group   
9  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  with low grant absorption rates). Bioalba Group noted similar success  in their pilot with RisiAlbania (see 
text box), including the need to collaborate with other local actors who can support social and 
economic transformation.  
Impactful partnerships can also lead other actors to  copy and scale proven models.  RisiAlbania u ses 
the Adopt, Adapt, Expand, Res pond framework as a planning tool to articulate a vision for systemic change, 
and as a monitoring tool to understand how they are progressing toward that vision. RisiAlbania further 
segments actors by their willingness to a dopt new business practices or id eas—Innovators, Early 
Adopters, and Followers —and looks for ways to support adoption among those three tiers of actors. 
To stimulate crowding -in, RisiAlbania facilitates partner exchange on inclusive business models and 
practices, and partners with media for the dissemination of inspiring approaches. This is especially 
important given that Albania is a small country, with a relatively limited number of private -sector market 
actors in each sector, which results in ample oppo rtunities for shared learning and  copying of business 
models.  
This [copying] is pretty normal in every industry in Albania, one innovates, and 
everyone follows. – RisiAlbania private -sector partner  
For example, in 2019, RisiAlbania organized a workshop for  17 partners from different secto rs to 
discuss the importance of diversity, inclusion, and equity in the business world. In a follow -up 
questionnaire administered 2 months after the session, attendees reported that participation in the 
workshop helped them  identify diversity and inclusion  opportunities and led to an increase in female 
employees. Feedback also highlighted the need to create more business cases for diversity and inclusion , 
and establish flexible business models for young women and single mothers.41  
Another example is RisiAlb ania’s work with exporters in FFV ; there are about 50 consolidated 
exporters in Albania, which makes it “a quite manageable number to monitor and try t o influence.”  The 
Activity spent time segmenting them and has reached a point  where messages to foster sc ale-up and 
replication are easily targeted. In this example, RisiAlbania collaborates with a certification body to 
generate information on standards, w hile working to stimulate the consultancy market to develop 
services linked t o obtaining certification. R isiAlbania also works with four FFV exporters to show that it 
is worthwhile to invest in group Global Good Agronomic Practices (GAP) certification , because it opens 
market opportunities in high -value markets, which command highe r prices for their goods. Fr om 
RisiAlbania’s side, it increases the security of the contractual relationships along the value chain, while 
making exporters more mindful of labor c onditions, job quality, use of technology, and opening up more 
jobs in higher  functions of the value chai n (e.g., packing or managing machinery) for young women and 
men. The business model has worked to create 125 FTE jobs for young women and men, with the  
expectation that it would create more than 500 FTE jobs by the end of the Ac tivity. Now, RisiAlbania 
wants the rest of the market to hear about it, support the service market to deliver products that will 
allow them to obtain certification, and stimulate a demand for those services, instead of  partnering 
individually with further exporters. The Activity does  this through ongoing information generation and 
sharing via different platforms, including media, business cases, and events where partners share thei r 
models and stories.  
 
41 RisiAlbania currently works on pilotin g childcare services models to address constraints to female labor market 
inclusion. This is something they are initially pilot ing in urban areas, with the intention to determine whether they 
can scale to other sectors and rural environments.   
10  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  To sustain partnerships , RisiAlbania includes an 
exit strategy and a vision for s cale-up in concept 
notes at design stage. For example, in the same 
certification example used above, RisiAlba nia 
anticipated that the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development (MARD) would be a key actor 
in securing sustaina bility of these certificatio n 
schemes, so they ensured MARD representatives 
had enough information over the 2 years of 
engagement with th e Activity through bilateral 
information sessions, jointly organized Global GAP 
STOP TOUR, field visits with MARD 
repre sentatives, and the promotio n of partners as 
champions of change via mass and social media 
outlets. As a result, MARD now includes Global  GAP certification and group -level GAP certification in 
their national grants.  
CONCLUSIONS  
Overall, RisiAlbania’s exp erience shows us that market -based approaches and working through the 
private sector can facilitate jobs in the agricultural sector for m ale and female youth. This is best 
achieved when implementers use a variety of tailored approaches and tools at each st age of the partner 
engagemen t process. Critical to RisiAlbania’s success was (1) identifying a more diverse pool of partners, 
beyond orga nizations used to obtaining donor support, all of whom serve the project’s target 
beneficiaries to varying degrees, (2)  approaching the partnership  as a business venture with a strong 
business case, and (3) continuing to make the business case and build gr eater buy -in for inclusive 
business models through piloting. Having a vision of sustainability and systemic change from  design and 
piloting stages also allowed RisiAlbania to see tangible results in later stages, including crowding -in from 
other market act ors and preliminary evidence of public -sector actors taking on new and expanded 
functions to support inclusive business  models.  
There are context -specific characteristics and issues that remain particular to this case, including:  
• Albania’s small size and relatively small number of market actors , which were analyzed using a 
detailed market analysis and segmentation, made for ample opportunities to disseminat e 
information around inclusive business models and influence private -sector actors.  
• Sector selection is essential to achieve outcomes for male and female youth. Sector -specific 
issues and the co -development of business models did not always have a n explicit gender or 
youth focus when discussed with the private sect or. This may have some influence on the 
willingness to get greater buy -in from the private sector in the beginning, because innovations 
are not presented as a gender or youth model. Examp les of this were abundant in the FFV and 
MAPs sector, where the empha sis was on certification, traceability, identifying end markets 
with quality rather than price standards, and establishing formal contracts with workers —all 
models that were not explicitl y gender - or youth -focused, but generated great opportunities 
for inc lusion and sustainability.42  
 
42 RisiAlbani a’s understanding of sustainability encompasses financial, institutional, environmental and s ocial aspects.  While RisiAlbania’s Private Sector Development 
component primarily focuses on private -sector 
partnerships, the  Activity also encourages public -
sector engagement by developing public -private 
partnerships  and strengthening public -private 
dialogue on improvi ng the business environment. 
By brokering relationships between private and 
public actors, RisiAlbania generat es broader 
support for inclusive business models, sustains 
partner interventions, and encoura ges public -
sector investment through, for example, la nd 
leasing and agricultural service provision in the 
MAPs sector.   
11  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIE S WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  • Systemic barriers to female youth ’s inclusion persist, especially in the agricultural sector, such 
as moving female youth into mor e formal employment, and exp anding access to 
entrepreneurship and decision making. As the Bioalb a Group text box shows, this could 
require an expanded pool of partners beyond the private sector, looking at public or civil 
society actors with a clear mandat e to work on these issues, a nd facilitating greater 
connections to work together on these issues . 
• Robust monitoring and evaluation that have direct links to programmatic decision making are 
needed to make sure inclusion results are realized and negative or  potentially harmful results  
are addressed, especially before and during the scale -up phase. For  example, where RisiAlbania 
captured insights around increases in female labor burdens as a result of partner interventions, 
the Activity is trying to raise awa reness and incorporate insig hts into contracts and milestones 
with partners, but recognizes that  the issue is salient and further work is needed to address it 
systemically . Similarly, one consulting firm reflected on the fact that youth customers tended 
to save them costs , because co ntract negotiation took far less time and they were much more 
flexib le than adults. This highlights potential vulnerabilities youth have in less bargaining power, 
leading to unfair terms of agreement and/or possible exploitation , and presents a n opportunit y 
for Activities to address potential information asymmetry or power  imbalances .  
CONTACT  
For more information on RisiAlbania, contact Lutjona Lula on Lutjona.Lula@helvetas.org  or 
info@risialbania.al . For more information on Bioalba Group, contact Sokol Stafa at 
sokol.stafa@bioalba.al . For more information on AZ Consulting sh.p.k, contact Edona Bilali at 
edona.bilali@azconsulting.al . 
  
This is one of four case studies pro duced as part of a larger review of how MSD programs include women and youth, entitled Youth, Women, 
and Market Systems Development in Agriculture and Supporting M arkets: Landscape Analysis and Case Studies Report . The s tudy was conducted for 
USAID by the Feed the Future Advancing Women’s Empowerment (AWE) program and is available on the USAID Development Experience 
Clearinghouse (DEC).  
CASE STUDY  4 
PRISMA: DEVELOPING AN EFFECTIVE 
BUSINESS  CASE FOR INCLUSIVE PRIVATE 
SECTOR P ARTNERSHIPS   
 
Source: PRISMA  
INTRODUCTION  
In a market systems development ( MSD) approach focused on ag riculture and supporting mar kets, 
implementing partners engage market actors, such as the private sector and government, to lead 
activities and perform interventions to drive long -term systems change that results in more sustainable 
and inclusive outcomes for food security and econom ic growth. It is critically important to ensure that 
market actor -led approaches are inclusive , because without specific attention to inequalities between 
groups based on gender, age, physical and mental a bility, ethnicity, reli gion, or other, it is possib le to 
inadvertently replicate or exacerbate these inequalities. To address gender inequalities, implementers 
need proven, context -appropriate tools and approaches  to engage  market actors and support the 
development of their capa cities to integrate gender c onsiderations and promote women's inclusion in 
interventions and business models.  The Australia -Indonesia Partnership for Promoting Rural Incomes 
through Support for Markets in Agriculture (PRISMA) Activit y was chosen as a case study example to 
demonstrate  a fundamental aspect of MSD —how to work with the private sector to develop effective 
business cases for inclusion.  
 
This case explores a core learning question : What tools and approaches are used to id entify , select, 
develop, sustain, and evaluate impactful private -sector partnership s to reduce barriers and improve 
opportunities for women’s inclusion?  Activity  Highlights  
Name: PRISMA  
Lead Insti tution:  Palladium  
Country : Indonesia  
Donor:  DFAT  
Value of Award: Phase I: AUD 77 ( $50m) 
Phase  II: AUD 88 ( $58m)  
Period of Performance : 2013-2018 
(Phase I); 2019 -2023 (Phase II)   
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ABOUT THE ACTIVITY  
PRISMA is an MSD Activity that works to reduce poverty by fostering inclusive economic gr owth in the 
agriculture, hor ticulture, livestock, and aquaculture sectors. It is in its second 5 -year phase (Phase II), 
which began in 2019 and ends in 2023. In its first phase (Phase I), it was one of four Activities under the 
Austral ia-Indonesia Partners hip for Rural Economic Devel opment (AIP -Rural, 2013 –2018). PRISMA 
Phase I was AIP -Rural’s flagship MSD Activity, complemented by Activities on agricultural finance, 
irrigation, and applied research. PRISMA Phase II combines these four elements in one Activ ity and 
works in six provinc es of Indonesia.  
KEY FINDINGS  
1. Develop a clear business case for motivating businesses to include women, because it 
ensures businesses have a market -based incentive to lead and sustain inclusive interventions . 
2. To engage private -sector partners,  highlight th e business -case (rather than a social case) 
about the value of inclusion,  and speak in business language, not using development terms.  
3. Engage partners outside the agriculture sector with business structures  that can be 
adapted or expanded to fill market g aps, such as financing for agricultural producers or 
women -based agent networks, to jump start inclusion.  
4. Develop staff capacity and accountability for women’s inclusion to optimize efficiency 
and effectiven ess. Capacity include s number of staff, as well a s their skills and knowledge. 
PRISMA’s efforts to build capacity and accountability for inclusion is their proudest achievement.  
5. Create the conditions for partner accountability in the sustainability of the inclusion 
interventio n. This can be enabled throu gh their ownership over the strategy, design, and 
scaling efforts in the co -creation phase(s).   
CONTEXT  
In Indonesia, women perform about 40 percent of farm work; yet, their participation and roles as 
suppliers, consumers, wor kers, and active decision  makers in farm households go largely unnoticed by 
the private and public sectors. In PRISMA’s intervention areas and sectors, private input and service 
providers and public services, such as extension, do not often reach or target  women. This lack of 
outreac h leaves women with lower access to inputs, services, information, and capacity building (e.g., 
training) needed to optimize production and financial outcomes. A key reason firms and extension 
service pr oviders have not targeted  women is that they do not k now their customer and client base, 
including the percentage of women, and thus lack the incentive to target women. Compounding this 
challenge, many input and service providers lack the knowledge and cap acity to tailor messaging  and 
delivery to female farm ers, resulting in a failure to reach them even when they have an incentive.  
STRATEGY AND LEARNING  
PRISMA's objective is to address market system constraints that perpetuate smallholder farmers' 
poverty  and low productivity, th ereby improving competitiven ess, efficiency, and economic outcomes. It 
targets the production level and seeks to reach one million smallholder farming households, increasing 
their net incomes by 30 percent by 2023. PRISMA seeks to improve women’s benefit f rom their 
interventions by o ptimizing results in their current roles and expanding their involvement in male -
dominated roles, such as purchasing inputs and equipment, and working as input and service agents. 
PRISMA’s interventions and partnerships target i nclusive opportunities that significantly contribute to 
Activity objectives and have  a strong business case. Because it strives for sustainable impact at scale,  
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  PRISMA targets partners that work across sectors , and have willingness  and incentive to reach i solated 
communities , from mu ltinationals to domestic firms. It also facilitates links to buyers and among partners 
at different market system levels, creating networks across the system for coordinated sector 
development. PRISMA wo rks almost exclusively wi th private -sector partners a nd the Government of 
Indonesia at different levels, including a partnership with the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, 
where the government performs a unique market role to increase national seaw eed productivity.  
The Act ivity’s approach to gender h as evolved over the life of the Activity through progressive steps 
catalyzed by the adoption of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade ( DFAT ) gender 
strategy. The approach recognizes wome n’s economic empowerment (WEE) as an integral part of  a 
commercially driven strategy, which is detailed in a gender equality and social inclusion ( GESI) strategy. 
PRISMA frames its approach as fostering WEE as a path to gender equity that covers six dimens ions:  
1. Economic advanceme nt  
2. Access to opportunities  
3. Access to assets and services  
4. Decision -making  power  
5. Manageable workload  
6. Leadership roles and networking opportunities  
Where possible, PRISMA explores opportunities to work with local organizations and pr ograms to 
address social norms for transformative cha nge. For example, PRISMA promotes female agent models 
and changing business norms to hire more women workers to reach female farmers. Over the years, 
PRISMA has increased its rigor in partner selection a nd expectations , and stre ngthened its focus on staff 
accountability and capacity development. It developed this integrated approach using learning from a 
stocktaking of its WEE work in 2017. In 2019, PRISMA adopted a twin -track approach , whereby the 
Activity mainstreams women with in sectors and looks for opp ortunities to address gender -specific 
constraints to encourage women's participation in markets through targeted activities.  
CONDUCTING MARKET RESEARCH AND DEVELOPING EVIDENCE -BASED 
BUSINESS CASES  
PRISMA conducts market resear ch and segmentation to devel op a business case for each partner to 
engage in the intervention and promote women’s inclusion. PRISMA’s interventions typically focus on 
addressing production -level constraints throu gh products and services targeted at smallho lder farmers. 
PRISMA works w ith market actors to improve their ability to understand and address neglected market 
segments, such as women, people with disabilities, youth, and indigenous people, who represent 
important consumer segments with distinct prefe rences, behaviors, and learn ing strategies. These 
approaches require conducting research to understand these consumers’ differences and preferences 
with a specific gender lens.  
Good data leads [sic] to good desig n, which leads to good outcomes. This is why  we 
need to make sure that G ESI analysis is integrated into market systems analysis as 
early as possible. – PRISMA GESI Strategy  
PRISMA follows four primary research steps to ensure that a gender lens is applied during market 
analysis and sector strategy d evelopment to identify wheth er market segments can contribute to and 
benefit from market system growth, as illustrated in Exhibit 21.  
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 21: PRISMA four research steps  
 
 SOURCE: PRISMA  GESI Strategy . Graphic has been edited from it s original version for spelling.  
After complet ing the research stages, PRISMA analyzes the data and works to build a strong business 
case around identified opportunities. Opportunities vary from sector to sect or and are further 
customized to partners —PRISMA points out that there are no on e-size-fits-all GESI strategies, and a 
business case is generated from opportunities identified through data collection and analysis. Example 
opportunities that support a busin ess case for inclusion may entail : 
• Identification of an important potential cust omer segment  
• Improvements in productivity, product quality or suitability, and/or supply chain reliability  
• Opportunities to supply to niche markets that have GESI requirements  
• Diversification of distribution channels  
• Enhanced reputation or brand recognitio n 
PRISMA unde rstands that it is not enough to simply state and share this information with potential 
partners, which is why the development of the business case is crucial. PRI SMA prepares a business case 
that includes the gender business opportunity as pa rt of the bro ader business model and demonstrates 
the value of collaborating around the opportunity.  
 
Learning from  PRISMA:  Engaging Partners to Expand Inclusive Opportunities Across  
Sectors 
PRISMA identified and engaged partner PT RUMA (Ruma Limited), with its flagship serv ice Arisan Mapan, to 
reach women through its extensive network of female sales agents. Arisan Mapan is a network of rotating 
savings groups (known in Indonesian cu lture as Arisan ) that use savings to buy products and services, most of 
which are household r elated. Savings groups are coordinated by “influencers,” or agents, 95 percent of whom 
are female. Arisan Mapan had not worked in agriculture prior to working with  PRISMA, but PRISMA engaged 
them to add agriculture to  their portfolio, knowing that female a gents are often better able to reach and 
influence women than male agents. PRISMA showed the partnership as an opportunity for Arisan Mapan, its 
agents, and women farmers to increase their incomes. PRISMA conducted ma rket research to short -list 
potential p roducts for Arisan Mapan to offer and facilitated capacity building for female agents, who did not 
have agricultural experience, to market the products. Arisan Map an added 17 agricultural products (e.g., 
sprayers, pla nters, water pumps) that agents markete d to savings groups, increasing sales for Arisan Mapan, its 
agents, and female producers by expanding their ability to buy improved equipment. Arisan Mapan provide d 
women with product flyers. Women shared the flyers w ith their husbands, balancing knowledge  transfer across 
male and female spouses. PRISMA cites this partnership as one of its most successful engagements, because 
they engaged an actor to enter the secto r to address cross -cutting constraints (inclusion, fin ance), and fostered 
scale and internal collaboration by cutting across commodities and services (information and communication 
technology [ICT], finance).  COMMERCIAL   
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  INTERVENTION AND PARTNER SELECTION  
PRISMA has comprehensive Partnership Guidelines staff use to iden tify potential partners and later engage 
them. PRISMA’s GESI stra tegy also serves as a guidance tool, specifying when and how to integrate 
inclusion issues in selection and market analysis. PRISMA’s basic criteria for selecting partners are that 
they must be highly relevant to at least one target sector , and have the ab ility or willingness to partner 
using a facilitation approach and integrate inclusion into their work. Partners’ interest and capability to 
reach remote locations,  new markets , and hard-to-reach communities are key selection factors.  
 
DEVELOPING EFFECTIV E PARTNERSHIPS THAT PROMOTE INCLUSION  
In addition to the market studies described above, PRISMA carries out research as part of partner 
implementation , including f urther market analysis, gender analysis, and consumer segmentation. PRISMA 
does not offer dir ect capacity development to partners; instead, it co -invests in grant -supported capacity 
building, facilitates networking and resource referrals, and shares knowle dge. During the negotiation 
phase with potential partners, PRISMA staff complete a will/skill matrix , which is a standard tool used as 
part of the Making Markets Work appr oach to measure a potential partner’s willingness (or perceived 
incentives) and ability to lead implementation and integrate inclusion. The will/skill  matrix is a basic MSD 
tool where implementers plot willingness on one axis and ability on the other, from  low to high. To 
gauge will and skill related to inclusion, staff ask companies about their internal structure and staff 
capacity to integrate gender.  
PRISMA also states clear expectations of sustainability for partners at the start to take initiative in 
strategy, design, and scaling, and take ownership of inclusion in the intervention. These expectations are Learning from PRISMA: Developing a Business Ca se for Gender  
PRISMA emphasizes that the way the business case is communicated is critical to  building successful 
partnerships to promote inclusive market developm ent. The project has found the following tactics to be the 
most effective in building and pre senting the business case to both private and public partners:  
• Involve  partners around an evi dence -based business case to ensure they see a market -based incentive to 
engage. Be prepared to make this case from the start and frame the opportunity in terms of  improved 
business performance (e.g., increased customers or sales).  
• Conduct sufficient, rele vant research to frame the business opportunity in a concrete and real istic way, 
including sizing up the opportunity quantitatively.  
• Do not assume the partner is aware of women’s presence or roles in their customer base or supply chain. 
Be prepared to art iculate untapped opportunities and support them with evidence.  
• Do not  overestimate women’s presence in a supply chain or customer base. It is important to present  
accurate estimates of the potential opportunity to maintain the partner’s trust and maximize  the potential 
for sustainability.  
• Use “business language” when reaching out to and negotiating with partners. For example, talk about 
capturing more female custom ers or improving female farmers’ output volumes and quality, not about 
advancing gender equit y, inclusion, and other development  terms focusing on social justice issues.  
• Try to anticipate the potential partner’s arguments and concerns about gender -inclusi ve practices. Listen 
carefully and try to understand any expressed arguments and concerns. Re spectfully highlight the business 
case for any arguments where relevant and discuss how you can partner to address concerns (e.g., cost -
sharing to offset risk, lin king to capacity -building resources, etc.).  
• Monitor intervention outcomes and share results w ith partners so they can see the be nefits in concrete, 
quantitative terms and solidify their belief in the intervention.   
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  core to the market systems approach, chiefly  the aspects of facilitation and co -creation. Partners invest 
about 50 percent of the cost of the relevant  intervention. PRISMA uses ongoing monitoring, evaluation, 
and learning ( MEL) (referred to as Results Measurement and Learning) and partner engagement  to gauge 
potential sustainability through implementation , and determine whether and how to adapt approach es to 
improve potential sustainability.  
 
BUILDING STAFF CAPACITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY  
PRISMA underwent a deliberate process to build staff capacity and accountabil ity within all levels, 
including management, to buy into the value of collecting and analyzin g gender information to improve 
the quality and results of interventions. This process  was initiated by engaging staff in the GESI self -
evaluation and all other as pects of data collection, analysis, design, and learning processes.  
PRISMA has employed a va riety of capacity -development activities, from regular gender and WEE 
training courses , to team and individual coaching, to knowledge -sharing activities. Staff are  provided with 
a suite of tailored tools, systems, and guidance to help them integrate gender  considerations throughout 
the Activity life cycle. These tools support staff in diagn osing gender constraints and opportunities, 
developing intervention designs a nd business cases, and capturing learning. The tools include guidance on 
gender -sensitive dat a collection to assess women’s roles and decision -making dynamics within 
households. W EE is also integrated into the Activity’s internal processes, including the I ntervention 
Concept Notes, Implementation Plans, Quality Management Tools, Result Chains and Intervention 
Steering Document, sub -sector reviews, and systemic change analyses to en sure gender considerations 
at every step of the process and teams ’ accountab ility for the overall quality of their portfolio outcomes.  
Training has focused on building st aff knowledge and ability to speak about inclusion in a language 
businesses understand , instead of using development terminology —for example, referring to women as  
potential customers instead of  talking about social inclusion (see Exhibit 22 for examples). PRISMA also 
supports staff in developing relevant expertise to share with partners through implementation, such as 
identi fying relevant and proven tactics to reach and gain women customers.  Learning from  PRISMA:  Market Research Sup ports Partner Corteva to Reach More 
Female  Customers  
PRISMA has b een working with Corteva, a high-quality hybrid maize seed producer, to increase the 
productivity and performance of maize farmers in Madura through the adoption of better farming practices 
and hybrid seed. PRISMA provided a market analysis to help Corteva  reach smallholders. This an alysis 
included identifying the number of potential women customers Corteva was not currently reaching, which 
demonstrated the business opportunity of integrating inclusion into its marketing and delivery processes. 
PRISMA share d not only these data with C orteva, but also expertise in smallholder -oriented marketing 
approaches and information about sociocultural dynamics and constraints that affect women’s decision m aking 
and production outcomes to help Corteva design targeted mes saging and delivery. Corteva  subsequently 
expanded its rural retail network, added mobile retail, hired female sales agents, cultivated women as lead 
farmers, launched a farm demo plot contes t, and initiated women -only training sessions, all of which great ly 
improved producers’ outco mes, while increasing hybrid maize sales and the number of women customers.   
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  Exhibit 22: Exampl es of business language vs. development terminology  
WEE LANGUAGE/INTERVENTIONS  KEY TERMS/L ANGUAGE FOR EXTERNAL PARTIES  
(PRIVATE -SECTOR PARTNERS,  INTERMEDIARY SERVICE 
PROVIDERS, FARMERS ) 
Male and female farmers  Customer, consumer, or cl ient  
Gender -disaggregated data  Market intelligence data for market segmentation, retention 
program, strate gic promotion and training  
Focus group discussions  Customer focus group discussion  
Gender story  Customer or business partners’ testimony and re view  
Recruiting female field staff or female 
farmers as trainers -of-trainers or master 
trainers  Diversifyi ng channels of promotion to various type of customers,  
defining the right partners of business  
Increasing income of male/female farmers  Profitabi lity of customers after using products (or services)  
Inclusive access to input service skills, credit 
marke t, and other needed supports  Expanding channels for p romotion, networks, customer bas e, 
early adopter customers, product influencers, or endorsers   
Agency: decision  making  Identifying customers’ decision -making dynamics in buying and 
using products or s ervices  
Manageable workload  Identifying customers’ pain points that may influence their 
decision on buying products or applying knowledge  
Leadership  Identifying potential customers who have influencing roles, skills, 
and position in the community or villages  
SOURCE: PRISMA  
WHAT ARE THE CHARACTERISTICS  OF AN IMPACTFUL PARTNERSHIP? HOW 
ARE THESE PARTNERSHIPS EVALUATED?  
PRISMA uses ongoing MEL a nd partner engagement to evaluate impact and sustainability, focusing on 
business outcomes and disaggregating by sex to evaluate inclusion outcomes. PRISMA’s MEL s ystem h as 
scale, sustainability, resilience, and inclusiveness indicators to measure near -term outcomes and likely 
long-term impacts. PRISMA primarily measures progress and results of mainstreaming inclusion into the 
Activity lifecycle. Both PRISMA and par tners e ngage in partner -level data collection, with partners’ 
systems varying according to th eir capacity. Where needed, PRISMA engages businesses to improve 
their gender data collection and analysis as appropriate, such as capturing sex for customers and famers 
in training/information sessions.  
At the most basic level, impactful partnerships resu lt in a demonstrated increase in inclusion and sales 
for males and females across firms, entrepreneurs, and producers. Going a step further, such 
partnerships scal e up, w ith actors applying inclusion approaches outside of the intervention area 
(population,  geography) or business unit (e.g., scaled across parent company). PRISMA’s MEL and 
partner interviews indicate these outcomes are realized for both Corteva and Ar isan Ma pan; further, 
there is incentive and ability to sustain and scale. Corteva has been ab le to convert more than 30,000 
smallholder farmers to hybrid maize, over half of whom are women, in part due to using women sales 
agents and women -only training gr oups. A risan Mapan has seen increased both sales and satisfaction 
among its agents, and produ ction and sales by women farmers as a result of improved access and 
affordability of advanced production equipment. This learning demonstrates that businesses can influen ce 
overall organizational strategies for more inclusive business practices with a test ed business case.   
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN, AND  MSD IN AGRICULTURE: CASE STUDIES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  More broadly, impactful partnerships can lead other actors to copy and scale those models given 
appropriate capacity to do so. However, this requ ires im plementers and partners to disseminate their 
approaches and benefits to inspire others . PRISMA sees other companies adopting its intervention 
models introduced earlier in the program and more partners are willing to invest in inclusive practices. 
To share inclusive best practices among businesses, PRISMA has recently conducted and plans to share a 
study on female agents to capture their experiences and factors that contribute to (or limit) women’s 
participation as effective agents in agriculture.  
CON CLUSION S  
Overall, PRISMA’s experience shows that the market -based business case, business la nguage, and staff 
accountability and capacity are critical for successfully integrating inclusion in market systems 
partnerships. The business case serves as both an entr y and exit strategy , because it ensures the partner 
is committed to investing in and o wning the intervention after the Activity ends. When staff have the 
responsibility and capacity to design and “sell” inclusive interventions, the Activity develop s effective, 
sustainable partnerships that equitably benefit women and men.  
There are a few co ntext -specific issues other implementers should consider when applying these lessons 
learned:  
• The degree to which social norms constrain outcomes for women and bus inesses differs by 
context and must be understood. PRISMA indicated that this issue may warra nt more focus in 
the future, and partners such as Corteva echoed its importance. Where social norms 
constrain outcomes for women and partners, actors need to under stand the issues and ways 
to address them. For example, extension and input agents ought to k now how to engage males 
on equitable decision making where women are responsible for production, but have little 
decision -making power in purchasing, and to make s ure women are invited to training sessions 
because they are key contributors to the productio n processes (invites are often directed to 
male heads of households). Arisan Mapan, Corteva, and PRISMA also noted the need to build 
women’s confidence, which may be reduced due to social norms.  
• To foster sustainability and scale -up of inclusion, market sy stems must include actors who can 
help firms realize market -based incentives for inclusion and build their inclusion capacity. 
Across contexts, market systems may have few or no actors filling these functions. Business 
development services are positioned t o do so, but must have an inclusion -aware mindset, 
frameworks to assess the market potential for inclusion, and knowledge and skills to train 
businesses. Some gove rnment ministries and trade associations can also serve these functions.  
• As MSD is inherently  dynamic and occurs in complex, changing contexts, it is critical for 
implementers to monitor ongoing results. Monitoring is essential to confirm the business case  
holds true, determine how well expected results are realized, gauge potential sustainability , 
and adapt strategies and tactics to optimize results and sustainability.  
The views, findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this publication are  not the views of the 
Government of Australia and the Government of Indonesia.  
CONTACT  
For m ore information on PRISMA’s approach on GESI, contact Maryam Piracha – Portfolio Adviser 
Agriculture, Gender Equality and Social Inclusion at info@aip -prisma.or.id  Maryam.Piracha@aip -
prisma.or.id    
1  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ANNEX ES  
ANNEX 1: PROJECT LIST  
PROJECT  PROJECT 
LOCATION  PROJECT 
DATES  FUNDING 
AMOUNT 
(USD)  FUNDING 
SOURCE  IMPLEMENTING 
PARTNER  SECTORS  TYPE OF 
YOUTH AND 
GENDER 
INCLUSION  
RisiAlbania   Albania  2013–2021 $13.3M  SDC Helvetas, Partners 
Albania  Agro-business, tourism, 
ICT, labor market 
services  Youth -
targeted 
project  
RDC  Bangladesh  2016–2020 $24.5M  USAID/F eed 
the Future  ACDI/VOCA  Rice, maize, pulses 
(lentils and mung beans), 
and oilseeds (sunflowe r, 
sesame, and mustard); 
mechanization, ICT, crop 
protection, finance, 
fertilizer  Gender 
mainstreaming  
ÉLAN RDC   DRC 2013–2018 (I)  
2019–2020 (II)  $65M  DFID  Adam S mith 
International  Agriculture, branchless 
banking, small and 
medium enterprise 
finance, tran sport, 
renewable energy  Gender 
mainstreaming  
MDF  Fiji, Timor -
Leste, Papua 
New 
Guinea, Sri 
Lanka, and 
Pakistan  2011–2017 (1)  
 
2018–2022 $36M (I)  
 
n/a (II)  DFAT  Palladium and 
SwissContact  Fiji: tourism  
Timor -Leste: 
agribusiness, tourism and 
finance  
Papua New Guinea:  
agricultural and 
economic diversification 
Sri Lanka: tourism  
Pakistan: livestock, 
horticulture, leather, 
finance, nutrition, water, 
and energy  Gend er 
mainstreaming   
2  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  PROJECT  PROJECT 
LOCATION  PROJECT 
DATES  FUNDING 
AMOUNT 
(USD)  FUNDING 
SOURCE  IMPLEMENTING 
PARTNER  SECTORS  TYPE OF 
YOUTH AND 
GENDER 
INCLUSION  
PRISMA   Indonesia  2013–2018 (I) 
 
2019–2023 (II)  AUD 77M/ 
$51M (I)  
AUD 
12M/$ 74M (II) DFAT  Palladium 
w/SwissContact  Livestock, horticulture, 
agriculture , and 
aquaculture  Gender and 
youth 
mainstreaming  
AWEF   Egypt, 
Jordan, 
Palestine  2015–2020 $13M  DFID  Development 
Alternatives Inc.  Egypt: citrus, food 
service, and food retail  
Jordan: sheep and goat 
dairy  
Palestine: traditional 
food processing  Women -
targeted 
project  
Mozambique   
Agricultural 
Innovations 
Activity  (Inova)
  Mozambique  2017–2022 $21M  USAID/Feed 
the Future  Development 
Alternatives Inc.  Agricultural inputs 
distribution,  supply chain 
management, logistics 
services, media and 
communication, 
marketing and research 
services, and other 
supporting services  Gender 
mainstreaming  
PropCom  
Mai-Karfi  Nigeria  2012–2017 (I)  
2018–2021 (II)  27 mil po unds 
(1); 51 mil 
pounds (II)  
$101M DFID  Palladium  Inputs, finance, poultry  Pivot to 
include women 
or youth mid -
project  
USAID PEEP    Pakistan  201–2021 $20M  USAID  Chemonics  Horticulture, livestock,  
and dairy  Pivot to 
include women 
or youth mid-
project  
Naatal  Mbay   Senegal  2015–2019 $24M  USAID/Feed 
the Future  Research Triangle 
Institute  Irrigated rice, rainfed 
rice, millet, and maize   Women -
targeted 
project   
3  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  PROJECT  PROJECT 
LOCATION  PROJECT 
DATES  FUNDING 
AMOUNT 
(USD)  FUNDING 
SOURCE  IMPLEMENTING 
PARTNER  SECTORS  TYPE OF 
YOUTH AND 
GENDER 
INCLUSION  
DYNAMIC   Uganda  2015–2020 $21.4M  Masterc ard 
Foundation  GOAL  Agriculture, finance  Youth -
targeted 
project  
RAIN   Uganda  2011–2015 $6.6M  
(Walmart - 
1M) OFDA/  
Walmart 
Foundation 
for Gender 
Inclusion  Mercy Corps  Cassava, sesame, 
groundnut, beans, maize, 
sorghum, and rice  Pivot to 
include women 
or you th mid-
project  
YLA  Uganda  2015–2020 $21.5M  USAID/Feed 
the Future  Chemonics  Agribusiness  Youth-
targeted 
project  
Yapasa   Zambia  2014–2019 $7.6M  SIDA  ILO and FAO  Aquaculture, soybeans, 
and other horticultural 
products  Youth -
targeted 
project  
Financial Sect or 
Deepening   Zambia  2016–2019 $3.4M  SIDA/DFID  Financial Sector 
Deepening Trust  Finance  Gende r and 
youth 
mainstreaming  
 
  
4  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ANNEX 2: LIST OF SELECT RESOURCES  
The research team has compiled this select list resources shared or identi fied in the course of this research. The tables below organize the 
resources into the four ke y sections from the report: (1) Planning for Inclusion, (2) Implementation, (3) Adaptation and Learning, and  (4) 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning ( MEL). 
Where possible, direct links to the resource are provided. The associated Activity is identified to  encourage others to reach out directly for 
additional information and explore opportunities to proactively cross -pollinate resources and share data.  
PLANNING FOR INCLUSION RESOURCES   
RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVIT Y  
ÉLAN RDC GESI Review (2015)   This comprehensive Gender Inclusion Review forms part of ÉLAN RDC’s 2015 GESI Action Plan 
to bolster its gender  mainstreaming efforts ac ross the program in line with its commitment to 
facilitating Women’s Economic Empowerment through market system change.  ÉLAN RDC  
ÉLAN RDC II GESI Strategy 
(2020)  This strategy describes how ÉLAN 2 will contribute to greater GESI in the DRC focusing on 
facilitating positive role changes for women within the program’s target sectors.  ÉLAN RDC  
GESI Guidance and Tools (2020)  This manual is meant to equip ÉLAN 2 staff  with the knowledge, skills and tools to identify, 
design, implement, and measure more inclus ive intervention through the use of strategic market 
information and the development of business cases with strong GESI considerations.  ÉLAN RDC  
PRISMA Gender St rategy  This strategy outlines how PRI SMA ensures that increases in income and productivity stimulated 
by the Activity are inclusive of and benefit women and to a limited extent, youth. This strategy 
aims to provide practical guidance to PRISMA’s staff an d management.  PRISMA  
DYNAMIC Theory of Change  DYNAMIC’s succinct theory of change articulat es how MSD and youth development intersect 
and improve access to economic opportunity.  DYNAMIC  
RDC Gender Strategy  This strategy is meant for use by RDC staff, pa rtners , and collaborat ing market actors as a guide 
through the evolution of the organization’ s gender approach, women’s constraints and 
opportunities in the Activity’s context, gender integration priorities , and team member s’ 
responsibilities.  RDC 
Feed the Future  Inova Findin gs 
from a Qualitative Study on 
Gender Norms in Farming, Input 
Use, and Distribution in Manica 
Province (2018)  This study summarizes key findings from the Qualitative Study on Gender Norms in Farming, 
Input Use, and Distribution in Man ica Province (Mozambiq ue) undertaken by Feed the Future 
Inova. It maps out men’s and women’s roles and responsibilities in farming and , particularly , the 
input distribution market system; and provides analysis on women as buyers and users of inputs 
in term s of understanding the  information flows, norms, and incentives driving women’s FTF Inova   
5  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVIT Y  
preferences, household decision making around inputs, and the implications for marketing and 
sales strategies of input distributors. See the infographic produced by Feed the Fu ture Inova in 
the Impl ementation Resources below.  
Feed the Future Naatal Mbay 
Project Women's Economic 
Empowerment Strategy  This WEE strategy aims to present the means to address gender issue s, empower women , and 
avoid project activities that co uld inadvertently either directly or indirectly cause harm to 
women. The strategy was develop ed using a data -driven (evidence -based) value chain approach by 
prioritized value chains and intervention strategies on the ba sis of the extent and nature of 
women ’s participation in each value chain, financial returns to production, and the current and 
potential role of crop in women’s incomes and household food security.  Naatal Mbay  
 
IMPLEMENTATION RESOURCES  
RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVITY  
Technical Brief: A Facilitat ion 
Approach to Youth Workforce 
Development and 
Entrepreneurship  This brief describes the facil itated activities YLA has implemented to build relationships among 
youth, prospective employers, service providers, and education institutions to create meaningf ul 
employment linkages and skills development.  YLA  
ÉLAN RDC ’s Women’s 
Economic Empowerment 
Learning Series: Case Study 1  This case study aims to test the theory that by engaging poor women on the same terms as men 
as out-growers in cash crop industries, commercial farms can benefit from increased yield and 
improv ed supply chain reliability; and poor women can increase their incomes and adopt “more 
beneficial roles” within the market system.  ÉLAN RDC  
ÉLAN RDC’s Women’s 
Economic Empowerment 
Learning Series: Case Study 2  This learni ng document describes tactics to target women as consumers, marketing “women -
friendly ’ products and reducing women’s unpaid care burden.  ÉLAN RDC  
GESI Champio n Mo del This concept note details the rationale for and operational aspects of implementing a GES I 
Champion Model within the ÉLAN RDC program.  ÉLAN RDC  
Working with the Private Sector 
to Empower Women: What to 
Measure and How to Build the 
Business Case for Change  This AWEF Practitioner Learning Brief provides a practical framework for development actors on 
how to de velop a robust business case for private sector companies on the commercial value of 
empowering w omen.   AWEF   
6  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVITY  
Working with the Private Sector 
to Empower Women: How YOU 
Can Build a Business Case for 
Change  This blog post describ es the steps to take to develop a business case for women.  AWEF  
Making Digital Finance Work 
for Women in the MENA 
Region: Eight Lessons from the 
Field  This Practitioners Learning B rief explores opportunities and challenges to women’s financial 
inclusion and empowerment. It show cases 14 case studies from AWEF and other organizations 
working in the M iddle East and North Africa region, including eight key lessons on how to design 
and implement intervention that can pave the way for women’s digital financial empowerment.  AWEF  
Expanding the Agri -inputs market 
by targeting female farmers  This infographic developed by Market Share Associates is meant to present the business case for 
female  farmer inclusion in the agri -inputs markets. By better understanding women consumer s’ 
preferences , input distributors can better deliver products and services tailored to their needs.  FTF In ova 
Business Case: Engaging Women 
in Agricultural Market Systems  This business case study aims to understand the specific roles of women in the RDC sectors, 
detect the cases where companies have engaged women and leveraged their roles effectively, and 
pinpoin t firms’ barriers or perceived barriers to women’s involvement.  RDC 
Partner Assessment Tool for 
gender inclusion  This assessment tool includes questions and a framework to determine whether appropriate 
partners are selected to facilitate gender inclusion.  RDC 
Market Actor Agreement 
Assessment Tool  This market actor assessment tool consists of a series of questions meant to indicate how 
strongly ma rket actors can accommodate gender within the agreement, and to guide gender 
integration in p artner co -creation processes . This includes  evaluating the commercial incentive, 
feasibility, scale, and sustainability of integrating women within proposals . RDC 
Deal Making and Relationship  
Management Guidelines  
for Private -Sector Partners   These guidelines are to provide practical guidance on engaging private -sector partners, inclu ding 
the tools and confidence to facilitate win -win negotiations and ensure strong relationship 
management, Including the will/skill matrix referred to in Case St udy IV.  PRISMA (AIP -
RURAL)  
 
ADAPTATION AND LEARNING RESOURCES  
RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVITY  
Gender -responsive agri -business  
models in Northern Uganda  This short fact sheet summarizes RAIN’s “gender journey ,” describing the adaptations required to 
better address gender after poor initial outcomes. The document discusses the Act ivity’s RAIN   
7  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVITY  
improved gender responsiveness through appropriate staffing and sourcing additional gender 
resources for impact.  
Confronting Organizational  
Challenges to Mainstreaming 
Women’s E conomic 
Empowerment in Market Systems 
Development Programs  This case study shares insights to existing guidance on WEE in MSD by (1) examining widespread 
challeng es to effective WEE mainstreaming in MSD programs, and (2) providing examples of how 
the Aust ralia-Indonesia Partnership for Rural Economic Development has tackled some of these 
challenges. The paper starts from the pers pective that the organi zational etho s and supporting 
materials do not embody principles and tools of WEE.  PRISMA  
 
MEL RESOURCES  
RESOURCE NAME  DESCRIPTION  ASSOCIATED 
ACTIVITY  
Beyond Income – A critical 
analysis of agency measurement 
in economic programming  This co mprehensive framework lays the foundations for tool development , allowing projects to 
measure  women’s agency in a range of contexts.  MDF   
Meth odology for Measuring 
Progression in Women’s Roles 
(2017)  This measurement methodology descr ibes ÉLAN RDC log -frame indicators at output and 
outcome level focused on the progression of women’s roles within market systems.  ÉLAN RDC  
Finding the Best Fit  This case study describes Naata l Mbay’s overall approach to digital integration and  its experience 
introducing various digital tools and approaches. It reviews the impact of digit al tools on Naatal 
Mbay’s partners and targeted value chains, and offers lessons learned abou t its digital integration 
experience drawn from the reflections of various stakeholders.  Naatal Mbay   
8  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  ANNEX 3: ADDITIONAL LEARNING QUESTIONS   
 
AREA  LEARNING QUESTIONS  
Mainstream vs. targeted 
approaches to market 
integration  • Comparat ive analysis of mainstreamed vs. targeted projects in the 
agriculture sector, with regards to (1) the range of impacts of youth in 
terms of the domains of positive  youth development (assets, agency, 
contribution , and enabling environment) and (2) the consi deration of 
gender  
• Improving understanding of what each type of inclusion strategy offers 
to women and/or youth  
Youth in MSD  • Are there components of MSD all youth  entrepreneurship and 
employment programs should adopt?  
• Are young adolescents served  by MSD?  What are the bare minimum 
requirements to be able to safely participate in these types of programs?  
• To what extent do standard WEE tools and measurement framewor ks 
translate to young women in MSD? What special considerations are 
needed, if any? 
Tools fo r MSD  • Tensions exist in the development of results chains for MSD —with 
limited space, how much real estate, if any, should be reserved for youth 
and women?  
• What b est practices/models exist?  
• To what extent are MSD programs getting to root ca uses of women’ s 
and youth’s exclusion?  
• To what extent do planning tools for women and youth identify ways to 
drive systemic change across sectors for women and youth as opposed  
to targeted changes within specific sectors and functions within those 
sectors ?  
• What tools have been developed for activities at different steps along 
the project cycle that can be shared, such as youth -and gender -focused 
market analyses?  
Direct deliver y vs. facilitation 
in MSD  • What type of challenges cannot be bridged through fac ilitation and why? 
Where does high -intensity facilitation or even direct delivery make 
sense?  
• To what extent is mainstreamed gender and youth inclusion in MSD an 
effective means  to address social norms? What are the preconditions for 
partners to be success ful at underta king this type of challenge?  
Staffing for inclusion in MSD  • What is the best way to get staff up to speed with youth and gender 
inclusion? Who is best suited to th is work (business or gender/youth 
staff)?  
• What gaps can "making gender and you th everyone's business" provoke? 
Can this growing practice be standardized and optimized?  
• What is the optimal way to assign responsibility for gender? Where are 
experts needed?  How much can lay staff be  expected  to do?  
• What are some effective staff struc ture models an d what are the factors 
that should be considered when deciding what model works best for a 
particular context? CLA mindset does not explicitly call out gender or 
inclusion. Why not? What are the steps to change this?   
9  |  YOUTH, WOMEN,  AND MSD IN AGRICULTURE: LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS  | ANNEXES  WWW.FEEDTHEFUTURE.GOV  AREA  LEARNING QUESTIONS  
Social norms  • How and to what extent do  MSD programs put stock in exploring 
gender - and age -related norms, and designing interventions to confront 
them?  
• How successful are social norms approaches at af fecting systemic change 
in markets for women and/or youth?  
End-market -oriented and 
demand -driven approaches to 
inclusion in MSD  • Are demand -driven approaches alone enough to facilitate active 
inclusion of women and/or youth in market systems?  
• If so, what  are the right ingredients for success (e.g., analytical tools, 
implementati on approaches, st affing, etc.)?   
Partner engagement  • What tactics are the most impactful in getting market actors to drive 
inclusion within a sector by adopting more inclusive bus iness attitudes 
and behaviors?  
• Can lead firms’ adoption of more inclusive b usiness attitudes  and 
behaviors have spillover effects within the sector?   
• Do joint partnerships yield better results than single -actor ones?  
• What are market actors’  perspectives  of the support, incentives and 
long-term outcomes of participating in an in clusive MSD Activ ity? 
Combination of MSD tactics  • What kinds of opportunities and constraints have been identified and 
what patterns are seen across cases?  
• What combination of MSD  tactics contribute s the most to women’s and 
youth’s inclusion in different contexts and oppo rtunity spaces? How do 
these tactics drive scalable and sustainable change?  
MEL • What MEL tools/resources are particularly effective for supporting MSD 
projects t o conduct gender -/youth -sensitive formative research? What 
tools/resources are effective for supporting assessing the contribution of 
MSD tactics to changes in women's or youth's participation or benefit? 
What tools/resources are effective for measuring sy stemic changes that 
include gender/youth impacts?  
• What MSD market analysis, measurement tool s, or program 
frameworks integrate youth and/or gender lenses? What can be learned 
from them and what are promising practices in this space?  
Donor considerations  • Do current USAID institu tional requirements, set up for traditional 
development programming, meet the challenge of innovation and 
dynamism women - and youth -inclusive MSD requires?  
 
 
 