Introduction
Ethiopia has undergone rapid transformation over the past two years. Soon after being appointed in 2018, Prime Minister 
Abiy Ahmed, an ethnic Oromo, effectively dissolved the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front, the party that 
had wielded absolute power since 1991, promising a restoration of political freedoms and peace with neighbouring Eritrea 
that was recognised with a Nobel Peace Prize (Gardner, 2020; Nobel Prize, 2019). That same year saw the appointment 
of Ethiopia’s first female president, Sahle-Work Zewde, and a cabinet in which half the positions are held by women. This 
new era has seen improvements in people’s rights to voice and association but has also been accompanied by increased 
insecurity and violence, which first erupted in 2015 and then spread throughout the country, leaving hundreds of people 
dead and millions displaced (Human Rights Watch, 2020).
This policy note synthesises findings from the Gender and Adolescence: Global Evidence (GAGE) programme’s 
2019/2020 round 2 data collection to explore changes in Ethiopian adolescents’ access to voice and agency in the 
midst of the country’s dramatic political transformation. It uses mixed-methods research that includes a survey (with 
7,538 adolescents and their caregivers) and 601 qualitative interviews (with adolescents, parents and service providers). 
Respondents were from three diverse rural regions – South Gondar (Amhara), East Hararghe (Oromia) and Zone 5 (Afar) 
– as well as three very different urban areas (Debre Tabor in Amhara, Batu in Oromia and Dire Dawa City Administration). 
We pay careful attention to gender and regional differences in how young people between the ages of 12 and 20 are 
accessing decision-making opportunities within the family and community. We also explore changes in adolescents’ 
mobility and access to safe space, and social interactions with peers, their access to age-appropriate information and digital 
‘Children are future leaders of the country’: 
Ethiopian adolescents’ access to voice and 
agencyPolicy Brief
October 2020
Authors: Elizabeth Presler-Marshal, Nicola Jones, Rebecca Dutton, Sarah Baird and Workneh Yadete1
1   Suggested citation: Presler-Marshal, E.,Jones, N., Dutton, R., Baird, S. and Workneh, Y. (2020)  ‘“Children are future leaders of the country”: Ethiopian 
adolescents’ access to voice and agency .’ Policy Brief. London: Gender and Adolescence: Global Evidence.Secondary school girls’ club in Amhara region, Ethiopia © Nathalie Bertrams/GAGE 20202technology, and to inspirational role models. We then discuss 
key actions needed to accelerate progress, especially for 
girls, if Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5 – ‘women’s 
full and effective participation and equal opportunities for 
leadership at all levels’ – is to be achieved (United Nations, 
2020). 
Key findings
The broader changes unfolding across Ethiopia are 
reflected in myriad ways in adolescents’ lives. Since our 
baseline research in 2018, adolescents have become more 
comfortable speaking up for what they need, more involved 
in their communities, have more say over when they leave the 
house and where they go, enjoy better access to information, 
and are more likely to have a role model who inspires them. 
Changes have not, however, accrued uniformly to all groups 
of adolescents.
Voice and decision-making in the household 
and community
There has been substantial change over the past two years in 
adolescents’ ability to contribute to the decisions that shape 
their own lives, their households and their communities, 
although the patterning is complex. As expected, given that 
they are now two years older, considerably more younger 
adolescents (aged 12–14 years) reported feeling comfortable 
expressing their opinions to adults at midline (45%) than 
at baseline (29%). As also expected, girls (44%) were less 
comfortable voicing their opinions than boys (47%), and 
especially in the case of older adolescents (17–19 years) 
where the gender divide was greater (44% for girls compared 
to 50% for boys). This difference in the survey was, however, 
more muted than in the qualitative findings. Our qualitative research suggests that this relative parity 
between girls and boys reflects girls’ lower expectations 
rather than their actual input to decisions, with fathers 
admitting that they have very limited communication with 
their daughters and girls explaining that even their mothers 
have limited say. ‘What can I talk about with my daughter? 
There is nothing I talk about with her!’  exclaimed a father from 
Debre Tabor. ‘Some mothers exercise their rights. The power 
goes to fathers mostly,’  explained a married 17 -year-old girl 
from East Hararghe. Our findings further highlight that girls 
have very little say in the decisions that shape their lives, 
including whether and when to marry (see Box 1). ‘I cannot 
refuse. If I refuse the man who is going to marry me, he would 
be given permission to take me by force,’ emphasised a 
17 -year-old married girl from Zone 5 (Afar). 
Our survey found that differences in adolescents’ voice by 
location were more notable than gender and age differences, 
with those living in rural Amhara and urban areas far more 
comfortable with speaking up to adults than those living 
in rural Oromia (approximately one-half versus one-third). 
This same patterning is reflected in an index capturing 
adolescents’ perceived input into household decision-
making, which was higher in rural Amhara (4.8/8) than in any 
other location, especially compared to East Hararghe (3.8/8).2
Our qualitative work suggests that differences are 
shaped by both cultural norms and access to services. In 
Box 1: ‘I can take care of myself’
Marta is a 13-year-old girl, married at age 8 and now divorced, living in rural South Gondar. She is exceptional not because of the 
age at which she was married but because of her determination to make her voice heard against formidable family and community 
pressures. 
Marta was unable to refuse her marriage, which was arranged by her grandfather because he wanted to see the family line continue. 
But she drew the line at being made to leave school by her husband, who was nearly 10 years older and still studying himself. ‘I said 
to him, “What am I going to do if you finish your school and become a government worker and leave me? Am I going to end up being 
a farmer and take care of your babies?”’ 
Indeed, having heard that girls can get pregnant even before menarche, as soon as she was forced to become sexually active she 
went to the local health extension worker and demanded a contraceptive implant. ‘I asked her for the implant that lasts for three 
years… I didn’t want to give birth before I become mature and know myself better and become self-sufficient,’ she explained.
Determined to escape her marriage and illiteracy and to realise her aspiration of going to university, Marta stole grain from her 
in-laws and sold it to finance her escape. When she was caught by a cousin, she fought back: ‘I was beaten and forced to go back 
but I refused. I told them that I would commit suicide.’ Although her father and her in-laws tried to intimidate her into returning to 
her husband, Marta persisted. She was allowed to divorce and was preparing, before the disruptions brought by covid-19, to start 
secondary school.  I cannot refuse. If I refuse the 
man who is going to marry me, he 
would be given permission to take 
me by force.
(A 17-year-old married girl from Zone 5 (Afar))3Married girls ha ve le ss access to  friends , information
and technology than their unmarried peers .
have a
trust ed friendhave a
phonelisten to
radioread the 
newspaperMarried girls ar e less lik ely to:
East Hararghe, whereas initial explanations surrounding 
school dropout and child marriage emphasised adolescents’ 
voice and adults’ inability to exercise control, broader 
narratives highlighted how adolescent ‘choices’ are shaped 
by adults’ demands. ‘She has quit on her own. She doesn’t 
want to go to school,’ explained a 15-year-old in-school boy 
of his sister. ‘But there must be somebody to prepare foods 
and do all these tasks, so that our mother orders her to do 
those tasks.’ This view was reinforced by key informants. As 
a community leader in East Hararghe noted: ‘When boys and 
girls reach the age of adolescence, conflict arises between 
the mother and such children… Once mothers initiated the 
girls for marriage, girls will go with someone for marriage.’  
In South Gondar, where school enrolment rates are higher 
(91% of younger adolescents enrolled, compared to 78% 
in East Hararghe and 61% in Zone 5) and schools are more 
likely to have active clubs on topics including gender and 
civic participation, young people are more regularly exposed 
to messages about their rights – including their rights to an 
education and to remain unmarried. ‘They teach us about 
discipline, our rights and responsibilities and so on,’  observed 
a 15-year-old girl who is a member of her school’s civics club. 
‘I take part in school clubs… It is to get better knowledge,’  
added a 15-year-old girl who explained that she had drawn 
on this awareness to refuse a marriage arranged by her 
parents. In Zone 5 (Afar), pastoralist realities shape day-to-
day adolescent decision-making. Young people reported 
that they largely did as their parents told them – because livestock need herding – but that they have final control over 
the animals gifted to them by their parents.  ‘If I want to give 
them [livestock], I can give them. I can also refuse to give 
them goat. When I refuse, my family accepts my word,’  noted 
a 16-year-old girl.
There have been increasing opportunities in recent years 
for adolescents to participate in their communities. In our 
midline research, this was most evident in East Hararghe, 
where the regional youth movement known as ‘ qeerroo ’ 
helped usher Abiy to power calling for redress of Oromo 
political and socio-economic marginalisation.  While there 
is considerable debate about the role and nature of the 
qeerroo  movement (Jalata, 2016), in our research sites our 
findings revealed qeerroos  taking on some positive roles. 
For example, qeerroos  were working beside government 
officials to provide for internally displaced persons, and 
locating truant children and returning them to the classroom. 
In addition, in communities where it has been banned, they 
were also involved in collecting fines from the parents of 
adolescents caught participating in traditional shegoye  
dances (some areas have banned shegoye  given its 
negative consequences for participants’ school attendance 
and performance).  ‘The chairperson of the qeerroo  in our 
kebele  has… connections and communications with kebele  
administrators,’  explained an 18-year-old boy participant. 
‘Qeerroos  work day-in and day-out and bring children to 
school. Qeerroo  enable us to solve the serious problems that 
we have,’ emphasised a father from a remote community. 
2 The index (0–8) measures adolescents’ perception of having a say about household issues such as: how much time they spent helping 
around the house, how much education they will get, when and who they will marry, who their friends are, what they do in their free time, 
when they can leave the house and their involvement in income-generating activities, with higher scores indicating more perceived 
input into household decision makingGraphics made for GAGE by Ottavia Pasta4Although adolescents’ actions and voices are increasingly 
visible in and respected by communities in East Hararghe, 
girls remain comparatively shut out by gender norms that 
position them as subservient. A 17 -year-old girl who is a 
member of a female qeerroo  group now led by a young 
man noted that when he asked her to take over the 
group’s leadership, she declined – because she knew the 
community would never listen to her:  ‘I refused, believing 
that this village will not accept my leadership.’ 
In South Gondar (Amhara) and Zone 5 (Afar), 
adolescents’ engagement in the community tends to be 
less formal and relatively rare. In Zone 5, a 19-year-old 
divorced girl added that her generation is completely 
ignored by local leaders:  ‘Children are future leaders of 
the country, but no one seems to think that way. No one is 
concerned about the development of the area. Even in our 
high school, no one contacted us about what we need and 
what we are doing.’  A 17 -year-old boy from South Gondar 
noted that he and his friends had recently come together 
to fight desertification and climate change, after hearing 
about the issue on the radio: ‘We got the information from 
the radio, we planted a number of trees.’ Mobility, access to safe spaces and peers
Adolescents’ ability to control their movements outside 
of the home, to access safe spaces and spend time with 
friends is also highly variable. Overall – and to be expected, 
given that they are now two years older than at baseline – 
adolescents’ mobility is improving. Our midline survey found 
that 38% of young people had left their kebele  (community) 
at least once in the past three months and that fewer had 
had to seek permission to do so.  ‘I don’t ask them and I 
don’t want their permission to go everywhere,’ explained a 
15-year-old boy from Zone 5 (Afar), who noted that where 
he goes depends more on his livestock than his parents. 
In line with the broader evidence base, however, this 
was far less true for girls. Over half of boys (52%) but less 
than a quarter of girls (24%) reported having recently left 
their communities. Indeed, girls were quite likely to report 
even greater restrictions on their mobility over time, due 
to parents’ concerns about girls’ reputations and how they 
reflect family honour.  ‘Our mothers do not let us get out of 
home once we are becoming older,’  observed a 13-year-old 
girl from East Hararghe. ‘The boys are set free,’  added a girl 
of the same age from South Gondar. 
Regional differences were also marked. Adolescents 
from Zone 5 (Afar) were least likely (27%) to have left their 
communities, largely because they live in remote areas but 
also due to clan and inter-ethnic violence that has made 
travel risky. Those from East Hararghe were most likely to 
have travelled out of their kebele  (44%), due to girls’ need 
to fetch water from distant water holes and adolescents’ 
greater engagement with the cash economy and markets. 
‘There is no limit and I can go to market based on need,’ 
observed a 15-year-old girl from a remote community in 
East Hararghe.
Box 2: Marriage multiplies girls’ disadvantage across all domains
Our survey found that married girls have significantly less access to mobility, friends, and information and communications 
technology (ICT) than their unmarried peers. Compared to their unmarried peers, older married girls (17–19 years) are less likely 
to have a trusted friend (59% versus 71%), have a phone (36% versus 42%) or listen to the radio (24% versus 31%).
Our qualitative work found that the limits on married girls’ worlds are shaped by social norms around the intra-household 
gender division of labour and a husband’s control of his wife. Married girls across the regions in our study emphasised that 
they simply did not have time to engage with the world beyond their home. ‘We spend most of our time searching for firewood, 
fetching water and working on the farm, so we don’t get time,’ explained a 14-year-old married girl from East Hararghe. ‘It is those 
unmarried girls who attend school that have happiness… Married girls have a lot of household responsibilities and worries about 
their household,’ added a 15-year-old married girl from South Gondar. More important, girls agreed, was that husbands exert 
almost total control over their young wives’ lives. ‘I say that I have to wash clothes today; I have to fetch water or collect firewood. 
These things I know and I decide on my own,’ explained a married 13-year-old from South Gondar. When asked whether she 
was allowed to have a say in larger decisions, she replied: ‘It is the man who knows.’ Married girls added that while technology 
could help expand horizons even for those who are homebound, it tends to be controlled by men.  ‘Most of the time men sit and 
listen to the radio while chewing khat [a plant that acts as a stimulant, common in parts of Ethiopia] together. Females do not 
join them and listen to the radio. I never sit with them to listen to the radio,’  reported a married 15-year-old girl from Zone 5 (Afar).  Children are future leaders of 
the country, but no one seems to 
think that way ... Even in our high 
school, no one contacted us about 
what we need and what we are 
doing.
(A 19-year-old divorced girl in Zone 5 (Afar))5Younger adolescents were less likely to report having a 
trusted friend at midline than at baseline (64% compared to 
76%), presumably because they are less likely to be enrolled 
in school and – for some girls – because they are more 
likely to be married (see Box 2). There were no differences 
between unmarried girls and boys. However, those living in 
urban areas or in East Hararghe were more likely to have a 
confidant (approximately 75%) than those living in South 
Gondar (approximately 66%) and especially those living in 
pastoralist Zone 5 (Afar) (approximately 40%). The latter 
figure could be capturing the fact that due to more limited 
school enrolment in Afar, adolescents are missing out on 
opportunities to forge relationships with school peers. 
However, our qualitative findings suggest that they have 
opportunities to build friendships with age-mates: many 
Afar adolescents are active participants in sadah , a cultural 
dance where boys and girls dance outside at night without 
parental supervision. Adolescent boys also join faema , 
a tightly knit group of peers who support the elders in 
enforcing clan rules and sanctions, and commonly reported 
on the close relationships that they enjoy with their faema . 
Our qualitative work suggests that the violence unfolding 
across Ethiopia during midline data collection was often a 
formidable barrier to friendship. Younger adolescents (12–
14 years) in South Gondar reported that gun violence and 
local deaths encouraged them to limit social interactions; 
in East Hararghe, their peers remained wary following the 
border conflict of late 2017/early 2018 that left hundreds of 
thousands displaced; and in Afar, as already mentioned, 
clan and inter-ethnic tensions have disrupted community 
mobility over the past two years. Similarly, older adolescents 
in urban areas specifically detailed how friendships had been 
disrupted by inter-community violence. In Dire Dawa in late 
2019 our qualitative findings highlighted that students from 
different groups were unable to learn in mixed ethnic groups 
due to harassment and fighting, and that some parents were 
forced to withdraw their children and move them to other 
schools. For example, a 19-year-old boy from Dire Dawa reported that he changed schools mid-year ‘to isolate 
myself’ from the daily violence that took place even inside 
classrooms. A 20-year-old young woman with a physical 
disability added that she can no longer use social media 
to communicate with her friends because her phone was 
stolen in a melee at Debre Tabor University: ‘I had a mobile 
phone which is used to access Facebook but... my phone 
was stolen during the conflict in this university. I was with 
my friends in the cafeteria and when the students started 
throwing stones, I forgot my phone and left it on the table.’
Access to age-appropriate information and 
digital technology
Adolescents’ access to information and digital technology 
is also increasing, as technology filters further into rural 
areas, young people mature, and the need to be aware 
of current events has taken on new urgency as political 
events unfold and violence spreads. Although there are 
considerable differences by gender (see Box 3), residence 
location and age are the primary delimiters – a pattern 
established by our baseline research. Among older 
adolescents, 19% of those living in urban areas and 7% of 
those living in rural areas have read a newspaper at least 
once in the past month. Similarly, 61% of those in cities and 
only 33% of those in rural areas have a phone for their own 
use. (Among younger adolescents, who are less likely to 
work and to be able to contribute to the purchase price, 
figures for phone ownership are much lower – 10% and 
9% respectively.) 
Adolescents in our qualitative sample reported that 
improved access to digital technology is shaping not 
only their daily lives, allowing them to communicate with 
friends and listen to music, but also enabling them to invest 
in their futures.  ‘I used to download books,’ explained a 
17 -year-old girl from Batu, after noting that her phone had 
recently run out of charge. Somewhat surprisingly, given 
that they receive relatively little guidance from parents and 
educators, adolescents quite often also saw the downsides Box 3: The gender digital divide
Across age groups and locations, girls have significantly less access to information and digital technology than boys. This is true 
of older forms of technology, such as radio, with 37% of boys having listened at last once in the past month compared to only 
23% of girls. It is also true of newer forms of technology, with 25% of boys but only 18% of girls having a mobile phone for their 
own use. The gender gap is larger still in terms of phones with internet connectivity. In urban areas, 46% of older boys have a 
smartphone compared to 35% of girls. 
Our qualitative work highlights that gender norms prevent girls from using the digital technology that would allow them to access 
information. First parents and then husbands are afraid that girls will use phones to illicitly communicate with boys and men. ‘In 
our area, females do not have phones. It is usually males who can have a cell phone… It is to prevent women from cheating with 
other men by calling through the phone,’ explained a 14-year-old girl from Zone 5 (Afar). Even in urban areas, girls often reported 
that they must rely on word of mouth to learn what is going on around them. ‘I collect information from people,’  replied a 19-year-
old girl from Batu when asked how she learnt about current events. In rural areas, where girls’ mobility is more tightly restricted 
and their friends are just as likely to be deprived of information, many girls have no exposure to political affairs. ‘Politics is like, 
umm, it is like, umm, I don’t know what it is,’ confessed a 15-year-old girl from South Gondar. 6of improved connectivity. A 19-year-old girl from Dire 
Dawa admitted that while her phone helps her study, it also 
facilitates time-wasting: ‘There is 50% chance of anything 
to be good or bad. But our brain tends to balance towards 
the negative. Even myself, I do not use it properly. I could 
download books and read but that is not what I do.’
In an attempt to capture the dynamic changes unfolding 
across Ethiopia, our midline tools included new modules 
to explore adolescents’ political knowledge and beliefs. 
These tools highlighted that while some young people – 
primarily boys from rural East Hararghe and South Gondar 
– are embracing active citizenship, others are almost 
completely disenfranchised. In East Hararghe, 35% of older 
adolescents reported that politics were ‘very important’ 
to them. Our qualitative findings underscored that the 
ascension of Prime Minister Abiy has been personally 
salient for many young people in these communities. 
However, his administration is increasingly seen as a 
grave disappointment given a perception of limited 
gains for Oromo communities coupled with increased 
ethnic violence and insecurity. Moreover, there have 
been campaigns by political activists to resist the Prime 
Minister’s efforts to promote pan-ethnic unity. Nearly as 
many young people in South Gondar agreed that politics is  
‘very important’  (31%). ‘There is now freedom of expression 
and transparency… This is since the government changed 
and Dr Abiy came to power,’ observed an 18-year-old boy. 
By contrast, in Zone 5 (Afar), 66% of adolescents reported 
that politics were ‘completely irrelevant’  to their lives and 
in the qualitative findings only one adolescent was able to 
name the Prime Minister when asked. 
Urban adolescents, despite their increased access to 
information, were far less likely to report that politics were 
‘very important’  to them than rural adolescents. Only 20% 
of boys and 17% of girls answered in the affirmative (versus 
36% of boys and 24% of girls in rural areas). Our qualitative 
work found that for that minority, social media serves 
as a venue through which young people can discreetly 
engage in political movements. ‘Facebook users inform 
us about the political situation in the town… A person who 
uses Facebook can get access to new information like the 
violence that occurs in town,’ explained a 16-year-old boy 
from South Gondar. Similarly, a 19-year-old adolescent boy 
from Dire Dawa noted: ‘I have two Facebook pages. I use 
one of them to communicate with friends and to download 
videos. However, I use the second one to upload secret political messages and to share videos of ethnic violence 
within our community.’  The majority of urban adolescents 
reported either that they  ‘followed politics but do not really 
care’  (40% of boys and 35% of girls) or that politics were 
‘completely irrelevant’ (40% of boys and 48% of girls). Our 
qualitative work strongly suggests that urban adolescents’ 
apparent apathy is an attempt to disguise fear.  ‘I don’t need 
to talk about politics. I only want peace and stability. What 
matters is not the one who leads; it must be about peace 
and stability,’ explained a 19-year-old boy from Batu, after 
noting that gangs had led to recent chaos in the city. A 
14-year-old girl from Debre Tabor agreed, observing that 
university students have been fleeing to avoid violence: ‘It 
wasn’t that much of a problem in the past but now it is a big 
problem… These days university students are withdrawing 
because of the security issues and conflicts.’ 
Role models
In part driven by the changing world around them, young 
adolescents were far more likely to report having a role 
model at midline than at baseline (54% versus 35%). 
Improvements were more marked among boys, of whom 
63% reported an inspirational role model (compared to only 
45% of girls); and among those living in South Gondar, where 
59% had a role model (compared to 47% in East Hararghe 
and 38% in Zone 5). ‘There is no one that I consider as a role 
model,’  reported a 12-year-old girl from a remote community 
in South Gondar. Gender and regional divides were also 
apparent in the type of characteristics adolescents valued 
about their chosen role model. Girls and boys alike admired 
those who were ‘smart’ and ‘successful’,  though those from 
South Gondar tended to emphasise educational success 
and those from East Hararghe financial success.  ‘My 
sister finished her education and started a job; she brings 
blankets for my father. He blessed her so much when she 
gave him her gift. When I see her status I started to focus 
on my education to be like her,’ explained a 17-year-old boy 
from South Gondar, when asked why he wanted to be like 
his sister. Boys, however, and especially those from Zone 5 
(Afar), admired those whom they saw as ‘strong’ , while girls 
were attracted to those with a  ‘good personality’ .
The individuals that girls and boys chose as role models 
spoke volumes about girls’ relative disadvantage. While 
47% of boys who had a role model said that that role model 
was from outside the home, this was the case for only 29% 
of girls. Furthermore, while boys were likely to choose 
someone famous (24% of those with role models outside 
of the home) or a male friend or relative (43%), girls were far 
more likely to choose a male relative (40%) than a female 
friend (20%) and were very unlikely to choose someone 
famous (3%). This was also captured in our qualitative work,   Facebook users inform us about 
the political situation in the town.
(A 16-year-old boy from South Gondar)7where boys singled out political leaders for emulation while 
girls did not. ‘I want to be like Jawar [an influential political 
activist]… because he is analyst of the entire world, I want 
to achieve like that goal,’ stated a younger boy from East 
Hararghe.  ‘I want to be like PM Abiy Ahmed,’  added another, 
from the same region. Although Ethiopia’s president is 
a woman, no girl in either the quantitative or qualitative 
data spontaneously mentioned her as a role model and 
few admitted to knowing about her, even when pressed. 
‘We heard her name,’ stated a 17 -year-old girl from East 
Hararghe. Girls instead tended to mention uncles and 
older brothers and male cousins as having inspired them 
along a particular path. ‘I saw some who went to Addis 
Ababa University. My cousins were also educated… When 
I saw them learning, I said I would not be a fool,’  reported a 
19-year-old divorced girl from Zone 5 (Afar), now finishing 
secondary school after being married against her will at age 15. Indeed, even in South Gondar, where there are more girls 
who could serve as role models, girls remain likely to choose 
a man on whom to pattern their aspirations. ‘He treats us 
well and he is polite and doesn’t mistreat us,’  explained a 
15-year-old girl from South Gondar when asked why she 
chose her male English teacher as her role model.
25%
famous man
25%
male r elativ e33%
male r elativ e
20%
female friendGirls are less lik ely than boysto have role models
and most often look up to  men  rather than women.
63%
45%Who do adolesc ents
look up to ?
BOYS GIRLS  I saw some who went to Addis 
Ababa University. My cousins were 
also educated… When I saw them 
learning, I said I would not be a 
fool.
(A 19-year-old divorced girl from Zone 5 (Afar))
Graphics made for GAGE by Ottavia Pasta8This policy note is an output of the GAGE programme which is funded by UK Aid from the UK government. However, 
views expressed and information contained within do not necessarily reflect the UK government’s official policies 
and are not endorsed by the UK government, which accepts no responsibility for such views or information or for 
any reliance placed on them.
ISBN: 978-1-913610-25-8
Key actions to accelerate progress
In order to capitalise on the opportunities opening up to 
adolescents in this time of rapid political and social change 
– and yet also to keep them safe – it is vital to balance young 
people’s growing needs for independence and connection 
with their need for protection. In the case of adolescent 
girls – given their marked disadvantages as highlighted 
by our findings across the domains of voice, agency and 
mobility – it is especially important to invest in addressing 
the barriers they face at household and community levels to 
set the foundations for the realisation of SDG 5’s ambitious 
vision of equal participation of women in the political arena. 
Our research suggests the need for five broad actions 
to increase adolescents’ access to voice and agency and 
facilitate their maturation into empowered adults who 
can make decisions about their own lives and contribute 
meaningfully to their communities and country:
1  Invest in adolescent clubs and safe spaces that 
provide young people with opportunities to foster 
their own voices in child-friendly venues that over 
time segue into scaffolded community interactions: 
Provide adolescents with school- and community-
based opportunities to spend time with peers and 
with adults who can mentor them through the transition 
from childhood to adulthood. Clubs, including municipal 
youth centres, should promote programming that 
endeavours to foster confidence and voice, supports 
boys to become champions of gender equality, 
and helps young people find meaningful and age-
appropriate ways to contribute to their communities. 
2  Provide parents with parenting education courses 
that help caregivers balance adolescents’ needs 
for protection and participation:  Support parents 
to help them understand the importance of allowing 
adolescents to make age-appropriate decisions about 
their own lives and contribute to household decision-
making. Focused attention should be paid to gender 
norms, and the myriad ways they disempower girls  
and women.
3  Recognise that married girls are the most 
silenced and step up cross-community efforts to 
eliminate child marriage and support married girls’ 
agency: Work with community leaders, parents and 
adolescents to help them understand the advantages 
of adult marriage – especially vis-à-vis investments in education – and to cancel adolescent-planned 
marriages, as well as sanctioning adults who facilitate 
these unions. Simultaneously, provide programming 
for young married couples aimed at fostering more 
egalitarian forms of communication and addressing  
gender inequities.
4  Foster an engaged citizenry by ensuring that civics 
education fosters democratic and peace-oriented 
beliefs and behaviours and counters misinformation: 
Whether delivered by school curriculum and/or in 
grassroots venues, civics education for young people 
needs to focus on encouraging democratic and peace-
oriented beliefs and behaviours, including in the home, 
school and community. It is also vital to teach young 
people how to critically consume information and 
detect misinformation. 
5  Inspire girls by creating campaigns aimed at 
providing them with female role models: These 
should include regional and national-level role models, 
publicised on posters and billboards and in the school 
curriculum, given girls’ limited access to other sources 
of information. There should also be concerted efforts 
at the local level to highlight successful girls and women, 
including to girls’ families and communities.
References
Gardner, T. (2020) ‘Will Abiy Ahmed’s bet on Ethiopia’s polit -
ical future pay off?’ FP, 21 January (https:/ /foreignpolicy.
com/2020/01/21/will-abiy-ahmed-eprdf-bet-ethiopia-  
political-future-pay-off)
Human Rights Watch (2020) ‘Ethiopia: Justice needed for 
deadly October violence. Credible prosecutions, redress 
key to preventing future abuse’. Human Rights Watch web -
site, 1 April (www.hrw.org/news/2020/04/01/ethiopia-justice-  
needed-deadly-october-violence)
Jalata, A. (2016) ‘Why the Oromo protests mark a change in Ethi -
opia’s political landscape.’ The Conversation, 14 August 2016 
(https:/ /theconversation.com/why-the-oromo-protests-mark-
a-change-in-ethiopias-political-landscape-63779)
The Nobel Prize (2019) Abiy Ahmed Ali – facts (www.nobelprize.
org/prizes/peace/2019/abiy/facts)
United Nations (2020) ‘Sustainable Development Goals. Goal 
5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls’ 
(www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/gender-equality)