COVID-19 and its implications 
for protecting children online
April 2020
COVID-19 has prompted widespread school closures and physical distancing measures and made online 
platforms and communities essential to maintaining a sense of normalcy. Children and their families are 
turning to digital solutions more than ever to support children’s learning, socialization and play. While digital 
solutions provide huge opportunities for sustaining and promoting children’s rights, these same tools may 
also increase children’s exposure to online risks. This technical note sets out some of the key priorities and 
recommendations on how to mitigate those risks and promote positive online experiences for children.
COVID-19 has abruptly pushed children’s daily lives online 
As of 3 April 2020, COVID-19 has led to at least 188 country-wide school closures , impacting more than 
90% of the world’s student population.
In places where there is wide access to digital technology, more and more aspects of people’s daily 
lives are moving online, as people choose or are asked to stay home. Internet usage is up 50%  in some 
parts of the world following the spread of COVID-19.
Similarly, many children’s learning experiences are being reshaped by the sudden introduction of 
remote learning, including – where available – technology and virtual platforms as a substitute for the 
classroom and schoolyard.   
Online games, social media and video chat programs are  providing opportunities  for children to 
connect with and play with their friends, parents and relatives while in isolation.
While children aged 13 and older  may already be familiar with social media, the pandemic has 
introduced younger children to social networking tools that may not be designed for them and for 
which they may have limited preparation. 
Parents and caregivers, meanwhile, are being asked to navigate their children’s shift to online learning 
and recreation while balancing work and other uncertainties related to the pandemic.
Increased online activity supports children’s learning, socialization and 
play, but also puts them at heightened risk
Increased internet use can put children at greater risk of online harms such as sexual exploitation and 
cyberbullying. Not all risks will translate into actual harm, but children facing other issues in their lives may 
be more vulnerable. It is important that measures to mitigate risks should be balanced with children’s rights 
to freedom of expression, access to information, and privacy. Keeping children informed and engaged and 
empowering them with the skills to use the internet safely is a critical line of defence.  
Online sexual exploitation. The most recent Global Threat Assessment  by WePROTECT Global Alliance 
and groundbreaking investigative reporting by New York Times  set out the scale and impact of online 
sexual exploitation. It is highly likely that COVID-19 will heighten this risk to children, as highlighted  by 
national law enforcement agencies and civil society organisations around the world. Spending more 
time online may increase the likelihood that children come into contact with  online predators. Physical 
distancing measures are likely to increase children’s outreach to new contacts and groups online, which 
could be exploited by predators to groom children for sexual exploitation. With more adults isolated at 
home, there may also be additional demand for child sexual abuse material, leading to more commercial 
sexual exploitation of children. The livestreaming of sexual abuse by family members is already a well-
documented phenomenon in certain communities. Stay-at-home orders will also mean that families are 
forced to remain in close quarters, which, for children living with abusers, could result in an escalation of 
sexual abuse, both offline and online.
11For example  COPPA  and GDPR-K .Cyberbullying. It is well-established  that cyberbullying is a major concern  among teenagers and has wide-
ranging, negative impacts. With many children suddenly experiencing extended periods of unstructured 
time online and grappling with mounting sources of stress, cyberbullying could proliferate. The COVID-19 
pandemic has also introduced instant messaging, online gaming and chat services to an increasing 
number of young children, who may have limited online experience and be less resilient to hurtful 
behavior. Girls, children with disabilities and those perceived to be different or at greater risk of catching 
or spreading COVID-19 may be at increased risk of online bullying and discrimination.
Online risk-taking behavior. A lack of in-person interaction with friends and partners may lead older 
children to engage in riskier behaviour online, for example, through sexting or the sharing of self-
generated sexualized content , which may expose them to risks of extortion, harassment and humiliation.
Potentially harmful content. Increased online activity may expose children to age-inappropriate and 
potentially harmful content, including content that is violent, misogynistic, xenophobic, promotes political 
or ideological violence or incites suicide and self-harm. Children may also be exposed to a larger quantity 
of targeted online marketing  that promotes unhealthy foods, gender stereotypes or is age-inappropriate. 
They may also be exposed to misinformation  about COVID-19 that could drive additional fear and anxiety.
Inappropriate collection, use and sharing of data. The shift of children’s lives online, including via 
education technology, may result in the added collection and processing of children’s personal data by 
companies, along with increased exposure to digital marketing content and techniques. This may affect 
children under 13 years of age who normally have privacy protection  by law.1
Limited child safeguarding online. With the rush to set up distance learning, schools may not have 
proper child safeguarding policies in place to govern student and teacher conversations via private 
networks and other online tools. Parents and caregivers may not be aware of school district policies, if 
they exist, and may be unfamiliar with new technologies , limiting their ability to engage their children in a 
discussion about keeping safe online.
Governments, companies, schools and parents must work together to 
ensure that children’s online experiences are safe and positive
In the context of COVID-19, keeping children safe online will require concerted, urgent action on the part of 
parents and caregivers, school authorities, digital technology companies, providers, social service workers 
and governments.
1.  Empower children online
Parents and caregivers, school authorities, digital technology companies, media providers, social 
service workers and governments must recognize that children are agents of change and should equip 
them with the knowledge and information they need to navigate their online lives safely during the 
COVID-19 crisis and beyond.
Messages, information and advice on navigating the digital world should be targeted to children in a 
manner and via the channels that most resonate with them. Children should also be informed about 
how to seek out help and support.
2Children should also be encouraged to use their voices online to support others in need of help during 
this crisis.Children’s perspectives should inform improvements to platforms and other changes intended 
to keep them engaged and safe during this quickly moving emergency. Government and social service 
providers should incorporate children’s voices  and actively involve children in policymaking that  
affects them.  
2. Support parents and caregivers to help children stay safe online
Parents and caregivers can help children access the online resources that are vital for learning,  
socializing and playing in the era of COVID-19. At the same time, parents and caregivers need to be 
alert to the online risks  for children. Governments, companies and others should support parents with 
appropriate guidance and tools , including how to respond to and, if needed, report harmful contacts, 
conduct and content.
Parents and caregivers can establish with their children rules for how, when and where the Internet 
can be used. Boundaries should be set to establish a healthy balance between online time and other 
activities. Parents and caregivers should also ensure their children’s device/s have the latest software 
updates and antivirus programmes and ensure that privacy settings are set to ‘high.’  For younger 
children, tools such as parental controls can help mitigate online risks.
Parents and caregivers can discuss openly with their children how and with whom the children are 
communicating online. Children need to know that kind and supportive interactions are expected, and 
that hurtful, discriminatory  or inappropriate contact is never okay. Children should feel confident about 
telling a trusted adult immediately if anything distressing or inappropriate occurs.
Parents and caregivers can also help children differentiate between regular content and 
advertisements and engage in dialogue with their children to seek to counteract any negative 
messages.
Parents and caregivers can be alert to signs of distress that may emerge in connection with children’s 
online activity. For example, if a child is experiencing cyberbullying, they may give off warning signs, 
such as using their device more or less frequently, or becoming withdrawn or depressed. Governments, 
companies and school administrators should make parents and caregivers familiar with relevant 
policies, as well as online and offline reporting mechanisms. Parents should have the numbers of 
support helplines and hotlines handy and contact the police if their children’s distress is related to 
threats, potential crimes or other illegal behaviors.
3. Provide a safe online learning experience for students
Schools should create or update their current safeguarding policies  to reflect the new realities for 
children learning from home. One-on-one online interactions between school staff and students 
should be transparent and regulated. Specific safeguards may include requiring schools to share 
online schedules; advising children to wear appropriate clothing when in front of webcams and not 
to connect with their teachers or virtual classrooms from bedrooms; and refraining from using private 
instant messaging services in teacher-student communications or asking for consent from parents for 
such sessions. Schools should also seek digital security mechanisms to ensure that only authorized 
individuals are able to access online learning platforms and that those platforms do not record and 
store the virtual learning sessions by default.
Schools should clearly communicate online safety policies and provide resources  and information on 
digital safety to support parents and caregivers in creating a positive online learning experience e.g. 
Interland , internetmatters.org , NSPCC  and Childnet International .
3Schools should clearly communicate with all learners the expected code of conduct on digital platforms 
and communications, just as would be expected for ‘in person’ behavior.  They should promote and 
monitor good online behavior among students. Schools should be aware that younger children in 
particular may not have developed or practiced these skills before and could unintentionally hurt 
others. Schoolyard bullying among classmates may easily morph into cyberbullying, and school 
authorities need to adapt anti-bullying rules and policies to online spaces and make them clear to 
students and parents
Schools should ensure that children have uninterrupted access to school-based counseling services. 
In the absence of in-person contact with counselors, children in distress must have safe, confidential 
means of securing support online or by phone. There may be increased need for counselling services 
in the context of COVID-19, where children may be experiencing family problems, domestic violence or 
heightened feelings of insecurity and anxiety. Girls, children with disabilities and those perceived to be 
different or at greater risk of catching or spreading COVID-19 may be experiencing increased anxieties 
requiring additional support. Schools should promote country-specific helplines  or online counselling 
platforms. Schools should also update guidance for teachers on identifying and reporting child abuse or 
neglect via their virtual communications.
4. Make online platforms safe and accessible for children
In order to avoid exacerbating inequalities during the pandemic, technology companies should work 
with governments to improve access to digital devices and internet connectivity for disadvantaged 
children, including those who are affected by poverty, separated, on the move, disabled, in domestic 
and family violence settings, conflict settings and those who may have lost parents or primary 
caregivers to the pandemic. ITU’s new Global Network Resiliency Platform ( #REG4COVID ) is a place for 
regulators, government authorities and industry to share and pool experiences, ongoing initiatives and 
innovative policy and regulatory measures designed to help ensure communities (and children) remain 
connected. Technology companies should also make online learning resources available for free or 
at significantly reduced cost to educators and students. Mobile operators should consider providing 
online learning resources and COVID-19 health information for free.
It is imperative that increased safety features are incorporated into all devices, including those being 
made available at low or no cost, and that parents and caregivers are instructed how to activate  
these features.
Companies that are developing and deploying virtual classrooms and other education-specific 
platforms should make sure that safety features are integrated and enhanced  and clearly accessible to 
educators, parents and students. Data collection and other commercial practices should be transparent, 
responsible and reflective of national/international laws and regulations. Social networking platforms 
used for teacher-student interactions should employ built-in protection measures for children while 
giving adult teachers appropriate permissions to carry out their functions. Furthermore, online platforms 
using video conferencing services, which are increasingly being used for online interactive sessions, 
should ensure that relevant security and privacy protections are in place.
Companies should use their platforms to promote and facilitate child safety referral services and 
helplines for the estimated 1.5 billion children  and youth currently out of school, some of whom may be 
at increased risk of psychosocial stress, violence and exploitation. This includes sharing information on 
referral and other support services available for youth, such as national Child Helplines. Companies can 
seek to increase child helpline capacity with cloud-based infrastructure and by leveraging Interactive 
Voice Response (IVR)/bot systems to automate helpline queries. Mobile operators should enable short-
codes or free-of-cost calls, waving interconnect charges and promoting referral and helpline resources 
to children.
4Given that the pandemic is bringing younger children onto education and social networks (some for the 
first time), companies should make significant efforts to help them, and their parents and caregivers, 
learn to use online resources safely . This includes: 
Adapting online safety resources to different age groups and making these resources more 
accessible on their platforms to inform children, parents and caregivers of online risks and provide 
access to support services.
Offering clearly signposted and easy to use technical tools and solutions (e.g. ‘parental controls’) 
which can empower parents and caregivers to help their children experience digital technology in an 
age-appropriate way.
Amplifying messaging on safe and responsible behaviour online and supporting children to develop 
‘digital resilience’ skills – in other words, knowledge of how to navigate and respond to risks.
5. Strengthening national prevention, response and support services. 
Governments should actively monitor how restricted movement and lockdowns may exacerbate 
different forms of violence, both offline and online, using the latest data and existing models  to inform 
policy. Governments should enforce existing regulations and strengthen law enforcement to help 
monitor and respond to increased online risks.
Governments should allocate sufficient resources to bolster, train and equip core child protection 
workers to ensure that they can continue to keep children safe throughout the pandemic. Wherever 
possible, countries should maintain center-based supports and home visiting for those severely 
affected or adapt and deliver social services virtually.
Governments should train health, education and social service workers on the impacts that COVID-19 
may have on child well-being, including increased online risks. Those providing front line mental 
health/psychosocial support will need skills in talking to children about COVID-19 and addressing their 
anxiety and insecurity.  Special attention should be paid to the most vulnerable children including those 
separated, on the move, disabled, in conflict settings and those who may have lost parents or primary 
caregivers to the pandemic.
Government should be aware of the potential increased online risks to children during the pandemic 
and seek to address them through increased monitoring and enforcement of existing regulations.  Law 
enforcement should be supported to monitor a potential increase in online offending behavior and 
have their units functional to respond to this.
Governments should make sure social service providers, schools, parents, caregivers and children are 
aware of local reporting mechanisms, and that they have the support numbers of local helplines and 
hotlines. If they do not already exist, local helplines and hotlines should be installed to support children 
in distress. The major international reporting networks include INHOPE Hotlines  and IWF portals . 
Children can find direct support through the nationally-based Child Helpline . The public should be 
directed to contact the police when there is imminent danger. 
To complement efforts to connect children to resources for online learning, socialization and play, 
governments should step up educational initiatives on child online safety. These should include raising 
awareness about online risks and resources, using media and other communications channels to 
spread key messages.
56Additional Resources
Parenting tips  on keeping children safe online during COVID-19
 
www.unicef.org/press-releases/covid-19-children-heightened-risk-abuse-neglect-exploitation-and-violence  
amidst
www.unicef.org/coronavirus/covid-19-parenting-tips
www.end-violence.org/protecting-children-during-covid-19-outbreak
en.unesco.org/covid19
www.unicef.org/coronavirus/covid-19
www.itu.int/en/Pages/covid-19.aspx 
www.childhood-usa.org/resources
www.unodc.org/unodc/en/covid-19.html