International Journ al of Instruction       January  2020 ● Vol.13, No.1 
e-ISSN: 1308 -1470  ● www.e -iji.net                                       p-ISSN: 1694 -609X  
pp. 165-184 
Citation: Gjelaj, M., Buza, K., Shatri, K., & Zabeli, N. (2020). Digital Technologies in Early 
Childhood: Attitudes and Practices of Parents and Teachers in Kosovo . International Journal of 
Instruction , 13(1), 165-184. https://doi.org/10.29333/iji.2020.13111a  
 Received: 12/03/2019 
Revision: 03/08/2019  
Accepted: 08/08/2019 
OnlineFirst: 16/10/2019 
 
Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and Practices of 
Parents and Teachers in Kosovo  
 
Majlinda Gjelaj  
Asst. Prof., Faculty of Ed ., University of Prishtina , Kosovo, majlinda.gjelaj@uni -pr.edu  
Kastriot Buza  
Assoc. Prof., corresponding author , Faculty of Ed ucation ., University of Prishtina, 
Kosovo , kastriot.buza@uni -pr.edu  
Kyvete Shatri  
Asst. Prof., Faculty of Ed ., University of Prishtina, Kosovo, kyvete.shatr i@uni -pr.edu  
Naser Zabeli  
Assoc. Prof., Faculty of Ed ., University of Prishtina, Kosovo, naser.zabeli@uni -pr.edu  
 
 
 The purpose of this study was to examine preschool teachers and parents’ attitudes 
and their practices regarding the use of digital technol ogies during preschool 
education. The main research questions the study intended to address focused on 
teachers’ and parents’ attitudes and practices about the role of digital technology 
supplies in young children’s development. The study used a mixed rese arch 
approach, using in -depth interviews and an online questionnaire. The results have 
shown that only one of the eight preschool teachers reported a positive attitude 
regarding the impact of digital technology in children’s development. Most of the 
interv iewed preschool teachers showed preference towards authentic play and 
activities exercising children’s psycho -motor skills. However, most of parents have 
suggested that their children, starting from early years of their development, are 
exposed to differen t digital technologies. In conclusion, there are two contradictory 
findings (progressive and regressive philosophies) among parents and preschool 
teachers regarding their perceptions and practices on the use of digital technologies 
in young children’s lear ning and development. The study advocates for continuous 
cooperation between parents and teachers to ensure prospects of maximizing 
benefits and alleviating potential risks of using digital technologies in early 
childhood education.  
Keywords : preschool tea cher, parents, digital technology, attitudes, practices  166                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 INTRODUCTION  
Technology plays a crucial role in children and adults’ everyday lives. There are 
numerous studies showing that the use of digital technology, from different user groups, 
is increasing ev ery day. However, studies also show that there are different perceptions 
regarding the advantages and disadvantages of the use of digital technology children, 
especially during their early ages of development.  
Information and Communications Technology ( hereafter  ICT) can be defined as 
“anything which allows us to get information, to communicate with each other, or to 
have an effect on the environment using electronic or digital equipment” (Bolstad, 2004) 
However, according to Kalas (2010) , in early childh ood education literature ( hereafter  
ECE), the concept of ICT includes computer hardware and software, digital cameras and 
video cameras, the Internet, telecommunication tools, programmable toys, and many 
other devices and resources.   
In many countries, EC E or preschool education is conceptualized differently. This study 
focuses on preschool education, i.e. the years before children attend elementary school. 
In Kosovo, the Law on Pre -university education requires children to enrol in elementary 
school at si x years old. Therefore, the study concentrates on perceptions on the use of 
technology during children development before the age of six, known as preschool age 
as defined by the Kosovo Curriculum Framework (MEST, 2016). In addition, the study 
focuses on t he use of digital technology at early childhood institutions and their home. 
Early childhood education policies and practice itself in Kosovo has been a great 
challenge for the overall educational policies. According to a study report published by 
the “Kos ovo Education and Employment Network – KEEN” project,  the inclusion of 
children in institutionalized pre -school education in Kosovo continues to be a challenge 
given that by 2017, according to data from the Education Management information 
System (EMIS), t here are only 42 public kindergartens and 88 licensed private 
institutions, 5 which are community -based (Gjelaj, Rraci & Bajrami, 2018).  As a result, 
Kosovo remains the country with the lowest inclusion of children in preschool 
education, aged 0 to 4 years  old, in the region, with an inclusion rate of 4.5%. The 
highest inclusion rate is in pre -primary classes (aged 5 to 6), where 76.27% of children 
are involved (Ibid).  
Despite this current situation the Kosovo Education Strategic Plan (KESP), (2017 -2021) 
under the strategic objective ‘teaching and learning’, plans to maximize learning through 
quality teaching, implementing competency -based curricula, and by using high -quality 
teaching resources. The implementation of the new curriculum in all schools is 
understood as central to improving the quality of learning in Kosovo. In addition to 
teacher training, this requires the preparation of textbooks and other teaching and 
learning materials, including electronic teaching materials that are in harmony with the 
Kosovo Curriculum Framework (KCF). This also assumes that special attention should 
be paid to providing schools with ICT equipment, as well as other teaching support.  
However, two important stakeholders in early childhood development, teachers and 
parents, have opposing opinions regarding the use of digital technology in education.  Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       167 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 The purpose of this study is to analyze teacher and parents’ attitudes and practices about 
the use of digital technologies during early years of education. The study aims to give 
answer to two main research questions:  
1. What are the attitudes and practices of the parents towards the use of digital 
technology during early years of children development at home?  
2. What are the attitudes and practices of preschool teachers toward the use o f 
digital technology during early years of children development in kindergarten 
education?  
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Historically, theorists and researchers have debated whether young children should use 
technology at school (Alper, 2011; Blackwell, 2013; Cordes &  Miller, 2000; Kirkorian, 
Wartella, & Anderson, 2008; House, 2012; Lindahl & Folkesson, 2012; Morgan, 2010, 
Parett, Quesenberry & Blum, 2010; Plowman & McPake, 2013 at Zomer and Kay, 
2016). Various authors have expressed the view that computer/ICT use is n ot 
appropriate for young children’s cognitive, physical, social, and emotional development. 
However, there is no clear evidence to support this claim, and this view has increasingly 
been replaced by the view that, when used appropriately, ICT can be a usef ul tool for 
supporting young children’s learning and development (Bolstad, 2004) . There are 
diverse attitudes presented from different stakeholders when discussing early years of 
children development and the use of digital technology.  
Today, it is common to observe  toddlers and preschool children watching videos, 
playing games on tablets, or exploring on the internet. With such dynamic 
developments, there is a need to establish a better understanding of the process of 
engaging ICT in everyday play and learning activ ities of preschool children. Several 
recent research findings pointed out the extraordinary potential of ICT to enhance the 
learning and other developmental processes of children (Kalas, 2013). According to 
Kalas (2013), studies have shown that digital tec hnologies can provide children with 
new opportunities to engage in attractive and relevant play, learning, communication, 
exploration, and development. Properly integrated digital tools can empower younger 
children by providing them with a voice, especiall y with limited literacy capabilities, at 
their young age (U.S. Department of Education, 2016). Digital technologies as digital 
toys which are properly integrated in learning can empower children by granting them a 
voice they have never had before. In this context, digital technologies also open new 
pathways for alternative social interactions and change the learning relationships 
between children and teachers (UNESCO, 2012) . 
Hayes and Whitbread (2006) examined a holistic development of young children’s 
learning and identified seven different ways that learning could be enhanced by 
integrating ICT, namely, (a) ICT and literacy; (b) ICT and mathematical understanding; 
(c) ICT and science; (d) creativity, problem solving, and playful use of technology; (e) 
visual literacy and painting; (f) media education (digital animation); and (g) learning of 
music. Results of the interviews with teachers and parents as shown by the study of 
Ihmeideh & Alkhawaldeh (2017) have indicated a clear perpetuation of the role of 168                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 technology and digital media in the intellectual, religious, and moral aspects due to the 
contributions of these aspects to children's learning and development. Based on Byron 
(2008), New Zealand Council for Educational Research (2004), and Stephen & 
Plowman ( 2002), most of the concerns fall into one of four categories: (a) harmful 
physical effects; (b) children’s learning, cognitive, social, and emotional development; 
(c) exposure to harmful contents; and (d) new technologies displacing other important 
learnin g and play activities. However, nowadays, it is almost impossible to come across 
an educational institution without an ICT presence.  
In early childhood education, the term ICTs could include computers digital cameras 
and digital video cameras, creativity and communication software and tools, the internet, 
telephones, mobile telephones, tape recorders, interactive stories, computer games, 
programmable toys, videoconferencing technologies and closed -circuit television, data 
projectors, microphones, headphone s electronic whiteboards and more  (Olowe & 
Kutelu, 2014). Early childhood in -service and pre -service teachers’ views are essential 
for ICT integration in early childhood settings and studies have shown that positive 
views are crucial for influencing their decisions to use ICT in their teaching (Sime & 
Priestley, 2005) . Their views and intentions predict the integration (or lack thereof) of 
ICT in the classroom, while the successful integration will also depend on other factors 
such as appropriate skills and  training (Sime & Priestley, 2005) . Inan & Lowther (2009) 
examined the effects of teachers’ individual characteristics and perceptions of contextual 
factors that influence ICT integration in classrooms. One of the independent variables 
included in their st udy was teachers’ beliefs about technology, which was defined as the 
teachers’ perception of the influence of technology on teaching and learning practices. 
Findings showed that teachers’ computer proficiency, teachers’ overall support, 
teachers’ technical  support, and computer availability have a significant influence on 
teachers’ beliefs about technology. Also, teachers’ beliefs had a strong influence on the 
use and integration of ICT in classrooms.  
Regarding pre -service early childhood teachers , Angeli ( 2004)  showed that they are not 
free of personal beliefs about the role of ICT in early childhood settings and that they 
may also have misconceptions about the potential of ICT tools in teaching and learning. 
Although they appropriate technology in their ro le as students (e.g., to prepare lessons 
plans), they resist seeing technology as a part of their relationship with children and 
express little desire to use computers with children, as future teachers (Laffey, 2004) . 
Furthermore,  Kiridis, Tsakiridou, Kask alis, & Golia (2004)  have found that pre -service 
early childhood teachers have positive views about the use of computer in early 
childhood settings. Such views have pointed out that the use of computer enhances 
teaching, thus, computers should be used acro ss all kindergarten activities. Their 
findings have recommended the introduction and use of computers have positive 
outcomes for young children, such as: higher concentration and participation in 
educational process, enhancement of learning outcomes, and f acilitation of 
communication.  
Literature also speaks that in -service teacher training has been of informative nature and 
non-systematic  (Minaidi & Hlapanis, 2005)  and relevant courses mainly aim at the  Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       169 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 development of teachers’ familiarity with ICT (use of  word processing, spreadsheet, 
presentation programs and internet). According to Gialamas & Nikolopoulou (2010),  the 
positive influence of the computer self -efficacy on views –intentions is statistically 
significant for each population, but it is stronger f or the teachers. This finding is in 
agreement with earlier studies that showed positive relationships between computers 
self-efficacy and in/pre -service early childhood teachers’ views (Chen & Chang, 2006; 
Tsitouridou & Vryzas,  2001, 2004) .  
On the contra ry to teacher’ perceptions and beliefs, parents are more opened to use 
different supplies of digital technologies and most of studies show that there is a strong 
relationship between parent’s different habits and influence to their children. Studies 
show t hat nowadays parents are not spending much quality time with their children 
while the amount of time spent by them on reading to their children is very low (Shin, 
2015; Hesketh, Hinkley & Campbell, 2012). Studies also found that parent technology 
use or at titudes toward media to be positively correlated with their children's use of 
technology . Further analyses indicate that child screen time use appears to be the result 
of an interaction between child and parent factors and is highly influenced by parental 
attitudes (Genc, 2014; McCloskey et al. 2018; Vittrup, Snider, Rose & Rippy, 2014; 
Blackwell, Lauricella & Wartella, 2014). Overall, parents showed positive attitudes 
toward media, to the extent that they believed media exposure to be vital to children’s 
development, and many disagreed with recommendations from expert sources regarding 
age-appropriate screen time (Vittrup, et al. 2014).  
STUDY CONTEXT  
The Republic of Kosovo is the newest state in Europe. It declared its independence on 
February 17th, 2008. T he total population of the Republic of Kosovo is estimated at 1.8 -
2.2 million, with ethnic Albanians comprising 88%, ethnic Serbs 7% and other ethnic 
groups 5% of the total population.  
The current education sector in Republic of Kosovo is undergoing extens ive reform 
efforts in all sub -sectors, addressing key challenges of increasing participation and 
improving equity and quality of education with limited resources. According to the 
Strategic Developing Plan of Education (2017 -2022), despite good progress in  
education reform, there are challenges to be addressed. Regarding preschool education 
system, Kosovo seems to have the lowest rate of inclusion of preschool children in 
institutionalized education. According to the Agency of Statistics in Kosovo (2017), 
there are only 42 public kindergartens in overall state. The capital of Kosovo, Prishtina 
municipality has started implementing new model of community -based kindergartens 
and it seems the best way to expand the inclusion of preschool aged children in 
educat ion.  
The National Development Strategy Plan (201 6-2021) aims at improving the quality of 
education and early childhood education is one of the priorities. The new Kosovo 
Curriculum Framework (KCF) focuses on learner -centeredness, competencies, 
integrated teaching and learning, flexibility, mobility and transparency (MEST, 2016 ).  
Overall, Kosovo is considered to have a very advanced legislation in the field of 
education (pre -primary education for children aged 5 -6 years is expected to become 170                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 mandatory afte r a financial analysis done by 2015 (KOMF, 2014) . Public awareness 
about the importance of ECE has also risen due to initiatives of UNICEF, MEST, and 
numerous partner organizations. MEST has committed itself to providing improved 
access and quality educati on for all children and on all educational levels including 
Early Childhood Education (ECE). Preschool education is now part of the wider Pre -
University Strategy. During 2008, preschool sector started to acquire support by MEST 
in order to develop Early Le arning Development Standards (ELDS) for children from 
birth to 6 -year-old. The goal of the Early Learning Development Standards was to 
increase the quality of education activities in preschool education both in the family 
environment and preschool institut ions (MEST, 2011) .  
However, the Kosovo Education Strategic Plan –KESP (2017 -2021) and the document 
of Kosovo Curriculum Framework underline that in order to become successfully 
integrated into a digital economy, students need to attain digital competencies . 
Therefore, along with basic knowledge of literacy and numeracy, the current and future 
education system should stress the importance of digital awareness and literacy, so that 
full functional literacy is achieved during formal schooling  (MEST, Kosovo Edu cation 
Framework, 2016). Even though educational policies in our country prioritize the 
continuous professional development of educators and the integration of ICT at all 
levels of pre -university education and specifically in preschool institutions. This 
research contributes to enhancing the aspect of cooperation between educators and 
parents in harmony with Kosovo's strategies and documents for Digital Technologies in 
Early Childhood . 
METHOD  
Participants  
The sample for this study includes 8 preschool teac hers selected randomly from 7 public 
preschool institutions all over Kosovo in order to see if there are differences in 
perceptions regarding the use of digital technologies in early childhood education 
between preschool teachers working in different parts  of Kosovo. The number of 
kindergartens in the cities of Kosovo is very low, (usually there is one kindergarten in 
one city). However, the situation regarding the availability of kindergartens (public, 
private, and community based) is higher in Prishtina, the capital of Kosovo. Teachers 
involved in this study varied also in terms of age and working experience.  
Table 1  
Teachers’ Demographic Characteristics  
Variable  Gender  Ethnicity  Age Working 
experience  Education  Working 
place  Type of 
kindergarten  
Teacher 1 F Albanian  59 37 Pedagogical High School  Peja Public  
Teacher 2  F Albanian  45 19 Faculty of general pedagogy  Prishtina  Public  
Teacher 3  F Albanian  51 26 Pedagogical High School  Gjakova  Public  
Teacher 4  F Albanian  30 7 Faculty of Education (BA)  Prishtin a Public  
Teacher 5  F Albanian  42 18 Faculty of Education (BA)  Ferizaj  Public  
Teacher 6  F Albanian  50 25 Pedagogical High School  Podujeva  Public  
Teacher 7  F Albanian  41 18 Faculty of Education (BA)  Gjilan  Public  
Teacher 8  F Albanian  45 17 Faculty of Edu cation (BA)  Prizren  Public  
Mean    45.3 20.8     Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       171 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 In addition to preschool teacher attitudes, also parents 100 randomly selected parents 
participated in the study. Table 2 provides parent demographic information.  
According to Creswell (2014), one of the mo st common probability sampling 
approaches used by researchers is random sampling, which allow representatives 
(preschool teachers and parents in this study) an equal chance of getting selected. This 
sampling strategy was purposely chosen by our group of re searchers, considering that 
topics such as the use of digital technologies in early childhood education are limited in 
the context of developing countries, such as Kosovo. Hence, this sampling strategy 
allowed our study to acquire a wide range of perceptio ns from both preschool teachers 
and parents as randomly selected the selected sample representatives, enhancing the 
value of our findings.  
Table 2  
Parents’ Demographic Characteristics  
Children age  N Place of living  
0-1 11 Rural  Urban  
2-3 28 10% 90% 
4-6 52   
Didn’t declare  9   
 100-total   
Instruments  
The study used both in -depth interviews and an online questionnaire to collect the data.  
In depth interviews with 8 preschool teachers where used to find out what are the 
teacher attitudes and practice s regarding use of digital supplies in preschool education 
settings. A model of in-depth  interview protocol used from Kelly (2014) was used to 
identify four dimensions of teacher attitudes toward use of digital technology, consisted 
from:  
1. Teacher previous  experience with regards to technology use,   
2. Availability of digital technologies in current workplace,  
3. Own believes about technology effects to children learning and development, and  
4. Professional development activities with regard to technology skills  
Questions about the practices of integration of technology during the classes and the 
ones that ask to describe the lessons/ activities with technology where avoided when 
teachers declared that they do not have any kind of digital technology in their 
classro oms.  
In order to collect preschool parents’  attitudes regarding the use of use of digital 
technologies in early childhood education, an open online questionnaire was distributed 
to 100 parents in October, 2017.  
The questionnaire was self -constructed and a djusted to the context. It covered main 
research questions dealing with parental attitudes and practices about:  
- The types of digital technologies used by their children  172                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 - The amount of time spent with any kind of digital technologies, and  
- Believes about adva ntages and disadvantages regarding the effects of digital 
technologies on their children development and school readiness.  
 
Data Analysis  
The in -depth interviews were analyzed using content analysis (Kolbe & Burnett, 1991). 
In addition, the four dimensions  from Kelly (2014) model were used as criteria and 
guiding elements to convey many themes and discussions. The content analysis was 
followed by a descriptive statistical analysis of the online questionnaire ( Creswell, 
2014) . 
FINDINGS  
Parents Attitudes and  Practices about use of Digital Technology during Early 
Years  
According to the data, parents’ attitudes and practices about use of digital technology 
during early years can be organized into two groups. One of the groups comprises 
parents that support the idea of enabling their children to use digital technologies, such 
as TV, laptop, tablets, smart devices, computers, gaming technology (see Fig 1). The 
other group of parents represents the opinion of avoiding their children’s exposure to 
digital technologi es during their early stages of development (see Fig. 5)  
 
Figure 1  
Type of Technology Used by Children up to 5, as Reported by Parents  
The questionnaire data showed that most of the parents (66.67 %) declared positive 
towards th e use of digital technologies for their young children (ages 0 to 5). The results 
presented have indicated that most of parents grant access to TV (74.44%), smart 
phones (50.50%), and tablets (30.00%) for their young children (ages 0 to 5). Parents 
 Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       173 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 reporte d that they are satisﬁed with how their young children access and use technology 
at home, referring to the beneﬁts of technology use, including but not limited to a) 
learning of English language, b) acquiring technology skills, and c) general 
development. In fact, around 43 percent of parents declared they are firm believers that 
children using technology will promote their school readiness. However, around 57 
percent of them do not support this relationship.  
 
Figure 2  
Parents Perceived Beneﬁts on School Readiness   
Despite the countless benefits, parents associate technology use with socializing 
problems, too much screen time, sleeping problems, physical development delays while 
they also think that children miss outdoor play with their pe ers and they even develop 
behavioral  problems from the contact with inappropriate content such as violence and 
aggressive games.  
 
Figure 3  
Time Children Spend Using Technology Each Day 
The data presented in the pie chart above indicates a variation of children’s time allotted 
in front of screen, from 30 minutes to 4 hours per day, as reported by parents. Most of 
the children (54.44%) use any type of technologies up to 2 hours per day. According to 
Lauricella, Wartella & Rideout (2015), there is scientific evidence to argue that very 
young children spend less time with media than older children. This finding corresponds 
174                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 with other findings (Lauricella, Wartella & Rideout, 2015), suggesting the general 
assumption that there is less  exposure to technology in educating very young children.  
 
Figure 4  
Parents’ Perceived Beneﬁts  Associated with Technology Use 
While there is evidence to suggest that the use of technology does not nearly support 
children’s social skills development, it is important to recognize that parents are aware 
of the benefits technology brings. The que stionnaire results showed that parents believe 
that by using digital technologies, children improve their language skills (46.15%), early 
learning skills (35.16%), and technology skills (40.66%). Having in mind that there are 
very few applications for youn g children in Albanian language (main language in 
Kosovo), children are using digital platforms in English language and this might be 
considered by their parents as e beneficial modality for their children language 
development. These results complement oth er studies related to the language teaching 
lessons in particular. Such studies emphasize that the use digital stories that promote 
lessons as enjoyable and productive affect the improvement of language skills, interest, 
attitudes, attention and motivation  in a positive way (Girmen & Kaya, 2018).  However 
other fields of development are considered to be rather poorly developed, such as social 
skills (10.99%), psycho - motor development (2.20%), and communication skills 
(29.67%).  
In addition, our findings of this study are consistent with other studies in the field of 
early childhood education and the use of technology. Such studies also support the 
conclusion that parents have positive attitude towards the use of digital technologies in 
early childhood educat ion (see: McCloskey, 2018; Genc, 2014; Vittrup, 2014; 
Blackwell, Lauricella & Wartella, 2014). In addition, they support the process of 
exposing their children to technology supplies arguing in favor of the technology 
benefits on their children development . As reported by Ihmeideh & Alkhawaldeh 
(2017), both parents and teachers expressed a high degree of agreement concerning the 
role of technology digital media in developing child culture.  
Nevertheless, data presented in the Figure 5 indicates parents’ conc erns about the 
negative effects of technology on their children’s development. As our findings present, 
parents’ indicate their concerns by reporting distress that their children: a) are spending 
excessive screen time (51.55%), b) can be exposed to inappro priate content when using 
 Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       175 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 the internet (40.21%), c) engaged in less active play time (58.76%), d) might be 
negatively influenced by commercial content (11.34%), e) are engaged in less time 
playing in the yard (51.55%), might develop physical disorders (36. 08%), and f) might 
develop sleeping problems (28.87%). In such cases, while studies (see: Girmen & Kaya, 
2019; McCloskey, 2018; Genc, 2014; Vittrup, 2014; Blackwell, Lauricella & Wartella, 
2014) highlight the importance of the use of digital technologies i n early children’s 
education, our study points towards other imperative aspects in early children education 
that might lack behind due to the use of technology.  
 
Figure 5  
Parent’s Concerns About Negative Effects from Digital Technology Use 
Preschool Teachers Attitudes and Practices about use of Digital Technology during 
Early Years  
Comparing to parents’ attitudes, preschool teachers declared themselves very differently 
regarding the use of digital supplies during early year’s edu cation. Most of the teachers  
believe that young children, during this age, mostly need interaction with their 
surrounding environment and engage with concrete tools (toys).  
Teacher experiences with regards to technology   
As declared by the interviewed tea chers, most of them have been raised and educated in 
an environment without the use of any type of digital technologies. None of them were 
provided with the opportunity to be exposed to an education environment that makes 
uses of digital technologies avail able at their disposal for teaching and learning. Their 
education system did not support any digital technology learning tools. The interview 
results emphasized that the previous education system power students learning through 
making use of physical mater ials as means of demonstration. Back then, the only 
technology related supplies that students were acquainted with were radio and TV. 
Therefore, teachers’ lack of experience with technology related supplies during their 
previous learning experience is a va lid predictor for their current attitudes and 
perceptions regarding the use of technology in early childhood education. The following 
verbatim quote represents this same argument.  
176                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 “Our teachers never used technology in the classroom. We were educated in a  very 
traditional method. We didn’t have computers in school or at home. We even didn’t 
have TV at school. The main source of knowledge was books and teachers. During early 
childhood we didn’t used to go to kindergarten. We went to school for the first tim e 
when we were 7 years old. I saw a computer for the first time on 1999, when we bought 
one for my son” declares a preschool teacher (L.M, age 59).  
It can be seen also from other interviewed teachers that their experience with regard to 
technology was very  poor. The presented lack of experience could have affected 
teachers believes, attitudes, and practices on their present work with young children. 
Only one from eight teachers declared that she was trained to work with computer.  
Available technology suppl ies in current working place  
Most of the teachers declared that they have only one TV in the kindergarten. The TV is 
placed in a joined room where all the children from different groups could have their 
time to go there and watch a movie. During the previo us years, they were asked or 
advised from the educational inspectors not to let children watch TV at all, since they 
are being passive during that time. Based on their experience, they were using TV only 
for calming down the children as they prefer watchin g TV. This indicated experience 
shows that the only technology available in the kindergarten was no used for educational 
proposes. Five from eight kindergartens reported that they only possessed one video - 
projector that is rarely used, since the group is packed and it is logistically inconvenient 
to organize spate projector group uses. Moreover, the interviewed teachers declared that 
they lack any kind of smart devices in the classroom. In addition, children are not 
allowed to bring their own devices at sc hool/ kindergarten. In all the classrooms, they 
declared that they do have a music player. The music player is bought usually by parents. 
There are no computers in the classrooms in none of the seven public kindergartens in 
Kosovo’s main cities.  
 
Figure 6  
Type of digital technology supplies in the kindergarten as declared by teachers  
Instead of real digital technology supplies, preschool teachers declared that they use 
technology supplies brought by parents such as: TV, microwav e, iron, radio, which are 
 Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       177 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 not properly functioning or are out of order. A preschool teacher has reported the 
following:  
“Through imaginary play with these technology supplies, children develop their 
communication skills and creativity, as well as enjoy rol e playing” (I.G, age 41).  
A preschool teacher working in a public kindergarten (F.H. age 45) declared that:  
“We encourage children to play in groups, socialize with each - other through authentic 
play and toys, even if they want to bring their own smart de vices, we don’t allow them 
to do so because the devices are fragile and children can break them and we don’t have 
time to deal with such issues”  
Personal attitudes towards digital technology  
There is a consensus among the majority of the interviewed teach ers that using digital 
technology during early years will only harm children psycho -physical development. 
The results have shown that they ignore any possibility that the use of technology 
devices is beneficial during early childhood education. Teachers ha ve claimed that if 
kindergarten funding would enable them to purchase technology supplies, they would 
only utilize them as didactical materials, serving as means for providing illustration and 
examples. Such technology supplies will not to be used by child ren themselves.  
Most of the kindergarten teachers (seven from eight) believe that children already spend 
a lot of time using digital devices at home so while they are at school or kindergarten, 
they should only play and learn in interaction with the enviro nment, other children, and 
other adults.  
“Children learn best when they explore and discuss with their peers and adults. They 
need to move around, solve authentic problems, think critically and resolve possible 
conflicts from the real -life experiences” (Pr eschool teacher H.M. age 51).  
One of the interviewed teachers (J.M. age 30) declared that she would use smart devices 
such as smart boards or other smart tablets. She said:  
“We miss very essential materials, toys and paper. I don’t know when we will be ab le to 
have smart devices in the classroom. We could only ask from parents to bring their own 
devices at school. Children love exploring and playing with them. They can learn math, 
language or singing.”  
Professional development activities for technology sk ills 
Preschool teachers were asked about their types of professional development activities 
that have helped them acquire technology skills and to what extent did their college 
coursework prompted them to integrate technology in classroom. Teachers that ha ve 
been recently graduated with a bachelor degree in preschool education (Faculty of 
Education) declared that they had only one course dedicated to ICT in preschool 
education. The other teachers that have been studying in so called Pedagogical High 
School (training offered for kindergarten teacher before preschool education was offered 
at University level) they never had a single course that dealt with the integration of 178                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 technology in teaching. Similarly, teachers coming from the faculty of general pedagogy  
were not offered any course during their pre -service teacher training. All of interviewed 
teachers declared that they attended an in -service training of basic ECDL (European 
Computer Driving License) qualification. However, they have never used such train ing 
into their practice due to lack of computers at their disposal at kindergartens where they 
work.  
“It is usually one computer at principal’s office, but none in our classrooms” (I.M. age 
30). 
None of the interviewed teachers feel they are sufficiently prepared to teach early 
childhood content using technology.  
All of them would prefer a training that would prepare them to use different technology 
supplies and also help them change their traditional mindset toward technology use 
during early years.  
“We admit that the world has changed. Children of today are children of technology era. 
They like it and maybe they can learn from it if used properly”, declares one of the 
interviewed teachers (I.M. age 30).  
The findings supported by this study conclude that younger generation teachers that 
have been qualified during recent years have been displayed a more open attitude 
towards the use of technology use and the need to incorporate technology training 
during their professional development plan. However, teacher s who have been educated 
during pre -professional age (Hargreaves, 2000) have the tendency to be more reluctant 
to new teaching methods and changing their perspectives.  
DISCUSSION  AND CONCLUSION  
The purpose of this study was to analyze  preschool teachers an d parents ’ views and 
practices regarding use of digital technologies during early childhood education. Our 
findings have indicated that there are differences between parents and teacher views and 
attitudes regarding the use of digital technologies during e arly years of children or pupil 
development. Most of the parents of children 0 to 5 declared that they provide to their 
children different types of digital technology supplies starting from their first year of 
their development. Regularly, children spend a  lot of time on TV, laptop, and other 
smart technological devices. Children spend screen time from 30 minutes up to more 
than four hours per day. Parents believe that there are some benefits emerging from the 
digital media. They believe that their children  development increases in some of their 
developmental areas including: language development, cognitive, early learning skills, 
and technology skills. Children are using digital supplies in English language and this 
might be considered by their parents as e  beneficial to their language skills development. 
This funding is consistent with other findings in the field of technology use in early 
children education (see: see: Girmen & Kaya, 2018; McCloskey, et al. 2018; Genc, 
2014; Vittrup, 2014; Blackwell, Lauric ella & Wartella, 2014), However, while our 
findings are emerge and support from numerous findings in this field, the novelty of our 
results should be emphasised. That is, while the use of technology use in early children  Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       179 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 education is important, our study s uggests that other fields of development are 
considered weekly developed, such as social skills, psycho - motor development, and 
communication skills.  
Parents believe that the use of technology improves their children’s overall development 
and school readin ess. However, they have also reported some concerns about the 
negative impact technology might have on their children wellbeing such as: lack of 
active play time in opened environment, physical development disorders or sleeping 
problems. Correspondingly, G enc (2014) have showed that parents with negative 
opinions indicate how smartphone usage can cause physical or mental problems in the 
future: they fear that their children will be introverted, have an isolated life, or be 
affected by harmful radiation. Despite this, most of them exposed their children to at 
least one digital supply during the first year of life and the number of supplies increases 
on a yearly basis. This finding is very controversial and points toward further 
discussions in the field of tec hnology use in early children education.  
Despite parent’s views, preschool teachers have very different attitudes about use of 
digital technology supplies during early years of children development. The in -depth 
interviews showed that teacher attitudes ar e mostly affected by four factors as shown in 
the model below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6  
Visualization of Factors Influencing Teacher Attitudes toward Technology Use 
Teachers’ previous experience with regards to technology use, availability of digital 
technology supplies in current working place, own believes about technology effects to 
children learning and development, and  professional development activities with regard 
to technology skills were indicated also very important at Kelly (2014). This study 
reports that teachers’ perceptions were influenced both by the interpersonal level as well 
as the community/institutional level. In addition, our findings are consistent with Kelly 
(2014) suggesting that the capacity building of teachers is important for ef fective use of 
technology tools.  
Teaching experience seems to be correlated to their attitudes toward use of technology. 
Studies show that teachers with more teaching experience have less favourable attitudes 
toward technology and use technology less ofte n than teachers with less experience 
(Blackwell, Lauricella and Wartella, 2014). Our study also depicted a similar situation 
in Kosovo. Teachers’ with more teaching experience where strictly against the 
integration of technology in their lesson plans or ac tivities with preschool children. Inan 
Attitudes  Teachers’ previous 
experience  
Availability of digital 
technology  Own believes about 
technology  Professional 
development  180                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 & Lowther (2010) showed that teachers’ perceptions of instructional benefits are an 
influential factor that affects technology integration in classrooms. The interviewed 
teachers in our research also declared their vi ews as negative toward technology. This 
affected their practice as well. The study of Badia et al. (2014) presents that ICT related 
school conditions such as ICT teaching policy and ICT infrastructure show a significant 
but more modest association with tea chers’ perceived effectiveness of digital 
technology. Similarly, put finds have reported that the lack of proper technological tools 
in kindergarten, to a certain extent, have influenced their negative perceptions regarding 
the use of technology. For many years, these poor conditions have influenced teachers’ 
lack of willing to use technology with young children.  
Their professional in service and pre -service development is also poor and their 
previous experience in school was not guided by the use of techn ology. As reported by 
UNICEF (2012), it is imperative that ECCE educators are productively integrated in 
professional development related to technological use. It is important to understand that 
the process of becoming ICT competent for ECCE educator is a long-term 
transformation, which requires continuous support and monitoring. Since its beginning, 
efficient professional development program must focus both on (a) developing ICT 
literacy of the educators, and simultaneously utilizing their emerging new lit eracy for (b) 
building new pedagogies of ICT in favor  of children’s learning and development.  
Findings of the study are debatable, since, on the one hand the majority of parents 
support and utilize the use of technology in their children development, while  preschool 
teachers (later in children education) are stemming children’s exposure to digital 
technologies. This influences children development in many levels, while in this case 
creating two confusing levels of early children education, i.e. using both p rogressive and 
regressive philosophies in children development. This is also relevant to initiate 
discussions at policy level, in the country and other countries concerning with similar 
conflicts. Findings have policy implications for preschool curriculum implementation 
towards quality education in early children development. This research contributes to 
enhancing the aspect of cooperation between educators and parents in harmony with 
Kosovo's strategies and documents for Digital Technologies in Early Child hood  
The question today on the use of technology does not concern the paradigm of whether 
it is positive or negative. Today, the use of digital technologies in education system is 
inevitable. Rather, different stakeholders involved with early childhood dev elopment 
should acknowledge both the benefits and risks that technology use brings to children 
and teachers. A continuous cooperation between parents and teachers should be 
facilitated to ensure prospects of maximizing its benefits and alleviating potentia l risks 
in early childhood education . 
REFERENCES  
Alper, M. (2011). Developmentally appropriate new media literacies: Supporting 
cultural competencies and social skills in early childhood education. Journal of 
Childhood Literacy, 13 (2), 175 -196. doi: 10.117 7/1468798411430101 .  Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       181 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 Angeli, C. (2004). The effects of case -based learning on early childhood pre -service 
teachers' beliefs about the pedagogical uses of ICT. Journal of Educational Media , 
29(2), 139-151. doi: 10.1080/1358165042000253302.  
Badiaa, A., Menese sa, J.  Sigalésa, C., & Fàbreguesa , S. (2014). Factors affecting 
school teachers’ perceptions of the instructional benefits of digital technology .  
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences,  141, 357 -362. 
Blackwell, C.  K., Lauricella, A.  R., & Wartella, E. (2014). Factors influencing digital 
technology use in early childhood education.  Computers & Education Journal , 77, 82-
90. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2014.04.013 . 
Bolstad, R. (2004).  The role and potential of ICT in early childhood education : A 
review of New Zealand and international literature . Wellington:  Ministry of Education, 
New Zealand Council for Educational Research . 
Byron, T. (2008). Safer children in a digital world:  The report of the Byron review . 
Retrieved from: https://www.iwf.org.uk/sites/defaul t/files/inline -
files/Safer%20Children%20in%20a%20Digital%20World%20report.pdf.  
Chen, J., & Chang, C.  (2006). Using computers in early childhood classrooms: 
Teachers' attitudes, skills and practices . Journal of Early Childhood Research , 4(2), 
169-188. doi: 10.1177/1476718X06063535.  
Coalition of NGO -s for Child Protection (KOMF). (2014). Education - An obligation 
for a visionary state. Komf statment on the involvment of children in pre -primary 
education.  Prishtina. Retrieved from: http://www.childpact.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/01/Find -KOMFs -full-statement -on-preprimary -education -in-
Kosovo.pdf . 
Creswell, J. (2014). Research design:  Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods 
approaches . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Genc, Z. (2014). Parents’ perceptions about th e mobile technology use of preschool 
agedchildren. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences , 146, 55-60. 
Gialamas, V., &  Nikolopoulou, K. (2010). In -service and pre -service early chilhood 
teachers' views and intentions about ICT use in early childhood setti ng: a comparative 
study. Computers and Education , 55(1),  333-341. 
Girmen, P., & Kaya, M. F. (2019). Using the flipped classroom model in the 
development of basic language skills and enriching activities : Digital stories and game s. 
International Journal of  Instruction, 12 (1), 555 -572. doi: 10.29333/iji.2019.12136a . 
Gjelaj, M., Rraci, E. , & Bajrami, K. (2018). Preschool education in Kosovo.  Kosovo 
Education and Employment Network – KEEN”  project, 26 -27. 
Hargreaves, A. (2000 ). Four ages of professionalism. Teachers and Teaching: Theory  
and Practice, 6 (2), 152 -182. doi: 10.1080/713698714.  
Hayes, M. , & Whitebread, D. (2006). ICT in the early years . UK: Open University . 182                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 Hesketh, K.  D., Hinkley T., & Campbell , K. J.  (2012). Children's physical activity and 
screen time: qualitative comparison of views of parents of infants and preschool 
children.  International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9 : 152. 
doi: 10.1186/1479 -5868 -9-152. 
Ihmeideh, F.  M., & Al khawaldeh, M. F. (2017). Teachers' and paren ts' perceptions of 
the role of technology and digital media in developing child culture in the early years. 
Children and Youth Services Review, 77 , 139-146. doi: 
10.1016/j.childyouth.2017.04.013.  
Inan, F.  A., & Lowther, D.  L. (2010). Factors affecting tech nology integration in K -12 
classrooms: A path model.  Educational Technology Research and Development, 58(2), 
137-154. doi: 10.1007/s11423 -009-9132 -y. 
Kalas, I. (2012), ICTs in early childhood care and education . Russian Federation: 
UNESCO : http://iite.unes co.org/pics/publications/en/files/3214720.pdf  
Kalas,  I. (July, 2013) . Integration of ICT in early childhood education . Paper presented 
The X World Conference on Computers in Education , Toruń, Poland . 
Kelly, S . A. (2014). Perceptions, beliefs and practices about technology among 
teachers in a  Jamaican infant school  (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
South Florida , US.  
Kiridis, A., Tsakiridou, E., Kaskalis, T., & Golia, P. (2004). Early childhood education 
students' attitudes and views abaut the introduction of new technologies in kindergarten, 
in Florina's pedagogic department. Themes in Education , 5(1-3), 161-172. 
Kolbe, R.  H., & Burnett, M.  S. (1991 ). Content -analysis res earch: an examination of 
applications with directives for improving research reliability and objectivity . Journal of 
Consumer Research , 18(2), 243 -250. 
Kosovo Agency of Statistics (KAS). (2018). Education statistics in Kosovo  2017 -2018. 
Retrieved from: http://ask.rks -gov.net/media/4146/stat -e-arsimir -2017 -2018ang.pdf  
Laffey, J. (2004). Appropriation, mastery and resistance to technology in early 
childhood preservice teacher education. Journal of Research and Technology in 
Education , 36(4) 361 -382. doi: 10.1080/15391523.2004.10782420 . 
Lauricella A.  R., Wartella E., & Rideout, V. J. (2015). Young children's screen time: 
The complex role of parent and child factors.  Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology , 36, 11-17. 
McCloskey, M., Johnson, S.L., Benz, C.,  Thompson, D.A., Chamberlin, B., Clark, L., & 
Bellows, L.L. (2018 ). Parent perceptions of mobile device use among preschool -aged 
children in rural head start cente rs. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior , 50(1), 
83-89.  Gjelaj, Buza, Shatri & Zabeli       183 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 Minaidi, A., &  Hlapanis, G. (2 005). Pedagogical obstacles in teacher training in 
information and communication technology. Technology, Pedagogy and Education,   
14(2) 241 -254. doi: 10.1080/14759390500200204.  
Ministry of Education Science and Tecnology (MEST). (2016). Kosovo education 
strategic plan 2017 -2022.  Prishtina. Retrieved from: https://masht.rks -
gov.net/uploads/2017/02/20161006 -kesp-2017 -2021.pdf.  
Ministry of Education Science and Tecnology (MEST). (2016). Kosovo curriculum 
frame work .  Retrieved from: 
http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fi leadmin/user_upload/archive/curricula/kosovo/kv_alfw_20
11_eng.pdf . 
Ministry of Education Science and Tecnology (MEST). (2011). Kosovo curriculum 
framewor k.  Retrieved from:  https://masht.rks -gov.net/uploads/2015/05/elds -report -alb-
for-web_1.pdf . 
New Zeala nd Council for Educational Research (2004). The role and potential of ICT in 
early childhood education. A review of New Zealand and international literature . 
Wellington. Retrieved from  http://www.educationcounts.govt.nz/publications/ict/498 3. 
Olowe, P.  K., & Kutelu,  B. O. (2014). Perceived importance of ICT in preparing early 
childhood education teachers for the new generation children . International Journal of 
Evaluation and Research in Education (IJERE),  3(2), 119-124. 
Prime Minister of Kosovo. (2016). National development strategy 2016 – 2021 (NDS).  
Prishtina: Kosovo Government. Retrieved from: http://www.kryeministri -
ks.net/repository/docs/National_Development_Strategy_2016 -2021_ENG.pdf.  
Shin, W. (2015).  Parental socialization of children’s internet use:  A qualitative 
approach. New Media and Society, 17 , 649 -665. doi: 10.1177/1461444813516833 . 
Sime, D., & Priestley, M. (2005). Student teachers' first reflections on information and 
comunications technology and classroom learning: Implications for initial t eacher 
education. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 21(2), 130-142. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365 -2729.2005.00120.x . 
Stephen, C., & Plowman, L. (2002). ICT in pre -school settings: Benign addition or 
playgroom revolution? Early Childhood Folio , 7, 33-38. 
Tsitour idou, M., & Vryzas, K. (2001). Early childhood education students' attitudes 
towards information technology. Themes in Education  , 2(4), 425-443. 
Tsitouridou, M., &  Vryzas, K. (2004). The prospect of integrating ICT into the 
education of young children: Th e views of Greek early childhood teachers.  European 
Journal of Teacher Education , 27(1), 29-45. doi: 10.1080/0261976042000211838  
U.S. Department of Education (2016), http://sites.ed.gov/oese/2016/04/open -discussion -
on-the-role-of-education -technologies -in-early -childhood -stem-education/  184                                Digital Technologies in Early Childhood: Attitudes and  … 
 
International Journal of Instruction, January 2020  ● Vol.13, No. 1 Vittrup , B., Snider , S., Rose , K. K. , & Rippy, J. (2014). Parental perceptions of the role 
of media and technology in their young children’s lives. Journal of Early Childhood 
Research. 14 , 43-54. doi: 10.1177/1476718X14523749 . 
Zomer, N., & Kay, R. K. (2016). Technology use in early childhood education : A 
review of literature . Journal of Educational Informatics , 1, 1 -25.  