1 
   
Effectiveness of Digital Platforms to Reduce VAW  
Dr Erika Fraser  and Caroline Enye          31 January  2019 
Query:  What is the evidence on the effectiveness of digital platforms (e.g. soap operas, radio 
programmes, Facebook, Apps, YouTube and Instagram) to reduce violence against women?  
Purpose:  To test a soap opera approach to drive behaviour change to address deeply ingrained 
socio -cultural norms that enable very high levels of VAWG in Bangladesh. Reaching women and girls 
through traditional outreach and training has had some impact, but digital technology presents an 
opportunity to increase and widen our reach.   Digital and mobile phone penetration is high in 
Bangladesh particularly amo ng young people.    At this stage we envisage the soap opera would 
primarily target young people (16 -25 years), with the scripting of the story youth -led and broadcast on 
digital platforms used by young people in Bangladesh . 
 
1. Introduction  
Traditional and digital  media1 platforms  can be important a pproaches to reach young people  with 
social messaging, with huge potential to transform harmful  social norms around gender and violence 
through public discussion and social interaction. However, these tools are not without risks and 
challenges.  This document  provides a rapid review of the evidence on the effectiveness of digital 
platforms , including  soap operas, radio programmes, Facebook, Apps, YouTube  and Instagram,  to 
reduce violence against women and girls (VAWG).  As these digital platforms  are still relatively new, 
this query  also includes any evidence on the effectiveness of more traditional me dia approaches (e.g. 
radio, television).  This report begins by setting out the methodology and strength of the evidence base 
(Section 2), before pulling out the key lessons from the evidence on the effectiveness of digital 
platforms to reduce VAWG (Section  3).  Further details on case studies are provided in Annex 1.  
 
2. Methodology and evidence base  
The review prioritised existing syntheses where possible in order to draw on the fullest range of 
evidence possible , given time constraints.  
Search strategy : Studies  were identified through searches using Google and relevant electronic 
databases (PubMed, Science Direct, and Google Scholar ) for priority sources. Key search terms 
included: soap opera, radio, television, TV, Facebook, Apps, YouTube , Instagram, technology, digital 
AND violence against women, GBV, rape AND adolescent, youth, young people.  
Criteria for inclusion : To be eligible for inclusion in this rapid mapping, studies  had to fulfil the 
following criteria:  
• Focus : Research, evaluations and studies of digital platforms  and soap opera programmes  to 
reduce violence against women  
• Time period : 2000 – January 2019.  
• Language : English and Portuguese.  
                                                           
1 Traditional media refers to television, radio and print media . DFID refers to the word ‘digital’ within its strategy  (2018b)  as 
“the tools, techniques, technology and approaches of the internet age”.   Typically , digital media is used to describe internet  
forums, blogs, wikis, podcasts, and social media applications (e.g. YouTube, Instagram, Facebook)  
VAWG Helpdesk Research Report       No. 224  2 
 • Publication status : publicly available – in almost all cases pub lished online.  
• Geographical focus : low and middle -income countries, but opened up to high -income countries in 
areas where evidence was lacking.  
Overall, the evidence base on the effectiveness of digital platforms and media programming to 
reduce  VAWG is limited , according to DFID’s (2014) How to Note on Assessing the Strength of 
Evidence, i.e. moderate to low quality studies, medium size evidence body, low levels of consistency. 
The most rigorous studies are over ten years old (e.g. Soul City in South Africa;  Programme H in 
Brazil ) or currently awaiting results (e.g. Change Starts at Home in Nepal) . Most  other  studies are  
either  low-quality observational studies  or are based primarily on monitoring data on the reach of a 
programme – for example, h ow many viewers or listeners, rather than impact . The few systematic 
reviews that exist on VAWG  point to the scarcity of high quality, rigorous research  in this area, and 
particular ly a lack of  research measuring  changes in violent behaviour  or experiences  of VAWG (Fulu 
et al, 2014; Trabold et al, 2018 ). 
There is particularly limited data on the effectiveness of digital platforms , partly due to this 
being a relatively new approach  and the rapidly evolving technological context . Various apps 
and online tools have been developed, but these are mostly not evaluated. There is also an e vidence 
gap in understanding t he effectiveness of different approaches for women and girls who are 
particularly vulnerable  to violence online and offline , such as adolescent girls, women  and girls  with 
disabilities , and young people of diverse sex ualities and gender identities (Faith and Fraser, 2018).  
Examples of soap opera and digital platforms used to address VAWG  
(see Annex 1 for further examples and details)  
Programme  Location  Activities  Digital platforms used  
Soul City IV  South 
Africa  A prime time soap opera TV series, daily radio 
drama, booklets,  advertising campaign, advocacy 
and social mobilisation campaign , and national 
toll-free helpline  None  
Voices for 
Change  Nigeria  TV soap, TV adverts, radio drama, radio talk 
shows, brand promotion (lifestyle brand called 
Purple), web/Mobile site, app, online Learning, 
billboards, and community mobilisation  Facebook, Twitter, 
Instagram, Mobile App, 
Web/Mobile site  
Somos 
Diferentes,  
Somos Iguales  
(We are Different, 
We are Equal  Nicaragua  Weekly TV series, nightly radio call -in show, 
community -based activities such as youth 
leadership training, capacity and network building 
with journalists and local organisations  None  
A Mass Media 
Experiment to 
Reduce VAW  Uganda  Three short anti -VAW videos were produced - 
approx imately  4-8 minutes each , shown at  film 
festivals in 112 rural villages.  None  
Main Kuch Bhi 
Kar Sakti Hoon , 
(I, a Woman, Can 
Achieve 
Anything ) India  An Indian soap opera  involving a flagship TV 
drama serial of 130 episodes broadcast over two 
seasons . Also included radio and  on-the-ground 
activities  Interactive voice 
response system (IVRS)  
Social media outlets  
Must Bol  India  Digital campaign for young people to examine 
violence in their lives and speak out against it. 
Including short fictional videos photos, posters and 
blogs.  Youtube channel ,   
A dedicated website 
with videoblogs, a 
‘shoutbox’ and a team 
blog  
  3 
 Females in 
Nigeria  Nigeria  Closed Facebook group with over 1 million 
members, acting as a support group for women 
who have experienced violence  Facebook  
VOICES Project 
- Samajdhari 
(Mutual 
Understanding)  Nepal  Innovative radio program  with 88 episodes  
broadcast on the state owned Radio Nepal as well 
as 16  local FM stations. Included training and 
outreach activities  Mobile phone 
component to interact 
and receive information 
directly  
Bell Bajao (Ring 
the Bell)  India  Television, radio an d press advertisements; mobile 
video vans which encourage audience participation 
through games, street theatre; celebrity 
involvement; and leadership training with youth 
and community leaders.  Interactive website with 
blog.  Recently created 
‘America 2049 ’ - a 
Facebook game on sex 
trafficking  
Change Starts 
at Home   Nepal  9-month weekly radio drama with IVR/SMS listener 
engagement; Listening and Discussion Groups; 
Awareness raising and street theatre; Training with 
religious and community leaders  Interactive voice 
response (IVR) and 
short message service 
(SMS)  
Media Matters 
for Women  Sierra 
Leone  Local female journalists report on issues relevant 
to the lives of rural women and girls via podcasts  Podcasts - shared peer 
to peer via Bluetooth, 
mobi le phone kiosks  
Mobile apps  Cambodia  Three apps offer ing legal information, peer 
support, anonymous reporting, and personal 
network alerts.  Mobile apps  
Love Journey  Viet Nam  Online photo essay competition, and an offline 
music concert.  Facebook  
17 Man  (Men 
Join Together)  China  Article contests; a model UN session; a debating 
contest; a moot court held at China’s top law 
school ; signature campaign, online quiz  Sina, Weibo, Soh u 
(popular websites)  
Entre Nós  
(Between Us)  Brazil  Radio soap opera produced and disseminated as a 
component of Programs H and M; comic books 
and a soun dtrack  None  
Clique 180' (Call 
180) Brazil  App which aims to educate users on VAWG, 
connected with a helpline. Users can pin unsafe 
locations.  Mobile app  
Girl Effect ’s 
Yegna brand  Ethiopia   30 minute radio drama followed by a talk show, a 
music band  Music videos available 
to download online  
 
3. Lessons learned about the effectiveness of digital platforms to reduce VAWG  
Designing programme activities  
• Traditional and new media, including  digital platforms , show some promise in driving 
behaviour change around VAWG , but research suggests that it should be linked with  more 
intensive engagement via  offline activities and local action . Key lessons include the 
importance of providing  opportunities for young people  to put new norms and behaviours into 
practice. I n India , a soap opera whose themes include acid attacks and d omestic violence - Main 
Kuch Bhi Kar Sakti Hoon (MKBKSH) — I, A Woman, Can Achieve Anything  used a 360° 
communication approach across a wide range of communication platforms2 to engage the 
audience. As part of this, it formed 738 community outreach groups.3 Research found that the 
groups were spurring interpersonal conversations  beyond the group , for example 48% of group 
                                                           
2 Including a television and radio serial, an interactive voice response system, social media outlets, and on -the-ground 
activities.  
3 The programme partnered  with 10 NGOs in the states of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh to infuse MKBKSH viewing/listening 
with community outreach groups: 202 groups in 3 Districts of Bihar and 536 groups in 5 Districts of Madhya Pradesh.  These 
groups were called Sneha Groups, named afte r Dr. Sneha, the protagonist in the soap opera.  4 
 members reported talking  about the issues raised in the soap opera  to family, 37% to friends, and 
13% to frontline health or social workers (Wang, and Singhal, 2017) . In India, Bell Bajao  found that 
mobile video vans, accompanied by staff and youth advocates, were extremely effective in 
mobilising communities a nd enabled the public to ask questions about domestic violence and 
women’s rights  (Breakthrough, 2011) . In Nigeria, Voices for Change (V4C) observed  that people 
that had physical interaction with the programme had the most intense change, but that others who 
were targeted indirectly through mass media also sometimes reached a position from where they 
are able to act on gender inequality: “brand/mass m edia campaigns are an important part of 
creating change but may not be enough, by themselves, to create profound change in most cases. 
Rather, they can create the conditions for further influencing by those that experienced intensive 
inputs – they are the next generation of low -hanging fruit” (Milward and Nelson, 2017: 5).  Other 
examples of media/digital programmes involving ‘offline’ discussion groups include Soul City 
(South Africa), Change Starts at Home (Nepal), Programme H and Entre Nós  (Brazil and bey ond), 
and Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales We Are Different, We Are Equal (Nicaragua)).  
• Evidence suggests  the type of communications platform  (visual vs. verbal)  appears to play 
a role in influencing behaviour change , although further research is needed and  attributing 
change within a multi -media programme can be complex.  Data from Nigeria’s V4C programme 
found a difference in attitude and behaviour associated with hearing the media talk about violence 
against women in the Purple Tinz (radio show) versus seeing violence portrayed in the media.  This 
suggests that seeing or hearing depictions of violence can reinforce harmful descriptive norms, the 
sense that violence is common and acceptable. In contrast,  hearing violence being discussed 
provides lis teners/viewers the space to analyse and challenge their own perceptions  and harmful 
norms  (see box below) . 
Influencing Behaviour Change: Lessons from DFID’s Voices for Change (V4C) programme  
Whilst the results are not clear -cut and there is more to learn about how to effectively use mass 
communications, communications platforms which specifically created space for discussion and 
interrogation were shown to be particularly effective . For example , findings from V4C suggests 
that seeing more scenes of violence against women portrayed on TV/radio corresponds with higher 
VAWG (perceptions and behaviour), whereas discussion of VAWG on TV and the radio correlates 
with a decline in VAWG at home . This hy pothesis is consistent with findings from V4C’s qualitative 
surveys where interviewees credited discursive spaces as being particularly influential in the 
development of new ideas and shifting personal attitudes and behaviours.  
The impact of online content is mixed.  Evidence generated by V4C finds that individuals 
participating in the Purple Academy and Purple online (Purple E -Spaces) felt more willing to speak up 
against violence . Yet, findings from  V4C show very different results from light versus intensive web 
engagement . People with intensive  online  Purple Academy exposure (completion of a module) 
reported four to eight times greater change in their support for gender equality, including their 
willingness to speak up against VAWG, compared to thos e with general Purple Academy recognition. 
Analysis of the Attitudes, Practice and Social Norms Survey  (APSN ) results suggest that people who 
had only light exposure to online Purple content are consuming digital media from a much broader 
range of sources as well – and this wider online engagement is different  from people who have no 
exposure to online Purple con tent. This matters because, simultaneously with programming online, 
there were many other spaces and forums where gender was being discussed in unmoderated, and 
often negative, ways.  
Sources: V4C (201 7 b); Denny,E et all  (2017 ) 
 5 
 Storylines and m essaging  
• Storylines and m essages should be piloted with target audiences  to ensure they are 
understood correctly and to minimise any unintended negative effects (Avis, 2017). The evaluation 
of Soul City soap opera in South Africa highlighted the importanc e of formative research with both 
audiences and experts to develop and field test storylines and materials to ensure their 
effectiveness. DFID’s V4C programme also gained valuable lessons about messaging, both in pre -
test and in the annual communications r eview. At the launch of the brand, whilst users found the 
Purple brand appealing and the communications relevant, there was no association with gender 
equality. This resulted in the programme re -branding to ‘Purple: 50/50’ (the 50/50 suggesting 
gender equa lity) which created a dramatic shift in users understanding of the core brand message  
• The most effective messaging is tailored to audiences using social marketing principles 
and creating a supportive environment  that enables the intended audience to make c hanges 
(Avis, 2017). – e.g. by mobilising communities in support of the campaign. For example V4C’s 
Purple 50/50  lifestyle brand unified communications encouraging a sense of a wider gender 
equality movement r ather than disparate activities  (V4C, 2017 a and 2017b ). Identifying how 
gender equal ity and non -violent behaviour will benefit the audience was at the core of 
communication.  
• Programmes should avoid reinforcing harmful descriptive norms4 that VAWG is widespread 
and instead look to reinforce protective norms or put positive norms in place . For example, 
in Nicaragua, Paluck and Ball (2010) note that it appears possible that the plot of the television 
series and radio call -in programme Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales (We are Different, We are 
Equal)  may have reinforced negative descriptive norms, such as the perception that sexual and 
physical abuse are widespread problems. By advertising how common a problem is, there is a risk 
of norma lising this behaviour.  For example , in Nigeria  positive messages  around self -fulfilment, 
career success and loving romantic relationships were developed from V4C’s research into the 
values young people held. The meta -narrative of gender equality within rel ationships was 
promoted by the Purple 50/50 tagline , creating a sense of identity as a 50/50 person who will be 
the best they can be and support others to reach their full potential.  
• It is also important to channel individuals into opportunities to act on messages , such as 
supporting and advertising a hotline to report violence . For example, Soul City in South Africa 
partnered with a national toll -free helpline with online counsellors and a comprehensive national 
database to refer callers to ongoing support at community level  - approx imately  180,000 calls 
were answered on 4 lines over 5 months. When raising awareness or trying to change social 
norms, it is an ethical imperative to ensure that details of local support services are accessible for 
peopl e who have experienced violence (see later section on safeguarding).   
• A single brand identity unifies communications, encouraging wider sense of a movement 
for change. For example, the Girl Effect programme developed different brands in close 
association w ith girls: Ni Nyampinga in Rwanda (meaning “the beautiful girl – inside and out – who 
makes good decisions” in Kinyarwanda) and Yegna in Ethiopia (“ours” in Amharic). In Ethiopia, the 
Yegna brand focuses on a branded edutainment package (radio drama, talk show, music, and a 
network of Yegna ambassadors who hold weekly ‘listening parties’) that creates a platform to have 
a national conver sation about some of the cultural norms holding girls back, such as violence 
against girls. Nigeria’s V4C ‘Purple’ brand was effective in its ability to attribute  individuals ’ change 
and to which particular media platform  through the annual Social Norms At titude and Practice 
Survey, The findings informed programming choices to maximise impact and value for money.  
                                                           
4 Descriptive norms are what people think other people do  6 
 • Saturation (or intensity ) of messaging is key to changing behaviours. For example, research 
in Burkina Faso on using radio  programming  concluded that up to ten messages a day are 
required to be able to scientifically prove a subsequent related change in behaviour ( Murray et al, 
2018 ). However, such high -intensity broadcasting is challenging to achieve in practice ; instead the 
study  recom mend s developing messages across a range of channels - short 60 second 
advertising spots combined with longer dramas and opportunities to interact.5 
 
Broadening a ccess to digital platforms  
• Rigorous research can help identify which  communications platform s are most accessible 
and used by the target audience. National data may be out -of-date or not disaggregate by 
factors such as gender, age, religion/culture, disability. Small scale pilots can help with 
understanding diversity and i nclusion.  
• Evidence suggests that it is also  important  not to rely solely on digital platforms – the most 
effective programmes provide alternative options to ensure young people who are not digitally 
connected are not being left behind :  For example,  in Br azil, Promundo’s Entre Nós ("Between 
Us") radio soap opera aired on community radio and was broadcast in places you ng people  
frequented - schools, beauty salons, cyber cafes.  In rural Sierra Leone,  Media Matters for Women 
(MMW) broadcasts a udio podcasts at 15 Listening Centres that MMW  builds and manages 
through community promoters in and around towns6, often attracting around 100 -200 people  to 
hear the weekly broadcasts.  
• People with disabilities can face particular barriers to accessing traditional and digital 
media . DFID’s Strategy for Disability Inclusive Development 2018 -23 notes the importance of 
considering the differential needs of girls and women with disabilities, and ensuring they can 
access the same opportunities to participate  (DFID, 2018a) . No examples were found during this 
query  of media or digital tools  on VAWG which have considered the needs of people with 
disabilities. DFID have highlighted various  ways tha t digital technologies can overcome barriers , 
includ ing: voice recognition, magnification, and text -to-speech functionality for people with visual, 
cognitive, learning, and mobility disabilities; text messaging, telephone relay, and video captions 
for pers ons with hearing and speech disabilities; and hands -free navigation and gesture -controlled 
interfaces for people with severe mobility impairments  (DFID 2018b; World Bank, 2016) . 
Programmes can also work offline with Disabled People’s Organisations  (DPOs)  to reach people 
with disabilities who cannot access digital platforms. Further advice and information can be 
accessed  at DFID’s new disability helpdesk.7  
 
Working with young people  around digital platforms  
• Formative research is important in understanding how young men and women use different 
digital platforms. In Nigeria,  V4C’s (2017c)  legacy paper  on using digital8 spaces noted  that 
young people  often  engage for short periods of time, while they  multitask  with other activities, view  
different sites at once, messag e friends, as well as being regular interrupted  by bad connection s. 
Programmes need to take these habits into account when designing content  for digital platforms  
and when evaluating impact.  
                                                           
5 https://www.developmentmedia.net/methodology.html   
6 Such as Kenema, Makeni, and Waterloo located in three different provinces  
7 Contact email: enquiries@disabilityinclusion.org.uk  
8 Note that V4C findings refer to digital (online/mobile) only. Usage of radio, tv e tc is less complex.  7 
 • Co-creation with young people is important to get the content and messaging right. For 
example, the ‘Springster’ online mobile -first platform (formally Girl Effect Mobile) was ‘designed for 
and created by g irls’. Girl readers submit their own stories via a monthly ‘Your Words’ contest, and 
connect with each other using features such as commenting threads, polls and reactions.9 In 
DFID’s V4C programme in Nigeria, young people were engaged in a ‘user experienc e and content 
design workshop’ to design the look, feel and initial content of the ‘I am Purple’ website  and 
employed young people as core staff to support content creation and moderate social media.  
• Young people engage in different ways  depending on their age  - evidence suggests it is 
important to o ffer a range of age-appropriate opportunities. In India, Must Bol used creative 
digital media platforms for young people to examine violence in their lives and speak out against it. 
Must Bol f ound that different online activities attracted different age groups ; photo contests 
attracted young er people, whereas a blogathon attracted an older group (Liou, 2013) . 
• Evidence suggests that m usical and artistic approaches  are effective ways of  engaging 
young people, as are celebrities and other influencers .  In Brazil, Entre Nós soap opera was 
accompanied by a set of comic books and a soundtrack. In Viet Nam, celebrities participated in a 
digital  campaign  ‘Love Journey’  by being ‘models’ in a s ample photo essay, creating a campaign 
music video and writing songs on healthy relationships that they performed at a musical concert.  In 
Ethiopia, Girl Effect created the Yegna girl pop group to accompany a ra dio drama and talk show 
that championed the potential of girls.  In Nigeria, popular musicians created a music video, 
supported the campaign through live appearances and promoted Purple through their social media 
channels.  
• Challenges  to engaging young people around digital platforms  to prevent VAWG include  
literacy, cultural norms, only reaching certain young people who have access to digital technology, 
as well as risks to privacy and safety (see following section) (Avis, 2017).  For example: V4C 
Purple mobile platform had consistently lower numbers of young women engaging on the site, 
closely reflecting the national statistics of male/female online users (M 77%, F 33%). Additional 
investment went into women targeted advertising a nd content that spoke directly to young women. 
As a result overall user numbers dropped but resulted in almost equal number of male and female 
users: (M 51%, F 49%). Whilst being equally popular and relevant amongst the wealth groups, the 
purple radio show  was most successful in reaching the lower wealth quintiles  (Denny  and Hughes , 
2017)  
 
Safeguarding  
• Risks with digital (mobile/online) spaces need to be carefully planned for, monitored and 
mitigated against.  Risks associated with the use of digital platforms include  trolling, grooming and 
abusive content , as well as risks to digital privacy  – all of which need to be carefully managed and 
mitigated. For example, the V4C Purple website and social media platforms were closely 
monitored for signs of backlash and abuse, and in response to abusive content posted on the 
Facebook page, a number of users were banned from the platform.    
• Importance of moderators  and rules  to ensure digital  space s are safe for young people  – 
For example, the closed Facebook group ‘Female in Nigeria’ (Fin) (with over a million members) 
gets hundreds of applications for posts every  day but they are managed and approved by a group 
of 28 volunteers. About 40 -100 make it on the page.  It also has strict rules, including not judging 
each other, removing negative comments, and no religious -themed advice (“Fin is not a place of 
worship” ). 
                                                           
9 For more information, see: https://www.girleffect.org/what -we-do/mobile -platforms/springster/   8 
 • Ensure digital  platforms  provide a way for young people who have experienced violence to 
access support. For example, in Nigeria, the V4C Purple website featured a dedicated page with 
links to organisations and services for survivors of VAWG. In South Africa, Soul City partnered with 
a national toll -free helpline staffed by counsellors.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation  
• Monitoring and evaluation of traditional and digital  media approaches to reduce VAWG 
remains a key evidence gap , where investment is needed to avoid the risk of programmes 
being unable to demonstrate impact. Of the 17 examples reviewed for this query, only  nine had 
evidence of impact  on attitudes and two on violence perpetration or victimisation . DFID’s (2017) 
review of the VAWG portfolio cautioned of the risks for innovative DFID media programmes which 
are not able to demonstrate impact (e.g. attracting ne gative public attention and being shut early).  
• Evaluations of traditional and new media programmes often generate complex results, 
which can take time to interpret . Both Somos Diferentes, Somos Iguales  in Nicaragua and  V4C 
in Nigeria found mixed  changes in attitudes, behaviours and norms relating to VAWG, which var ied 
by geographic and programming areas . In Nigeria, there was strong evidence that V4C has 
brought about significant change amongst individuals who engaged in phy sical and virtual Safe 
Spaces, targeted trainings and mass media communications . 
• Evidence suggests the most effective programming builds in opportunities for learning and 
adapting in response to audience feedback and wider changes in the political and socio -
economic context. In Nepal, the DFID -funded ‘Change Starts at Home’ programme w hich aims to 
reduce intimate partner violence between married couples uses  Listening and Discussion Groups10 
to ensure that the radio drama content is relevant and applicable, as well as to explore issues in 
greater depth. Listener reactions and feedback ar e shared with the radio production team to guide 
the content of future episodes, and adapt messaging accordingly (Clark et al, 2017).  
• Digital  platforms can provide transparent and accessible mechanisms to generate real time 
beneficiary feedback at scale, c lose feedback loops and provide a ‘pulse check’ for offline 
activities. For example, the Indian soap opera Main Kuch Bhi Kar Sakti Hoon (MKBKSH) — I, A 
Woman, Can Achieve Anything  (2014 - present) pioneered the use of an Interactive Voice 
Response System ( IVRS) which provided a discussion forum for viewers and a way to share 
feedback. The IVRS platform had 1.7 million calls from more than 390,000 unique phone numbers 
across 29 out of 36 India’s states. Independent analysis of the IVRS data noted that IVRS w as 
reached “media dark” areas through Mobile Vaani networks and Community Radio Stations, giving 
voice to less privileged audience members: “No media initiative, anywhere in the world, has 
received such a high level of audience participation in real time a t such a scale” (Wang and 
Singhal, 2017: 1)  
 
Costs and V alue for Money  
• High upfront costs are often incurred by programmes using digital platforms and 
communications approaches  to allow for design, testing and adaptation, according to a review of 
DFID’s VAWG portfolio. It also noted that the timeframe needed to achieve social norm change, 
and the front -loading of inputs can skew Value for Money assessments in the early stages of 
programming (VAWG Helpdesk, 2017). So while costs may come down over time , it should  also 
be noted that costs may increase in subsequent years if additional investments are needed to 
                                                           
10 2 male and 2 female groups per study site meet weekly for 39 weeks  9 
 develop the intervention, based on programmatic learnings, as was the cas e with V4C in Nigeria.11 
More costing information is forthcoming in 2019 from DFID’s What Works to Prevent VAWG 
research programme.  
• Digital platforms can be resource intensive during implementation.  For example, in India, the 
Must Bol  digital campaign for young people12 noted that they needed more staffing. During the last 
quarter of the campaign, when both on - and offline work was the strongest, there were only three 
full-time people working on the campaign – a larger group would have been much better (Liou, 
2013).  In Cambodia, a key lesson f rom DFID and Asia Foundation ’s support to three mobile apps 
which aim to end violence against women13 is that apps often have hidden costs, requiring 
investments to maintain complex backend systems and websites. It is therefore important to fully 
understand from the outset the process and the time /cost  requirements involved , as well as 
whether any other s imilar digital platforms exist which could be adapted.  
• Costing studies of soap opera approaches have calculated  low unit costs , due to the large 
number s of people reached. For example, South Africa’s Soul City soap opera cost US$0.23  per 
person reached by television, US$0.07  per person reached by print media, and US$0.01  per 
person reached by radio  (in 2000). These low costs were  largely due to the massive reach of the 
programme ; Soul City 4  (the series on violence against women)  reached 82% of the population in 
South Africa . 
• However, data  on unit costs  should be used with caution  as other approaches may have 
more evidence of effectiveness . Evidence reviews have concluded that although edutai nment 
approaches may have lower unit costs per beneficiary, they are not necessarily more cost -effective 
than more intensive activities such as community mobilisation (e.g. S ASA! in Uganda ) (Fulu et al, 
2014).  
 
Sustainability and  scale -up 
• Schools and educational institutions provide entry points to scale up programming for 
young people, as well as offline discussions.  For example,  in Brazil,  Promundo began 
collaborating with the  Education Secretariats and schools in the states of Rio de Janeiro and Bah ia 
to adapt and integrate Entre Nós ("Between Us") radio soap opera into the public education sector. 
Similarly,  in China,  the 17 Man campaign united more than 100,000 students across top 
universities campuses in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Hunan, in both digital and virtual 
activities.  In Viet  Nam, the Department of Education supported Love Journey activities  in schools.  
• There are several examples of promising practice in partnering with private sector 
organisations to leverage distribution networks a nd expertise in social marketing, branding 
and communications. For example, in Ethiopia, Girl Effect  partnered with the leading water 
company – Ambo Mineral Water – to further publicise the Yegna brand . Ambo Water printed the 
Yegna logo and programme schedule of the Yegna radio show on the stickers of five million 
bottles, as well as on 20 Ambo trucks. Distribution of the bottles was mainly targeted at girls in 
                                                           
11 For example, V4C’s unit costs of social media reach was £0.31 per person reached by social media (Y1), decreasing to 
£0.02 (Y2), £0.01 (Y3), but then £0.171 (Y4) . However, other parts of the programme came down consistently, for example 
the physical safe space costs (Armitage and Hughes, 2017).   
12 Must Boi encouraged young people to examine violence in their lives and speak out against it.  The campaign specifically 
targeted mainly urban middle -class youth aged 18 -25, and consciously aimed to work more with  young men  
13 The three apps are: Krousar Koumrou (animated features and a sharable quiz which aims to change negative attitudes 
and be an educational tool to increase knowledge to end domestic violence); Safe Agent 008 (a personal network 
notification app for users to be able to discreetly and quickly contact up to 10 trusted family and friends if they feel 
unsafe); and 7 Plus (to help food and service sector workers feel confident and able to claim their rights to be free from 
harassment and violence in th e workplace)  10 
 rural areas of Amhara region, where the Ye gna marketing director noted that “Ambo reaches 
everywhere in the country and this creates an opportunity for us to connect to the inner society that 
we could not reach only through radio and television … Partnering with Ambo means that we can 
leverage the ir extensive distribution network to increase awareness of Yegna and drive more 
listeners to the show.”14  In Brazil, Promundo partnered with SSL International to design a new 
brand of Durex condom that spoke for and to young people. Promundo’s ‘peer educat ors’ - young 
men recruited from the community developed the ‘Hora H’ condom, which translates as “in the 
heat of the moment” after young men reported hearing their peers saying “Everyone knows you 
shouldn’t hit your girlfriend, but in the heat of the momen t you lose control” (Ruxton, 2004).  
• Evidence suggests that programmes that partner with local organisations and build 
capacity are the most sustainable. For example, in Nepal, the VOICES project combined an 
innovative Samajhdari (Mutual Understanding)  radio programme with a comprehensive community 
outreach initiative that provided legal literacy training, formed listener and dialogue groups and 
trained women leaders as ‘community reporters’ and community leaders. Local radio stations and 
organisations also benefitted from enhanced professionalism on talking about violence against 
women. An impact assessment of the programme noted that the sustainability of radio/digital 
technology is improved by 'offline' activities such as outreach and training in communiti es: 
“Although the program has now ended, these organisations and media reporters will continue to 
play a crucial role in reporting and preventing violence”  (Equal Access, 2010: 44)  
 
 
  
                                                           
14 Abdu, J. (2014) ‘Ambo partners with Girl Hub to promote radio show’, Addis Fortune, October 5 2014.   11 
 4. References  
Armitage, J and Hughes, C (2017) V4C Value for Money , V4C Paper.  
Avis, W. (2017 ) Digital Tools and Behaviour Change (GSDRC Helpdesk Research Report 1414) 
Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham.  
Breakthrough (2011) Breakthrough’s Bell Bajao! A Cam paign to Bring Domestic Violence to a Halt.  
http://www.bellbajao.org/wp -content/uploads/2011/08/Bell -Bajao -Case -Study -FINAL -FOR -PRINT -
07202011.pdf  
Clark, C et al. (2017) 'Evaluating a  multicomponent social behaviour change communication strategy 
to reduce intimate partner violence among married couples: study protocol for a cluster randomized 
trial in Nepal', BMC Public Health  (2017) 17:75  
Denny, E  and Hughes C. (2017) V4C Attitudes, Practices, Social Norms Survey, Endline Report.  
DFID (2018 a) Strategy for Disability Inclusive Development 2018 -23, London: DFID   
DFID ( 2018b) Digital Strategy 2018 -2020: Doing Development in a Digital World,  London: DFID   
Equal Access (2010) Impact Assessment: VOICES Project. Reducing the Twin Pandemics of 
HIV/AIDS and Violence against Women Media & Outreach Interventions  (August 2007 to May 2010), 
Latlipur, Nepal: Equal Access.  
Faith, B and Fraser, E (2018) What Works to Prevent Cyber Violence agai nst Women and Girls , 
VAWG Helpdesk Research Report No. 212. London, UK: VAWG Helpdesk.  
Fulu, E, Kerr -Wilson, A. and Lang, J (2014) Effectiveness of interventions to prevent violence against 
women and girls: A Summary of the Evidence http://www.whatworks.co.za/documents/publications/4 -
effectiveness -of-interventions -to-prevent -violence -against -women -and-girls/fil e  
Liou, C. (2013). Using social media for the prevention of violence against women: Lessons learned 
from social media communication campaigns to prevent violence against women in India, China and 
Viet Nam.  Bangkok: Partners for Prevention.  
Milward , K and Nelson , K (2017) How Change Happens A light touch study on the theory of change , 
Voices for Change paper.  
Murray  J, et al. (2018) ‘Modelling the effect of  a mass radio campaign on child mortality using facility 
utilisation data and the Lives Saved Tool (LiST): findings from a cluster randomised trial in Burkina 
Faso’. BMJ Glob Health  2018;3:e000808.  
Ruxton, S. (2004) Gender Equality and Men: Learning from Practice, Oxford: Oxfam.  
Paluck, E and Ball, L (2010) Social norms marketing aimed at gender based violence: A literature 
review and critical assessment , Conducted for the International Rescue Committee.   
Soul City 4 materials and messages: https://www.soulcity.org.za/media/soul -city-series/soul -city-
series -4   
Trabold, N et al (2018) ‘A Systematic Review of Intimate Partner Violence Interventions: State of the 
Field and Implications for Practitioners’, Trauma, Violence and Abuse,  2018.  
VAWG Helpdesk (2017) Review of DFID’s  VAWG Portfolio , London: VAWG Helpdesk.  
Voices for Change (V4C) (2017 a) Using Social marketing to shift discriminatory gender norms . 
Voices for Change (V4C) (2017 b) Lessons from Nigeria on preventing violence towards women and 
girls through social norm  change.  V4C paper.  12 
 Voices for Change  (V4C)  (2017 c) Using the digital space to catalyse social change at scale , V4C 
Legacy Paper . 
World Bank (2016) World Development Report: Digital Dividends , Washington DC World Bank.  
 
About Helpdesk reports: The VAWG  Helpdesk is funded by the UK Department for International 
Development, contracted through Inclusive Societies Department (ISD).   This helpdesk report  is 
based on 6 days of desk -based research and is  designed to provide a brief overview of the key issues  
and expert thinking on VAWG issues.   
VAWG Helpdesk services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations and individual 
experts on VAWG, including Social Development Direct, International Rescue Committee, ActionAid, 
Womankind, and the Institute of Development Studies (IDS).  Expert  advice may be sought from this 
Group, as well as from the wider academic and practitioner community , and those able to provide 
input within the short time -frame are acknowledged.  Any views or opinions expressed do not 
necessarily reflect those of DFID, th e VAWG Helpdesk or any of the contributing 
organisations/experts.   
For any further request or enquiry, contact enquiries@vawghelpdesk.org .  
Suggested citation:  
Fraser, E  and Enye, C (2018) Effectiveness of Digital Platforms to Reduce VAWG , VAWG Helpdesk 
Research Report No. 224. London, UK: VAWG Helpdesk.  
 
 