FO
R RELEASE MARCH  7, 2019  
Mobile Connectivity in 
Emerging Economies 
Publics see mobile phones and social media bringing certain 
benefits to them and their societies. But these views are paired 
with widespread concerns about their impact on children  
BY Laura Silver,  Aaron Smith, Courtney Johnson, Kyle Taylor,  Jingjing Jiang, 
Monica Anderson and  Lee Rainie  
FOR MEDIA OR OTHER INQUIRIES : 
Lee Rainie , Director, Internet and Technology Research  
Shawnee Cohn , Communications Manager  
Stefan Cornibert , Communications Manager  
202.419.4372 
www.pewresearch.org  
RECOMMENDED CITATION  
Pew Research Center, March  2019, “ Mobile Connectivity in 
Emerging Economies ” 1 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org About Pew Research Center  
Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes 
and trends shaping America and the world. It does not take policy positions. The Center conducts 
public opinion polling, demographic research, content analys is and other data -driven social 
science research. It studies U.S. politics and policy; journalism and media; internet, science and 
technology; religion and public life; Hispanic trends; global attitudes and trends; and U.S. social 
and demographic trends. A ll of the Center’s reports are available at www.pewresearch.org . Pew 
Research Center is a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts, its primary funder.  
© Pew Research Center  2019  2 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Table of Contents  
Overview: Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies  ........................................................................ 4  
1.U
se of smartphones and social media is common across most emerging economies  ................. 15
M
ost adults say they own a mobile phone; relatively few share one  .................................................... 16 
Smartphones are generally the most common type of mobile device  .................................................. 19 
Facebook and WhatsApp are the most widely used social platforms  ................................................... 23 
Internet use is common across most of the nations surveyed  .............................................................. 29 
Home computer or tablet access is relatively rare in most countries  ................................................... 31 
2.M
ajorities say mobile phones are good for  society, even amid concerns about their impact on
children  ................................................................................................................................................... 33 
Overwhelming majorities say mobile phones have been more positive than negative for them 
personally  .................................................................................................................................................. 34 
Mobile phone users have mixed views about upsides and downsides of their phones, are especially 
divided over whether they ‘couldn’t live without’ phones  ...................................................................... 35 
Users largely agree mobile phones help them maintain long- distance communication, st ay informed 
about important issues  ............................................................................................................................. 37 
Majorities in most countries say mobile phone use has had a good impact on education, but fewer 
see positive impacts on children, health, morality  ................................................................................. 40 
Concern is widespread about the risk that mobile phones might expose children to immoral or 
harmful content ......................................................................................................................................... 42 
It is relatively common for mobile phone users to limit the amount of time they – as well as their 
children – spend on their phones  ............................................................................................................ 44 
It is common for parents to monitor their child’s mobile phone use, and notable shares monitor the 
phone activity of their spouse or partner  ................................................................................................ 46 
3.P
eople say the internet brings economic and educational benefits – but some are concerned
about social media’s societal impact  ................................................................................................... 48 
Publics largely see comparable influences from mobile phones and the internet  .............................. 49 
Views of the impact of the internet have shifted in recent years as usage has become more prevalent
 ................................................................................................................................................................... 51 
In most countries, more say social media are good for society than bad  ............................................. 54 
Acknowledgments  ................................................................................................................................. 56 3 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org M
ethodology  ........................................................................................................................................... 57 
Appendix A: About the focus groups  ..................................................................................................... 58 
Appendix B: Compiled usage figures  .................................................................................................... 60 
Appendix C: Detailed tables  .................................................................................................................. 63 
Topline Questionnaire  ............................................................................................................................ 70 4 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies  
Publics see mobile phones and social media bringing certain benefits 
to them and their societies . But these views are paired with 
widespread concerns about their impact on children  
After more than a decade of studying the spread and impact of digital life in the United States , Pew 
Research Center has intensified its exploration of the impact of online connectivity among 
populations in emerging economies – where the prospect of swift and encompassing cul tural 
change propelled by digital devices might be even more dramatic  than the effects felt in developed 
societies.  
Surveys conducted in 11 emerging and d eveloping countries across four global regions find that the 
vast majority of adults in these countries own – or have access to – a mobile phone of some kind.1 
And these mobile phones are not simply basic devices with little more than voice and texting 
capacity: A median of 5 3% across these nations now have access to a smartphone capable of 
accessing the internet and running apps.   
In concert with this development, social media platforms and messaging apps – most notably, 
Facebook and WhatsApp – are widely used . Across the surveyed countries, a median of 64% use at 
least one of seven different social media sites or messaging apps.2 Indeed, smartphones and social 
media have melded  so thoroughly that for many they go hand -in-hand. A median of 91 % of 
smartphone users  in these countries also use social media , while a median of 81 % of soc ial media 
users say they own or share a smartphone .  
1 Throughout this report,  mobile phone users include those who say they own or share a mobile  phone. 
2 The su rvey a sked r espondents whether they u se seven d ifferent s ocial m edia a nd messaging platforms: Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, 
WhatsApp, S napchat a nd Viber, plus t he dating app Tinder. Throughout this r eport, r eferences t o “social media p latform a nd m essaging a pp 
users” o r “social media u sers” e ncompass anyone who u ses one or more o f these se ven d ifferent si tes. F or more i nformation on the use o f 
these  platforms in d ifferent c ountries and b y different demographic group s, please see Chapter 1 of this report. What is a median?  
Throughout this report, median percentages are used to help readers see overall patterns. The median is th e 
middle number in a list of figures sorted in ascending or descending order. In a survey of 11 countries, the 
median result is the sixth figure on a list of country -level findings ranked in order.  5 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 People in these nations say mobile p hones  
have help ed them personally in various ways . 
Among mobile phone users, an 11- country 
median of 93% say these devices have helped 
them stay in touch with people who live far 
away, and a somewhat smaller share (a 
median of 79%) say they have helped the m 
obtain news and information about important 
issues. More broadly, majorities of adults in all 11 countries say the internet has had a good 
impact on education –  and majorities in 10  of 11 countries say the same of mobile phones.  
At the same time, smaller shares of adults in these nations  say mobile phones and social media 
have been good for society than say these technologies have been good for them personally. A nd 
the challenges that digital life can pose for children  are a particularly notable source of concern . 
Some 79% of adults in these countries say people should be very  concerned about children being “Facebook has brought a lot of advantages 
for our society. However, it has also 
affected society in a negative way. Just like 
anything which can be used for both good 
and bad, social media have brought 
negatives and positives for people.”  
-Man, 22, Philippines  The 11 countries in this report and why they were included  
This report is the first of several  reports  that will be issued this year based on nationally  representative 
surveys of adults age s 18 and older conducted in 11 countries located in four different regions of the globe: 
Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia; South Africa and Kenya; India, Vietnam and the Philippines; and Tunisia, 
Jordan and Lebanon.  
These countries were selected for the survey based on a number of crite ria. Key goals of the country 
selection process were to assemble a group of countries that:  
 Are middle -income countries  as defined by the World Bank.  
 Contain a mix of people with different sorts of devices.  Many of these countries have notable variation  
in the share of their populations who have smartphones, more basic phones –  or no phones at all.  
 Offer country -level diversity and variety.  These countries offer a variety of regional, pol itical, economic, 
social, cultural, population size and geographic conditions.  
 Vary in their market conditions.  These countries differ in their technological and industry 
competitiveness , and have a range of “networked readiness” ratings as calculated by the World 
Economic Forum .   
 In many cases have high levels of internal or external migration . Each of these countries exhibits 
rising levels of urbanization , and most still have substantial  rural populations. A special report examining 
the impact of mobile phones on the migrant experience is also forthcoming.  
 
 6 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 exposed to harmful or immoral content when using mobile phones, and a median of 63% say 
mobile phones have had a b ad influence on children in their country. They also express mixed 
opinions about the impact of increased connectivity on physical health and morality .  
Some of these tensions between the upsides and downsides of digital life span all 11 countries 
surveyed . At other times, there are nation -specific elements to people’s views about  what these 
technologies have brought to their lives . For instance, more than half of mobile phone users in five 
of these countries describe their phone as something they couldn’t live without –  but users in six 
countries are more likely to describe it as something they don’t always need.  
These are among the major findings from a new Pew Research Center survey conducted among 28,122 adults  in 11 countries from Sept. 7 to Dec. 7, 2018. In addition to the survey, the Center 
conducted focus groups with diverse groups of participants in Kenya, Mexico, the Philippines and 
Tunisia in March 2018 , and their comments are included throughout the repo rt.  
 
  How the focus groups were conducted  
Pew Research Center conducted a series of focus groups to better understand how people think about their 
own mobile phones and the impact of these devices on their society. Five focus groups were held in each of 
the following four countries: Kenya, Mexico, the Philippines and Tunisia. Each focus group consisted of 10 
adults coming together for an hour and a ha lf for a discussion led by a local, professional moderator using a 
guide developed by the Center. For more information on how these groups were conducted, see Appendix A . 
These groups were primarily used to help shape the survey questions asked in each of the 11 countries. But, throughout the report, we have also included quotations that illustrate some of the major themes that were discussed during the groups. Quotations are chosen to provide context for  the survey fin dings and do  not 
necessarily represent the majority opinion in any particular group or country. Quotations may have been 
edited for gramma r and  clarity.  
 7 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Majorities say  mobile phones and social 
media have mostly bee n good for them 
personally, somewhat less so for society 
Asked for their overall assessment of the impact 
of mobile devices and social media platforms on 
society and their own lives, people in these 
nations generally are more affirming than not. But within this broadly positive consensus, 
there are important nuances . 
First, at both a personal and societal level 
publics are generally more likely to say mobile 
phones have had a mostly good impact than t o 
say the same of social media . A median of 70% 
of adults across these 11 countries say mobile 
phones have been a mostly good thing for society, but that share falls to 57% on the 
question of the impact of social media. Indeed, 
a median of 27% think social media have  been a 
mostly bad thing for society.  
Second, these publics are more likely to say that both mobile pho nes and social media have been 
mostly good for them personally than they are to say they have been mostly good for society. As 
noted above , an 11 -country median of 70% say that mobile phones have been mostly good for 
society. But an even larger share of 82 % say mobile phones have been mostly good for them 
personally . When it comes to social media, users of these sites are generally more likely to 
proclaim their benefits than non- users. Even among users, people’s views of their personal impact 
tend to be mor e positive than their views of their societal impact.  
These broad themes tend to occur across the full scope of the countries surveyed. But Kenyans and 
Vietnamese stand out somewhat for their more positive views of the societal impact of both mobile 
phones  and social media. Conversely, relatively large shares of Venezuelans view the societal 
impact of these technologies as a negative one.  
 
 Mobile phones viewed as having a more 
positive personal, societal impact than 
social media in 11 emerging economies  
% of adults who say __ have mostly been a good/bad 
thing …  
 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians .  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q11a -b & Q12a -b. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  8 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Many worry th at mobile phones are a problem for children ; it is common for parents to 
attempt to curtail and surveil their child’s screen time  
While on balance people in these nations express 
largely positive judgments about the personal and societal impact of technologies , they also 
express significant concerns over the effects 
mobile phones and online connectivity might 
have on young people. Wo rries that mobile 
phones might expose children to immoral or 
harmful content are a key flashpoint in these 
fears. A median of 79% of adults in these 11 
countries – and majorit ies in all countr ies 
surveyed – say people should be very  concerned 
about this.  More broadly, a median of 54% say 
the increasing use of the inte rnet has had a bad 
influence on children  in their country , and a 
median of 63% say t he same about mobile 
phones.  
Coupled with these concerns, m any parents say 
they try to be vigilant about what their children 
are doing and seeing on their phones.
3 Among 
parents whose children h ave mobile phones, a 
median of 5 0% say they monitor what their 
children do on their mobile devices. P arents who 
are themselves smartphone or social media users 
are more li kely than non- users to monitor their 
child’s phone in this way. Along with monitoring 
their children’s activities on their mobile devices, 
a median of 52% of parents whose children have 
mobile phones have tried to limit the time their children spend with t heir phones.  
Beyond these concerns about the influence of connectivity on children, people’s views of the 
broader impact of digital technologies on family life are more positive . For instance, the vast 
                                                        
3 In the survey, questions about parents and children were asked of all respondents. The results reported here were recalculated to exclude 
those who volunteered that they do not have an y children, and/or that their child or children do not have a mobile phone.  Publics in 11 emerging economies 
express w idespread concerns about the 
impact of digital technology on children   
% of adults who say people should be __ about children 
being exposed to harmful or immoral content when 
using their mobile phones  
 
 
% of adults who say the increasing use of __ has had a 
bad influence on children in their country  
 
 
% of parents whose children have a mobile phone who 
say they ever … * 
 
 
* In the survey, questions about parents and children were asked of 
all respondents. The results reported here were  recalculated to 
exclude those who volunteered that they do not have any children, 
and/or that their child or children do not have a mobile pho ne. 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians.  
Source: Mobile  Technology and Its Social Impact Survey  2018. 
Q14Ai, Q14Bi, Q19f, Q25b & Q26b.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  9 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 majority of mobile phone users (a median of 93% across the 11 countries) say their phone has 
helped them stay in touch with people who live far away . And although m ajorities of Lebanese 
(70%) and Jordanians  (62%) feel that mobile phones have had a bad influence on family cohesion, 
in most  other  countries surv eyed, more say  mobile phones have had a good influence in this regard  
than a bad one .  
Publics are divided over the role mobile 
phones play in their lives  
Overall, mobile phone users  tend to associate 
their mobile phones with feelings of freedom. In 
every country  surveyed , a larger sha re of mobile 
phone users describe their phone as something that frees them as opposed to something that ties 
them down. 
When it comes to whether their phones help 
them save time or make them waste time , the 
largest share of mobile phone users in seven 
coun tries describe their phone as something that 
helps them save time. Still, larger share s of 
Jordanians and Filipinos describe their phone as something that makes them waste time. And in Lebanon and Mexico, roughly equal shares  see 
their phone as a time save r and time waster.  
Across the 11 countries surveyed, m obile phone users fall into two camps about whether their 
phone is something they don’t always need  or something they couldn’t live without. Kenyans, 
South Africans, Jordanians, Tunisians and Lebanese who use a mobile phone are more likely to 
say their phone is something they couldn’t live without. But in the six other countries, larger 
share s say they don’t always need their phone.  
Both phone type  and demographic differences 
are at the core of these assessments about  the 
value of mobile phones in users’ lives. For 
instance, adults ages 50 and older are more 
likely than those under 30 to view their phone  
as a time saver, while younger adults are more Across 11 countries, more see mobile 
phones as freeing, time saving  
% of adult mobile phone users who say their phone is 
something that …  
 
 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians. Respondents who gave 
other responses are not shown. Mobile phone users include those 
who say they own or share a mobile phone . 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q16, 
Q17 & Q18.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
“Have you ever gone one day without a 
phone? You feel like you’re not in this 
world.”  
-Man, 32, Kenya  10 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 likely to view it as a time waster – a relationship that persists in most countries even when 
accounting for ag e-related differences in  smartphone  use. And although mobile phone users tend 
to see their phone as something that frees them, the prevalence of these attitudes varies by device 
type. For instance, in most countries, smartphone users are more likely than basic or feature 
phone users  to say their phone is something that ties them down rather than something that frees 
them.  
Publics in these countries say mobile phones have a beneficial impact on certain aspects 
of society, but a more negative influence on others  
People’s assessments of the 
specific societal impacts of 
mobile phones vary depending 
on the aspect of society in 
question. Broadly, people in 
most countries think mobile 
phones and the internet have had similar impacts on society 
– possibly because for many 
their online access comes 
through a mobile phone.  
In most countries, education 
stands out as the issue where 
the largest share of adults say 
the increasing use of the 
internet and mobile phones has 
had a good impact. A median of 
67% say this about the impact 
of mobile phones , and a median 
of 71% about the internet . 
Public attitudes regarding the 
influence of the internet on education  have grown more positive since 2014
 in six of the countries 
studied here (Jordan, S outh Africa, Kenya, Vietnam, Lebanon and Mexico), while falling in 
Tunisia.  
Adults in the 11 nations surveyed also view these technologies as having a largely good influence 
on the economy: A  median of 58% say this of mobile phones and 56% say same about t he internet. Across 11 emerging economies, majorities think 
mobile phones have been beneficial for education  and 
the economy – but negative for children  
% of adults who say the increasing use of mobile phones has had __ on …  
 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q14Ba -i. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  11 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 And i n seven of the 10  countries for which trends are available, more people today say the 
increasing use of the internet has had a good influence on their country’s economy than said the 
same in 2014.4 
But digital connectivity is seen in a less positive 
light when it comes to other issues. In addition 
to their widespread worries about the impact on children , publics in these countries also express 
mixed views about increased connectivity ’s 
impact  on health. An 11 -country median of 40% 
say mobile phones have had a bad influence on 
physical health , and 37% say the same of the 
internet. Majorities of the public in Jordan, 
Lebanon and Tunisia view these technologies as having a negative influence  on health.  
In addition, a  median of 35% say that both mobile phones and the internet have had a bad 
influence on morality. In four countries for which trend  data are available (Kenya, Venezuela , 
Mexico  and Colombia ), larger share s of the public say the internet has had a good influence on 
morality than was true four years ago. But in Jordan  and Lebanon, the share s saying this have  
declined since 2014.  
When  people consider i ssues such as the impact of digital tools on local culture, civility, family 
cohesion and politics , the overall balance of public sentiment leans positive. But notable minorities 
– ranging from a median of 20% in the case of family cohesion to a median of 29% in the case of 
politics – say mobile phones have had a negative impact on these facets of society.  
Moreover, public opinion across these 11 countries has diverged in recent years when it comes to 
the internet’s impact on politics. Compared with surveys conducted in 2014, larger shares of 
Mexicans, South Africans, Venezuelans, Kenyans and Colombians now say increasing use of the 
internet has had a positive impact on politics. But Tunisians, Lebanese and Jordanians are now 
less likely to say this  compared with 2014.  
 
 
                                                        
4 Trend survey data are not available for India because of sampling design changes between 2014 and 2018.  “Children usually play with gadgets the 
most and are exposed to radiation and 
experiencing seizures  – that’s what I 
heard. ” 
-Man, 43, Philippines  
“Also, instead of playing outside, they are 
busy with gadgets . [...] They are no longer 
able to socialize with other kids .” 
-Woman , 21, Philippines  12 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Despite wide- ranging worries about the problems mobile phones invite, personal benefits  
are still widely recognized  
In addition to their concerns 
about the impact of mobile 
phones on children , majorities 
across the 11 countries surveyed 
also say people should also be 
very worried about issues such 
as identity theft (an 11 -country 
median of 66% say people 
should be very concerned about 
this), exposure to false 
information (64%), mobile phone addiction (62%)  and 
harassment or bullying (59%)  
when using their mobile 
phones . Fewer are very 
concerned about the risk that people might lose the ability to 
communicate face -to-face due 
to mobile phone use (48%).  
  Widespread concern about mobile phones’ impact on 
children across 11 emerging economies surveyed  
% of adults who say people should be very/somewhat/not concerned about 
__ when using their mobile phones  
 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q19a -f. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  13 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Yet these broader concerns often coexist with 
perceived benefits to users. For instance, d espite 
widespread concerns that mobile phones might 
expose people to false or inaccurate information, 
a sizable majority of mobile phone users (79%) 
say their own phone has helped their ability to 
get news and information about important issues.  Similarly, a median of 58% of mobile 
phone users say their devices have helped  their 
ability to communicate face -to-face – even as a 
median of 48% of adults in these countries say 
people should be very worried about mobile phones’ effects on face -to-face communication.  
Other key findings relating to the adoption 
and use of digital technology in these countries include : 
 Majorities in each  country own their mobile 
phone , and s haring a phone with someone 
else is relatively rare . A median of just 7 % of 
adults in these countries share a mobile 
phone , ranging from a low of 1% of adults in Vietnam to a high of 17% in Venezuela . 
 Smartphone us e is higher among  younger adults and those with high er education levels.5 
Lebanon and Jordan are the only countries in the survey in which a majority of  adults ages 50 
and older –  as well as a majority of those with less than a secondary education –  are 
smartphone users.  
 Home computer and tablet access is relatively rare in these countries: A median of 34% have 
access to either kind of device. And a median of 27% of adults in these countries say they do not have a tablet or computer at home but do have a sm artphone, ranging from a low of 18% in 
Venezuela to a high of 50% in Jordan.  
 By a substantial margin,  Facebook (used by a median of 62 % of adults in these countries) and 
WhatsApp (used by a median of 4 7%) are the two most commonly  used social media or 
mess aging platforms out of the seven included in the survey . To the extent that adults use only 
one of these platform s, in every country that platform is either Facebook or WhatsApp.   
                                                        
5 For the purpose of  comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ 
International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below secondary education and the 
higher  category is secondary or above.  Vast majority of users in 11 countries 
say mobile phones help them stay 
connected with those who live far away  
% of adult mobile phone users who say their phone has 
mostly __ their ability to …  
 
Note: Percentages are 11 -country medians. Respondents who gave  
other responses are not shown.  Mobile phone users include those 
who say they own or share a mobile phone . 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . 
Q13Aa-e. 
“Mobile Connectivity in  Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  1%
3
4
11
1393%
79
63
62
58Hurt Helped
Stay in touch with those 
who live far away
Get information and news 
about important issues
Earn a living
Concentrate and get 
things done
Communicate 
face-to-face14 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
  Some social media platforms or messaging apps are more popular in some count ries than in 
others . For example, about one- third of Lebanese adults (34%) use the photo -sharing site 
Instagram. The messaging app Viber is more popular in Lebanon and Tunisia – where about 
one-in-five adults report using it  – than elsewhere, while Jordani ans stand out for their use of 
the photo -messaging app Snapchat (24%).   15 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 1. Use of smartphones and social media is common across 
most emerging economies  
Large majorities in the 11 emerging and developing  countries surveyed either own or share a 
mobile phone , and in every country it is much more common to own one’s own phone than to 
share it with someone else. I n seven of the se countries , half or more now use smartphones – and 
smartphone use is especially common among younger and more educated groups . 
Meanwhi le, access to tablets or computers is rarer. In only one country –  Lebanon – does a 
majority (57%) have access to a working desktop, laptop or tablet computer in their household , 
and mobile devices play a prominent role in how people access the internet an d their social 
networks in many of these nations.6 Additionally, i n most of these countries a majority of adults 
use social media platforms or messaging apps –  with Facebook and WhatsApp showing prominent 
levels of adoption.  
  
                                                        
6 Throughout this report, the term “mobile device” refers specifically to mobile phones.  16 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Most adults say they own a mo bile phone; relatively few share one  
Majorities of adults in each of the 11 emerging 
and developing countries surveyed report 
owning their own mobile phone.  Ownership 
level s are highest in Vietnam, where nearly all 
adults (97%) own a mobile device , although  
about nine -in-ten or more also own one  in 
Jordan, Tunisia, Colombia, Kenya, Lebanon 
and South Africa.  Ownership is lowest in 
Venezuela, India and the Philippines, but even 
in these countries about seven -in-ten adults 
own a mobile device.   
Meanwhile, an 11 -country median of 1 1% say 
they do not  own a mobile phone , which 
includes a median of 7 % who say they regularly 
use someone else’s phone.7 But overall, p hone 
sharing is relatively rare in most countries – 
ranging from just 1% in Vietnam to a high of 
17% in V enezuela . (Throughout this report, 
phone owners and phone sharers will be grouped together and referred to as “mobile 
phone users .”) 
Sharing tends to be more common among adults with lower levels of education.
8 And in 
India – where women are less likely th an men 
to own their own mobile phones –  significantly more women (20%) than men (5%) report sharing 
a device with someone else.  
  
                                                        
7 Mobile phone sharers are people who said they do not own a mobile phone but regularly use someone else’s.  
8 For the purpose of compa ring education groups across countries, we standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ 
International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below secondary education and the 
higher categ ory is secondary or above.  Majorities of adults own a mobile phone  
% of adults who say they __ a mobile phone  
 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . Q4 & 
Q5. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  97%
94
91
89
89
89
87
78
73
70
68
891%
3
5
5
8
2
8
8
7
13
17
72%
3
4
6
3
9
5
14
20
17
15
6Vietnam
Jordan
Tunisia
Colombia
Kenya
Lebanon
South Africa
Mexico
Philippines
India
Venezuela
MEDIANOwn Share Do not use17 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Mobile phone ownership varies by age, gender and education  
Across these 11 countries, mobile phone ownership (as distinct from phone sharing) tends to vary  
by several demographic traits, including educational attainment , gender and age . 
In all countries surveyed, a dults with a secondary education or higher are more likely to own their 
own mobile phone than are those with less than a secondary education. These educational gaps in 
ownership range from just 3 percentage points in Vietnam to 35 points in the Philippines.  
Majorit ies of both men and women own mobile pho nes in all of the countries surveyed . But 
ownership rates among women vary significantly across the countries, from a low of 56% in India 
to a high of 96% in Vietnam. Outside of India  – where men are 28 percentage points  more likely 
than women to own a mob ile phone –  gender gaps in ownership in other countries are either 
relatively modest (such as the 8 -point differences in Kenya and Lebanon) or nonexistent, as in the 
case of Vietnam  and the Philippines.  
Most of those ages 18 to 29  report owning their own m obile phone  in almost all countries 
surveyed . However, a slightly smaller share of younger Venezuelans –  but still a majority at 65% – 
say they own a mobile phone . A majority of those 50 and older also report owning a mobile phone  
in most of the 11 countri es surveyed . Only in the Philippines do fewer than half of the oldest age 
group own a phone (46%) . Overall, y ounger people are more likely than older adults to own a 
phone  in the Philippines (41 percentage point s), Lebanon (27 points), India (25 points) and 
Mexico (24 points).  
For more on how phone owne rship and us e varies by age, gender or education levels, see Appendix 
C. 
 
  18 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Phone users cite multiple reasons for 
sharing, rath er than owning , a mobile 
device  
Across the countries surveyed, the 7% median 
of those who share , rather than own, a mobile 
phone  cite a number of reasons for why they 
share  their phones . About four -in-ten phone  
sharers in Kenya (42%), Venezuela (40%) and 
Tunisia (38%) say they share a phone primarily 
because they cannot afford their own device. Another half of Ve nezuelan sharers say they 
now share a phone because their own phone was lost, broken or stolen, as do  about four -in-
ten Colombians (41%) and Kenyans (41%). Not 
needing to use a mobile phone regularly is a 
common ly cited  reason for sharing a phone in 
India (39%) and the Philippines (29%).  
In India, a sizable portion of phone sharers also name  another reason for sharing rather than 
owning their own device: They think phones are too complicated to use (26%).  
 
 Cost  and loss of device are most -cited 
reasons why people share phones  
Among adults who share a mobile phone, % who say 
they share rather than own a mobile phone primarily 
because …  
 
Notes: Percentages are 8 -country medians. Jordan, Lebanon and 
Vietnam are excluded due to low sample size . 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q6.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  34%
31
15
6
5
2
1They cannot afford a 
mobile phone
Their mobile phone was 
lost, broken or stolen
They don't need to use a 
mobile phone regularly
They think mobile phones 
aretoo complicated to use
They do not like using 
mobile phones
They are not allowed to 
own a mobile phoneThey are afraid that their 
mobile phone will be stolen19 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Smartphones are generally the most common type of  mobile device  
Smartphones , or phones that can connect to the internet and run apps,  are the most prevalent type 
of mobile device in nine of the 11 countries surveyed : A majority of adults (median of 5 3%) report 
using a smartphone. Usage  is highest in Leba non (86%) and Jordan (85%), and lowest in India 
(32%).  
  How this survey defines different types of mobile phone users  
Some general features and capabilities can help distinguish between the three broad types of mobile 
phones:  
 
 Basic phones  are generally the most technically limited –  and most affordable –  mobile phone option. 
These phones typically only have the ability to make voice calls or send text messages and cannot 
access the internet or download apps.  
 Feature phones  typically fall between smartphones and basic phones in terms of connectivity and price. 
These devices can access the internet and may offer some of the same features as smartphones, such as the ability to access social media platforms. However, they have fewer advanced capabilities than 
smartphones and typically do not support apps.  
 Smartphones  are the most advanced –  and generally most expensive –  type of mobile phone. These 
devices can connect to the internet, run a variety of apps and offer many of the same capabilities of a traditional computer.  
 
Respondents to this survey were asked a series of questions to determine the type of mobile device they own 
or share with someone else . Those who indicate d that their phone is a smartphone are classified as 
smartphone users. Those who said  their mobile phone can connect to the internet –  but that it is not a 
smartphone – are categorized as feature phone users. And those who said  their phone is not a smartphone 
and cannot access the internet are considered to hav e a basic phone.  Responses to each of these individual 
questions can be found in the topline  and more information on the combined measures can be found in 
Appendix B . 20 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Basic  and feature phones are less popular overall, but some countries stand out for their high 
usage of these less digitally  connected phones. I n India nearly half of adults (47%) say they use a 
basic mobile phone that cannot connect to the internet. S izable sh ares in Kenya (40%), Tunisia 
(37%) and Venezuela (36%) also report using a basic phone.  
Across emerging economies , smartphones –  rather than basic or feature phones –  
are often the most widespread type of mobile device  
% of adults who say the type of mobile phone they use is a …  
 
 
Note: Mobile phone users include those who say they own or share a mobile phone. Smartphone users include those who say they use or 
share a smartphone. Feature phone users include those who say their phone can connect to the internet but is not a smartphone. Basic 
phone users include those who say they use a mobile phone but that it cannot connect to the internet.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q7 & Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 
Feature phones are generally the least common devices in the countries surveyed, with few adults 
(median of 4 %) saying  they own or share  a device that can connect to the internet but is not a 
smartphone . But feature phones  – which offer some of the same features as smartphones, but 
typically cannot support apps – are popular in Mexico, where one- third of adults say they use this 
type of device.  About one -in-five Kenyans (21%) and Colombians ( 17%) also use feature phones.  
Smartphone use is far more common among younger and more educated adults  
Younger adults lead the way in smartphone use in each of the countries surveyed. Across all 11 
countries, those under 30 are much more likely to use a sm artphone than those ages 50 and older.  Feature phone  Smartphone  
4%
11
29
26
19
23
37
36
11
40
47
26Basic phone
86%
85
67
63
58
53
51
45
42
36
32
53Lebanon
Jordan
Vietnam
South Africa
Colombia
Philippines
Tunisia
Venezuela
Mexico
Kenya
India
MEDIAN1%
1
2
6
17
4
8
4
33
21
4
421 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 However, usage rates among 18 - to 29-year -olds 
differ substantially by country, from nine -in-ten 
or more in Lebanon, Jordan and Vietnam to 
fewer than half of Kenyans under 30 (46%).  
Lebanon and Jordan – where smartphones are 
widespread  – stand out for being the only 
countries where a major ity of adults ages 50 and 
older also report using smartphones. Still, older 
Lebanese and Jordanian adults are far less likely than their younger counterparts to use  a 
smartphone.  
 
  Wide age gaps in smartphone use 
across countries surveyed  
% of adults who say they use a smartphone  
 
 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Smartphone users 
include those who say they own or share a smartphone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
22 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 People with higher levels of education are also 
more likely to use smartphones. In each count ry 
surveyed, a majority of those with a secondary 
education or more use smartphones. The 
education gap is most pronounced in India, 
where more educated people are 41 points more 
likely to use a smartphone.  
In six of these countries, men are somewhat 
more likely than women to use smartphones. 
This gap is largest in India, where 40% of men 
use smartphones compared with 23% of 
women.  
While smartphone users are generally younger and more educated, the opposite is true of basic phone users: People who use these more 
technically limited devices tend to be older and have lower levels of education.  
Feature phone use doesn’t consistently vary by 
age or education. However, in Mexico –  where 
one-third of the population uses a feature 
phone  – women (38%) are more likely than 
men (27%) to report using this type of device.  
 
 
  More educated adults are more likely to 
use smartphones  
% of adults who sa y they use a smartphone  
 
 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Smartphone users 
include those who say they own or share a smartphone. For the 
purpose of  comparing education groups across countries, we 
standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ 
International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations 
surveyed , the lower education category is below secondary 
education and the higher  category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  23 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Facebook  and WhatsApp  are the most widely  used  social  platforms  
Among the seven online social media platforms and messaging apps asked about on this survey, a 
median of 62 % use Facebook . Facebook is most popular in Jordan and Lebanon, where about 
seven -in-ten adults say they currently use it. Although India has the smallest percentage of 
Facebook users (24%) of the countries surveyed, the country also has the largest net number of 
active Facebook users in the world .  
  
The seven social media platforms and messaging apps in this report and why they were 
included  
Respondents w ere asked about their use of seven different social media platforms and messaging apps. 
These platforms were chosen based on three criteria: high usage rates, input from local survey organizations 
and to capture a range of different types of sites with dis tinctive features. The  seven platforms included are:  
 
 Facebook , a social networking platform founded in 2004. As of the release date of this report, i ts 
interface is available in over 100 languages.  
 WhatsApp , a messaging platform launched in 2009. The service allows users to send text messages 
and other media, as well as make phone and video calls. WhatsApp’s interface is available in up to 60 
languages.  
 Twitter , a social networking and microblogging platform founded in 2006. The Twitter interface is 
available in 47 languages.  
 Viber , a messaging and voice over platform founded in 2010. Its interface is available in 39 languages.  
 Instagram , a photo - and video -sharing platform founded in 2010. Instagram’s interface is available in 
up to 36 languages.  
 Snap chat , a multimedia messaging platform founded in 2011. Its interface is available in 22 languages.  
 Tinder , a mobile dating platform founded in 2012. It is available in over 40 languages.  
 For purposes of this report, people who use any one of these seven  social media platforms or messaging 
apps are classified as “social media users.” Responses to each of these individual questions can be found in 
the topline , and more information on the combined measures can be fo und in Appendix B
. 24 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 The messaging application WhatsApp, which was purchased by Facebook in 2014 , is also one of 
the most widely used digital platforms, with a median of 47% saying they use it. As with Facebook, 
WhatsApp is most popular in Jordan and Lebanon, where about eight -in-ten or more say they 
currently use it. The messaging app is least popular in the Philippines and Vietnam, where very 
few adults use it –  4% and 2%, respectively.  
Use of the other platforms included in the survey is less widespread. A median of 20% say they use the photo -sharing application Instagram –  which is also owned by Facebook
 – while 10% or fewer 
report using Twitter or the messaging and photo -sharing app Snapchat. Just 4% of adults in these 
countries say they use the Viber messaging app, and no more than 3% in any country use the dating app Tinder.  
But s ome platforms are more  popular in particular countries. For example, about one -third of 
Lebanese adults (34%) say they currently use Instagram. The messaging app Viber is most popular 
in Lebanon and Tunisia, where about one -in-five adults report using it. And Jordanians stand o ut 
for their use of the photo -messaging app Snapchat (24%).  
 
  Facebook and WhatsApp are most widely used social media platforms 
and messaging applications  
% of adults who say they currently use …  
 Facebook  
% WhatsApp  
% Instagram  
% Twitter  
% Viber  
% Snapchat  
% Tinder  
% 
Colombia  63 71 25 11 2 7 2 
India  24 29 7 4 1 2 1 
Jordan  71 78 28 8 8 24 1 
Kenya  35 30 12 10 4 6 2 
Lebanon  68 84 34 12 19 18 2 
Mexico  62 67 20 14 3 10 3 
Philippines  58 4 10 7 6 6 1 
South Africa  47 57 13 12 2 5 1 
Tunisia  55 14 23 7 18 7 2 
Venezuela  64 47 29 21 2 5 2 
Vietnam  63 2 11 3 8 2 1 
MEDIAN  62 47 20 10 4 6 2 
      
 
Note: Numbers for each country’s most commonly used social media platform or messaging app shown in bold. 
Source:  Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  25 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
  
In most countries, e ach of these social media and messaging services are more likely to be used by 
younger adults . For exam ple, while 91 % of Vietnamese 18- to 29-year -olds say they currently use 
Facebook, 23% of the country’s 50-and-older population uses the site. In most  of the other 
countries surveyed, there are also large age gap s in WhatsApp usage.  
 Younger people are far more likely to use Facebook , WhatsApp  
% of adults who say they currently use …  
 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. 
Source:  Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10a -b. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  26 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Educational gaps in usage are also significant 
for most of these services, with p eople  who have 
a secondary education or higher being more 
likely to use them. In Vietnam, for example, a 
large majority of more educated adults (85%) 
use Facebook, compared with 52% of those with 
less than a secondary education.  
Majorities of adults in most cou ntries use at 
least one social media platform or 
messaging application, but relatively few 
use three or more  
In most of the 11 countries  analyzed , a majority 
of adults report using at least one of the seven 
social media platforms or messaging app s 
included  in this survey . This type of online 
activity is especially common in Lebanon, Jordan, Colombia and Mexico, where about 
three -quarters or more use  at least one of these 
services.  
Kenya and India are the only countries where a majority of adults do  not use at least one of 
these social media  or messaging services.  
Although it is common to use at least one of these platforms, relatively few adults  (median of 20%)  
say they  currently  use three or more  social media platforms or messaging apps. This level of use is 
most common in Lebanon and Jordan, where about four -in-ten say they use three or more of these 
apps  (42% and 38%, respectively) . About three -in-ten say the same  in Venezuela  (31%),  Colombia  
(29%)  and Mexico (27%) . People in India (9%), the Philippines (9%) and Vietnam (5%) are the 
least likely to report using three or more of these apps.   
  In most countries, majorities use social 
media and messaging services  
% of ad ults who say they currently use at least one social 
media platform or messaging app  
 
 
Note: Social media  platforms  and messaging app users include 
those who say they use one or more of the seven specific online 
platforms measured in this survey.  
Source:  Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 85%
81
75
73
69
64
62
59
57
41
31
64Lebanon
Jordan
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela
Vietnam
South Africa
Philippines
Tunisia
Kenya
India
MEDIAN27 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 In most emerging economies  surveyed, few adults say they use three or more social 
media platforms  
% of adults who say they currently use __ social media platforms or messaging apps  
 
 
Note: Social media platform and messaging app users include those who say  they use one or more of the seven specific online pla tforms 
measured in this survey.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 
  28 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Among people who use just one social media platform or messaging app, Facebook and 
WhatsApp  are most common  
For adults who only use one of the social media 
platforms or messaging app s included in this 
survey , two services dominate: Facebook and 
WhatsApp. Single -platform  user s rarely report 
using any of the other five services included in 
the survey.  
The dominant platform among this group of 
people who only use one service varies by 
country: Facebook is most common among 
single -site users in the Philippines, Vietnam, 
Tunisia, Venezuela and Kenya. Meanwhile , 
WhatsApp is most common among such users in Mexico , Colombia , Jordan, South Africa, 
India and  Lebanon . 
Kenya is the onl y country where a sizable share 
(14%) of these single -site users are using 
something other than Facebook or WhatsApp –  
in this case, mostly Snapchat (8%).  
 
 Facebook, WhatsApp are most popular 
apps for people who only use one social 
media or messaging service  
Among adults who use just one  social media platform or 
messaging app, % who say they use …  
 
 
Note: Social media  platform  and messaging app users include those 
who say they use one or more of the seven specific online pla tforms 
measured in this survey. “Other sites” include Instagram, Snapchat, 
Twitter, Viber and Tinder.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impa ct, 2018. Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  29 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Internet use is common across most of the nations surveyed  
This survey define s an “internet user” as anyone 
who says they use the internet, who uses at least 
one social media platform or messaging 
application, or who owns or shares a feature 
phone or smartphone. Majorities of adults in 
every country surveyed except India are 
internet users.  
Internet use is most widespread in Jordan and Lebanon, where 87% of adults in each country 
go onl ine. About eight -in-ten adults also go 
online in the Latin American countries of Mexico (81%), Colombia (80%) and Venezuela 
(77%).  
India has the smallest share of internet users of the countries surveyed: Just 38% of Indians use the internet. However, a ma jority of Indians 
ages 18 to 29 (55%) go online, as do a majority 
of Indians with a secondary degree or more 
(67%).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In most emerging economies surveyed , 
a majority of adults go online 
% of adults who say they use the internet  
 
 
Note: Internet users include those who say they use the internet, 
use at least one social media platform or messaging app, or own or 
share a smartphone or feature phone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 87%
87
81
80
77
74
74
67
65
62
38
74Jordan
Lebanon
Mexico
Colombia
Venezuela
South Africa
Vietnam
Tunisia
Philippines
Kenya
India
MEDIAN
How this survey defines ‘internet users’  
The definition of an internet user used in this report seeks to capture the many ways in which p eople are 
likely to go online. In addition to asking people directly whether they use the internet, people are also 
classified as internet users if they:  
 
 Use any of the seven major social media or messaging services included in the survey (Facebook, What sApp, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, Viber and Tinder).  
 Use a smartphone  or feature phone  that can connect to the internet . 
Responses to each of these individual questions can be found in the topline
, and more information on the 
combined measures can be found in Appendix B . 30 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Similar  patterns regarding age and education 
are found in the other 10 countries surveyed : 
Younger and more educated people are more 
likely to go online.  
In eight of these countries , gender differences 
in internet use are either nonexistent  (in the 
case of Colombia, the Philippines, Venezuela 
and Vietnam)  or modest ( in the case of Jordan, 
Lebanon, Mexico and South Africa) . These 
differences are most prominent in India , Kenya  
and Tunisia , although majorit ies of both men 
and women in Tunisia and Kenya go online . In 
India, 46% of men and just 29% of women use 
the internet. To s ome extent, these gender gaps 
in internet use coincide with differences in 
smartphone use, as men in both countries are 
more likely to use smartphones than women.  
For more on how use of the internet and of 
specific social media platforms and messaging 
apps vary by age, gender or education, see 
Appendix C . 
  Younger people are more likely to use 
the internet  
% of adults who are internet users  
 
 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Internet users include 
those who say they use the internet, use at least one social media 
platform or messaging app, or own or share a smartphone or 
feature phone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  31 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Home computer or tablet access is relati vely rare in most countries  
In most  of the  countries  surveyed , relatively  few 
people (median of 34%) have access to a 
desktop computer, laptop or tablet in their 
household . The exception is Lebanon, where a 
majority of adults (57%) say they have access to 
such a device.  As with most other measures of 
technological connectedness , those who are 
younger and more educated are generally more 
likely to have access t o a computer or tablet at 
home.  
 
  Most people do not have access to a 
home computer or tablet  
% of adults who say they have access to a working 
desktop computer, laptop or tablet in their household  
 
 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q47.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  57%
47
40
37
37
34
30
30
20
14
11
34Lebanon
Venezuela
Colombia
Jordan
Tunisia
Mexico
South Africa
Vietnam
Philippines
Kenya
India
MEDIAN32 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Anywhere from 2 8% (in India) to 52% (in Jordan) of adults in these countries use the internet in 
some fashion but do not have a computer or tablet at home. And a median of 27% of adults in 
these countries say they do not have a tablet or computer at home but do have a sm artphone, 
ranging from a low of 18% in Venezuela to a high of 50% in Jordan.  
 
 In most countries, roughly four -in-ten or more go online without access to a computer 
or tablet at home  
% of adults who say they …  
 
 
Note: Internet users include those who say they use the internet, use at least one social media platform or messaging app, or own or share a 
smartphone or feature phone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q47.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  55%
44
39
35
34
33
30
28
18
12
9
33Lebanon
Venezuela
Colombia
Jordan
Mexico
Tunisia
Vietnam
South Africa
Philippines
Kenya
India
MEDIAN13%
23
20
13
19
33
26
26
35
38
62
2633%
34
41
52
47
34
44
45
47
50
28
44Use the internet and have access 
to computer or tablet at home  Use the internet, but do not have 
access to a computer or tablet  
at home  Do not use the internet  33 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 2. Majorities say mobile phones are good for society, even 
amid concerns about their impact on children  
Across the 11 countries surveyed, people’s attitudes toward mobile phones tend to be largely 
positive. In most of the countries, a large  majorit y say mobile phones have been good for them 
personally , and many also say mobile phones positive ly impact education and the economy . 
Mobile phone users also overwhelmingly agree that their phone s help them to stay in t ouch with 
faraway friends and family and keep them informed of the latest news and information.   
At the same time, people’s positive attitudes are paired with concerns about the impact of mobile phones on certain aspects of society –  
and especially their impact on children. In 
eight of these countries, a majority of the public says that the increasing  use of mobile 
phones has had a bad impact on children today. And w hen asked about the potential risks of mobile phone use, majorities in every country 
say people should be very concerned that mobile phones might expose children to harmful or 
inappropriate  content.   
 
 “I think mobile phones have made the 
world like a global village.”  
-Man, 24, Kenya  34 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Overwhelming majorities say mobile phones have been more positive 
than negative for them personally  
In nine of the 11 countries surveyed, large 
majorities say mobile phones have been mostly 
good for them personally. I n Venezuela , people 
are more skeptical of the role mobile phones are 
playing in their lives . There, 49% say mobile 
phones have been mostly good for them 
personally, while 47% say they have been mostly 
bad. Elsewhere, no more than 11% in any 
country say mobile phones have been mostly a 
bad thing for them.  
In nine of these 11 countries, majorities al so say 
mobile phones have had a positive impact on society . But in most countries, people report less 
enthusiasm  about the societal impact of mobile 
devices than about the ir personal impact.  For 
example, while 82% of Jordanians say mobile 
phones have mostl y been good for them 
personally, just 53% express positive views about 
their societal impact. And in Colombia, Tunisia 
and Mexico, there is at least a 10- percentage-
point difference between shares who see the 
personal benefits of mobile phones and those 
who see the society -wide benefits.  
Regardless of the type of mobile phone people use – basic, feature or smart – most have similar 
views about how their lives and societies have 
been impacted by their devices.
9 Across all surveyed countries, basic or feature phone users are 
just as likely as smartphone users in their country to say mobile phones have mostly been a 
positive thing for them personally. And in all countries but Mexico, similar shares of smartphone 
users and those with less advanced devices say the societal impact of mobile phones has mostly 
been good. In Mexico, where smartphone use is relatively low compared with  other countries , 
                                                        
9 Throughout this this report, m obile phone users include those who say they own or share a mobile phone . 
 Mobile  phones seen as better for 
individual users than society as a whole  
% of adults who say mobile phones have mostly been  … 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q11a & Q12a . 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  35 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 smartphone users are somewhat more likely than basic or feature phone users to say the impact on 
society has been mostly positive (77% vs. 69%).   
But there are some differences between mobile phone users and those who do not use a mobile phone  at all . In five of these 11 countries (India, Kenya, Lebanon, Mexico and South Africa) , 
mobile users  of any kind are more likely than non- users to say that mobile devices have had a 
mostly positive impact on society.  
Mobile  phone  users have mixed views about upsides and downsides of 
their phones , are espe cially divided over whether they ‘couldn’t live 
without ’ phones   
In every country surveyed,  mobile phone users 
are more likely to say their phone is something 
that frees them rather than  something that ties 
them down. A t least 63% in five countries 
(Kenya,  Vietnam, Venezuela, South Africa and 
the Philippines) characterize their phone as 
something that frees them, whereas users in other countries are somewhat more ambivalent. For example, while 46% of Jordanian mobile phone users say their phone frees them, 25% say it ties 
them down, and 21% volunteer that neither statement holds true. I n Lebanon, 40% of mobile 
phone users say their phone frees them, compared with 30% who say it ties them down.  
Across the 11 countries surveyed, m obile phone users are somewha t more divided when it comes to 
whether their phone helps save them time or makes them waste time. In seven countries, larger 
shares say  their phone helps save them time. Kenyans are especially likely to see their phone as a 
time saver; 8 4% of mobile phone  users say their phone saves them time, compared with 1 4% who 
say it wastes their time. Venezuelan (71%), South African (65%), Indian (64%), Vietnamese (63%),  
Tunisian (54%) and Colombian (50%) phone users are also more likely to say that phones save 
them time rather than waste it. But mobile phone users in Jordan and the Philippines generally 
believe they waste more time on their phones than they save, while Mexican and Lebanese phone 
users are roughly evenly divided in their assessments.  
Mobile phone  users are even more divided when assessing their reliance or lack thereof on their 
mobile device. In six countries – Mexico, Colombia, India, the Philippines, Venezuela and Vietna m 
– around half or more see their phone as something they don’t always need . But  in five others  – 
Jordan, Lebanon, South Africa, Tunisia and Kenya  – users are more inclined to say they  couldn’t 
live without it.   “It’s like the mobile phones become your 
partner.”  
-Woman , 40, Philippines  36 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
  
In some instances , people’s perceptions of the necessity of their mobile device is not linked to their 
assessments of its  utility in other aspects of their life . For instance, a majority of Venezuela ns say 
their phone is something that frees them and helps them save time –  but just 29% say they 
couldn’t live without it. Conversely , a majority of Jordanians say they couldn’t live without their 
phone – even as they are more likely to describe it as a time waster rather than a time saver.  
 
Consistently, smartphone users tend to be somewhat more critical of their device than basic or 
feature phone users in their country. For exam ple, in every country smartphone users are more 
likely than basic or feature phone users to say the ir phone makes them waste time . And in all 
countries except Lebanon, smartphone users are more likely to say their phone ties them down 
rather than frees the m.   
There are also prominent and consistent differences by age. In every country surveyed, mobile 
phone users ages  50 and older are significantly more likely than users ages 18 to 29 to believe their 
phone helps them save time. The age gap is particularly notable in Vietnam, Tunisia and Mobile phone users divided over whether their phone is something they ‘don’t 
always need ’ or ‘couldn’t live without ’ 
% of adult mobile phone users who say their phone is something that …  
 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses are not shown.  Mobile phone users include those who say they own or share a mobile phone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q16, Q17 & Q18.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  37 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Colombia , where the shares  of older adults who see their phone as a time saver surpass those of 
younger adults by at least 27  percentage point s. And, while it is true that younger adults use 
smartphones and social media at higher rates than older adults, in every country but India these 
age differences persist even when accounting for age- related differences in usage.  
Users largely agree mobile phones help them maintain long- distance 
communication, stay informed about important issues  
 Vast majorities of mobile phone users say their  phone helps them stay in touch with 
people who live far away  
% of adult mobile phone users  who say their phone has mostly __ their ability to …  
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses are not shown. Mobile phone users include those who say they own or share a mobile phone.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . Q13Aa -e. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  38 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 When asked about a variety of ways in  which 
mobile phones might affec t their day -to-day 
lives, users across the surveyed countries 
generally agree that mobile phones have 
mostly helped them keep in touch with people 
who live far away and obtain information 
about important issues. But there is  less 
consensus  when it comes to mobile phones’ 
impact on people’s ability to earn a living, concentrate and get things done , or communicate face -
to-face.  
Large majorities say their phones have mostly helped them stay in touch with people who live far 
away. A median of 93% across the 11 countries surveyed express this view, whereas a median of just 1% say mobile phones have hurt their ability to stay in touch. M ajorities also say their mobile 
phones have helped them obtain information and news about important issues, ranging from a low of 73% in Vietnam to a high of 88% in Kenya. And only small shares (from 1% to 6% of users) indicate that phones have hurt their ab ility to do this.  
In all 11 countries, smartphone users are significantly more likely than basic or feature phone 
users to say their phone has helped them obtain news and information. The difference is 
particularly prominent in Lebanon,  where 8 3% of smartp hone users say the impact has been 
positive, compared with 26% of non -smartphone users. And in Jordan, smartphone users are 
much more likely than non- smartphone users to say their phone has mostly helped them obtain 
information (8 3% vs. 44%).  
Less consensu s over whether mobile phones help users earn a living, concentrate or 
communicate face -to-face  
Across the 11 countries surveyed, there is less agreement about whether mobile phones have 
helped people earn a living. Majorities of users in nine countries say  their phone has had a positive 
impact on their livelihood –  ranging from 55% in Tunisia to 81% in Kenya –  while Jordanians and 
Lebanese most commonly say that mobile phones have not had much impact either way on their ability to make a living. Still, few people see mobile phones having a negative effect. E ven in 
Jordan and Lebanon, nearly four -in-ten say the impact has been favorable.  
There is less consensus among mobile phone users that their devices have helped them to 
concentrate and get things done. Ma jorities in eight out of 11  countries say mobile phones have “In general terms, communication is much 
more efficient. You are more 
interconnected, [whether] with your 
relatives or with world affairs.”  
-Man, 26, Mexico 39 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 mostly helped them concentrate and get things done. But notable shares in the Philippines (30%), 
Lebanon (18%) and India (16%) say mobile phones negatively affect their concentration.  
In some ins tances, these attitudes are related to  the type of device users carry  – although this 
relationship varies by country. Smartphone users in five out of 11 countries  – Lebanon, India, 
Jordan, Colombia and Venezuela – are more likely than other phone users to say their phone helps 
them concentrate and get things done, while there are no differences based on smartphone usage 
in the other six countries surveyed. This pattern is particularly salient in Lebanon, Jordan and 
India , where smartphone users and non -smar tphone users differ by at least 10 percentage points.  
These findings echo the concerns raised by 
some focus gro up participants  (see Appendix A  
for more information on how the groups were 
conducted) . Some respondents noted how 
mobile phones bring distractions and shorten 
their attention spans, leading people to commit 
basic errors or not complete work  because of the attention paid to their devices. In every group 
held in the Philippines, for example, at least one participant brought up that she had burned the rice she was making because of her focus on her phone.  
Lastly, majorities of users in eight c ountries say their mobile phones have helped their ability to 
communicate face -to-face – but notable shares in many countries say that impact has been mostly 
negative. In particular, 35% of Lebanese phone users say mobile phones have hurt their ability to 
communicate face -to-face.  
 In focus groups, some lamented that more and 
more people prefer virtual communication 
enabled by mobile phones and other 
technologies to face -to-face interaction. A few 
participants across the four countries where 
focus groups were conducted also pointed o ut 
similar trends among children and young 
people.  
Because these questions center on people’s personal relationship with their device, they were only asked of those who own or regularly share a mobile phone. For those who reported not using a 
phone at all , a different set of questions were posed: How do mobile phones, in general, shape 
people’s ability to stay in touch with those far away, to obtain information, and so on? Broadly , “Because I was busy texting my client, my 
rice got overcooked.”  
-Woman , 40, Philippines  
“People meet less because of their phones; 
people use telephones to express 
themselves to avoid face -to-face 
discussions.”  
-Man, 23, Tunisia  40 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 non- users’  impressions of the impact of mobile phones tend to mirror the ways users feel about 
their own devices. The vast majority of non -users feel that mobile phones help people stay in touch 
with those who live far away, but smaller shares think  they help people  to concentrate and get 
things done or communicate face -to-face.  
Majorities in most countries say mobile phone use has had a good impact 
on education, but few er see positive impacts on children, health, morality  
Publics in the  11 nations polled  view mobile  phones as having a range of positive and negative 
consequences when it comes to their broader impact on their country and its society . Most 
notably, a median of 67% –  and around half or more in every country –  say the increased use of 
mobile phones has ha d a good influence on education. Slightly smaller majorities say the increased 
use of mobile phones has had a good influence on the economy (58%) as well as on their local 
culture  (56%) . 
Despite positive views of mobile phones’ impact on education and the economy, 
many fewer think they have had a good impact on children , physical health, morality  
 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q14Ba -i. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 41 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Few in these countries say mobile phones have had a good impact on children today  
Across all dimensions measured in the survey, publics in the 11 coun tries  are most negative about 
the impact of mobile phones on children. Nowhere does a majority feel that mobile phones have 
had a good influence on children. And in eight countries , majorit ies of the population  say that 
mobile phones have had a bad influence on children today. Residents of the three Middle East and 
North African ( MENA ) countries surveyed are especially downbeat about mobile phones in this 
regard: 90% of Jordanians, 86% of Lebanese and 81% of Tunisians say mobile phones have had a bad influence on children in their country.   
People also focus on  the negative impact s of mobile phones on physical health , morality  
 In addition to the impact of mobile phones on children, health and morality stand out as 
particular areas of concern. A median of 40% – and clear majorities in Lebanon (71%), Jordan 
(69%) and Tunisia (63%) – say the increasing 
use of mobile phones ha s had a bad influence 
on people’s physical health. Some focus group participants expressed similar sentiment by commenting that excessive screen time, phone 
“addiction” and lack of physical activities were 
potential health -related challenges.  
Meanwhile, a media n of 34% say mobile phones have had a positive impact on morality, similar to 
the share who say the impact has been negative. As was the case wit h children and health, 
Lebanese, Jordanians and Tunisians hold the most unfavorable views in this regard. R ough ly a 
third or more in Colombia, Mexico, Kenya  and South Af rica also say mobile phones negatively 
affect people’s morality.  
 As noted above, publics in Lebanon, Jordan and Tunisia stand out in their overall negativity 
toward mobile phones on these aspects of society. But other countries are conspicuous for having relatively positive attitudes in this regard. Kenyans, in particul ar, offer especially upbeat 
assessments of mobile phones. Half or more Kenyans feel that mobile phones have had a positive impact on each of these aspects of 
society, with the exception of children today 
(just 28% of Kenyans say mobile phones have 
been goo d for children). South Africans and 
Filipinos are also relatively positive about most areas surveyed.  “Phones also give us much more room to 
conceal things.”  
-Man, 42, Mexico  
“My kid’s always on his phone, and every 
time I address him he just nods while on 
his phone.”  
-Woman , 46, Mexico 42 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 In most countries, t here are no differences between smartphone users and non -users – nor 
between social media users and non- users – when it comes to people’s views about the impact of 
increasing mobile phone use on children.  But on other questions there is more variation between 
users and non- users. For instance, i n six out of 11 countries larger share s of social media users 
than non- users say the increasing use of mobile phones has had a good influence on their nation’s 
politics. This includes all  three MENA  countries in the survey . Conversely, in eight of these 11 
countries larger share s of social media users than non- users say mobile phones have had a bad 
influence on family cohesion.  
Concern is widespread  about the 
risk that mobile phones might 
expose children to immoral or 
harmful content  
Despite the perceived benefits of increased 
mobile adoption  in areas such as education, 
public s express concern about  an array of  
potential downsides of mobile phone use . The 
survey a sked about six possible risks from 
mobile phone use , and respondents in every 
country are most concerned about children being exposed to immoral or harmful content. A 
median of 79 % – including a majority in each 
country  surveyed – feel people should be ver y 
concerned about this.  
Meanwhile, the prospect of users losing the ir 
ability to communicate face -to-face is the item of 
least concern in each country. In only two 
countries (South Africa and Colombia) are a 
majority of adults very concerned about 
declinin g face -to-face communication skills  as a 
result of mobile phone usage .  
Among these 11 countries, Colombians rank in 
the top two most -concerned about all of these 
issues . Other countries that rank in the top two 
most -concerned on particular issues include : Majorities  are very concerned about 
children being exposed to harmful 
content when using their mobile phones  
% of adults who say they are __ concerned about 
children being exposed to immoral or harmful content  
when using their mobile phones  
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q19f. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  94%
92
90
88
83
79
78
78
73
67
55
794%
4
7
8
8
14
15
17
20
14
24
14Colombia
Jordan
Tunisia
Mexico
South Africa
Lebanon
Venezuela
Philippines
Vietnam
Kenya
India
MEDIANVery Somewhat NET
98%
96
979691
93
93
95
93
81
79
9343 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Mexico (identity theft and online harassment); Jordan ( phone addiction and  impacts on children); 
South Africa (exposure to false information and losing the ability to talk face -to-face); and Tunisia 
(phone addiction).  
 
Beyond these country -specific differences, concerns about mobile phone use exhibit few  consistent 
or substantial differences relating to gender, age, phone type or social media usage.  Notably, 
concerns about children  are widespread across multiple groups. In most instances, men and 
women, older and younger adults, and social media users and non- users express similar levels of 
concern about the impact of inappropriate online content  on children.  People in most countries  are very  concerned about a broad range of potential 
negative impacts of mobile phone use  
% of adults  who say people should be very  concerned about __ when using their mobile phones  
Highest % in each country saying very concerned                Second -highest % i n each country saying very concerned  
 
 Children being 
exposed to 
immoral or 
harmful content  Identity  
theft  Exposure to false 
or incorrect 
information  Mobile phone 
addiction  Harassment  
or bullying  Losing the ability 
to communicate 
face -to-face  
Colombia  94% 83% 70% 70% 75% 58% 
Jordan  92 64 64 70 61 52 
Tunisia  90 70 64 72 58 46 
Mexico  88 80 65 68 73 52 
South Africa  83 78 71 68 71 63 
Lebanon  79 56 53 56 53 50 
Venezuela  78 66 57 53 59 48 
Philippines  78 66 64 62 67 46 
Vietnam  73 50 48 53 37 33 
Kenya  67 56 48 35 42 32 
India  55 36 45 39 39 32 
MEDIAN  79 66 64 62 59 48 
 
Note: Respondents who gave  other responses are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . Q19a -f. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  44 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Additionally, men and women in most of these countries are similarly concerned about 
harassment and bullying  – a noteworthy contrast to the gender -related differences often seen in 
surveys of online harassment  among Americans . For example, a 2017 Pew Research Center  survey  
found that 70% of women in the U.S. said  online harassment was a “major pro blem,” compared 
with 54% of men.  
It is relatively common for mobile 
phone users to limit the amount of 
time they –  as well as their children  – 
spend on their phones  
 Amid a widespread debate over the impact of 
various types of screens on children  and adults  
alike, m ajorities of mobile phone users in five  of 
these 11 countries say they have ever tried to 
limit the time they themselves  spend on their 
phone. This behavior is especially common in 
the Philippines and Mexico , but somewhat less 
prevalent among mob ile phone owners in 
Jordan, Lebanon, Venezuela and Vietnam .  
In all 11 countries surveyed, smartphone users 
are more likely than n on-smartphone users to 
say they try to limit the time they spend on their 
mobile phone. These differences are especially 
prominent in Vietnam (where 46% of 
smartphone users and 24% of non- smartphone 
users have done this) and Colombia (66% vs. 
45%). And in 10 of these countries, larger share s 
of mobile phone users who also use social media 
say they have tried to limit the ir phone use 
relative to those who do not use social media.  Parents  at times try to limit their 
children’s screen time , and many try to 
limit their own time on the p hone  
% of adults who say they ever limit the time __ spend(s) 
on their mobile phone  
 
 
* Only respondents who use a mobile phone or whose child uses a 
mobile phone are shown. In the survey, questions about parents 
and children were asked of all respondents. The results reported 
here were recalculated to exclude those who volunteered that the y 
do not have any children, and/or that their child or children do not 
have a mobile phone.  
Note: Respondents w ho gave other response s are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q25a-b. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  “Sometimes I try to use [my phone] less, 
but it only lasts for two or three days and 
then I come back to the daily rhythm.”  
-Woman , 21, Tunisia  65%
59
58
68
56
34
34
39
46
38
4269%
67
60
53
53
52
51
47
43
40
38Mexico
Tunisia
Colombia
Philippines
South Africa
Lebanon
Jordan
Vietnam
Kenya
Venezuela
IndiaThey themselves* Their child(ren)*45 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 People’s efforts to limit screen time also extend to children. Among parents wh ose child  has access 
to a mobile phone, about half or more  in seven  of these countries say they ever set limits on how 
much time their child  can spend on their phone.10  
As was true of limiting their own screen time, parents’ efforts to limit the time their child spends 
on his or her phone also differ by the type of phone they themselves own .11 Smartphone -owning 
parents whose child also uses  a mobile phone are more likely than parents with more basic phones 
to say they have tried to limit their child’s screen time in nine of these 11 countries. Indeed, this 
gap reaches double digits in nine  of these 11  countries – and is as high as 22 points in Vietnam  and 
Jordan . 
Parents’ efforts to limit their child’s mobile phone use are also related to their concerns about the 
negative impacts of mobile phone use (such as online harassment or children being exposed to 
immoral content). In nearly every country surveyed, parents who say they are very concerned 
about at least five of the six issues tested are more likely to try to limit their child’s mobile phone 
use relative to those who are very concerned about two or fewer of these issues. The only exception 
to this trend is Jordan, where similar shares of highly  concerned and less -concerned parents say 
they try to limi t their child’s mobile phone use.  
 
 
  
                                                        
10 In the survey, questions about parents and children were asked of all respondents. The results reported here were recalc ulated to exclude 
those who volunteered that they do not have any children, and/or that their child or children do not have a mobile phone.  
11 Note: The survey did not ask what type of phone the respondent’s child or children use.  46 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 It is common for parents to monitor their child’s mobile phone use, and 
notable shares monitor the phone activity  of their spouse or partner  
In the focus group interviews conducted as part 
of this study, mobile phone surveillance 
performed by immediate family members 
emerged as a common theme. Some parents mentioned that mobile phones allowed them to 
track the whereabouts of their children and to 
make sure they were not exposed to harmful 
content. And for people in marriages or romantic 
relationships, mobile phone “spying” and social 
media “stalking” sometimes become the source of drama, jealousy and harassment.  
Among parents whose child  or chi ldren  use a 
mobile phone, a median of 50% say they ever 
monitor what their child is looking at or doing 
on the screen. But some variation exists  across 
these countries. In Jordan, Colombia and 
Mexico, for example, clear majorities of parents 
do this, compa red with 37% of parents in 
Vietnam and 38% in India.  
Parents who use a smartphone are generally more likely to say they monitor their child’s 
phone usage than parents who use a basic or 
feature phone. This trend is seen in 10  out of the 
11 countries and is especially prominent in 
Jordan and Vietnam , where smartphone users 
differ from other phone users by 30 percentage 
points each.  
Parents’ likelihood of monitoring their child’s phone use also differs by their own social media 
presence. Parents who use soci al media and messaging apps in each country are more likely than 
parents who do not use social media platforms to say they monitor content on their child’s phone.  It is more common to monitor a child's 
phone use than to monitor a partner’s  
% of adults who say they ever monitor what their __ is 
looking at  or doing on their mobile phone  
 
Note: Only respondents whose spouse/partner or whose child uses 
a mobile phone are shown. In the survey, questions about parents 
and children (as well as spouses or partners) were asked of all 
respondents. The results reported here were recalculated to exclude 
those who volunteered that they do not have any children  (or a 
spouse/partner) , and/or that their child or children (or 
spouse/partner) do not have a mobile phone.  Respondents who 
gave other responses are not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . 
Q26a -b. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  47 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Monitoring of mobile phone activity also extends to marriages and romantic relationships  
In all countries surveyed, it is less common to 
monitor a partner’s phone activity  – although 
notable shares of those with a spouse or 
partner report doing so .12 Among those whose 
partner or spouse uses a mobile phone, a 
median of 2 6% say they ever monitor their 
partner’s phone use. In the Philippines, this 
behavior is somewhat more common; 38% say 
they monitor their partner’s phone.  
In most countries surveyed, younger adults are 
more likely to monitor their partner’s phone 
than older adults in their country. This trend 
holds even after accounting for the fact that 
younger adults are generally more likely than older adults to use smartphone s or social 
media. In 10 countries, smartphone users ages 
18 to 29 are more likely to say they monitor their partner’s phone activity than smartphone 
users ages 50 and older.  
There are also notable gender differences when it comes to monitoring the phone activity  of their significant other. In five of these  11 countries 
(Jordan, Venezuela, Vietnam, Mexico and Tunisia), larger shares of women than men say they ever 
monitor what their partner does on the phone. India is the only country surveyed where men are 
more l ikely than women to say they keep an eye on their partner’s phone.  
 
 
  
                                                        
12 In the survey, questions  about spouses and partners were asked of all respondents. The results reported here were recalculated to exclude 
those who volunteered that they do not have a spouse or partner, and/or that their partner does not have a mobile phone.  “Wh en a guy commented on my post, my 
husband got jealous about it.”  
-Woman , 27, Philippines    
“You should be the one limiting your child. 
It’s up to you to make ways to be able to 
limit the problems that you encounter. 
That’s why even if my child is very 
interested with gadgets, he is consistently 
in the honor rolls … I make limitations.”  
- Woman , 38, Philippines    
“Talking from a married point of view, I 
think it’s brought a lot of mistrust. If my 
data is on at 10 in the night and someone 
sends something on WhatsApp, it’s always 
suspect. Who’s texting at 10? My husband 
is often suspicious.”  
- Woman , 32, Kenya  48 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 3. People say the internet brings economic and educational 
benefits  – but some are concerned about social media’s 
societal impact  
Whereas t he previous chapter looked specifically at mobile phones and their perceived impact , this 
chapter focuses on the perceived changes brought about by increasing internet and social media 
use. Majorit ies of the public in every country surveyed feel the internet is having a positive 
influence on education, and these assessments are often more positive than they were four years 
ago. In the three Middle Eas t and North African countries surveyed , people are more pessimistic 
about the internet’s influence on politics than they were four years ago . And publics are also 
skeptical about the effect the internet is having on their children . 
Generally, people in mos t countries think 
mobile phones and the internet have had 
similar impacts on society –  whether for good 
or for bad. And , although pluralities in most 
countries say social media have  been a good 
thing for society, large minorities see downsides 
as well  – a sentiment that is even more 
common among those who do not use social media . 
 
 “Things have gotten better indeed, but 
[the mobile phone] also has made us 
lazier. For the busier ones, it has helped us 
have everything more within our reach, 
but there are other times in which this can 
become counterproductive. Relationships 
become blurrier. You hardly ever see the 
other person. It’s become  shallow and 
everything comes down to what you post 
on Facebook or on Twitter.”  
-Man, 28, Mexico  49 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Publics largely see comparable influence s from mobile phones and the 
internet  
In addition to asking respondents how they think mobile phones have impacted society , the survey 
asked an identical series of questions about the influence of the internet. By and large, p ublics feel 
similarly about the influence of mobile phones and the influence of the intern et. Roughly equal 
shares within most countries say mobile phones and the internet have had a good influence on 
morality, politics, physical health, local culture, civility and the economy.  As was the case with 
mobile phones, many publics in these countries  are especially concerned about the influence th e 
internet has had on children.  
 
Internet users and non- users have fairly similar views on how internet use has impacted many 
aspects of their societies. But users are somewhat more upbeat than non- users abou t the internet’s 
influence on politics a nd the economy.  
 Few say increasing internet use has had a positive impact on children; more see 
benefits for economy  and education  
 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q14Aa -i.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  50 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 But when it comes to the influence these 
technologies are having on education,  many 
publics do see the influence of the internet and 
that of mobile phones in different lights . In six 
of the 11 countries surveyed, more people say 
the increasing us e of the internet is having a 
good influence on education than say mobile 
phones are having a good influence on 
education. Focus groups in four of the countries 
surveyed revealed some of this tension (see 
Appendix A  for more information on how the 
groups were conducted ). Whereas some focus 
group participants cited the educational 
benefits that stem from children using the 
internet to do their homework or research, 
others highlighted phone addiction, games and 
other distractions as things that hinder studies.  
In five countries,  people differ in their views of 
the impact of mobile phones and the internet 
on family cohesion. Where these differences 
exist, m ore say mobile phones have had a good 
influence on family cohesion than feel the same 
about the internet.  
Venezuelans and Kenyans stand out for their 
different  evaluations of the impacts of mobile 
phones versus the internet on these aspects of Many  see increasing internet use having 
a good influence on education  …  
% of adults who say the increasing use of __ has had a 
good  influence on education  
 The internet  Mobile phones  DIFF  
 % %  
Venezuela  84 74 +10 
Vietnam  66 56 +10 
Tunisia  56 48 +8 
Colombia  71 64 +7 
Mexico  63 56 +7 
Philippines  87 81 +6 
Jordan  71 68 +3 
Lebanon  66 63 +3 
South Africa  84 82 +2 
Kenya  76 75 +1 
India  65 67 -2 
… But many adults feel mobile phones 
more positively impact family cohesion  
% of adults who say the increasing use of __ has had a 
good  influence on family cohesion  
 The internet  Mobile phones  DIFF  
 % %  
Venezuela  75 74 +1 
Lebanon  20 20 0 
Vietnam  53 53 0 
India  51 53 -2 
Philippines  75 78 -3 
Jordan  26 30 -4 
Mexico  40 45 -5 
South Africa  63 69 -6 
Colombia  45 52 -7 
Tunisia  26 39 -13 
Kenya  63 77 -14 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses not shown.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q14Ad, Q14Ae, Q14Bd, Q14Be.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  “Concerning your studies, teachers can 
put some lessons on the internet or your 
friends can put things on the internet to 
study, so if you are far away from 
university you can have all kinds of 
information.”  
-Man, 23, Tunisia   51 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org so
ciety. Venezuelans are generally more likely to say the internet has had positive influence s on 
many facets of society, while Kenyans are more likely to say mobile phone s have had a positive 
impact.  
Views of the impact of the internet have shifted in recent years as usage 
has become more prevalent  
Internet use has generally risen substantially si nce 2014,  when Pew Research Center last asked 
people in t hese emerging ec onomies a bout t he internet’ s influence o n key fa cets o f their societies .13 
With thes e changes , opinions about the positive a nd n egative i mpacts of the internet in many 
countrie s have a lso s hifted . In general, over t ime – and as more p eople h ave gone o nline – views of 
the i nternet’s influence o n society have often grown m ore p ositive, e specially w hen i t comes to 
assessments o f its influence o n the economy and education.     
More now say the internet has had a good  influence on their country’s economy, education  
In many countries, p eople’s v iews of the 
internet’s influence on the economy and 
education have generally improved in the past 
four years. In seven of the 10  countries for 
which  trends are available, more pe ople today 
say the increasing use of the internet has had a 
good influence on their country’s economy than said the same in 2014. And in six countries, 
more say the internet’s influence on education 
is positive compared with  four years ago . 
Publics in Leba non, Kenya, South Africa, Mexico and Vietnam have grown more positive about the 
internet’s influence in both areas. Lebanese views of the internet’s influence on education have shifted especially strongly : In 2014, just one -in-five felt the internet was having a good impact on 
the economy, but today the share has roughly doubled to 42%. Jordanians have also become much more positive about the internet’s influence on education: 71% feel it is having a good influence on education toda y, compared with  less than half (44%) four years earlier .  
13 In the spring 2014 Global Attitudes Survey, internet users were defined as those who reported using the internet at least occasionally or 
who owned a smartphone. To provide comparable estimates of internet users’ views in 2018, we are using the same definition he re. “For me, WhatsApp is important because 
I have many groups. For instance, I have 
maybe 15 salespeople, so I don’t have to 
call [them] one by one – I just send one 
message.”  
-Woman , 35, Mexico  52 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Rising internet use overall 
appear s to play some role in 
many publics’ increasing ly 
positive assessments of the internet’s impact on the 
economy and education: 
Internet users in some countries are more likely to see the 
internet’s impact in a positive 
light . But rising internet 
adoption is only part of the 
story. For instance, m ore South 
Africans have access to the 
internet today than did in 2014, 
but views of the internet’s 
influence on the economy 
impr oved among internet users  
over the same period as well. Four years ago, 56% of South 
African internet users felt the 
internet was having a good 
influence on the economy, and 
today, 66% feel it does. I n 
Tunisia , too, internet use has become more widespread since 2014 . Yet  opinions there about the 
internet’s influence on their economy and education have actually grown more negative . 
In other instances, changes in public sentiment have been driven largely by non- internet users. 
For example, i n 2014 , 71% of Kenyan internet users felt the internet was having a good influence 
on the economy , while a similar portion (67%)  say the same today. But among Kenyans who do not 
use the internet or own a smartphone, views have improved , from 50% expressing optimism about 
the internet’s influence on the economy in 2014 to 61% saying the same today.  
 
 In several countries, more now see positive influence 
of the internet on the economy and education  
% of adults who say the increasing use of the internet has had a good  
influence on … 
The economy  Education  
 2014  2018  CHANGE   2014  2018  CHANGE  
 % %   % %  
Lebanon  20 42 +22 Jordan  44 71 +27 
South Africa  52 63 +11 South Africa  68 84 +16 
Vietnam  59 70 +11 Kenya  64 76 +12 
Mexico  37 47 +10 Vietnam  56 66 +10 
Kenya  56 64 +8 Lebanon  58 66 +8 
Colombia  49 56 +7 Mexico  57 63 +6 
Venezuela  54 60 +6 Venezuela  82 84 +2 
Jordan  43 39 -4 Colombia  71 71 0 
Philippines  73 69 -4 Philippines  88 87 -1 
Tunisia  58 44 -14 Tunisia  70 56 -14 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses not shown. India excluded due to changes in 
sampling design between 2014 and 2018.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q14Ac & Q14Ad. Spring 
2014 Global Attitudes Survey.  
“Mobile Connecti vity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  53 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 In some countries, views of 
the internet’s influence on 
morality and politics have 
grown more positive –  but in 
others, these views have 
grown more negative  
While many of these publics 
have generally  grown more 
positive about the internet’s 
influence on the economy and education  in recent years , fewer 
have grown more positive about its impact on morality and politics. Colombians, 
Kenyans, Venezuelans and 
Mexicans have become somewhat more optimistic  
about the internet’s impact on 
morality and politics. But 
Jordanian and Lebanese adults 
have grown more pessimistic  
over the same time period.   
The greatest change in public opinion on these questions has occurred in Jordan, where the 
public is much more pessimistic than it was 
four years ago. In 2014, about a third of Jordanians said the internet was having a good 
influence on morality and 42% felt it was 
positively influencing politics. Today, those 
figures stand at 12% and 31% , respectively . 
 
  In some countries, more now say the internet has 
positively influenced morality and politics  
% of adults who say the increasing use of the internet has had a good  
influence on  … 
Morality  Politics  
 2014  2018  CHANGE   2014  2018  CHANGE  
 % %   % %  
Kenya  28 45 +17 Mexico  28 44 +16 
Mexico  25 35 +10 South Africa  36 50 +14 
Venezuela  41 51 +10 Venezuela  36 48 +12 
Colombia  27 34 +7 Colombia  33 39 +6 
South Africa  44 48 +4 Kenya  41 47 +6 
Vietnam  40 44 +4 Vietnam  41 46 +5 
Philippines  47 49 +2 Philippines  48 51 +3 
Tunisia  17 18 +1 Tunisia  38 32 -6 
Lebanon  16 9 -7 Lebanon  32 23 -9 
Jordan  35 12 -23 Jordan  42 31 -11 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses not shown. India excluded due to changes in 
sampling design between 2014 and 2018.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q14Aa & Q14Ab. Spring 
2014 Global Attitudes Survey.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
“[Mobile phones and social media have] 
really led to the spread of hatred and 
tribalism. Another [issue] about th e 
family [is] cheating , which leads to home 
breakage and divorce. People just don’t 
trust each other.”  
-Man, 38, Kenya  54 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 In most countries, m ore say soci al media are good for society than bad  
In seven of the 11 countries 
surveyed, half or more say that 
social media ha ve mostly been 
a good thing for society . But 
around one -third or more in 
eight of these countries 
express ambivalence –  or 
outright skepticism – about 
social media’s  impact . 
Vietnamese are the most optimistic about social media, while Indians and L ebanese 
are notably less positive . But 
even in India, many more say 
social media have  been good 
(37%) for society than bad  
(9%) , while about a third do 
not give an opinion on the 
matter. Venezuelans offer a 
split verdict: 42% feel social 
media ha ve been a good thing, 
while 43% say they  have  been 
bad.  
As was true of mobile phones, people in the 11  countries 
surveyed often feel that social media ha ve been better for them personally  than for society as a 
whole. A median of 63% say social media have  been a goo d thing for them, compared with a 
median of 57% who say they have  been good for society.  
Even among those who themselves use social media and messaging apps, more see personal 
benefits than societal benefits in nearly all countries. Th is gap is largest in Jordan and Colombia . 
In these countries , around three -quarters of social media users say social media  have been good 
for them personally – while only around half or fewer say they has been a good thing for society.    
 
 More see social media as good than bad for society, 
but some  see potential downsides  
% of adults who say social media ha ve mostly been a __ thing for society  
 
 
Note: Respondents who gave other responses not shown.  
Source : Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q11b.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  55 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Social media user s see more societal benefits from the platforms than non -users  
Users of social media platforms and messaging 
apps  are often more likely than non -users to 
view these platforms as having a good impact 
on society as a whole. These differences are 
especially notable in Lebanon, India and 
Jordan , where there is a difference of more than 
20 percentage points in the shares of social 
media users and non- users who say these 
platforms have been beneficial for society . By 
contrast, users and non -users in Venezuela, the 
Philippines and Vietnam tend to see the social 
impact of these platforms in similar terms.  
These differences between user s and non- users 
tend to exist across all age groups and 
education levels. But in some countries, such as 
Mexico, Tunisia and Lebanon, younger and 
more highly  educated social media users are 
more likely to feel positive about social media’s 
societal effects  than older or less- educated 
users.  
For instance, i n Mexico, two -thirds of 18 - to 29-
year -old users feel that social media ha ve 
mostly been a good thing for society , compared 
with  about half of social media users ages 50 
and above. There is a similar 10 -point gap on 
this question between Mexican social media users with a secondary education or more 
(66%) and users with less than a secondary 
education (56%).  
 Social media platform, messaging app 
users often more likely than non -users 
to see social media as good for society  
% of adults who say social media ha ve mostly been a 
good  thing for society  
 
 
Note: Statistically significant differences in bold . Respondents who 
gave other responses not shown. Social media platform and 
messaging app users include those who said they use one or more 
of the seven specific online platforms measured in this survey.  
Source : Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q11b.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  56 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Acknowledgments  
This report is a collaborative effort based on the input and analysis of the follo wing individuals.   
Laura Silver , Senior Researcher  
Aaron Smith , Associate Director, Research  
Courtney Johnson , Research Associate   
Kyle Taylor , Research Analyst  
Jingjing Jiang , Research Analyst  
Monica Anderson , Senior Researcher  
Lee Rainie , Director, Internet and Technology Research  
 
Sara Atske , Assistant Digital Producer  
James Bell , Vice President, Global Strategy  
Shawnee Cohn, Communications Manager   
Stefan Cornibert, Communications Manager   
Claudia Deane , Vice President , Research       
Michael Keegan , Information Graphics Designer  
David Kent , Copy Editor  
Martha McRoy , Research Methodologist  
Patrick Moynihan , Associate Director, International Research Methods  
Stacy  Pancratz , Research  Methodologist  
Andrew Perrin , Research Analyst  
Margaret Porteus , Information Graphics Designer  
Audrey Powers , Senior Operations Associate   
Ariana Rodriguez -Gitler , Digital Producer  
Richard Wike , Director, Global  Attitudes Research 
Pew Research Center also received helpful advice and feedback for this report from a panel of expert advisers: Michael Kende , Visiting Professor at the Graduate  Institute, Geneva; Christopher 
Yoo, John H. Chestnut Professor of Law, Co mmunication, and Computer & Information Science, 
Director, Center of Technology, Innovation & Competition at the University of Pennsylvania; and Joshua A. Tucker, Professor of Politics, Director of the Jordan Center of the Advanced Study of Russia and co -Director of the Social Media and Political Participation (SMaPP) lab at New York 
University . 
While the analysis was guided by our consultations with these advisers, Pew Research Center is 
solely responsible for the interpretation and reporting of the data.   57 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Methodology  
About Pew Research Center’s Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018  
R
esults for the survey are based on face -to-face interviews conducted under the direction of  D3 
Systems, Inc. The results are based on  national samples. More details about our international 
survey methodology and country -specific sample designs are available here . 58 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org 
 Appendix A: About the focus groups  
Pew Research Center conducted a series of focus groups to better understand how people think 
about their own mobile phones and the impact of these devices on their society. Five focus groups 
were held in each of the following four countries: Kenya, Mexico,  the Philippines and Tunisia.14 
Each focus group consisted of 10 adults coming together for an hour and a half for a discussion led 
by a local, professional moderator using a guide developed by Pew Research Center.  
In each country, the groups were structured according to the following criteria: 
 Group 1, “basic phone” – all participants either owned or shared a basic phone that could not 
connect to the internet and were 36 years old or older;  
 Group 2, “younger, smartphone” –  all participants owned or shared  a smartphone and were 
under the age of 30;  
 Group 3, “older, smartphone” – all participants owned or shared a smartphone and were at 
least 30 years old;  
 Group 4, “women phone users” –  all participants were women who  either owned or shared a 
phone (including a minimum of five participants who owned or shared a smartphone), and at 
least two participants were married and two were unmarried;  
 Group 5, “migrant phone users” –  all participants either owned or shared a phone (including a 
minimum of five participant s who owned or shared a smartphone) and all either lived in a 
place that was different from where they grew up or had a family member who lived elsewhere.  
All focus groups also required participants to have at least some interest in politics, and, aside from group 4, which was all women , they were balanced with regard to gender. Aside from group 
1, participants were also required to use their phone at least once a week. Where feasible, participants were also recruited to ensure diversity with regard to education levels, employment status, rural and urban location, and the duration for which they have owned their phones.  
                                                        
14 Focus groups were held in four, rather than all 11 countries, because of time and resources. Countries were chosen purposefully to cover 
all four key regions included in the survey: Latin America, the Asia -Pacific, sub -Saharan Africa and the Middle East and Nort h Africa (MENA).  59 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 
 Focus groups were held in the following locations and on the following dates: 
 Mexico City, Mexico: March 13 -15, 2018  
 Manila, Philippines: March 21 -23, 2018  
 Nairobi, Kenya: March 26 -28, 2018  
 Tunis, Tunisia: March 28 -30, 2018  
D3 Systems,  Inc. worked with local field partners in each of the four countries to recruit the 
participants using a screener designed by Pew Research Center. All participants were given 
financial remuneration for their time.  
These groups were primarily used to help shape the survey questions asked in each of the 11 countries. But, throughout the report, we have also included quotations that illustrate some of the 
major themes that were discussed during the groups. Quotations are chosen to provide context for  
the survey findings and are not necessarily representative of the majority opinion in any particular 
group or country. Quotations may have been edited for gramma r and  clarity.  
  60 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Appendix B: Compiled usage figures    
Phone type  
% of adults who use a … 
 Smartphone  Feature 
phone  Basic 
phone  No phone  
 % % % % 
Colombia  58 17 19 6 
India  32 4 47 17 
Jordan  85 1 11 3 
Kenya  36 21 40 3 
Lebanon  86 1 4 9 
Mexico  42 33 11 14 
Philippines  53 4 23 20 
South Africa  63 6 26 5 
Tunisia  51 8 37 4 
Venezuela  45 4 36 15 
Vietnam  67 2 29 2 
 
Note: Mobile phone users include those who say they own or share 
a mobile phone. Feature phone users include those who say their 
phone can connect to the internet but is not a smartphone. Basic 
phone users include those who say they  have a mobile phone but 
that it cannot connect to the internet.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018 . Q4, 
Q5, Q7, Q8. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 
A note on the table above: Respondents who did not know if their phone was a smartphone or if it was capable of connecting to the internet were classified as basic phone users. Respondents who 
did not know if their phone was a smartphone but knew it connec ted to the internet were classified 
as feature phone users.   61 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Internet use  
% of adults who … 
 Use internet  Do not use 
internet  
 % % 
Colombia  80 20 
India  38 62 
Jordan  87 13 
Kenya  62 38 
Lebanon  87 13 
Mexico  81 19 
Philippines  65 35 
South Africa  74 26 
Tunisia  67 33 
Venezuela  77 23 
Vietnam  74 26 
Note: Internet users include those who say 
they use the internet, use at least one 
social media platform or messaging app, or 
own or share a smartphone or feature 
phone . 
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social 
Impact Survey 2018 . Q7, Q8, Q9, Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging 
Economies ” 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
 
 
 
  62 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
 
 
 
 
  Social media platform and messaging 
app use  
% of adults who say they currently …  
 Use social 
media 
platforms or 
messaging 
apps  Do not use 
social media 
platforms or 
messaging app s DK/Refused  
 % % % 
Colombia  75 25 0 
India  31 59 10 
Jordan  81 19 0 
Kenya  41 59 1 
Lebanon  85 15 0 
Mexico  73 27 0 
Philippines  59 40 1 
South Africa  62 38 0 
Tunisia  57 43 0 
Venezuela  69 31 0 
Vietnam  64 36 0 
Note: Social media and messaging app users include those who 
said they use one or more of the seven specific online platforms 
measured in this survey.  The DK/Refused category includes those 
who say they do not know if they use all seven of these platforms.  
Source:  Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. 
Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  63 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
Appendix C: Detailed tables  
  Smartphone use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they own or share a smartphone  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  58 79 61 31 +48 57 60 +3 38 77 +39 
Mexico 42 60 40 24 +36 36 49 +13 29 63 +34 
Venezuela  45 56 50 25 +31 46 45 -1 30 58 +28 
India  32 48 29 15 +33 23 40 +17 18 59 +41 
Philippines  53 74 53 24 +50 53 52 -1 30 66 +36 
Vietnam  67 90 68 29 +61 65 69 +4 56 88 +32 
Jordan  85 93 87 64 +29 83 86 +3 76 93 +17 
Lebanon  86 98 96 62 +36 84 88 +4 77 98 +21 
Tunisia  51 80 52 26 +54 47 55 +8 34 68 +34 
Kenya  36 46 33 16 +30 32 41 +9 27 60 +33 
South Africa  63 79 67 37 +42 62 65 +3 50 81 +31 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. For the purpose of  comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels 
based on the United Nations’ International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below 
secondary education and the higher  category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  64 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
  
Feature phone use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they own or share a feature phone  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  17 13 18 19 -6 18 15 -3 19 15 -4 
Mexico 33 30 37 29 +1 38 27 -11 35 29 -6 
Venezuela  4 5 3 5 0 4 4 0 5 4 -1 
India  4 5 4 3 +2 3 5 +2 3 5 +2 
Philippines  4 6 3 2 +4 5 3 -2 3 5 +2 
Vietnam  2 2 2 2 0 2 2 0 2 1 -1 
Jordan  1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 
Lebanon  1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 -1 
Tunisia  8 9 9 7 +2 8 9 +1 7 10 +3 
Kenya  21 18 23 23 -5 18 24 +6 23 15 -8 
South Africa  6 6 6 7 -1 6 7 +1 8 4 -4 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Feature phone users include those who say their phone can connect to the internet but is not a 
smartphone. For the purpose of comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ 
International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below secondary education and the 
higher category is secondary or above.  
Source:  Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q7 & Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  65 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
  
Basic phone use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they own or share a basic phone  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  19 3 16 40 -37 19 19 0 33 6 -27 
Mexico 11 4 11 20 -16 10 13 +3 16 4 -12 
Venezuela  36 25 36 48 -23 34 37 +3 44 29 -15 
India  47 38 52 52 -14 50 45 -5 56 30 -26 
Philippines  23 12 27 31 -19 24 22 -2 29 19 -10 
Vietnam  29 7 29 65 -58 30 28 -2 39 10 -29 
Jordan  11 2 10 29 -27 12 10 -2 17 5 -12 
Lebanon  4 0 2 12 -12 4 5 +1 7 1 -6 
Tunisia  37 8 37 60 -52 40 33 -7 52 21 -31 
Kenya  40 33 42 58 -25 46 34 -12 47 24 -23 
South Africa  26 12 23 48 -36 28 23 -5 36 12 -24 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Basic phone users include those who say they have a mobile phone but that it cannot connect to 
the internet. For the purpose of  comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ 
International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below secondary education and the 
higher  category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Soc ial Impact Survey 2018. Q7 & Q8.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  66 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
  
Internet use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who use the internet  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  80 97 84 56 +41 80 80 0 63 95 +32 
Mexico 81 95 82 60 +35 79 83 +4 71 96 +25 
Venezuela  77 93 82 50 +43 78 76 -2 60 91 +31 
India  38 55 35 20 +35 29 46 +17 40 80 +40 
Philippines  65 91 65 30 +61 65 64 -1 64 92 +28 
Vietnam  74 95 75 37 +58 73 75 +2 64 92 +28 
Jordan  87 95 89 66 +29 84 89 +5 78 95 +17 
Lebanon  87 99 97 65 +34 86 89 +3 79 98 +19 
Tunisia  67 94 71 39 +55 61 72 +11 48 86 +38 
Kenya  62 70 60 41 +29 55 69 +14 54 81 +27 
South Africa  74 89 77 47 +42 71 76 +5 62 89 +27 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Internet users include those who say they use the internet, use at least one social media or 
messaging app, or own or share  a smartphone or feature phone.  For the purpose of comparing education groups across  countries, we 
standardize education levels based on the United Nations’ International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the 
lower education category is below secondary education and the higher category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Social Impact Survey 2018.   
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  67 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
  
Social media platform and messaging app use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they use at least one social media platform or messaging app  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  75 95 79 45 +50 74 75 +1 54 93 +39 
Mexico 73 93 74 47 +46 70 76 +6 60 93 +33 
Venezuela  69 91 74 37 +54 71 67 -4 50 86 +36 
India  31 48 28 12 +36 21 40 +19 17 60 +43 
Philippines  59 88 58 21 +67 59 58 -1 31 76 +45 
Vietnam  64 92 63 23 +69 63 66 +3 53 86 +33 
Jordan  81 93 84 54 +39 78 85 +7 70 92 +22 
Lebanon  85 98 96 61 +37 84 87 +3 76 98 +22 
Tunisia  57 90 60 26 +64 51 64 +13 36 79 +43 
Kenya  41 54 34 17 +37 34 48 +14 30 68 +38 
South Africa  62 84 62 32 +52 59 65 +6 47 82 +35 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. Social media and messaging app users include those who said they use one or more of the seven 
specific online platforms measured in this survey.  For the purpose of comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education 
levels based on the United Nations’ International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is 
below secondary education  and the higher category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10a -g. 
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  68 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org   
Facebook use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they currently use Facebook  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  63 87 67 31 +56 63 63 0 43 81 +38 
Mexico 62 85 62 34 +51 59 66 +7 49 82 +33 
Venezuela  64 87 68 31 +56 68 61 -7 46 80 +34 
India  24 41 21 9 +32 14 34 +20 12 51 +39 
Philippines  58 88 57 21 +67 59 57 -2 30 76 +46 
Vietnam  63 91 62 23 +68 62 64 +2 52 85 +33 
Jordan  71 84 71 45 +39 61 80 +19 58 83 +25 
Lebanon  68 89 76 37 +52 66 70 +4 52 87 +35 
Tunisia  55 88 58 24 +64 48 62 +14 34 77 +43 
Kenya  35 48 29 13 +35 28 43 +15 25 62 +37 
South Africa  47 71 44 17 +54 42 51 +9 32 66 +34 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. For the purpose of comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels 
based on the United Nations’ International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the l ower education category is below 
secondary education and the higher category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10a.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emerging Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  69 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org  
 
  WhatsApp use by age, gender and education  
% of adults who say they currently use WhatsApp  
  Age Gender  Education  
 TOTAL  18-29 30-49 50+ YOUNGEST-
OLDEST DIFF  Women  Men  DIFF Less 
education  More 
education  DIFF 
 % % % %  % %  % %  
Colombia  71 89 76 42 +47 72 69 -3 50 89 +39 
Mexico 67 86 68 43 +43 65 69 +4 53 89 +36 
Venezuela  47 60 53 24 +36 48 47 -1 30 62 +32 
India  29 46 26 11 +35 20 37 +17 15 57 +42 
Philippines  4 6 5 2 +4 5 4 -1 1 6 +5 
Vietnam  2 3 2 0 +3 2 2 0 1 4 +3 
Jordan  78 89 81 50 +39 76 80 +4 67 88 +21 
Lebanon  84 98 94 60 +38 83 86 +3 75 97 +22 
Tunisia  14 28 12 4 +24 12 15 +3 5 23 +18 
Kenya  30 40 25 12 +28 26 34 +8 19 56 +37 
South Africa  57 75 58 30 +45 55 59 +4 43 76 +33 
Note: Significant differences shown in bold. For the purpose of comparing education groups across countries, we standardize education levels 
based on the United Nations’ International Standard Classification of Education. In all nations surveyed , the lower education category is below 
secondary education and the higher category is secondary or above.  
Source: Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018. Q10b.  
“Mobile Connectivity in Emergi ng Economies”  
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  70 
PEW RESEARCH CENTER  
www.pewresearch .org Topline Questionnaire  
Pew Research Center  
Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018  
March 7 , 2019 Release  
Me
thodological notes:  
Survey results are based on national samples. For further details on sample designs, see the  
Methodology section and our international survey methods database.
Due t
o rounding, percentages may not total 100%. T he topline “total” columns show 100%,
because they are based on unrounded numbers.
No
t all questions included in the Mobile Technology and Its Social Impact Survey 2018  are
presented in this topline. Omitted questions have either been previously release d or will be
released in future reports.
Chapter 3 presents trend data drawn from a past Global Attitudes Project survey,
conducted in 2014. For more on these data, please see the report , its topline  or its
methodology . Because of differences in the sampling plan and coverage of the survey, we
do not trend this survey to the 2014 survey conducted in India.Q4. Do you own a mobile phone — yes or no?
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam89 11 0 100
70 30 0 100
94 6 0 100
89 11 0 100
89 11 0 100
78 22 0 100
73 27 0 100
87 13 0 100
91 9 0 100
68 32 0 100
97 3 0 100
Q5. ASK ONLY THOSE WHO DO NOT OWN A MOBILE PHONE: Do you regularly 
use someone else's mobile phone — yes or no?
Yes No DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela45 55 0 100 271
42 57 1 100 852
48 52 0 100 139
73 27 0 100 204
19 81 0 100 210
37 63 0 100 518
26 74 0 100 695
65 35 0 100 274
56 44 0 100 201
53 47 0 100 815
Q6. ASK MOBILE PHONE SHARERS ONLY: Please tell me the primary reason why you share a mobile phone, rather than owning your own.
You don't need 
to use it 
regularlyYou cannot 
afford oneYou think it's 
too 
complicated to 
useYou are not 
allowed to 
have your own 
mobile phoneYou do not like 
using a mobile 
phoneYour phone 
was lost, 
broken or 
stolenYou are afraid 
that your 
phone will be 
stolenOther reason 
[RECORD 
VERBATIM] DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Kenya
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela10 19 3 1 13 41 8 6 0 100 116
39 19 26 2 5 6 1 1 0 100 352
3 42 1 4 4 41 2 5 0 100 145
19 34 11 4 8 18 0 5 0 100 155
29 22 10 1 10 21 1 5 0 100 177
5 33 6 0 5 36 2 11 3 100 173
23 38 6 1 4 25 0 4 0 100 111
2 40 2 0 1 50 3 1 0 100 415
71
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ7. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Can your mobile phone connect to the 
internet — yes or no?
Yes No DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam79 20 1 100 2332
40 59 2 100 3005
87 13 0 100 2434
56 41 3 100 2449
94 6 0 100 2272
86 13 1 100 1857
66 33 1 100 1969
68 31 1 100 2365
58 42 0 100 2442
57 43 0 100 2074
70 30 0 100 2475
Q8. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Is your mobile phone a smartphone or is 
it not a smartphone?
SmartphoneNot a 
smartphone DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam62 36 1 100 2332
38 61 1 100 3005
88 12 0 100 2434
37 62 1 100 2449
95 5 0 100 2272
49 49 2 100 1857
66 33 1 100 1969
66 33 1 100 2365
53 46 1 100 2442
53 46 0 100 2074
68 31 0 100 2475
Q9. Do you currently use the internet — yes or no?
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam67 33 0 100
29 68 3 100
81 19 0 100
37 62 1 100
82 18 0 100
67 33 0 100
48 52 1 100
55 45 0 100
55 45 0 100
68 32 0 100
69 31 0 100
72
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ10a. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? a. Facebook
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam63 37 0 100
24 62 14 100
71 29 0 100
35 63 2 100
68 32 0 100
62 38 0 100
58 40 1 100
47 53 1 100
55 45 0 100
64 35 0 100
63 36 1 100
Q10b. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? b. WhatsApp
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam71 29 0 100
29 58 13 100
78 22 0 100
30 69 2 100
84 16 0 100
67 33 0 100
4 91 5 100
57 42 0 100
14 85 1 100
47 52 1 100
2 93 5 100
Q10c. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? c. Twitter
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam11 88 0 100
4 76 21 100
8 91 0 100
10 87 3 100
12 88 0 100
14 85 1 100
7 90 4 100
12 88 1 100
7 92 1 100
21 79 1 100
3 93 5 100
73
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ10d. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? d. Instagram
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam25 74 1 100
7 71 21 100
28 71 0 100
12 84 4 100
34 65 1 100
20 79 1 100
10 86 4 100
13 87 0 100
23 76 1 100
29 70 1 100
11 85 5 100
Q10e. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? e. Viber
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam2 96 1 100
1 74 25 100
8 91 0 100
4 92 4 100
19 80 1 100
3 96 1 100
6 90 5 100
2 97 1 100
18 82 1 100
2 95 3 100
8 88 4 100
Q10f. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? f. SnapChat
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam7 92 1 100
2 75 23 100
24 76 0 100
6 90 5 100
18 81 1 100
10 88 1 100
6 90 4 100
5 94 1 100
7 92 1 100
5 93 2 100
2 92 5 100
74
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ10g. Do you currently use ____ — yes or no? g. Tinder
Yes No DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam2 96 2 100
1 73 26 100
1 98 1 100
2 92 6 100
2 96 2 100
3 96 1 100
1 92 7 100
1 98 1 100
2 97 1 100
2 95 3 100
1 92 6 100
Q11a. Overall, when you add up all the advantages and disadvantages of ____, would you say 
____ have mostly been a good thing or a bad thing for society? a. mobile phones
Good thing Bad thingBoth good and 
bad [VOL]Neither good 
nor bad [VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam68 21 9 1 1 100
68 5 24 2 2 100
53 21 24 2 0 100
86 8 5 1 0 100
69 10 17 3 2 100
70 16 10 2 1 100
72 8 18 1 1 100
76 15 7 1 1 100
72 16 11 0 1 100
47 46 4 3 0 100
83 5 11 1 0 100
Q11b. Overall, when you add up all the advantages and disadvantages of ____, would you say 
____ have mostly been a good thing or a bad thing for society? b. social media
Good thing Bad thingBoth good and 
bad [VOL]Neither good 
nor bad [VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam50 35 11 1 2 100
37 9 20 2 32 100
41 31 25 2 1 100
70 19 6 1 4 100
39 26 25 5 4 100
57 27 11 3 3 100
62 11 22 1 4 100
57 27 10 2 4 100
58 27 12 1 2 100
42 43 7 6 2 100
80 6 12 1 1 100
75
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ12a. Overall, when you add up all the advantages and disadvantages of ____, would you say ____ have 
mostly been a good thing or a bad thing for you? a. mobile phones
Good thing Bad thingThis doesn't 
apply to me 
[VOL]Both good and 
bad [VOL]Neither good 
nor bad [VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam86 9 1 3 1 0 100
73 5 4 16 1 1 100
82 8 2 8 0 0 100
91 6 0 2 1 0 100
76 8 3 11 2 1 100
80 11 1 6 1 1 100
81 6 1 11 1 0 100
84 11 1 4 0 1 100
84 10 0 5 0 0 100
49 47 0 2 1 0 100
87 4 1 7 1 0 100
Q12b. Overall, when you add up all the advantages and disadvantages of ____, would you say ____ have 
mostly been a good thing or a bad thing for you? b. social media
Good thing Bad thingThis doesn't 
apply to me 
[VOL]Both good and 
bad [VOL]Neither good 
nor bad [VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam65 21 6 4 1 2 100
39 8 10 13 1 29 100
62 16 9 11 1 1 100
74 15 3 3 1 3 100
53 19 6 16 4 2 100
63 21 3 9 2 2 100
67 11 5 14 1 3 100
59 25 6 5 1 3 100
65 22 2 7 1 3 100
44 44 1 4 4 3 100
83 5 2 8 1 1 100
Q13Aa. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: When it comes to how you ____, have mobile 
phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either way? a. obtain 
information and news about important issues
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam79 4 16 1 100 2332
81 6 6 6 100 3005
78 1 20 1 100 2434
88 3 9 0 100 2449
77 5 16 2 100 2272
74 2 23 2 100 1857
85 3 11 1 100 1969
85 3 10 1 100 2365
75 4 19 1 100 2442
83 1 13 2 100 2074
73 2 24 1 100 2475
76
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ13Ab. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: When it comes to how you ____, have mobile 
phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either way? b. stay in 
touch with people who live far away
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam91 2 7 0 100 2332
95 2 1 1 100 3005
92 0 8 0 100 2434
93 1 5 0 100 2449
94 2 3 0 100 2272
88 1 10 1 100 1857
94 1 5 1 100 1969
94 2 3 0 100 2365
93 1 6 0 100 2442
95 1 5 0 100 2074
87 1 12 0 100 2475
Q13Ac. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: When it comes to how you ____, have mobile phones 
mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either way? c. earn a living
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam61 3 33 2 100 2332
66 7 17 10 100 3005
36 4 60 1 100 2434
81 4 14 1 100 2449
38 9 51 2 100 2272
59 3 37 1 100 1857
63 6 28 2 100 1969
66 7 25 2 100 2365
55 6 38 1 100 2442
65 3 31 2 100 2074
67 1 31 1 100 2475
77
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ13Ad. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: When it comes to how you ____, have mobile 
phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either way? d. 
concentrate and get things done
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam62 11 25 2 100 2332
50 16 17 16 100 3005
55 9 35 1 100 2434
84 4 12 0 100 2449
43 18 38 1 100 2272
55 11 32 2 100 1857
39 30 30 1 100 1969
71 10 17 1 100 2365
64 11 25 1 100 2442
62 15 22 1 100 2074
66 4 29 1 100 2475
Q13Ae. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: When it comes to how you ____, have mobile 
phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either way? e. 
communicate face-to-face
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam50 16 33 2 100 2332
59 15 13 12 100 3005
58 13 29 1 100 2434
75 7 17 1 100 2449
40 35 24 2 100 2272
51 10 37 2 100 1857
73 6 19 1 100 1969
59 14 24 3 100 2365
55 15 30 1 100 2442
58 10 30 2 100 2074
61 4 35 1 100 2475
Q13Ba. ASK ONLY THOSE WITHOUT MOBILE PHONE ACCESS: When it comes to how people 
____, have mobile phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either 
way? a. obtain information and news about important issues
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Venezuela72 4 22 1 100 155
59 6 8 28 100 500
47 12 24 16 100 170
55 10 27 8 100 363
74 6 15 5 100 518
74 8 12 6 100 101
79 2 15 3 100 400
78
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ13Bb. ASK ONLY THOSE WITHOUT MOBILE PHONE ACCESS: When it comes to how people 
____, have mobile phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either 
way? b. stay in touch with people who live far away
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Venezuela85 5 9 1 100 155
90 1 2 8 100 500
83 4 7 6 100 170
75 3 17 5 100 363
88 4 6 2 100 518
83 4 10 3 100 101
89 1 8 2 100 400
Q13Bc. ASK ONLY THOSE WITHOUT MOBILE PHONE ACCESS: When it comes to how people 
____, have mobile phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either 
way? c. earn a living
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Venezuela58 9 27 5 100 155
44 5 17 34 100 500
38 17 33 12 100 170
42 12 35 11 100 363
63 11 21 5 100 518
61 8 23 7 100 101
62 5 30 3 100 400
Q13Bd. ASK ONLY THOSE WITHOUT MOBILE PHONE ACCESS: When it comes to how people 
____, have mobile phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either 
way? d. concentrate and get things done
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Venezuela58 17 21 4 100 155
28 15 15 43 100 500
20 32 26 22 100 170
43 15 32 11 100 363
46 26 23 5 100 518
55 12 25 8 100 101
57 14 25 4 100 400
79
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ13Be. ASK ONLY THOSE WITHOUT MOBILE PHONE ACCESS: When it comes to how people 
____, have mobile phones mostly helped, mostly hurt, or have they not had much effect either 
way? e. communicate face-to-face
Mostly helped Mostly hurtNot had much 
effect either 
way DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Venezuela50 16 30 3 100 155
39 16 13 33 100 500
25 48 17 10 100 170
45 18 29 8 100 363
66 9 22 4 100 518
53 17 22 8 100 101
58 14 26 2 100 400
Q14Aa. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? a. morality
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam34 44 18 4 100 1245
34 23 11 32 100 1759
12 76 10 2 100 1293
45 37 11 7 100 1212
9 72 16 3 100 1215
35 35 23 7 100 1158
49 29 14 8 100 1238
48 33 15 4 100 1179
18 65 15 2 100 1282
51 30 15 4 100 1272
44 15 35 5 100 1287
Q14Ab. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? b. politics
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam39 30 21 9 100 1245
38 20 8 34 100 1759
31 33 16 19 100 1293
47 38 8 7 100 1212
23 42 17 17 100 1215
44 24 22 10 100 1158
51 21 17 11 100 1238
50 28 12 10 100 1179
32 32 23 12 100 1282
48 24 15 13 100 1272
46 9 36 9 100 1287
80
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Ac. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? c. the economy
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam56 15 23 6 100 1245
39 15 9 36 100 1759
39 31 20 10 100 1293
64 20 9 7 100 1212
42 28 17 13 100 1215
47 21 26 6 100 1158
69 11 13 6 100 1238
63 18 12 7 100 1179
44 22 27 7 100 1282
60 13 16 11 100 1272
70 3 24 3 100 1287
Q14Ad. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? d. education
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam71 20 7 2 100 1245
65 17 5 13 100 1759
71 23 6 1 100 1293
76 15 5 4 100 1212
66 21 6 7 100 1215
63 22 11 4 100 1158
87 6 4 2 100 1238
84 10 4 2 100 1179
56 32 10 2 100 1282
84 9 5 2 100 1272
66 9 22 3 100 1287
Q14Ae. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? e. family cohesion
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam45 38 15 2 100 1245
51 21 11 18 100 1759
26 65 8 1 100 1293
63 20 11 7 100 1212
20 71 7 2 100 1215
40 35 21 4 100 1158
75 9 11 5 100 1238
63 20 13 4 100 1179
26 51 20 2 100 1282
75 13 10 2 100 1272
53 11 34 2 100 1287
81
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Af. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? f. civility
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam46 28 20 7 100 1245
42 26 11 22 100 1759
14 72 11 2 100 1293
59 20 13 8 100 1212
7 72 18 3 100 1215
43 22 24 11 100 1158
54 23 17 7 100 1238
53 27 15 5 100 1179
50 31 17 3 100 1282
67 15 14 4 100 1272
44 12 39 5 100 1287
Q14Ag. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? g. our local culture
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam54 24 17 5 100 1245
39 26 10 25 100 1759
52 36 10 2 100 1293
54 30 11 5 100 1212
37 42 16 6 100 1215
54 20 18 7 100 1158
64 12 16 8 100 1238
54 27 16 4 100 1179
56 26 15 3 100 1282
69 11 16 4 100 1272
55 6 34 5 100 1287
Q14Ah. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? h. physical health
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam35 37 24 4 100 1245
31 40 10 19 100 1759
16 68 15 1 100 1293
52 20 18 9 100 1212
8 73 15 4 100 1215
39 29 27 4 100 1158
43 38 13 6 100 1238
62 17 14 7 100 1179
14 67 17 3 100 1282
54 19 23 4 100 1272
32 36 30 2 100 1287
82
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Ai. ASK SPLIT 1 ONLY: Has the increasing use of the internet had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? i. children in our country
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam26 65 6 3 100 1245
38 45 5 13 100 1759
7 90 3 1 100 1293
29 63 5 3 100 1212
7 87 3 3 100 1215
35 53 9 3 100 1158
45 37 12 6 100 1238
40 52 6 2 100 1179
13 81 5 1 100 1282
53 36 7 4 100 1272
29 54 14 2 100 1287
Q14Ba. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? a. morality
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam32 43 22 3 100 1242
34 25 13 28 100 1746
13 72 13 1 100 1208
53 35 9 3 100 1296
7 75 15 2 100 1227
33 37 23 6 100 1062
50 26 17 6 100 1249
50 32 15 3 100 1287
19 62 17 2 100 1250
47 27 20 6 100 1202
43 13 41 4 100 1213
Q14Bb. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? b. politics
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam41 29 21 8 100 1242
39 21 9 31 100 1746
32 31 18 18 100 1208
50 34 10 6 100 1296
24 43 18 14 100 1227
46 22 23 8 100 1062
53 20 19 9 100 1249
48 29 13 10 100 1287
32 29 27 12 100 1250
48 22 17 13 100 1202
44 8 41 7 100 1213
83
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Bc. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? c. the economy
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam62 15 21 3 100 1242
40 15 11 34 100 1746
44 29 16 11 100 1208
71 17 9 3 100 1296
44 30 17 9 100 1227
48 22 24 6 100 1062
72 9 13 6 100 1249
65 18 12 5 100 1287
45 22 27 6 100 1250
58 14 18 10 100 1202
67 4 26 3 100 1213
Q14Bd. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? d. education
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam64 27 8 1 100 1242
67 18 5 10 100 1746
68 27 5 0 100 1208
75 18 4 3 100 1296
63 24 7 6 100 1227
56 26 14 4 100 1062
81 10 6 3 100 1249
82 13 4 1 100 1287
48 39 12 1 100 1250
74 14 10 3 100 1202
56 14 27 3 100 1213
Q14Be. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? e. family cohesion
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam52 35 13 1 100 1242
53 20 13 14 100 1746
30 62 8 1 100 1208
77 14 8 2 100 1296
20 70 9 1 100 1227
45 37 16 2 100 1062
78 10 10 2 100 1249
69 18 11 2 100 1287
39 43 17 1 100 1250
74 15 9 2 100 1202
53 11 36 1 100 1213
84
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Bf. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? f. civility
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam47 25 24 4 100 1242
40 28 12 20 100 1746
15 70 13 2 100 1208
69 14 12 5 100 1296
8 72 17 3 100 1227
40 26 25 10 100 1062
56 22 17 5 100 1249
54 25 15 6 100 1287
55 27 15 3 100 1250
59 15 18 7 100 1202
43 13 40 3 100 1213
Q14Bg. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? g. our local culture
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam57 20 19 4 100 1242
41 27 11 22 100 1746
51 37 10 2 100 1208
63 22 12 3 100 1296
39 40 15 5 100 1227
54 23 18 5 100 1062
62 13 18 7 100 1249
56 26 15 3 100 1287
56 25 17 2 100 1250
63 14 18 6 100 1202
53 8 35 3 100 1213
Q14Bh. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a 
bad influence, or no influence at all on ____? h. physical health
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam32 40 25 3 100 1242
35 41 11 14 100 1746
15 69 14 3 100 1208
58 17 19 6 100 1296
10 71 16 3 100 1227
30 36 30 4 100 1062
38 41 16 4 100 1249
61 18 16 4 100 1287
14 63 20 2 100 1250
46 21 27 6 100 1202
30 38 30 2 100 1213
85
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ14Bi. ASK SPLIT 2 ONLY: Has the increasing use of mobile phones had a good influence, a bad 
influence, or no influence at all on ____? i. children in our country
Good influence Bad influenceNo influence 
at all DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam19 72 7 2 100 1242
36 49 6 10 100 1746
7 90 3 0 100 1208
28 67 4 1 100 1296
6 86 4 3 100 1227
26 63 9 2 100 1062
44 40 10 5 100 1249
37 55 6 2 100 1287
12 81 6 1 100 1250
46 37 13 4 100 1202
25 62 12 1 100 1213
Q16. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Please tell me which statement most closely matches how you feel 
about your mobile phone, even if neither one is exactly right: You don't always need your mobile phone, or you 
couldn't live without your mobile phone?
Don't always 
need itCouldn't live 
without itSome of both 
[VOL] Neither [VOL] DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam76 22 2 0 0 100 2332
51 33 10 5 1 100 3005
37 56 6 2 0 100 2434
26 72 1 0 0 100 2449
31 53 13 3 0 100 2272
77 19 3 1 0 100 1857
68 24 5 3 0 100 1969
36 59 3 1 0 100 2365
43 54 2 1 0 100 2442
62 29 4 4 0 100 2074
69 25 5 1 0 100 2475
Q17. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Please tell me which statement most closely matches how you feel 
about your mobile phone, even if neither one is exactly right: Your mobile phone helps you save time, or your 
mobile phone makes you waste time?
Helps you save 
timeMakes you 
waste timeSome of both 
[VOL] Neither [VOL] DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam50 41 5 3 0 100 2332
64 18 15 2 1 100 3005
31 43 10 16 0 100 2434
84 14 2 0 0 100 2449
37 36 18 9 0 100 2272
45 47 5 2 0 100 1857
41 50 6 3 1 100 1969
65 28 5 1 0 100 2365
54 39 4 3 0 100 2442
71 20 5 3 0 100 2074
63 27 9 1 0 100 2475
86
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ18. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Please tell me which statement most closely matches how you feel 
about your mobile phone, even if neither one is exactly right: Your mobile phone is something that frees you, 
or your mobile phone is something that ties you down?
Something 
that frees youSomething 
that ties you 
downSome of both 
[VOL] Neither [VOL] DK/Refused Total                 N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam54 34 4 6 2 100 2332
54 20 15 8 2 100 3005
46 25 8 21 0 100 2434
86 12 1 0 0 100 2449
40 30 18 11 1 100 2272
55 32 3 8 2 100 1857
63 23 5 6 2 100 1969
64 27 5 2 1 100 2365
54 39 2 5 0 100 2442
66 19 5 11 1 100 2074
77 10 8 3 1 100 2475
Q19a. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? a. identity theft
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam6 10 83 1 100
16 27 36 21 100
17 17 64 1 100
25 17 56 2 100
17 24 56 3 100
5 14 80 1 100
10 22 66 1 100
10 11 78 2 100
9 20 70 1 100
18 14 66 1 100
19 28 50 2 100
87
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ19b. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? b. harassment or bullying
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam11 13 75 1 100
18 31 39 11 100
20 17 61 1 100
34 21 42 2 100
19 24 53 4 100
9 17 73 1 100
10 21 67 1 100
14 13 71 2 100
16 25 58 1 100
16 24 59 1 100
30 32 37 2 100
Q19c. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? c. exposure to false or incorrect information
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam14 15 70 1 100
12 32 45 10 100
14 21 64 1 100
31 21 48 1 100
15 28 53 4 100
10 24 65 1 100
9 27 64 1 100
14 14 71 1 100
10 25 64 0 100
16 26 57 1 100
19 32 48 1 100
88
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ19d. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? d. mobile phone addiction
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam17 13 70 1 100
22 30 39 9 100
18 12 70 0 100
42 22 35 2 100
21 21 56 2 100
14 17 68 1 100
13 24 62 1 100
16 15 68 1 100
11 16 72 1 100
29 17 53 1 100
21 25 53 1 100
Q19e. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? e. losing the ability to communicate face-to-face
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam22 19 58 1 100
21 33 32 14 100
27 20 52 1 100
44 24 32 1 100
21 27 50 2 100
19 26 52 2 100
16 37 46 1 100
17 19 63 1 100
27 26 46 1 100
27 23 48 1 100
31 34 33 2 100
89
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ19f. Let’s think for a moment about some experiences that might happen to 
people when they use their mobile phones. Do you think people should be 
concerned about ____ or not? [IF CONCERNED] And is that very concerned or 
only somewhat concerned? f. children being exposed to immoral or harmful 
content
Not concernedOnly 
somewhat 
concernedVery 
concerned DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam2 4 94 0 100
9 24 55 12 100
4 4 92 0 100
18 14 67 1 100
6 14 79 2 100
3 8 88 0 100
5 17 78 1 100
8 8 83 1 100
3 7 90 0 100
6 15 78 1 100
7 20 73 1 100
Q25a. ASK MOBILE PHONE USERS ONLY: Have you ever tried to limit ____ — 
yes or no? a. the time you spend on your mobile phone
Yes No DK/Refused Total N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam58 42 0 100 2332
42 54 4 100 3005
34 66 0 100 2434
46 54 0 100 2449
34 66 1 100 2272
65 34 1 100 1857
68 31 0 100 1969
56 43 1 100 2365
59 41 0 100 2442
38 60 2 100 2074
39 60 1 100 2475
90
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ25b. Have you ever tried to limit ____ — yes or no? b. the time your children 
spend on their mobile phones
Yes NoMy child or 
children do 
not have 
mobile phones 
/ I don't have 
any children 
[VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam46 30 24 0 100
26 41 29 3 100
21 20 59 0 100
30 40 30 0 100
26 24 50 1 100
58 25 16 1 100
41 36 22 1 100
40 35 24 1 100
44 21 34 0 100
28 41 31 0 100
37 41 21 0 100
Q26a. Do you ever monitor what ____ is looking at or doing on their mobile phone — yes or no? 
a. your partner or spouse
Yes NoThis person 
does not have 
a mobile 
phone [VOL]I do not have 
a partner or 
spouse [VOL] DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam26 62 1 11 0 100
18 55 9 15 2 100
14 46 2 37 0 100
27 68 1 4 0 100
12 51 5 30 1 100
21 67 2 9 0 100
30 47 6 16 1 100
25 64 1 10 0 100
24 70 2 4 0 100
22 64 1 12 0 100
23 73 1 3 0 100
91
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERQ26b. ASK IF PERSON HAS CHILDREN: Do you ever monitor what ____ is looking at or doing on 
their mobile phone — yes or no? b. a child of yours
Yes NoThis person 
does not have 
a mobile 
phone [VOL] DK/Refused Total N=
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam61 38 1 0 100 1972
37 55 4 4 100 2446
65 29 6 1 100 1138
45 52 3 1 100 1642
52 43 4 2 100 1256
58 40 1 1 100 1889
54 43 2 1 100 2025
43 55 1 0 100 1858
44 54 2 0 100 1750
49 48 2 0 100 1745
37 61 2 0 100 1860
Q47. Do you have access to a working desktop computer, laptop or tablet in your household or 
at work?
Yes, at home 
and at work Yes, at home Yes, at workNo, neither at 
home nor at 
work DK/Refused Total
Colombia
India
Jordan
Kenya
Lebanon
Mexico
Philippines
South Africa
Tunisia
Venezuela
Vietnam13 27 5 55 0 100
4 7 2 82 4 100
10 27 3 60 0 100
3 11 12 73 0 100
23 34 2 39 1 100
10 24 6 60 0 100
4 16 3 75 1 100
10 20 6 63 1 100
6 31 4 58 0 100
11 36 6 47 0 100
12 18 5 64 1 100
92
www.pewresearch.org
PEW RESEARCH CENTERRespondents are considered to have children if they did not volunteer in Q25b that they do not have childen . Respondents were also not asked this question if they volunteered that their children did not 
have a mobile phone in Q25b .