19Parenting in the Digital Age
The Challenges of Parental Responsibility  
in Comparative Perspective
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina Byrne
Abstract
As children in high, middle and even low-income countries gain access to the internet 
via a range of digital devices and services – most often via a mobile phone – parents are 
feeling challenged in their competence, role and authority. In response, parents draw on 
their available resources – socioeconomic and cultural – and their preferred parenting 
styles as well as some of the principles of positive parenting. In high income countries, a 
shift is underway from restrictive towards enabling forms of parental mediation. In middle 
and low-income countries, the evidence suggests that restrictive mediation is generally 
favoured by parents, although this brings costs in terms of children’s opportunities online, 
especially for girls. In all countries, the rapid pace of technological innovation undermines 
parental competence, this is in turn undermining children’s willingness to turn to parents 
for support. We conclude with suggestions to support parents in meeting the growing 
challenge of empowering their children online in diverse contexts.
Keywords: positive parenting, parental mediation, digital media, Global South, Global 
Kids Online, cross-national comparisons
Introduction
Who is responsible for enabling children’s internet use and protecting them from risks? 
Generally, the first answer is parents, especially when it comes to keeping children safe. 
Parents are held responsible for teaching their children about values, social norms 
and accepted behaviour. They are also expected to enable their children to study, help 
in the family, keep healthy, cross the road, and make good judgements about people, 
places and information. In enacting these responsibilities, parents – we include here 
Livingstone, Sonia & Byrne, Jasmina (2018). Parenting in the Digital Age. The Challenges of Parental Responsibility in Com -
parative Perspective p. 19-30 in Giovanna Mascheroni, Cristina Ponte & Ana Jorge (eds.) Digital Parenting. The Challenges for 
Families in the Digital Age . Göteborg: Nordicom.20
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina Byrnestep parents, grandparents and any other adults and older siblings taking on a caring 
role – have always been able to draw on their own life experience and the traditions 
and knowledge of their community. 
But as children in high, middle and even low-income countries gain access to the 
internet, parents are feeling challenged – especially as their children use mobile devices 
that are difficult for parents to supervise, and technologically complex services that 
parents may not understand. They are also influenced by popular worries about screen 
time, internet addiction, stranger danger and so on. So whatever is normatively  expected 
of parents, there are practical  limits to what they can do. No wonder that, in whichever 
country has recently gained widespread internet access, there is a groundswell of con -
cern – from parents  as they struggle to enact their responsibilities and about parents  as 
governments worry about the digital divide, child protection and cybercrime, on the 
one hand and, on the other, the digital skills of the future labour force.
Also under pressure are schools, expected to teach the digital literacies needed for 
children to benefit from the expanding digital opportunities; welfare and mental health 
services, now expected to address problems children face in proprietary online services; 
law enforcement, dealing with networked crimes involving child victims at considerable 
scale; and businesses, striving to expand into digital markets but undermined by issues 
of consumer literacy and trust. From the perspective of these organisations, the more 
that parents can take on to prepare their children for the digital age, the less the bur -
den on them. Conversely, the less able parents are to enable and protect their children, 
the greater are the calls for appropriate education, regulation, public expenditure and 
corporate social responsibility.
Parenting offline and online – how do they relate?
What kinds of parenting styles are likely to be effective in relation to the digital environ -
ment? There is a growing body of evidence, especially from high and middle-income 
countries, that demonstrates the importance of positive parenting for child development, 
including early childhood physical, cognitive and emotional development, educational 
outcomes, improved communication and trust, reduction in risk taking behaviour 
among adolescents, improved social competence of adolescents and reduction of 
violence (Daly, 2007; Knerr, Gardner & Cluver, 2013; Moore, Whitney & Kinukawa, 
2009). What is often considered “positive parenting” includes “stimulation and affection, 
clear and focused praise, supporting increasing autonomy, encouraging healthy habits, 
goal setting, establishing firm rules and consequences” (De Stone, 2016: 10). However, 
when children enter adolescents from around the age of 10, there are also changes in 
parent-child relationships with adolescents seeking more autonomy and independence 
(Patton et al., 2016), and parenting styles must adapt.
In 2007 the World Health Organization (WHO) developed a framework that ex -
amines key dimensions of parenting or parental roles that positively affect adolescent 21
Parenting in the Digital Agewell-being: connection, behaviour control, respect for individuality, modelling ap -
propriate behaviour, and provision and protection (WHO, 2007). These parental roles 
can be easily applied to all situations and environments, including to children’s digital 
world, as follows:
 1. Connection – a positive, stable, emotional bond between parents and adolescents is 
an important factor contributing to child and adolescent health and development. 
In the digital world that means that a child or an adolescent who feels connected 
with their parents is more likely to share their offline and online experiences 
without fearing their access will be blocked. Our Global Kids Online study shows 
that where children say they have positive relationship with parents in general 
(manifested through support and praise) they are more likely to share with them 
when negative things happen online (Georgiev et al., 2017; Logar et al., 2016).
 2. Behaviour control – this includes “supervising and monitoring adolescents’ ac -
tivities, establishing behavioural rules and consequences for misbehaviour, and 
conveying clear expectations for behaviour” (WHO, 2007: 11). When it comes to 
children and the digital technologies, this could include rules about time spent 
on the internet, use of digital devices after bed time, in children’s bedrooms, 
during meal time, as well as understanding what children do online, how they 
set up their privacy controls, with whom they share personal information etc. 
South African parents surveyed through Global Kids Online on average exhibit 
the digital skills of 12 to 14-year olds, making it relatively difficult for them to 
support and supervise their children’s online behaviour (Phyfer et al., 2016). The 
Bulgarian Kids Online survey shows that parental engagement in children’s online 
activities declines with children’s age, with 44 per cent of parents engaging with 
9 to 11-year olds and only 30 per cent with 12-year olds and older (Kanchev et 
al., 2017).
 3. Respect for individuality – this means allowing the adolescent to develop a healthy 
sense of self, apart from his or her parents. This includes listening to what ado -
lescents have to say, trusting them to complete their responsibilities or to take 
on new roles in the family. In the digital domain this means allowing children 
and adolescents to explore the internet independently in much the same way we 
would allow them to explore the physical world. The age and capacities of the 
child matter, as younger children will clearly need more guidance than the older 
ones. The Global Kids Online research shows that the 9 to 11-year old group finds 
it particularly difficult to know what information online is true and what is not 
(Byrne et al., 2016).
 4. Modelling appropriate behaviour – children and adolescents identify with their 
parents, absorb the values and norms established in the home and try to emulate 
parental behaviour. If parents spend most of their free time online, there is a strong 
likelihood that the children will do too. If parents share too much information 22
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina Byrneonline, will that affect how children share their own personal information or 
information about their friends? Through development of their sense of agency 
children may depart from the established norm in the family and decide to take 
a different approach to that of their parents. We have seen examples of children 
disagreeing over “sharenting” or parental sharing of content and images of their 
children online (Blum-Ross & Livingstone, 2017).
 5. Provision and protection – parents cannot meet all the needs of the growing 
adolescent. Their role is also to seek the resources for their children that they 
cannot provide or to ensure that they have access to appropriate services. When 
it comes to protection of children online parents still have an important role to 
play. But so do peers, teachers and other adults in children’s lives. When asked 
who they turn to if they experience something hurtful online, children would 
turn to “peers” first and then “parents” second, as we show below (Byrne et al., 
2016). 
To what extent these parenting roles will be fulfilled, what parenting style will be adopted 
and what parenting practices will prevail will depend on many factors including parental 
education, beliefs and culture as well as the individual and institutional support avail -
able to parents. As we discuss in what follows, this varies in different parts of the world.
In high income countries
In the early days of internet access in Europe and North America, many children be -
came confident and competent internet users before their parents and teachers. This 
resulted in a considerable generation gap – parents underestimated their children’s use 
and the risk of harm they encountered online. As a consequence, few parents supported 
their children’s internet use beyond the fact of providing access. By the same token, 
few children turned to their parents for support when they encountered a problem 
on the internet. A culture rapidly developed in which, to generalize, many parents felt 
disempowered – ignorant of their children’s experiences online, susceptible to media 
panics about internet predators or pornography, and therefore restrictive in managing 
their children’s internet access. 
But the situation is now changing. A recent survey of 6,400 European parents of 
children aged 6 to14 (in France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Poland, Italy, Sweden 
and the UK) found parents to be fairly concerned about their children’s online experi -
ences – especially exposure to violent images and being bullied online, but also about 
their children being exposed to data tracking, digital identity theft and advertisements 
for unhealthy lifestyles (Livingstone et al., 2017a). However, analysis of what parents 
said they actually did to manage their children’s internet use revealed two styles of 
parental mediation:23
Parenting in the Digital Age 1. Restrictive mediation:  Parents restricting or banning or insisting on supervising 
any of a long list of online activities
 2. Enabling mediation:  Parents undertaking active strategies such as talking to a 
child about what they do online or encouraging their activities as well as giving 
safety advice; also activities that might seem restrictive (use of technical controls 
and parental monitoring) but are better interpreted as building a safe framework 
precisely so that positive uses of the internet can be encouraged.
In terms of outcomes, more enabling mediation by parents was positively associated 
with children’s experience of online opportunities, but also with more online risks. 
Conversely, more restrictive mediation was associated with fewer online risks experi -
enced by children, but also they enjoyed fewer opportunities. This makes it problematic 
if policy-makers concerned with risk urge parents to restrict children’s internet use 
without recognising the costs to their online opportunities. But also problematic is the 
tendency of educators to urge parents to enable children’s internet use without recog -
nising that this may bring more risk. In addition, both parents and policy makers need 
to be aware that risks do not necessarily translate to harm and that enabling mediation 
helps children to build resilience and adopt strategies that can help them stay safe both 
offline and online. 
Further analysis of the European parent survey showed that parents prefer a risk-
averse restrictive strategy for their less skilled children, presumably doubting their child’s 
ability to cope with risk if they encounter it, while being more encouraging of if their 
children, or they themselves, are more competent internet users. Thus in the Global 
North, it is time to recognize that many parents are also gaining digital skills and they 
can use these to enable their child online. However, parents who are less confident of 
their own or their child’s digital skills take a more restrictive approach, keeping their 
child safe, but at the cost of online opportunities – so, to avoid a vicious cycle of disad -
vantage, parents as well as children could be provided with digital literacy education.
To sum up, what we learned in the Global North suggests the value of an open dia -
logue between parent and child so that each comes to understand and respond to the 
online experiences, competences, and concerns of the other. However, insofar as parents 
or children lack digital skills, inequalities in children’s online opportunities may open 
up. EU Kids Online research shows other ways in which disadvantages in home life 
offline may extend online: children more vulnerable to risk of harm offline also tend 
to be more vulnerable online; also, around one in eight parents does not provide sup -
portive or safety mediation; last, around half of parents whose child has encountered 
an online risk is unaware of this – and this in countries where two-thirds of children 
say their parents know a fair amount about what they do online.
So even in the Global North, many parents and carers lack time, knowledge or other 
resources to manage their children’s internet use as well as they would wish, either to 
promote opportunities or minimize risks. And their responses both reflect and repro -
duce socio-economic inequalities in children’s life changes, now online as well as offline. 24
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina ByrneMoreover, the continual flow of technological innovations further destabilizes parental 
competence and confidence while placing children at the cutting edge of experimental 
forms of technological innovation (Lupton & Williamson, 2017). Add to this the con -
tradictory exhortations on the one hand to minimize “screen time” and, on the other, 
to buy the latest device to ensure children “keep up” , and parental anxieties become 
intense (Blum-Ross & Livingstone, this book).
In low and middle-income countries
It seems likely that the above problems are exacerbated in low and middle-income 
countries for several reasons (UNICEF, 2017). First, even though close to 4 billion peo -
ple – mostly in the Global South – are not connected, of those who are, young people 
below the age of 25 are nearly three times more likely than the general population to 
be using the internet (ITU, 2013). So while children are often “pioneers” in exploring 
the internet, they may lack support from knowledgeable adults. As Gouws (2014: 14) 
comments about South African teenagers’ use of technology, although “perceived to 
be street-smart, arrogant “know-it-alls” and technological experts, they are also young, 
lonely, insecure and find themselves in a life period of major developmental challenges” .
Many children in developing countries are brought up by a single parent or even by 
relatives, often grandparents. In Central/South America and sub-Saharan Africa, children 
are more likely to live with either one or neither of their parents than children in other 
regions (Child Trends, 2017). Factors such as migration, illness, parental death, poverty 
affect these family units’ functioning and parents or caregivers are often left with little 
resources and time to help with their children with the digital skills. The digital divide 
between children and their grandparents is even more pronounced and it is hard to 
expect that a 70-year old will be able to monitor his or her grandchild’s internet use or 
support them with the development of digital skills. 
Sometimes, parental mediation techniques are based on the cultural norms prevail -
ing in society, tending to restrict children’s digital use even further (Bulger et al., 2017), 
which may in turn lead to children hiding from their parents what they do online. For 
instance, Davidson and Martellozzo (2013: 1456) found in their study in Bahrain, that: 
“Young people use digital media in much the same way regardless of the social and 
cultural contexts, but that culturally gendered perspectives place restrictions upon us -
age. ” Specifically, they note that parental expectations about girls’ use of digital media 
led girls to conceal acts that would be judged unacceptable (such as communicating 
with boys online) or that would be harshly punished if discovered. 
Indeed, parenting restrictions can fall particularly heavily on girls (Livingstone et 
al., 2017b). As Porter and colleagues (2012: 159) note in their study of three African 
countries: “ These constraints [on girls by parents and communities], often imposed 
at least in part from positive welfare motives, can be a substantial barrier to accessing 
education and improved livelihoods, especially (but not only) in rural areas. ” A study 25
Parenting in the Digital Ageof parental mediation practices in South Africa found that girls received less parental 
mediation with regard to their internet use, which was associated with fewer online 
risks but also with lower levels of digital skills and fewer online opportunities (Phyfer 
& Kardefelt-Winther, forthcoming).
The degree to which parents and carers are often reluctant to discuss sexual matters 
with teenagers can leave them vulnerable to online and offline risks as they search for 
answers online, potentially finding problematic content as a result (Nwalo & Anasi, 
2012).  No wonder that girls themselves call for efforts to educate parents, teachers and 
communities on the importance of their access to the internet, and to having ICTs better 
integrated in the curriculum (de Pauw, 2011). Parents may also not understand the nature 
of the risks online. In Turkey, a small-scale survey of 12 to19-year-olds found that “the 
most reported form of exposure to cyberbullying students experience is being insulted 
and being threatened” (Aricak et al., 2008: 259) yet that parents and teachers tend to 
see verbal threats as less serious than physical bullying face-to-face, notwithstanding 
research which shows harms from cyberbullying (United Nations, 2016). 
In South Africa, parents do worry about children experiencing of bullying online yet 
a sizeable percentage of children (40%) said they experienced bullying in person which 
parents did not mention as a concern. Such one-sided worries stem from the lack of 
parental knowledge of both digital technologies and their children’s life experiences, 
so their mediation practices may go “from total restriction and no access to a device, 
to access to a device with little guidance on how to use the internet safely” (Phyfer et 
al., 2016: 15). 
In addition, since in the least developed countries school attendance is low, pupil/
teacher ratios are high, and the overcrowded classrooms and untrained teachers are 
common (UNESCO, 2016). It seems fair to conclude that in many countries, children 
lack a supportive and/or informed adult in their lives who can teach them to navigate 
the internet safely or offer support when needed. 
What is being done, what can be done?
Policy and practice must respect the different conditions that apply in different parts of 
the world. The Global Kids Online (GKO) project is interviewing and surveying parents 
and children (aged 9-17) across different continents to benchmark and track children’s 
online access, skills, opportunities, risk and safety – and the skills and protective actions 
of their parents. Recent findings from partners’ research reveals the different sources of 
support that children themselves turn to in different contexts (Byrne et al., 2016; Cabello 
et al., 2017; Georgiev et al., 2017; Kanchev et al., 2017; Logar et al., 2016; Phyfer et al., 
2016; Popadić et al., 2016).
Figure 1 shows that in Bulgaria and Montenegro parents are more likely to be 
children’s first recourse for help when something is problematic on the internet, com -
pared with in the Global South countries surveyed. In Chile, children seem less likely 26
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina Byrneto tell anyone at all, while in South Africa and the Philippines, friends are preferred 
over parents, though both are helpful. In no country do children turn to teachers or 
other professionals in significant numbers. This suggests that it is difficult to provide 
alternative adult sources of support to parents, but that children might be supported 
by peer-based mentoring systems.
Figure 1.  The last time something happened online that bothered or upset you, did 
you talk to anyone of these people about it? (per cent yes, by country)
Comments:  9 to 17-year olds in all countries. In Bulgaria, Chile and Montenegro, representative national samples are used. Caution is 
needed for the findings from the Philippines and South Africa, which are based on pilot data; in the Philippines, the sample is very small. 
For methodological details, see www.globalkidsonline.net/results  
Multi-stakeholder discussions often express the hope or expectation that parents will 
take primary responsibility for child safety online. Parental mediation can be tailored 
according to the age, maturity, cultural or psychological circumstances of each child. It 
doesn’t limit adults’ freedoms online and it is cheap. Moreover, parents are already on 
hand, willing to play their role. But they also expect that their child’s school will offer 
them advice and safety education, and that the government will “police” the internet 
so that parental lapses in effort or effectiveness don’t have disastrous consequences.
In Europe, Insafe1, is the awareness-raising network for national centres that coordi -
nates the annual Safer Internet Day and provides parental guidance regarding the latest 
popular site or newest online fashion among children. Furthermore, there are numerous 
multi-stakeholder initiatives that draw together the combined expertise of educators, 
parenting groups, child welfare bodies, industry, and law enforcement (see, for example, 
the work of the ICT Coalition in bringing together the internet industry; Croll, 2015).
Coordinated, accessible, parent-focused efforts in the Global South are few and far 
between (Livingstone et al., 2017b). Although there are many parenting education pro -
grams in this region, very few address children’s online experiences. Integrating online 
issues into existing programs may be a way to reach more parents and address their 
needs holistically. Also likely to be useful is peer mentoring, given children’s preference  100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
 0
 Bulgaria Chile Montenegro South Africa Philippines
   Friend  Parets/carer  Sibling  Another adult I trust  Teacher  A professional3653
12
4412429
710
422248
14
31249
25
7
28
139
32
17
77727
Parenting in the Digital Ageto turn to a friend for a support, especially when it comes to marginalized groups of 
children, e.g. children with disabilities or adolescent girls in societies where gender 
inequality undermines girls’ opportunities to benefit from ICT use. For instance, in 
Iraq provision of online resources allowed adolescent girls to access information, also 
linking them to peer-to-peer support networks where they could discuss issues usually 
considered private or taboo in their society (UNICEF, 2013).
Conclusion
We have drawn on the available and new research to argue that, in both the Global 
North and the Global South, while it is entirely appropriate to call on parents to play 
a key role since they are ideally positioned to address the particular “best interests” of 
their child, policies which leave the bulk of the responsibility to parents will find that 
this works better for relatively privileged families than for the majority, including for 
those particularly vulnerable or at risk, thereby leaving many challenges for the rest 
of society to address. The problems are multiple. First, parents are usually not the 
first people children wish to tell about their relational, emotional, or sexual concerns. 
Second, the internet is hugely complicated and fast-changing, making it difficult for a 
busy parent to grasp what children need to know. Third, some parents do not take on 
this responsibility, and they are “hard to reach” by awareness campaigns. Fourth, small 
minorities of parents are truly neglectful of or abusive to their children, making it inap -
propriate to rely on them to ensure their child’s safety. However, for those seeking to 
prevent or manage the risks of harm to children, it is important to empower all parents 
and to provide a safety net for circumstances of childhood vulnerability. 
Some trends in the Global North have implications for experience in the Global 
South. For instance, the growing understanding and willingness of parents to engage 
with their children’s internet use as they catch up with their early adopter children. 
Some trends in the Global South have implications for experience in the Global North. 
We can point the trend towards “mobile first” , replacing first use via desktop or laptop 
computer, which is now also spreading in the Global North, reducing parents’ ability to 
monitor their child’s internet use (Mascheroni & Ólafsson, 2015). Other trends invite us 
to recognise that, also in the Global North, some children escape parental oversight by 
going online outside the home, or lack reliable parenting or adult figures in their lives. 
The WHO five parental roles have resonance for families everywhere, for most 
parents struggle with the tension between protecting their children versus giving them 
the freedom to explore, learn and grow independently. In addition, most parents can 
be encouraged to draw on what they know about their child and the wider society, as 
often this knowledge is also applicable in the digital domain. Therefore, in considering 
the stakeholders supporting parents, there are questions about balance. In future, it 
will also be critical to include parenting in the digital age as a component of parenting 
programmes currently being offered in the North and the South and to evaluate them 28
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina Byrnefor impact. Such examples of evidence-based programmes include Triple P or Sinovuyo 
Teen parenting programme (Haggerty et al., 2013; Cluver et al., 2018), indicating the 
positive impact of specific interventions in relation to parenting support. 
In seeking answers to these dilemmas, we would refer to the UN Convention on the 
Rights of the Child which clearly specifies that parents have the primary responsibility 
for childrearing, but it also places obligations on states and communities to support 
parents in these endeavours. It seems that the old saying “it takes a village to raise a 
child” still applies in a digital world. It’s just that the village is now both local and Global.
Note
 1. www.saferinternet.org
References
Aricak, T., Siyahhan, S., Uzunhasanoglu, A., Saribeyoglu, S., Ciplak, S., Yilmaz, N. & Memmedov, C. (2008). 
Cyberbullying Among Turkish Adolescents. CyberPsychology & Behavior , 11(3), 253-61.
Blum-Ross, A. & Livingstone, S. (2017). “Sharenting, ” Parent Blogging and the Boundaries of the Digital Self. 
Popular Communication , 15(2), 110-125. 
Bulger, M., Burton, P ., O’Neill, B. & Staksrud, E. (2017). Where Policy and Practice Collide: Comparing US, 
South African and European Union Approaches to Protecting Children Online. New Media & S ociety, 
19(5), 1-15.
Byrne, J., Kardefelt-Winther, D., Livingstone, S. & Stoilova, M. (2016). Global Kids Online Research Synthesis, 
2015–2016. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti and London School of Economics and Politi -
cal Science. [online]. Available at < https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/869/ >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
Cabello, P ., Claro, M., Lazcano, D., Antezana, L., Cabello-Hutt, T. & Maldonado, L. (2017). Kids Online 
Chile: Study of the Uses, Opportunities and Risks in the Use of ICT by Children and Teenagers . [online]. 
Available at < http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/gko/chile-a-third-of-children-do-not-use-the-internet-at-school/ >. 
[Accessed 27 June, 2018].
Child Trends (2017). World Family Map: Mapping Family Trends and Wellbeing Outcomes.  Ne w  Yor k 
& Barcelona: Social Trends Institute. [online]. Available at < http://sti.pushroom.com/Media/
files/000008/0000381_WFM-2017-FullReport.pdf >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
Cluver, L. D., Meinck, F., Steinert, J. I., Shenderovich, Y ., Doubt, J., Romero, R. H., ... & Nzima, D. (2018). 
Parenting for Lifelong Health: A Pragmatic Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial of a Non-commer -
cialised Parenting Programme for Adolescents and Their Families in South Africa. BMJ Global Health 
3(1) e000539.
Croll, J. (2015). Assessment of the Emerging Trends and Evolutions in ICT Services Used by Children and Youths . 
Brussels: ICT Coalition.
Daly, M. (Ed.). (2007). Parenting in Europe: A Positive Approach . Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Davidson, J. & Martellozzo, E. (2013). Exploring Y oung People’s Use of Social Networking Sites and Digital 
Media in the Internet Safety Context. Information, Communication & Society , 16(9), 1456–76.
Georgiev, M., Hajdinjak, M., Kanchev, P . & Apostolov, G. (2017). Parental Support for Development of Chil -
dren’s Digital Skills . Sofia: Bulgaria Kids Online. [online]. Available at < https://www.safenet.bg/images/
sampledata/files/Parental-support.pdf >. [Accessed 3 July, 2018].
Acknowledgement
An earlier version was published as Livingstone, S. and Byrne, J. (2015). We are grateful to our 
colleagues and partners in the Global Kids Online project, a collaboration among UNICEF Office 
of Research-Innocenti , London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) , and the EU 
Kids Online  network; see www.globalkidsonline.net .29
Parenting in the Digital AgeGouws, F. (2014). The Changing Life World of the Adolescent: A Focus on Technological Advances. Journal 
of Communication,  5(1), 9–16.
Haggerty, K. P ., McGlynn-Wright, A. & Klima, T. (2013). Promising Parenting Programs for Reducing Ado -
lescent Problem Behaviors. Journal of Children’s Services,  8(4): 229–243. 
International Telecommunications Union (2013) Measuring the information society . Geneva: ITU.
Kanchev, P ., Hajdinjak, M., Georgiev, E. & Apostolov, G. (2017). Are Digital Natives Digitally Literate: Insights 
From a National Representative Survey, 2016 . Sofia: Bulgaria Kids Online. [online]. Available at < https://
www.safenet.bg/images/sampledata/files/Digital-and-Media-Literacy.pdf >. [Accessed 3 July, 2018].
Kardefelt-Winther, D. & Phyfer, J. (forthcoming). The Role of Active Parental Mediation in Child Internet Use 
Outcomes in South Africa. Florence: Unicef Office of Research – Innocenti.
Knerr, W ., Gardner, F. & Cluver, L. (2013) Improving Positive Parenting Skills and Reducing Harsh and 
Abusive Parenting in Low- and Middle-income Countries: A Systematic Review. Prevention Science , 
14(4): 352-363.
Livingstone, S. & Byrne, J. (2015). Challenges of Parental Responsibility in a Global Perspective. pp 26-29 
in Gasser, U. (Ed.), Digitally Connected: Global Perspectives on Youth and Digital Media . Cambridge: 
Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard University.
Livingstone, S., Haddon, L. & G örzig, A. (Eds.). (2012). Children, Risk and Safety Online: Research and Policy 
Challenges in Comparative Perspective . Bristol: The Policy Press. 
Livingstone, S., Ólafsson, K., Helsper, E. J., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Veltri, G. A. & Folkvord, F. (2017a). 
Maximizing Opportunities and Minimizing Risks for Children Online: The Role of Digital Skills in 
Emerging Strategies of Parental Mediation. Journal of Communication , 67(1): 82-105.
Livingstone, S., Nandi, A., Banaji, S. & Stoilova, M. (2017b). Young Adolescents and Digital Media Uses, Risks 
and Opportunities in Low- and Middle-income Countries: A Rapid Evidence Review . DFID/ODI: Gen -
der and Adolescence, Global Evidence. [online]. Available at < http://www.gage.odi.org/publications/
young-adolescents-and-digital-media-rer >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018]. 
Logar, S., Anzelm, D., Lazic, D. & Vujacic, V . (2016). Global Kids Online Montenegro: Opportunities, Risks and 
Safety . IPSOS, Government of Montenegro and UNICEF. [online] Available at < www.globalkidsonline.
net/montenegro >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018]
Lupton, D. & Williamson, B. (2017). The Datafied Child: The Dataveillance of Children and Implications for 
Their Rights. New Media & S ociety, 19(5), 780-794.
Mascheroni, G. & Ólafsson, K. (2015). The Mobile Internet: Access, Use, Opportunities and Divides Among 
European Children. New Media & Society , 18(8), 1657-1679. 
Moore, K.A., Whitney, K. & Kinukawa, A. (2009). Exploring the Links Between Family Strengths and Adolescent 
Outcomes . Child Trends Research brief. No. 2009-20.
Nwalo, K. & Anasi, S. (2012). Access To and Use of Reproductive Health Information Among In-school 
Adolescent Girls in Lagos State, Nigeria. Health Education Journal , 71(1), 90–101.
Patton, G. C., Sawyer, S. M., Santelli, J. S., Ross, D. A., Afifi, R., Allen, N. B. & Kakuma, R. (2016). Our Fu -
ture: A Lancet Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing. The Lancet , 387(10036), 2423-2478.
De Pauw, L. (2011). Girls’ Speak Out: Girls’ Fast-talk on the Potential of Information and Communication 
Technologies in Their Empowerment and Development . London: Plan International.
Phyfer, J., Burton, P . & Leoschut, L. (2016). South African Kids Online: Barriers, Opportunities and Risks. A 
Glimpse into South African Children’s Internet use and Online Activities. Technical Report . Cape Town: 
Centre for Justice and Crime Prevention. [online]. Available at < http://www.globalkidsonline.net/
south-africa > [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
Popadić, D., Pavlović, Z., Petrović, D. & Kuzmanović, D. (2016). Global Kids Online Serbia: Balancing be -
tween opportunities and risks. Results from the pilot study. Belgrade: University of Belgrade. Avaliable 
at www.globalkidsonline.set/serbia [Accessed 11 October, 2018].
Porter, G., Hampshire, K., Abane, A., Munthali, A., Robson, E., Mashiri, M. & Tanle, A. (2012). Y outh, Mo -
bility and Mobile Phones in Africa: Findings From a Three-country Study. Information Technology for 
Development , 18(2), 145–162.
De Stone, S., Meinck, F., Sherr, L., Cluver, L., Doubt, J., Orkin, F. M., ... & Redfern, A. (2016). Factors Associ -
ated with Good and Harsh Parenting of Pre-Adolescents and Adolescents in Southern Africa . Innocenti 
Working Paper No.2016-20. UNICEF Office of Research, Florence. 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2016). Pupil-Teacher Ratio by Level of Education. [online]. Available at: 
<http://data.uis.unesco.org/?queryid=180 > [Accessed 27 June, 2018].30
Sonia Livingstone & Jasmina ByrneUNICEF (2013).  Integrating Information and Communication Technologies into Communication for Develop -
ment Strategies to Support and Empower Marginalized Adolescent Girls . New Y ork: UNICEF. [online]. 
Available at: < http://www.unicef.org/cbsc/files/ICTPaper_Web.pdf  >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
UNICEF (2014). Children, ICT and Development: Capturing the Potential, Meeting the Challenges, Innocenti 
Insight, Florence . Florence: UNICEF Office of Research. [online]. Available at: < http://www.unicef-irc.
org/publications/pdf/unicef_royalholloway_ict4dreport_final.pdf >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
UNICEF (2017). The State of the World’s Children 2017: Children in a Digital World . New Y ork: UNICEF. [on -
line]. Available at < https://www.unicef.org/publications/index_101993.html >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].
United Nations (Ed.) (2016). Ending the Torment: Tackling Bullying From the Schoolyard to Cyberspace (pp. 
115-122), New Y ork: Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against 
Children. [online]. Available at https://violenceagainstchildren.un.org/content/ending-torment-tackling-
bullying-schoolyard-cyberspace  [Accessed 10 October, 2018].
World Health Organisation (2007). Helping Parents in Developing Countries Improve Adolescents’ Health.  
Geneva. [online]. Available at < http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43725/1/9789241595841_eng.
pdf?ua=1&ua=1 >. [Accessed 27 June, 2018].