Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Child Abuse & Neglect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chiabuneg
Preventing child sexual abuse: A systematic review of interventions
and their e ﬃcacy in developing countries
D. Russella,*, D. Higginsa, A. Possob
aInstitute of Child Protection Studies, Australian Catholic University, Australia
bRoyal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Child sexual abuse
Low-to-middle income countriesDeveloping countriesPreventionSystematic reviewInterventionABSTRACT
Background: Research on prevalence, risk factors, and prevention interventions for child sexual
abuse has continued to focus on western and developed countries. Where country-level pre-
valence data or large-scale research exists, rates of child sexual abuse are consistently higher in
developing and non-western countries than their western and developed counterparts.Objective: We systematically reviewed research on the nature of child sexual abuse interventions
in developing countries, the settings and populations included to identify types of child sexual
abuse prevention initiatives being implemented in developing countries and their eﬀ ectiveness.
Methods: Following PRISMA guidelines, we conducted a systematic search of six databases and
identiﬁed eight studies to include in our analysis.
Results: Most empirically evaluated interventions in developing countries have focused on pre-
school and primary school-aged children. Most have focused on interventions delivered in edu-
cational settings, with a lack of focus on population-level interventions to prevent child sexual
abuse. Researchers have used outcomes measuring knowledge or skills for young people in self-
protection and help-seeking, not deployment of those skills, actual reduction in prevalence ofCSA, or improvements in conditions of safety in organizational contexts.Conclusions: If the focus on school-based strategies to prevent child sexual abuse continues in
developing countries, a signi ﬁcant gap in knowledge of the eﬃcacy of population-level inter-
ventions outside of school contexts, and consistency across the application of interventions willremain. Evaluations are needed that address the e ﬃcacy of broader government-led or whole-of-
community prevention interventions to reduce actual prevalence of child sexual abuse, or thatcan link increased knowledge and skill with reduced victimization.
1. Introduction
Child sexual abuse (CSA) is a global social problem with growing research and media attention. Many researchers in developed
countries have investigated prevalence rates ( Mathews et al., 2016 ), risk and protective factors ( Kaufman et al., 2016 ) and prevention
strategies ( Morley & Higgins, 2018) to mitigate the occurrence of CSA, particularly within the context of youth-serving organizations.
Concern regarding the signi ﬁcant issue of CSA has begun to be echoed by research in developing and non-western low-to-middle
income countries in recent years ( Abeid, Muganyizi, Massawe, Mpembeni, Darj et al., 2015 ;Al-Saif et al., 2018 ;Plummer & Njuguna,
2009; Veenema, Thornton, & Corley, 2015 ). Although some authors refer to ‘low-to-middle income countries ’, we use the term
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.104395Received 30 August 2019; Received in revised form 20 January 2020; Accepted 28 January 2020⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: d.russell.psych@icloud.com (D. Russell).Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
0145-2134/ © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T‘developing countries ’, based on the nomenclature set out in the UN ’s country classi ﬁcation ( United Nations, 2014 ).
The World Health Organization (WHO) deﬁ ned CSA as:
“…the involvement of a child in sexual activity that he or she does not fully comprehend, is unable to give informed consent to, or
for which the child is not developmentally prepared and cannot give consent, or that violates the laws or social taboos of society.
Child sexual abuse is evidenced by this activity between a child and an adult or another child who by age or development is in a
relationship of responsibility, trust or power, the activity being intended to gratify or satisfy the needs of the other person. ”(World
Health Organisation, 2003, p. 75 )
It is also widely accepted that the deﬁ nition of sexual abuse includes both contact and non-contact forms of abuse ( Kloppen,
Haugland, Svedin, Maehle, & Breivik, 2016 ;Mathews & Collin-Vezina, 2017 ).
Numerous systematic reviews exist of research on topics related to CSA such as prevalence rates ( Barth, Bermetz, Heim, Trelle, &
Tonia, 2013 ;Pereda, Guilera, Forns, & Gomez-Benito, 2009; Stoltenborgh, Bakermans-Kranenburg, Alink, & van Ijzendoorn, 2015 ),
risk factors ( Putnam, 2003; Whitaker et al., 2008) and the e ﬀectiveness of di ﬀerent prevention strategies ( Letourneau, Schae ﬀer,
Bradshaw, & Feder, 2017 ;Walsh, Zwi, Woolfenden, & Shlonsky, 2018 ). These reviews, however, have largely focused on research
conducted in developed countries. Therefore, our aim here is to focus on what research evidence is available about CSA preventioneﬀorts in developing countries and identify implications for improving prevention e ﬀorts globally.
Many developing countries have begun implementing laws with local and international non-government organizations supporting
the prevention of CSA. In recent years, developing countries have broadly adopted policies and laws that directly and formally
address violence against children, including sexual abuse ( United Nations, 2014 ). This has been achieved through national plans of
action on children, the inclusion of children ’s protection from sexual violence in broad child protection initiatives, and the devel-
opment of speci ﬁc national agendas on violence against children ( United Nations, 2014 ).
In recent years, more than 20 countries have adopted di ﬀerent types of action plans for children ( United Nations, 2014 ). However,
there are varying degrees of comprehensiveness with approximately 25 % of countries surveyed by the UN not fully adopting laws to
protect children against all form of violence. Since 2006, Angola, Bolivia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Kenya, Montenegro,
Serbia, and South Sudan have adopted or amended their constitutions to include a prohibition on violence against children ( United
Nations, 2014 ). Regarding sexual violence, the United Nations (2014) noted that signi ﬁcant progress has been made in recent years
on legislation against sexual abuse and exploitation of children. Of the 104 member states of the United Nations that responded to the
UN’s Global Survey (2014) , 96 % highlighted that a prohibition on sexual exploitation of children —including prostitution —is in
place. These initiatives are promising, considering the high prevalence rates of CSA in developing countries. However, a holisticapproach to understanding the right policy mix for CSA is warranted. This systematic literature review of CSA in developing countries
is the ﬁrst
step toward more research-informed and targeted policy development.
1.1. E ﬀects of child sexual abuse
The eﬀects of CSA have been found to be both immediate and long term. In childhood, researchers have identi ﬁed eﬀects
including: cognitive impacts ( Barrera, Calderon, & Bell, 2013 ) mental health including depression, anxiety ( Olafson, 2014 ;Wurtele,
2009) and posttraumatic stress disorder, and suicidal ideation ( Cashmore & Shackel, 2013 ;Fergusson, Boden, & Horwood, 2008).
Long-term e ﬀects into adulthood include mental ill health ( Amado, Arce, & Herraiz, 2015 ;Fergusson et al., 2008; Lindert et al., 2014 )
as well as detrimental impact on individuals ’adult roles such as employment, parenting, education and relationships ( de Jong, Alink,
Bijleveld, Finkenauer, & Hendriks, 2015 ).
Despite the risk of child sexual abuse being lower for males than females (although not necessarily in institutions; see Quadara,
Nagy, Higgins, & Siegel, 2015 ), the e ﬀects of CSA on men have been widely researched. One reason for this, apart from the need to
understand the life-long e ﬀects of abuse for male survivors, is fears of a cycle of abuse based on the fact that the majority of adult
child sexual o ﬀenders —and adolescents with harmful or concerning sexual behaviors —are male ( Plummer & Cossins, 2018 ). These
issues may be of more concern in developing countries that have patriarchal societal norms.
CSA has vicarious e ﬀects on families and communities ( Blakemore, Herbert, Arney, & Parkinson, 2017 ), which could be ex-
acerbated in societies that emphasize the needs of group members and place importance on interconnectedness between societal
members over individual priorities due to the value placed on community engagement. Such life-long e ﬀects for male and female
victims, coupled with concerning prevalence rates globally, indicates the need to have e ﬀective interventions, policies or strategies
targeted at the prevention of child sexual abuse for both boys and girls in developed and developing countries.
1.2. Prevalence
Few countries have good prevalence data ( Mathews et al., 2016 ). Where prevalence data do exist, they are usually expressed as a
range, given the disparate deﬁ nitions, methodologies, and data reporting mechanisms employed in studies. Many researchers, as well
as international development organizations, also suggest that CSA rates are consistently underestimated due to the inherent chal-
lenges of disclosure and reporting ( Kloppen et al., 2016; Radford, Corral, Bradley, & Fisher, 2013). Recent meta-analyses have
estimated global rates of CSA to be between 7.6 –7.9 % for boys and 18.0 –19.7 % for girls ( Pereda et al., 2009 ;Stoltenborgh et al.,
2015).
Where data are available, a strong contrast exists between developed and developing countries in terms of prevalence data.
Studies from developed countries show lower prevalence rates for boys and higher for girls, compared to developing countries. ForD. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
2example, prevalence in Scandinavia is reported to be between 3 % and 23 % for boys, and between 11 % and 36 % for girls ( Kloppen
et al., 2016 ); in Japan –4.1 % for boys and 10.4 –60.7 % for girls for non-penetrative CSA ( Tanaka, Suzuki, Aoyama, Takaoka, &
MacMillan, 2017 ); and in the United States –5.1 % for boys and 26.6 % for girls ( Finkelhor, Shattuck, Turner, & Hamby, 2014 ). This
considerable international variability may be explained (at least, in part) by gender di ﬀerences in prevalence of CSA in the two key
contexts in which it occurs: organizational vs. familial abuse. As Quadara et al. (2015) noted:
‘Child sexual abuse occurring within institutional settings (including residential, care, education, sporting or religious organi-
zations) generally see higher rates of boys being victims of abuse than girls; however, girls are victims of teacher-student sexual
abuse at a higher rate than boys ( Knoll, 2010; Moulden, Firestone, Kingston, & Wexler, 2010 ;Sullivan & Beech, 2004). Generally,
sexual abuse committed by educators occurs at a similar rate globally. ’(p. 8)
In recognition of the negative e ﬀects of segregated, institutional care and the bene ﬁts of family-based care, progressive de-
institutionalization of many care environments in western countries has occurred, such as home-based services to replace psychiatric
institutions and segregated homes for children and adults with disability and mental illness (e.g., see: Torrey, 1997 ) and the de-
velopment of foster care and kinship care in the child protection system to replace children ’s orphanages ( Innocenti Research Centre,
2003). Given such institutional care for children has been associated with high levels of neglectful and abusive behaviour - including
child sexual abuse, this might then lead to a di ﬀerent gender mix in overall prevalence of CSA in developed compared to developing
countries.
Based on the limited research that does exist, prevalence rates in developing countries paint a poorer picture than is the case for
developed/western countries. For example, Croatia has an overall prevalence of 10.8 % ( Ajdukovi ć,S u šac, & Rajter, 2013 ). Rates are
even higher for countries in Asia, Africa and South America, with rates of 14 % in Saudi Arabia ( Al-Eissa et al., 2015 ), between 16.4 %
(Zolotor et al., 2009 ) and 53.2 % ( Kacker, Varadan, & Kumar, 2007) in India, 27 % in Colombia, 30.6 % in Russia ( Zolotor et al.,
2009), and 13 % for boys and 28 % for girls in Tanzania ( Abeid, Muganyizi, Mpembeni, Darj, & Axemo, 2015 ). In some cases, these
rates may be comparable to data from developed countries, however data from developing countries are often not able to be dis-aggregated by gender. In other cases, there is distinct and concerningly higher rates in many developing and non-western low-to-
middle income countries, which has led to investigations of not only shared risk factors globally, but also speci ﬁc cultural and
contextual risk factors in these localities.
1.3. Risk factors
Although much of the research on risk factors has occurred in developed western countries, similar factors have been identi ﬁed
across a range of developing countries, including Indonesia, Pakistan and many African countries ( Ali, Ali, Khuwaja, & Nanji, 2014;
Bridgewater, 2016; Meinck, Cluver, Boyes, & Mhlongo, 2015; Rumble et al., 2018). In addition to the general risk factors associated
with CSA (see Kaufman et al., 2016 ;Putnam, 2003 ), developing countries face speci ﬁc risk factors due to their context. These
contextual di ﬀerences
are associated with the strong community-centric thinking of many societies in developing countries ( Meinck,
Cluver, Boyes, & Loening-Voysey, 2016 ;Plummer & Njuguna, 2009), and the economic situations faced by individuals, families and
communities ( World Health Organization, 2010 ). Research suggests these contextual risk factors play a more signi ﬁcant role in the
risk of CSA occurring than the individual or family-level factors prominent in both developed and developing countries ( Plummer &
Njuguna, 2009). These contextual risks include the patriarchal nature within communities ( Whitehead & Ro ﬀee, 2016 ), stereotyped
and discriminatory gender norms ( Bridgewater, 2016 ), and the perceived role of children within tribal communities ( Plummer &
Njuguna, 2009 ). Exacerbation of risk factors as a result of the absence of governance processes, the absence of screening mechanisms
to identify those who have already o ﬀended against children, and poor adult-child supervision ratios ( Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse, 2017 ) provide additional credence to the higher prevalence rates in developing
countries.
1.4. Prevention
A recent shift in how to address the issue of child sexual abuse has seen an increase in the desire to prevent abuse before it occurs,
rather than focus on better responses once CSA has already occurred, in order to reduce the likelihood of harm and ongoing trauma
(Letourneau et al., 2017; Levine & Dandamudi, 2016 ). This shift has required an investigation into how those outside of law en-
forcement (responsible for responding after CSA has occurred), can play a role in preventing abuse from occurring in the ﬁrst place.
CSA has been widely cited as a public health problem ( Letourneau, Brown, Fang, Hassan, & Mercy, 2018 ;Mathews, 2017).
Numerous researchers have suggested that population-level prevention initiatives (i.e., a public health approach) are the best way toprevent CSA, including researchers from both English-speaking western countries ( Letourneau, Eaton, Bass, Berlin, & Moore, 2014;
McMahon & Puett, 1999), and developing countries ( Skeen & Tomlinson, 2013 ;Veenema et al., 2015). Public health approaches
recognize that prevention occurs at three levels: Primary (before it occurs); secondary (when risks are evident); and tertiary (after
harm has occurred, to ameliorate its impact and prevent future harm) ( Quadara et al., 2015 ). Due to the community- and macro-level
approaches utilised in public health approach models, it is often led at the governmental or national level ( Herrenkohl, Lonne, Scott,
& Higgins, 2019). However, WHO (2015) noted that no national plans to prevent CSA existed across South East Asian countries,
raising questions as to whether any population-level initiatives were being applied in developing countries.
The ‘target ’of primary CSA prevention activity can range from individuals through to whole-of- community interventions.
Interventions such as delivery of CSA prevention education (or protective behaviors programs ( Quadara et al., 2015) are focused onD. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
3the individual knowledge and skill of children and young people: to understand their bodies, their right to safety and how to seek help
if confronted with concerning or abusive behaviour at the earliest possible opportunity. On the other hand, community-level pre-
vention initiatives such as parent-education strategies are typically large-scale government-led initiatives reaching much larger
audiences. To complement the focus on the knowledge, attitudes and skills of individuals, more recently, there has been a stronger
focus on situational and cultural risk factors in youth-serving organizations and other community settings ( Kaufman, Erooga, Higgins,
& Zatkin, 2019 ;Morley & Higgins, 2018 ).
Prevention initiatives need to be comprehensive, considering not only the broad range of risk factors, but also the potential
sources of protective strategies. Although there is good evidence for the e ﬀectiveness of prevention strategies to address other forms
of familial child maltreatment (such as home-visiting during the prenatal/infancy period –seeHolzer, Higgins, Brom ﬁeld,
Richardson, & Higgins, 2006), there is no available evidence to show that such generic family support initiatives are e ﬀective at
preventing CSA. Prevention initiatives also need to be targeted to the unique risks for CSA. As well as strategies to increase skills,
awareness and obligations of individual children/young people and their parents/caregivers, safety concerns also need to be ad-
dressed at a macro-societal level. These strategies should be focused on (a) equipping large numbers of young people with skills to
resist thus increasing the e ﬀort required of o ﬀenders to engage in o ﬀending behavior; (b) training adult workers who work in youth-
serving organizations to better understand the risk factors and signs and how to implement situational risk mitigation to addressprevent or interrupt grooming behaviour; and (c) increasing obligations surrounding reporting of child sexual abuse and those who
engage in potentially grooming behavior (e.g., see: https://www.education.vic.gov.au/school/teachers/health/childprotection/
Pages/expolitationgrooming.aspx ).
Systematic reviews of prevention methods in western and developed countries, such as that by Walsh et al. (2018) , have con-
tinued to support the development of programs and strategies to prevent child sexual abuse within these countries. Training programssuch as the Child Abuse School Liaison program ( Hanson et al., 2008 ) and the Enough! Preventing Child Sexual Abuse in My School online
training program ( Gushwa, Bernier, & Robinson, 2018 ) have shown positive results in improving knowledge and skills related to
preventing child sexual abuse. Whether such improvements in knowledge lead to reduction in actual occurrence of child sexual abuse
is debated in the literature ( Walsh et al., 2018 ). With the identi ﬁcation of speci ﬁc contextual risk factors in developing countries,
some researchers have begun looking at the e ﬀectiveness of prevention methods at the individual country level in developing and
non-western countries. We are not aware of any existing review of evaluations of CSA prevention strategies being applied in de-
veloping countries. However, knowledge of what prevention strategies are available —and their e ﬀectiveness in preventing CSA —is
needed to support the work of researchers, practitioners and policy makers wanting to improve the safety and wellbeing of childrenand young people globally.
Many western countries have had formal inquiries and government reviews, and in response, many prevention activities have
been implemented (through regulation by government, as well as voluntarily by organizations) and the nature of youth-serving
organizations having changed radically through a major process of de-institutionalization of disability and child welfare services
(Innocenti Research Centre, 2003; Torrey, 1997 ). It is important now to see what the application of these lessons might be for
developing countries where there may not have been government-led review of system failures, and where a greater proportion of the
population of children are spending time in institutional care of the kind subject to these inquiries.
Our aim is to systematically review the available evidence on the e ﬀectiveness of CSA prevention strategies in developing
countries. The research question that guided the analysis is: What type of sexual abuse prevention interventions or initiatives are
being implemented in developing countries, and are they e ﬀective?
In conducting this review, our aim is to better understand the types of prevention strategies that e ﬀectively support individuals,
organizations and communities in these countries. We hope to highlight best practice, knowledge gaps, and implementation gaps
(where we may have good evidence of e ﬀectiveness, but limited take-up of interventions) in relation to prevention of CSA, and to
identify implications for how best to support the safety of children and young people in developing countries from sexual abuse.
2. Method
To guide the systematic review, we developed an internal protocol, based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) criteria ( Moher et al., 2015 ). (Available by emailing the corresponding author.)
2.1. 
Search strategy
Electronic database searches were conducted in May 2018 to identify relevant English language, peer-reviewed published
Table 1
List of search terms.
Sexual Abuse Child Prevention Developing Countries
“sexual* abuse* ”OR pedophil* OR
paedophile* OR “sexual* assult* ”
OR rape*Child* OR Adolescen* OR Teen* OR
Youth*OR “school aged ”OR“young
people ”OR pre-schoolPrevent* ORdeter*(“developing countr* ”OR“emerging economy* ”OR“third
world ”OR“underdeveloped countr* ”OR
a[List of
developing countries –See Supplementary Table 1])
aSee Supplementary Table 1 for additional terms used in developing countries ﬁeld.D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
4literature. The databases searched included: Scopus, Web of Science (Core Collection), PsycINFO, ERIC, MEDLINE and the Social
Sciences Index. No date restrictions were used in order to capture as many studies as possible within the search parameters. Table 1
outlines the terms we included in our keyword searches. Where possible, we also conducted subject heading (index) searches.
2.2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Articles were included if they: (1) included an intervention, program, training or educational strategy to support the prevention of
sexual abuse or assault; (2) investigated the e ﬃcacy of the intervention by measuring changes in (a) knowledge, (b) attitude, (c)
perceptions, or (d) safeguarding practices, or the number of child sexual abuse reports made; (3) measured the outcome relevant to
(a) children and young people and/or (b) sta ﬀor volunteers working with young people; and (4) were conducted in a developing
country, as deﬁ ned by the International Statistical Institute (n.d.) . Our search strategy focused on English-language databases and
publications –although we did screen articles in Spanish, in which one co-author was ﬂuent.
Articles were excluded if they simply discussed the prevalence of child sexual abuse, investigated risk or protective factors related
to child sexual abuse within a speci ﬁc context (but with no reference to an intervention or prevention strategy), or if the prevention
strategy or intervention was aimed at child maltreatment in general and did not have elements speciﬁ c to sexual abuse. The search
strategy did not speci ﬁcally target grey literature.
2.3. Study selection
SeeFig. 1 for an overview of the search process. Initial searching resulted in 2,639 articles, of which 974 were duplicates. Authors
1 and 3 double-blind screened the remaining 1,665 articles using Rayyan QCRI Ouzzani, Hammady, Fedorowicz, & Elmagarmid,
2016), with any disagreement referred to Author 2 for a ﬁnal decision. This process resulted in 20 articles included for data ex-
traction. Of the 20 full-text papers retrieved for data extraction, two were pilot or introductory papers leading to the retrieval of 6additional papers through searching for additional papers or contacting the corresponding author. Of these 26 papers, ﬁve were
included in the ﬁnal data analysis after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Two additional papers were found while searching for material for the introduction to this review, and a third paper was sug-
gested by an anonymous reviewer upon submission of the manuscript for publication. Since these papers met the inclusion criteria,they were included. The ﬁnal analysis included eight studies.
2.4. Analysis plan
In analyzing the eight studies included in this review, as well as considering the results of each study, we focused on the
methodology and design, study characteristics (including year and size of study), sample population (age, gender etc.), and the
country of research. Data were extracted using an Excel spreadsheet based on the Cochrane Public Health Group Data Extraction and
Assessment Template. Using these data, indirect comparisons —where interventions used in separate studies are compared —were
made, to identify what types of interventions/initiatives/strategies are being used in developing countries to prevent CSA and howeﬀective these interventions are when considering the outcomes measured in each individual study.
3. Findings
3.1. Overview of studies
Two studies were from Africa, ﬁve were from Asia and one from Latin America. All the studies reviewed used a quantitative
methodology using quasi-experimental or experimental designs. Three studies were large-scale (over 500 participants), whereas the
remaining six were small-scale studies. Only one study ( Citak Tunc et al., 2018) made reference to any funding provided for the
research, which was provided by a university scienti ﬁc research projects management unit. This is not to say the other research, or
indeed interventions weren ’t provided funding, but this was not explicitly stated within the research articles. All but one study
included both male and female participants. Across the studies, interventions were implemented by a range of people including;teachers, nurses, trained facilitators, and children/young people themselves. We now describe which group(s) of participants were
the focus of attention within the studies, the types of interventions, and whether they were focused on evaluating e ﬃcacy of those
interventions.
3.2. Participants
As can be seen in Table 2, most research on interventions to support the prevention of child sexual abuse in developing countries
has been focused on younger children: either in primary school ( Dunn, 2011 ;Fitriana, Suryawati, & Zubaidah, 2018; Hurtado, Katz,
Ciro, Guttfreund, & Nosike, 2014; Neherta, Machmud, Damayanti, & Afrizal, 2017 )
 or pre-school ( Citak Tunc et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2014). One study focused on increasing the sexual abuse prevention knowledge of children living with a disability ( Kucuk,
Platin, & Erdem, 2017). One evaluated a program that supported women and children at risk of sexual abuse ( Sinclair et al., 2013 ).D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
53.3. Types of interventions
Most of the interventions used within the studies included in this review focused on improving children ’s knowledge of what
constitutes appropriate and inappropriate touching and self-e ﬃcacy to act (i.e., to speak up and seek help) if —hypothetically —they
were exposed to an abusive behaviour. Many of these educational interventions included the use of story books and other devel-
opmentally appropriate materials. One study focused on improving self-defense capabilities in young people, and three utilized one of
two intervention programs developed overseas (in western countries).
Within the literature included in this review, there was evidence of only one investigation into the e ﬃcacy of a large-scale,
government-led intervention to prevent CSA in a developing country ( Dunn, 2011). Similarly, there was little evidence of inter-
ventions that went beyond just increasing knowledge and/or skills of children and young people regarding how to stay safe from
potential abuse. Such studies have been questioned in relation to whether they contribute to a decrease in actual CSA victimization,
not just an increase in knowledge or skills ( Walsh et al., 2018 ). What was evident through this review was the e ﬀorts by researchers to
use strong methodologies such as experimental and pre-post intervention measurement designs, to a focus on measurement of
Fig. 1. PRISMA ﬂow diagram of screening process.D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
6Table 2
Papers meeting criteria for inclusion ( n= 8).
Author(s) &
dateCountry Method Sample type, size and
genderChildren details Intervention Key ﬁndings
Dunn (2011) South Africa Experimental Purposive, n= 1,697,
Female = 47.4%Attending grade 4, aged 9 –12 years
old, children had taken part in theHOOC campaign (See paper for
details)Hands O ﬀOur Children (HOOC) Campaign:
Ministerial initiative with several intervention
strategies. This paper focused on the school-
based program which included a HOOC board
game.The study described a state-level public healthinitiative to improve child sexual abuseprevention at the primary school level with
young children.
The board game signi ﬁcantly improved
knowledge regarding appropriate andinappropriate touch
Kucuk et al.
(2017)Turkey Pre-post design/
quasi-experimentalConvenience, 15children, Female = 60 %Aged between 10 and 14, had a mildintellectual disability and attended achild rehabilitation center.4 story books were developed using the Steinand Glen Story Map Method (Stein & Glen,2979). These were read in lessons to thechildren. Additionally, reading the stories
three times at home was also given as a
homework task.Stories were used in special educationalsettings to teach children about body parts,saying no, and telling a trusted adult.The intervention was developed speciﬁ cally for
young people with mild intellectualdisabilities.With reinforcement through homework, thestories were e ﬀective in increasing knowledge.
Neherta et al.
(2017)Indonesia Quasi-experimental Not stated, n= 1112
children, Female =44.9%Aged between 6 and 12 ( M= 9.5), The intervention was labeled as a ‘knowledge
increasing program ’using visual, auditory and
kinesthetic learning modalities. Four sessionsoccurred over a period of 7 weeks.The intervention used a variety of learningmedia,such as movies, role plays, discussion usingstories, local songs, and
leaﬂets.
The intervention was used in primary schools
(Grades 1 –6).
Both teachers and nurses were able toimplement the program and improveknowledge and assertiveness. The interventiongroup led by nurses was more e ﬀective than
that by the teachers.
Sinclair et al.
(2013)Kenya Experimental Purposive, n= 522 girls. Aged between 14 and 21 ( M= 16.7) No means no worldwide: A manual-based
intervention developed over 3 years.Developed in U.S and Europe aiming to reducesexual violence against women. Six 2 -hsessions including practicing self-defense useof voice, faking compliance.This intervention was a self-defense programaimed at improving verbal and physicalprotective strategies of women and children athigh risk of rape.The intervention was able to reduce the annualincidence of sexual assault by 62.6 % over a10-month period.
Zhang et al.
(2014)China Experimental Not stated, n= 150
preschool children,Female = 50.6%Aged between 3 and 5 ( M= 4.10) The Body Safe Training (BST) Program
(Wurtele, 2007). The program consists ofseveral stories accompanied by pictures ofchildren in unsafe situations where someonetries to touch a child. Delivered in ﬁve
sessions, each ranging from 15 −25 min on
ﬁve
consecutive days.The BST program is an educational programaimed at teaching personal safety skills from abehavioral perspective.This study investigated the interventionseﬀectiveness with preschool children aged
between 3 and 5.Preschoolers who participated inthe CSA prevention training program had
signiﬁcantly higher
levels of knowledge about sexual abuse and
scores on their skills that may be helpful inavoiding sexual abuse
(continued on next page )D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
7Table 2 (continued )
Author(s) &
dateCountry Method Sample type, size and
genderChildren details Intervention Key ﬁndings
Fitriana et al.
(2018)Indonesia Quasi-experimental Purposive, n=8 4
children, Female = NotstatedGrade 4 and 5 students. Mage =
10.95, SD= 0.88 (Intervention); M
age = 10.86, SD= 1.00 (control)The intervention involved peer education.Sessions were taught over 2weeks with each session lasting 25 minutes.Education by peers used discussion methodsand playing games. The media used included
ﬂipcharts, sexual violence prevention videos,
card games, a snake and ladders game, and
drawing.A school-based education intervention taughtby peers as opposed to by teachers or otherprofessionals.Primary school aged children; fourth and ﬁfth
grade.
Education by peers has
an inﬂuence on the knowledge of school-aged
children in relation to sexual abuse prevention.
Citak Tunc
et al.(2018)Turkey Experimental Random, n=8 3
children, Female =36.1%Mage = 57 months, SD= 9.07 The Body Safe Training (BST) Program
(Wurtele, 2007). The program consists ofseveral stories accompanied by pictures ofchildren in unsafe situations where someonetries to touch a child. Authors reported the
intervention was delivered in preschools in 10
sessions, each ranging from 20 −25 min on
seven consecutive days.The BST program is an educational programaimed at teaching personal safety skills from abehavioral perspective.This study sampled preschool children agedbetween 3 and 5.
Children ’s self-protection skills and recognition
of appropriate and inappropriate touch
increased in the intervention group.
Hurtado et al.
(2014)El Salvador Pre-post design/
quasi-experimentalNot stated, n = 189 pre-visit, n = 59 post-visit.tThe Tin Marin ’s Children ’s Museum
CSA exhibit addresses issues regarding bodyownership, types of inappropriate touching,and escaping and reporting skills. The exhibitwas part of a campaign initiated by the
Salvadoran government and several NGOs.
The exhibit was interactive; children playedalong the way and watched and discussed avideo with a trained museum guide.Children ’s knowledge scores on CSA
prevention signi ﬁcantly improved after visiting
the exhibit (P < .012).D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
8outcomes.
3.4. Outcome measures
Of the eight studies reviewed, four used psychometrically sound outcome measures. These measures included the “What if ”
Situations Test ( Wurtele, Hughes, & Owens, 1998 ), the Personal Safety Questionnaire ( Wurtele, Gillispie, Currier, Franklin, & Neglect,
1992) and the Children ’s Knowledge of Abuse Questionnaire-Revised ( Tutty, 1995). Sinclair et al. (2013) was the only study we
identiﬁed that used incidence rates in both an intervention and control group to measure the reduction in sexual abuse as a result of
the intervention being tested, while the remaining studies used their own outcome measure developed for the study, with no re-
porting on reliability or validity of the measure.
4. Discussion
The aim of this systematic review was to understand the state of primary prevention strategies being used and evaluated in
developing countries. We identify the nature of child sexual abuse prevention strategies and interventions in developing countries,
understand the typical settings and population groups in which intervention strategies are being used, to investigate the e ﬀectiveness
of the interventions used.
4.1. Nature of prevention policies and interventions
In the few interventions outlined in the research papers included in this review, most prevention work is targeted at the local
level, typically in education settings for children at pre-school and primary school. These interventions focused on improving chil-
dren’s understanding of their bodies, appropriate and inappropriate touch, and who they could reach out to if they have concerns
about someone ’s behavior. Given the reach of school systems, these interventions could be classi ﬁed as being based on a public health
approach to primary prevention ( Herrenkohl et al., 2019). Numerous researchers ( Letourneau et al., 2014 ;Quadara et al., 2015) have
discussed the importance of utilizing a public health approach to prevent child sexual abuse. As it involves both policy setting andcommunity-wide activities (such as awareness raising and behavior change strategies), public health strategies are typically led at the
national or state government level. Of the studies included in this review, only one study was a government-led intervention ( Dunn,
2011).
Two studies ( Citak Tunc et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2014 ) focused on an intervention —the Body Safety Training Pro-
gram —developed in the US in the mid-1980s, and revised in 2007, and which has been tested for e ﬃcacy when compared to control
groups and other intervention options (see: ( Wurtele, Saslawsky, Miller, Marrs, & Britcher, 1986 ;Wurtele, Kast, Miller-Perrin, &
Kondrick, 1989). Both studies discussed the translation of the program into the respective language of the participants —Mandarin
and Turkish —using psychologists, educators and other experts to support the translation of either the entire program or the key titles.
The use of ‘western ’interventions in developing countries comes with advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, these pro-
grams have often been evaluated in experimental trials and been found to enhance knowledge about sexual abuse and protective
skills. On the other hand, it is yet to be investigated whether sexual abuse prevention programs developed and shown to be e ﬃcacious
in one cultural or social context can be as e ﬀective in a di ﬀerent cultural or social context.
Considering the use of Body Safe Training Program —a western-developed, local-level intervention —in these two studies, it is
reasonable to consider that an expansion of interventions in developing countries could include western-developed community andsocietal-level interventions. Already there has been e ﬀorts to introduce child maltreatment prevention strategies from western-
developed countries such as parent education and early home visiting; however these were not identi ﬁed
through our literature
search (because they are broader in their goals and not designed to speci ﬁcally to prevent CSA, and no data exist to demonstrate their
eﬃcacy at reducing the risk of CSA). These kinds of societal and community-level interventions would most likely be based on
government-led prevention policies in developed countries but would have to take into consideration the cultural factors relevant to
the context in which interventions were being implemented.
4.2. Typical settings and population groups
Although the eight studies re ﬂected a variety of intervention types, speci ﬁc information was not always available. Where it was,
school-based interventions or interventions delivered by teachers were the most common. This trend has been previously noted
within the wider literature ( Letourneau et al., 2014 ). Evidence of the e ﬀectiveness of school-based interventions aimed at preventing
CSA—largely in developed countries —has been identi ﬁed through a recent systematic review ( Walsh et al., 2018 ). However, Walsh
et al. questioned whether children ’s gains in knowledge and skills translates to an actual reduction in CSA. This has implications for
developing countries where not all children are in school. The out-of-school rate in primary school-aged children in low-incomecountries is 20 % relative to 3 % in their high-income counterparts; the lower secondary out-of-school rate is 38 % and 2 %,
respectively. Of children not attending school globally, approximately 84 % are from developing countries ( UNESCO, 2018). Vul-
nerable groups, such as poor girls, are more likely to be out of school ( Mertaugh, Jimenez, & Patrinos, 2009). Thus, there is agreement
that a public health model, including population-level prevention strategies and a situational prevention approach, would be better
placed to improve prevention of child sexual abuse across di ﬀerent settings ( Kaufman, Erooga, Higgins, & Zatkin, 2019 ;Quadara,
2019). However, we did not identify any population-level interventions within the search parameters of this review. With so fewD. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
9studies meeting the criteria we set, concern regarding the e ﬀectiveness of programs to reduce the high rates of CSA in developing
countries is warranted.
Most interventions in developing countries appear to focus on very young children. The development —and empirical in-
vestigation —of interventions aimed at pre-school aged children is warranted considering the research showing that children under
the age of seven constitute a signi ﬁcant proportion of CSA victims ( Finkelhor, 1984). The intervention most used in developing
countries for children this age identi ﬁed in our review is the Body Safety Training program ( Wurtele et al., 1986 ), evaluated by two of
the papers ( Citak Tunc et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2014 ).
We were not able to uncover any peer-reviewed evaluation work conducted by any NGO in this review. Despite many interna-
tional aid and development agencies recognizing the importance of child protection in their work, it was surprising to see no
published evaluations of the e ﬃcacy of such programs. This could be because assessing outcomes (as opposed to delivering in-
itiatives) is not as highly valued, the di ﬃculties in translating evaluation results for peer-review publication, or the general challenges
of outcome evaluation designs makes such an activity very di ﬃcult.
4.3. Intervention eﬃ cacy in developing countries
Overall, the studies provided a positive picture about the e ﬀectiveness of the interventions in increasing abuse prevention
knowledge and —when tested —the self-e ﬃcacy of children and young people to take protective action should they encounter an
unsafe situation. All six studies that measured knowledge and/or skills showed signiﬁ cant improvements in participants ’capabilities.
The evidence suggests that interventions that aim to improve young people ’s knowledge and/or skills regarding keeping themselves
safe can be successful in that goal; however, researchers have not gone further to measure whether that increased knowledge and/orskill in the longer term leads to a decrease in sexual abuse victimization as a result. Such evidence would be di ﬃcult to obtain without
strong existing country or regional prevalence data, or at least incidence data for CSA reported to authorities, against which tocompare. Considering the average delay between abuse and disclosure of CSA is estimated to be in the order of 20 years ( Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse, 2017 ), this is a signi ﬁcant barrier to comprehensive evaluation of
current prevention e ﬀorts. The studies included in our review give evidence that a range of individuals —both professional and
peers —can support the improvement of sexual abuse prevention knowledge in young people. As prevalence and incidence are
notoriously di ﬃcult to measure in relation to child sexual abuse ( Mathews et al., 2016), it is perhaps not surprising that only one
study within the scope of this review used incidence rates to measure success ( Sinclair et al., 2013 ). Incidentally, in that study, rates
of sexual abuse dropped signi ﬁcantly as a result of the intervention. In the 10 months following participation in the program, sexual
assault incidence rates showed a statistically signi ﬁcant reduction within the intervention group of 15.4 %. The control group saw no
change in incidence rates across the same time. Verbal defense skills were identi ﬁed as the ﬁrst skill learned, followed by physical
self-defense skills. The authors attributed the decline in incidence for the intervention group to this. They acknowledged that if CSA
did occur, the intervention group would also be more likely to disclose that assault had occurred, noting that this opened the door to
potential support and intervention ( Sinclair et al., 2013 ).
The results from developing countries con ﬁrm
what has also been shown in developed countries: that prevention strategies
focused on knowledge can e ﬀectively increase the sexual safety knowledge and skills of young children. However, there is a lack of
evidence that supports the link between an increase in knowledge and a decrease in incidence of CSA ( Walsh et al., 2018 ). This lack of
evidence is not because of a lack of data to show no relationship, but because of the absence of an agreed ‘proxy outcome ’measure
and the di ﬃculty in tracking actual incidence of CSA, particularly in the absence of national prevalence or representative surveillance
data on sexual abuse incidence in most countries. The challenge of attributing direct outcomes to prevention-oriented policies and
interventions apply equally in developed and developing countries ( Mathews et al., 2016 ).
Seven of the eight studies focused on acquisition of knowledge and/or skills as the primary outcome measure. Only one evaluation
(Sinclair et al., 2013 ) looked at the implementation of that knowledge, the con ﬁdence and self-e ﬃcacy of participants to take action
based on knowledge/skill, or other emotional factors that might inﬂ uence implementation of the knowledge gained. Few studies
followed-up with participants. One study ( Dunn, 2011) that measured knowledge gains conducted follow-up tests after six weeks. The
study that measured disclosures of child sexual abuse and rape ( Sinclair et al., 2013) collected post-intervention data after 10 months.
Other than these follow-up procedures, there were no follow-up studies that examined the retention of knowledge, use of skills or
changes in con ﬁdence over time.
4.4. State of knowledge of CSA primary prevention activities in developing countries
The number of experimental or quasi-experimental designs is a major strength of the approach being taken by researchers in
developing countries to evaluate the e ﬀectiveness of interventions aimed at preventing CSA. Most of the studies had random allo-
cation to intervention and control groups, with some utilizing a pre-post evaluation design, measuring the intended outcomes bothbefore and after intervention. One of the key weaknesses of the research we identi ﬁed is the lack of comparative analysis of two or
more programs, using the same implementation protocol and outcomes evaluation strategy. Currently, no data exist to suggest whatworks better. All that can be said, given the range of speci ﬁc intervention programs, is that prevention knowledge and skills canbe
taught and achieve statistically signi ﬁcant increases in children ’s knowledge of sexual abuse prevention concepts in developing
country contexts, as has been seen in western English-speaking research on school-based interventions. A second key weakness is the
lack of outcome variables measured in research investigating CSA prevention strategies. Most research regarding the e ﬃcacy of
interventions has focused on the increase of children ’s prevention knowledge and skills. Investigation into the conditions of safetyD. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
10that support a situational crime prevention approach to preventing child sexual abuse could be gained by measuring additional
variables such as children ’s perceptions of safety within settings where abuse can potentially occur ( Moore, McArthur, Heerde, Roche,
&O’Leary, 2016 ), the safeguarding capabilities of sta ﬀand volunteers working with children and young people ( Russell & Higgins,
2019, 2020 ), or parent, carer, and family empowerment and awareness of CSA prevention being used in organizations and within the
community.
5. Conclusion
Safeguarding children from CSA has continued to receive increasing attention globally due to high incidence and prevalence rates.
While developed countries such as the US, Australia and countries across Europe have 40 years ’experience researching and de-
veloping interventions to prevent CSA, developing countries have only seen empirical evaluation of the e ﬀectiveness of such in-
terventions in the past decade. Although data are limited, as developing countries appear to have higher prevalence of CSA compared
to developed and western countries, it is heartening to see that school-based prevention interventions can result in increased
knowledge and skills for children in these countries. Despite the importance assigned to safeguarding activities by international aid
organizations, however, there is scant evidence in English language peer-review journals of rigorous quality evaluations of the
policies and related intervention strategies they can —or do —employ when working in developing countries.
Although there are considerable e ﬀorts internationally to prevent CSA that exist, however, they have not been subject to empirical
evaluation and the ﬁndings published in peer-review journals. The sizeable gap between the prevention e ﬀorts, and the formal
research evaluating their e ﬀectiveness suggests an area of focus for funding and further research e ﬀorts to understand whether and
how such prevention initiatives are (or are not) e ﬀective in their goal of preventing CSA in developing and non-western low-to-
middle income countries.
Considering the global scale and growing interest in addressing the problem of CSA, it is disappointing to have not found more
evidence of large-scale government-led initiatives to combat this abuse in developing countries. Compared to developed nations, fewevaluations of government-led initiatives, or institutional standard practices such as curriculum, have been undertaken in developing
countries. It is a given that individual nations hope to make a di ﬀerence and reduce CSA, but further work —and the requisite
funding —is needed to apply a rigorous public health approach with an evaluation component. Most programs being evaluated in
developing countries were isolated interventions or programs. Although there are some limited local, school-level programs in de-
veloping countries, even in that context, we did not ﬁnd reference to there being an overarching public health or system-level model
behind the interventions on which teaching about prevention of sexual abuse can be based at a whole-of-population level. We foundno evaluation of a national or regional initiative, or of an integrated prevention framework in a developing country.
There was relatively poor geographical coverage of evaluative research regarding CSA prevention, with no international com-
parisons undertaken. No evaluations were published from South America; North Africa, Paci ﬁca, or the Middle East. Given our
systematic search of multidisciplinary databases found so few eligible studies, research into CSA prevention in developing countries
and evaluation of interventions is a global need. For prevention strategies to e ﬀectively support individuals, organizations and
communities in developing countries, more rigorous evaluations need to be conducted and reported, so that the internationalcommunity can identify best practice for implementation.
6. Implications
To support local-level activities in developing countries aimed at reducing CSA, the accessibility of primary prevention programs
should be a focus of governments and non-government organizations operating in developing countries (who are funded directly by
governments, international aid agencies, and overseas donors). Country-wide policies/programs are needed, supported by partner-
ships with research experts to conduct evaluation research on their prevention e ﬀorts–whether they be at community or societal
levels. As is the case in dealing with related areas of interpersonal violence, such partnership activities between international agenciesand governments must also recognize and promote equality and the human rights of women and children, which underpin many of
the intervention activities.
CSA-speci ﬁc prevention also needs to be situated within the context of child maltreatment prevention more broadly, from a public
health perspective ( Herrenkohl et al., 2019). By recognizing the crossover between CSA prevention and broader child maltreatment
prevention, as well as issues related to gender and patriarchal social norms, prevention initiatives would be able to relate speciﬁ cally
to the risk factors identi ﬁed as being more relevant in the developing nations in which they are being implemented.
This
review highlights the need for prevention programs that are broader and go beyond school-based sexual abuse prevention
knowledge of children (particularly given the higher out-of-school rates in developing countries), linked to a framework for com-
prehensive CSA prevention, and preferably an even broader child maltreatment prevention framework.
Considering the opportunities a ﬀorded through technological solutions (where these can be appropriately used), research is
needed to investigate the e ﬃcacy of how these can be applied in developing countries, with consideration to the limitations and risks
that come with internet access in relation to CSA, could support broader roll-out of e ﬀective prevention interventions.
With the use of western-led interventions in developing countries to reduce CSA, it is essential to consider cultural adaptation of
such interventions, based on a solid examination of cultural beliefs that may be barriers or enablers of prevention e ﬀorts. As well as
development of new culturally appropriate and speci ﬁc CSA prevention strategies, such adaptations would need to ensure con-
sideration of the perceived role of children and young people within the societies that interventions are being applied in, as well asthe level of importance placed on community and societal cohesion.D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
11The primary prevention programs that governments and non-government agencies begin utilizing should go beyond school-based
protective behaviors programs, measuring only the increase in knowledge and skills, but rather be linked to a broader framework for
comprehensive prevention that includes improving conditions of safety for children, such as addressing workforce capabilities and
building engagement with parents and the broader community. Those leading prevention e ﬀorts should include within their pro-
grams research —including qualitative methodologies —to evaluate the e ﬀectiveness of prevention e ﬀorts in speci ﬁc contexts. For
example, this could include programs delivered in contexts where children may not be attending school regularly, and where other
risks to their safety and wellbeing (from poverty, neglect, child labor, etc.) may intersect with their risk of CSA and the capacity of
prevention initiatives to be e ﬀective.
Funding
This research did not receive any speci ﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-pro ﬁt sectors.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.
104395.
References1
Abeid, M., Muganyizi, P., Massawe, S., Mpembeni, R., Darj, E., & Axemo, P. (2015). Knowledge and attitude towards rape and child sexual abuse - a community-based
cross-sectional study in Rural Tanzania. BMC Public Health, 15 .https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1757-7 .
Abeid, M., Muganyizi, P., Mpembeni, R., Darj, E., & Axemo, P. (2015). A community-based intervention for improving health-seeking behavior among sexual violence
survivors: A controlled before and after design study in rural Tanzania. Global Health Action, 8 .https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v8.28608 28608– 28608.
Ajdukovi ć, M., Su šac, N., & Rajter, M. (2013). Gender and age di ﬀerences in prevalence and incidence of child sexual abuse in Croatia. Croatian Medical Journal, 54 (5),
469–479. https://doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2013.54.469 .
Al-Eissa, M. A., AlBuhairan, F. S., Qayad, M., Saleheen, H., Runyan, D., & Almuneef, M. (2015). Determining child maltreatment incidence in Saudi Arabia using the
ICAST-CH: A pilot study. Child Abuse & Neglect, 42 , 174 –182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.08.016 .
Ali, N. S., Ali, F. N., Khuwaja, A. K., & Nanji, K. (2014). Magnitude and factors associated with child abuse in a Mega City of Developing Country Pakistan. Iranian
Journal of Pediatrics, 24 (2), 140 –146.
Al-Saif, D. M., Al-Eissa, M., Saleheen, H., Al-Mutlaq, H., Everson, M. D., & Almuneef, M. A. (2018). Professionals ’attitude toward reporting child sexual abuse in Saudi
Arabia. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 27 (1), 22 –37.https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2017.1360429 .
Amado, B. G., Arce, R., & Herraiz, A. (2015). Psychological injury in victims of child sexual abuse: A meta-analytic review. Psychosocial Intervention, 24 (1), 49 –62.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psi.2015.03.002 .
Barrera, M., Calderon, L., & Bell, V. (2013). The cognitive impact of sexual abuse and PTSD in children: A neuropsychological study. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse,
22(6), 625 –638. https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2013.811141 .
Barth, J., Bermetz, L., Heim, E., Trelle, S., & Tonia, T. (2013). The current prevalence of child sexual abuse worldwide: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
International Journal of Public Health, 58 (3), 469 –483. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00038-012-0426-1 .
Blakemore, T., Herbert, J. L., Arney, F., & Parkinson, S. (2017). The impacts of institutional child sexual abuse: A rapid review of the evidence. Child Abuse & Neglect,
74,3 5–48.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2017.08.006 .
Bridgewater, G. (2016). Physical and sexual violence against children in Kenya within a cultural context. Community Practitioner: The Journal of the Community
Practitioners ’& Health Visitors ’Association, 89 (2), 30 –34.
Cashmore, J., & Shackel, R. (2013). The long-term e ﬀects of child sexual abuse. Retrieved from https://aifs.gov.au/cfca/sites/default/ ﬁles/cfca/pubs/papers/a143161/
cfca11.pdf .
*Citak Tunc, G., Gorak, G., Ozyazicioglu, N., Ak, B., Isil, O., & Vural, P. (2018). Determining the appropriateness of the “What if ”situations test (WIST) with Turkish
pre-schoolers. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 27 (3), 292 –304. https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2018.1425947 .
de Jong, R., Alink, L., Bijleveld, C., Finkenauer, C., & Hendriks, J. (2015). Transition to adulthood of child sexual abuse victims. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 24 ,
175–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2015.04.012 .
*Dunn, M. (2011). The learning of sexual abuse prevention concepts and the reliability of the CKAQ-RIII in the South African context. Social Work / Maatskaplike Werk,
47(2), 155 –175.
Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2008). Exposure to childhood sexual and physical abuse and adjustment in early adulthood. Child Abuse & Neglect,
32(6), 607 –619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2006.12.018 .
Finkelhor, D. (1984). Child sexual abuse. New York, NY: Free Press .
Finkelhor, D., Shattuck, A., Turner, H. A., & Hamby, S. L. (2014). The lifetime prevalence of child sexual abuse and sexual assault assessed in late adolescence. Journal
of Adolescent Health, 55 (3), 329 –333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.12.026 .
*Fitriana, R. N., Suryawati, C., & Zubaidah (2018). E ﬀect of peer education model on knowledge and self-e ﬃcacy of children in the prevention of physical sexual
violence. Belitung Nursing Journal, 4 (1), 51 –57.
Gushwa, M., Bernier, J., & Robinson, D. (2018). Advancing child sexual abuse prevention in schools: An exploration of the e ﬀectiveness of the enough! Online training
program for K-12 teachers. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 1–16.https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2018.1477000 .
Hanson, R. F., Ralston, E., Self-Brown, S., Ruggiero, K. J., Saunders, B. E., Gaw Love, A., ... Williams, R. (2008). Description and preliminary evaluation of the child
abuse school liaison program: A secondary prevention program for school personnel. Journal of Psychological Trauma, 7 (2), 91 –103. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19322880802231783 .
Herrenkohl, T. I., Lonne, B., Scott, D., & Higgins, D. (2019). New directions for public health approaches: Key themes and issues. In B. Lonne, D. Scott, D. Higgins, & T.
Herrenkohl (Eds.). Re-visioning public health approaches for protecting children (pp. 487 –499). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05858-6_28 Child
Maltreatment 9: Contemporary Issues in Research and Policy Series.
Holzer, P. J., Higgins, J., Brom ﬁeld, L. M., Richardson, N., & Higgins, D. J. (2006). The eﬀectiveness of parent education and home visiting child maltreatment prevention
programs. (Child Abuse Prevention Issues No. 24). Available at:Melbourne: National Child Protection Clearinghouse, Australian Institute of Family Studies. https://
aifs.gov.au/cfca/publications/e ﬀectiveness-parent-education-and-home-visiting-chil .
*Hurtado, A., Katz, C. L., Ciro, D., Guttfreund, D., & Nosike, D. (2014). Children ’s knowledge of sexual abuse prevention in El Salvador. Annals of Global Health, 80 (2),
103–107.
1References marked with an asterisk (*) indicate studies included in the systematic review.D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
12International Statistical Institute. (n.d.). Developing countries.
Innocenti Research Centre (2003). Children in institutions: The beginning of the end? The cases of Italy, Spain, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay. Florence, Italy: UNICEF
International Child Development Centre. https://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/insight8e.pdf .
Kacker, L., Varadan, S., & Kumar, P. (2007). Study on child abuse: India 2007. Retrieved from https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/library/study-child-abuse-
india-2007: .
Kaufman, K., Erooga, M., Stewart, K., Zatkin, J., McConnell, E., Tews, H., ... Higgins, D. (2016). Risk pro ﬁles for institutional child sexual abuse. A literature
review Retrieved from https://www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/sites/default/ ﬁles/ﬁle-list/Research%20Report%20-%20Risk%20pro ﬁles%20for
%20institutional%20child%20sexual%20abuse%20-%20Causes.pdf .
Kaufman, K., Erooga, M., Higgins, D., & Zatkin, J. (2019a). Youth-serving organization safety risks and the situational prevention approach. In B. Lonne, D. Scott, D.
Higgins, & T. I. Herrenkohl (Eds.). Re-visioning public health approaches for protecting children (pp. 165 –180). Cham: Springer International Publishing .
Kaufman, K., Erooga, M., Higgins, D., & Zatkin, J. (2019b). Youth-serving organization safety risks and the situational prevention approach. In B. Lonne, D. Scott, D.
Higgins, & T. I. Herrenkohl (Eds.). Re-visioning public health approaches for protecting children. Switzerland: Springer .
Kloppen, K., Haugland, S., Svedin, C. G., Maehle, M., & Breivik, K. (2016). Prevalence of child sexual abuse in the Nordic countries: A literature review. Journal of Child
Sexual Abuse, 25 (1), 37 –55.https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2015.1108944 .
Knoll, J. (2010). Teacher sexual misconduct: Grooming patterns and female o ﬀenders. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 19 (4), 371 –386.
*Kucuk, S., Platin, N., & Erdem, E. (2017). Increasing awareness of protection from sexual abuse in children with mild intellectual disabilities: An education study.
Applied Nursing Research, 38 , 153 –158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnr.2017.10.016 .
Letourneau, E. J., Brown, D. S., Fang, X., Hassan, A., & Mercy, J. A. (2018). The economic burden of child sexual abuse in the United States. Child Abuse & Neglect, 79 ,
413–422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2018.02.020 .
Letourneau, E. J., Eaton, W. W., Bass, J., Berlin, F. S., & Moore, S. G. (2014). The need for a comprehensive public health approach to preventing child sexual abuse.
Public Health Reports, 129 (3), 222 –228. https://doi.org/10.1177/003335491412900303 .
Letourneau, E. J., Schae ﬀer, C. M., Bradshaw, C. P., & Feder, K. A. (2017). Preventing the onset of child sexual abuse by targeting young adolescents with universal
prevention programming. Child Maltreatment, 22 (2), 100 –111. https://doi.org/10.1177/1077559517692439 .
Levine, J. A., & Dandamudi, K. (2016). Prevention of child sexual abuse by targeting pre-oﬀ enders before ﬁrst oﬀense. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 25 (7), 719 –737.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10538712.2016.1208703 .
Lindert,
J., von Ehrenstein, O. S., Grashow, R., Gal, G., Braehler, E., & Weisskopf, M. G. (2014). Sexual and physical abuse in childhood is associated with depression
and anxiety over the life course: Systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of Public Health, 59 (2), 359 –372. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00038-013-
0519-5 .
Mathews, B. (2017). Optimising implementation of reforms to better prevent and respond to child sexual abuse in institutions: Insights from public health, regulatory
theory, and Australia ’s Royal Commission. Child Abuse & Neglect, 74 ,8 6–98.
Mathews, B., & Collin-Vezina, D. (2017). Child sexual abuse: Toward a conceptual model and de ﬁnition. Trauma, Violence & Abuse .https://doi.org/10.1177/
1524838017738726 1524838017738726.
Mathews, B. P., Walsh, K. M., Dunne, M. P., Katz, I., Arney, F., Higgins, D., ... Bates, S. (2016). Scoping study for research into the prevalence of child abuse in Australia:
Final report 255.
McMahon, P. M., & Puett, R. C. (1999). Child sexual abuse as a public health issue: Recommendations of an expert panel. Journal of Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research
& Treatment, 11 (4), 257 –266.
Meinck, F., Cluver, L. D., Boyes, M. E., & Loening-Voysey, H. (2016). Physical, emotional and sexual adolescent abuse victimisation in South Africa: Prevalence,
incidence, perpetrators and locations. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 70 (9), 910 –916. https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2015-205860 .
Meinck, F., Cluver, L. D., Boyes, M. E., & Mhlongo, E. L. (2015). Risk and protective factors for physical and sexual abuse of children and adolescents in Africa: A review
and implications for practice. Trauma, Violence & Abuse, 16 (1), 81 –107. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838014523336 .
Mertaugh, M. T., Jimenez, E. Y., & Patrinos, H. A. (2009). The global challenge in basic education: Why continued investment in basic education is important. Retrieved
from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/484151468313820188/The-global-challenge-in-basic-education-why-continued-investment-in-basic-
education-is-important: .
Moher, D., Shamseer, L., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A., Petticrew, M., ... PRISMA-P Group (2015). Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-
analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. Systematic Reviews, 4 (1).
Moore, T., McArthur, M., Heerde, J., Roche, S., & O ’Leary, P. (2016). Our safety counts: Children and young people ’s perceptions of safety and institutional responses to their
safety concerns causes. A report for the Royal Commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse Retrieved from https://safeguardingchildren.acu.edu.au/
research_and_resources/institute_of_child_protection_studies_report_our_safety_counts: .
Morley, S., & Higgins, D. (2018). Understanding situational crime prevention for child sexual abuse: What services need to know. Retrieved from https://
safeguardingchildren.acu.edu.au/practice_tools/articles/situational_crime_prevention .
Moulden, H. M., Firestone, P., Kingston, D. A., & Wexler, A. F. (2010). A description of sexual o ﬀending committed by Canadian teachers. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse,
19(4), 403 –418.
*Neherta,
M., Machmud, R., Damayanti, R., & Afrizal (2017). The di ﬀerence in intervention of sexual abuse prevention by two variance professions on primary school
children in Padang. Indian Journal of Community Psychology, 29 (1), 118 –122.
Olafson, E. (2014). Child sexual abuse: Demography, impact, and interventions. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma, 4 (1), 8 –21.https://doi.org/10.1080/19361521.
2011.545811 .
Ouzzani, M., Hammady, H., Fedorowicz, Z., & Elmagarmid, A. (2016). Rayyan —A web and mobile app for systematic reviews. Systematic Reviews, 5 (1), 210. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13643-016-0384-4 .
Pereda, N., Guilera, G., Forns, M., & Gomez-Benito, J. (2009). The prevalence of child sexual abuse in community and student samples: A meta-analysis. Clinical
Psychology Review, 29 (4), 328 –338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2009.02.007 .
Plummer, M., & Cossins, A. (2018). The cycle of abuse: When victims become o ﬀenders. Trauma, Violence & Abuse, 19 (3), 286 –304. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1524838016659487 .
Plummer, C. A., & Njuguna, W. (2009). Cultural protective and risk factors: Professional perspectives about child sexual abuse in Kenya. Child Abuse & Neglect, 33 (8),
524–532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2009.02.005 .
Putnam, F. W. (2003). Ten-year research update review: Child sexual abuse. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42 (3), 269 –278.
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.CHI.0000037029.04952.72 .
Quadara, A. (2019). Child sexual abuse prevention strategies for population-level change: Challenges and future directions. In B. Lonne, D. Scott, D. Higgins, & T. I.
Herrenkohl (Eds.). Re-visioning public health approaches for protecting children (pp. 145 –164). Switzerland: Springer .
Quadara, A., Nagy, V., Higgins, D., & Siegel, N. (2015). Conceptualising the prevention of child sexual abuse. Retrieved from https://aifs.gov.au/publications/
conceptualising-prevention-child-sexual-abuse: .
Radford, L., Corral, S., Bradley, C., & Fisher, H. L. (2013). The prevalence and impact of child maltreatment and other types of victimization in the UK: Findings from a
population survey of caregivers, children and young people and young adults. Child Abuse & Neglect, 37 (10), 801 –813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2013.02.
004.
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse (2017). Final reportVolume 2 Commonwealth of Australia Retrieved from https://www.childa-
buseroyalcommission.gov.au/nature-and-cause .
Rumble, L., Febrianto, R. F., Larasati, M. N., Hamilton, C., Mathews, B., & Dunne, M. P. (2018). Childhood sexual violence in Indonesia: A systematic review. Trauma,
Violence & Abuse 1524838018767932. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524838018767932 .
Russell, D., & Higgins, D. (2020). Conﬁ rmatory factor analysis and psychometric properties of the Safeguarding Capabilities in preventing Child Sexual Abuse scale.
[Manuscript in preparation] .D.
Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
13Russell, D., & Higgins, D. (2019). Safeguarding Capabilities in preventing Child Sexual Abuse: Exploratory factor analysis of a scale measuring safeguarding capabilities
in youth-serving organizations workers. Child Maltreatment .https://doi.org/10.1177/1077559519870253 .
*Sinclair, J., Sinclair, L., Otieno, E., Mulinge, M., Kapphahn, C., & Golden, N. H. (2013). A self-defense program reduces the incidence of sexual assault in Kenyan
adolescent girls. Journal of Adolescent Health, 53 (3), 374 –380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.04.008 .
Skeen, S., & Tomlinson, M. (2013). A public health approach to preventing child abuse in low-and middle-income countries: A call for action. International Journal of
Psychology, 48 (2), 108 –116.
Stoltenborgh, M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Alink, L. R. A., & van Ijzendoorn, M. H. (2015). The prevalence of child maltreatment across the globe: Review of a
series of meta-analyses. Child Abuse Review, 24 (1), 37 –50.https://doi.org/10.1002/car.2353 .
Sullivan, J., & Beech, A. (2002). Professional perpetrators: Sex o ﬀenders who use their employment to target and sexually abuse the children with whom they work.
Child Abuse Review, 11 (3), 153 –167.
Tanaka, M., Suzuki, Y. E., Aoyama, I., Takaoka, K., & MacMillan, H. L. (2017). Child sexual abuse in Japan: A systematic review and future directions. Child Abuse &
Neglect, 66 ,3 1–40.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2017.02.041 .
Torrey, E. F. (1997). Out of the Shadows: Confronting America ’s Mental Illness Crisis.. New York, NY: Wiley .
Tutty, L. M. (1995). The revised Children ’s Knowledge of Abuse Questionnaire: Development of a measure of children ’s understanding of sexual abuse prevention
concepts. Journal of Social Work Research, 19 (2), 112 –120.
UNESCO (2018). One in Five Children, Adolescents and Youth is Out of School. United Nations Education, Scienti ﬁc and Cultural Organisation Fact Sheet No., 48 ,1–13.
United Nations (2014). Country classi ﬁcation. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/wesp/wesp_current/2014wesp_country_classi ﬁcation.
pdf:.
Veenema, T. G., Thornton, C. P., & Corley, A. (2015). The public health crisis of child sexual abuse in low and middle income countries: An integrative review of the
literature. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 52 (4), 864 –881. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2014.10.017 .
Walsh, K., Zwi, K., Woolfenden, S., & Shlonsky, A. (2018). School-based education programs for the prevention of child sexual abuse. Research on Social Work Practice,
28(1), 33 –55.https://doi.org/10.1177/1049731515619705 .
Whitaker, D. J., Le, B., Karl Hanson, R., Baker, C. K., McMahon, P. M., Ryan, G., ... Rice, D. D. (2008). Risk factors for the perpetration of child sexual abuse: A review
and
meta-analysis. Child Abuse & Neglect, 32 (5), 529 –548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2007.08.005 .
Whitehead, J., & Roﬀ ee, J. (2016). Child sexual abuse in Fiji: Authority, risk factors and responses. Current Issues in Criminal Justice, 27 (3), 323 –334.
World Health Organisation (2003). Guidelines for medico-legal care for victims of sexual violence. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/
publications/violence/med_leg_guidelines/en/ .
World Health Organization (2010). Violence and health in the WHO African region. Retrieved from https://www.afro.who.int/publications/violence-and-health-who-
african-regionWorld Health Organization .
World Health Organization (2015). Violence prevention in the South-East Asia Region. Retrieved from https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/164334. World Health
Organization .
Wurtele, S. K. (2009). Preventing sexual abuse of children in the twenty- ﬁrst century: Preparing for challenges and opportunities. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 18 (1),
1–18.https://doi.org/10.1080/10538710802584650 .
Wurtele, S. K., Gillispie, E. I., Currier, L. L., Franklin, C. F., & Neglect (1992). A comparison of teachers vs. parents as instructors of a personal safety program for
preschoolers. Child Abuse & Neglect, 16 (1), 127 –137.
Wurtele, S. K., Hughes, J., & Owens, J. S. (1998). An examination of the reliability of the “What if ”situations test: A brief report. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 7 (1),
41–52.
Wurtele, S. K., Kast, L. C., Miller-Perrin, C. L., & Kondrick, P. A. (1989). Comparison of programs for teaching personal safety skills to preschoolers. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 57 (4), 505 –511.
Wurtele, S. K., Saslawsky, D. A., Miller, C. L., Marrs, S. R., & Britcher, J. C. (1986). Teaching personal safety skills for potential prevention of sexual abuse: A
comparison of treatments. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54 (5), 688 –692.
*Zhang, W., Chen, J., Feng, Y., Li, J., Liu, C., & Zhao, X. (2014). Evaluation of a sexual abuse prevention education for Chinese preschoolers. Research on Social Work
Practice, 24 (4), 428 –436. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049731513510409 .
Zolotor, A. J., Runyan, D. K., Dunne, M. P., Jain, D., Peturs, H. R., Ramirez, C., ... Isaeva, O. (2009). ISPCAN Child Abuse Screening Tool Children ’s Version (ICAST-C):
Instrument development and multi-national pilot testing. Child Abuse & Neglect, 33 (11), 833 –841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2009.09.004 .D. Russell, et al. Child Abuse & Neglect 102 (2020) 104395
14