Azzahra, Nadia Fairuza; Amanta, Felippa
Research Report
Promoting Digital Literacy Skill for Students through
Improved School Curriculum
Policy Brief, No. 11
Provided in Cooperation with:
Center for Indonesian Policy Studies (CIPS), Jakarta
Suggested Citation: Azzahra, Nadia Fairuza; Amanta, Felippa (2021) : Promoting Digital
Literacy Skill for Students through Improved School Curriculum, Policy Brief, No. 11, Center for
Indonesian Policy Studies (CIPS), Jakarta
This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/249444
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.1
Key Messages: 
• Between 2015 and 2019, Indonesian Internet 
users increased by 22%. In 2019, 43.5% of the 
270 million people in Indonesia had access to 
the Internet. Of the roughly 117.5 million people 
with Internet access, 25.5% are children and 
adolescents. Digital activity has also intensified, 
especially during the Covid-19 pandemic.
• There is an urgent need to increase digital 
literacy from an early age to minimize the 
risk of online harm, to equip children who are 
future voters and consumers with the skills 
and understanding they need to assume those 
roles, and to maximize meaningful use of the 
Internet.• Generally, Indonesians have poor digital 
literacy. This problem was exacerbated when 
Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) was dropped from the national school 
curriculum in 2013.
• Several government initiatives, including the 
National Literacy Movement ( Gerakan Literasi 
Nasional /GLN), the Siberkreasi program, and 
reintroducing ICT to the school curriculum, 
have yet to be implemented effectively and with 
a specific focus on improving digital literacy 
skills. Promoting Digital Literacy Skill for Students 
through Improved School Curriculum Policy Brief No. 11
by Nadia Fairuza Azzahra & Felippa AmantaApril 2021POLICY BRIEF
shutterstock/Yos2
Digitalization and Digital Literacy in Indonesia
The number of Internet users in Indonesia has increased significantly in recent years. Between 2015 and 2019, 
Internet users increased by 22%. In 2019, 43.5% of the 270 million people in Indonesia had access to the Internet 
(Statistics Indonesia, 2020a). While the greatest increase comes from people living in urban areas, where the 
number of users increased by 53%, rural areas have also experienced a steady rise, increasing by 31%. 
Young people have also enjoyed increasing access to the Internet. In the past four years, the percentage of 
Indonesian students aged 5–24 years who have access to the Internet increased sharply from 33.98% to 59.3% 
(Statistics Indonesia, 2020b) (Graph 1). Slightly more than a quarter of Internet users (25.5%) are children and 
adolescents. • To strengthen students’ digital literacy, the 
Ministry of Education and Culture and the 
Ministry of Religious  Affairs need to improve the 
curriculum for teaching ICT. This requires the 
participation of the Ministry of Communications 
and Informatics and non-government actors 
with special expertise in digital solutions. It has 
to apply a new approach of cultivating critical 
thinking skills in the classroom, improving 
teachers’ capacities in both ICT and critical 
thinking, and introducing basic digital literacy 
skills for parents. • The Ministry of Education and Culture, and 
the Ministry of Religious Affairs need to 
cooperate with the Ministry of Communication 
and Informatics on expanding technology and 
Internet access, especially for students living 
in rural areas. This requires the cooperation of 
the private sector.
shutterstock/13_Phunkod3
Digital activity has also surged. A survey conducted by Hootsuite and We are Social (2021) reveals that Indonesian 
respondents aged 16-64 years old spend an average of 7 hours and 52 minutes on the Internet every day. This is 
higher than the global average of 6 hours and 54 minutes per day. Indonesia ranks 8th out of 42 surveyed countries 
in terms of most time spent on the Internet, higher than Singapore and Vietnam and lower than the Philippines 
and Malaysia. 
Children are also well engaged on the Internet, especially in social media. Focus group interviews in Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand conducted by UNICEF (2020) found that many children manage multiple social 
media accounts for entertainment, communication, and education purposes. Some of them are not only consumers 
but also content creators.
During the Covid-19 pandemic, digital activities have expanded and intensified as many people have had to shift 
to online solutions. For example, new digital consumers in e-commerce in Indonesia increased as much as 37% 
during the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 (Google et al., 2020; Ministry of Trade, 2020). Due to long-term school 
closures, educational activity has also shifted online, especially in urban areas. As a result, children are exposed 
to an expanded range of digital content and products and become a more important segment of online consumers. 
However, the remarkable growth of Internet use in Indonesia has not necessarily corresponded with improved 
digital literacy. This refers not only to the ability to use technology, such as skills to use devices, software and 
the basic use of the Internet. It also includes digital literacy skills that revolve around the ability to understand, 
evaluate, and responsibly use information acquired from digital sources, which is the subject of this policy brief. 
Considering the premature development of digital literacy in Indonesia, this brief will not engage in a discussion 
of more advanced levels of digital literacy that require an understanding of cybersecurity, digital citizenship, data 
privacy, etc.
According to the Economist Intelligence Unit (2020a), Indonesia ranks 61st out of 100 countries for its level of 
education and preparedness to use the Internet. Indonesia’s position is lower than neighboring countries such 
as Singapore and Malaysia, which rank 22nd and 33rd, respectively. The low level of digital literacy in Indonesia, 
especially in rural areas, limits what Internet users can meaningfully do when they are online and may exacerbate 
the digital divide1 (Purbo, 2017).
1 Digital divide is a gap between individuals, families, enterprises, and geographical areas at various socio-economic levels in terms of both their access 
to information and communication technology (ICT) resources and their use of the Internet for any purposes. Source: Statistics Indonesia (2020b).Figure 1. 
Percentage of students aged 5–24 years old who have access to Internet (2016–2020)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2016 2017 2018 2019 202033.9840.9645.7553.0659.334
The Urgency of Digital Literacy Improvement
As Internet use pervades every aspect of life, the urgency of improving digital literacy increases. This includes 
improving understanding of how to use digital products in a responsible manner and taking advantage of 
opportunities and resources available on the Internet. There is wide agreement that users must be equipped with 
the skills needed to maximize the benefits from their online activities (Purbo, 2017). Building these skills can 
begin at a young age, especially when children are already exposed to the Internet.
Children are quite agile in their technology use, but this does not necessarily translate to maturity in content 
consumption and engagement. Many online platforms are not designed for children and there are hardly any 
barriers to prevent their accessing inappropriate content. Without a thorough understanding of digital literacy, 
children may be susceptible to online threats and harmful content including hoaxes and misinformation, 
cyberbullying, online fraud, and even sexual exploitation. 
Awareness of hoaxes and misinformation is especially relevant in light of the societal threats posed by populist 
and radical internet content that can threaten democratic norms and institutions. As future voters, citizens, and 
political participants, children must be prepared to confront and recognize dangerous and misleading content 
and sources. 
In addition to preventing immediate online harm, acquiring digital literacy at an early age prepares children to 
become consumers of online goods and services. In the interest of future consumer protection, children should 
be equipped with the ability to critically assess online terms and conditions and understand consumer rights, and 
data privacy. The Indonesian Consumer Empowerment Index ( Indeks Keberdayaan Konsumen/IKK ) stood at 41.70 
in 2019.2 This score indicates that Indonesian consumers understand their role but are not yet critical in terms of 
using their rights and obligations (Ministry of Trade, 2020). Improving digital literacy among children can help to 
improve performance on this index in the future.
Digital literacy is also important because it opens the door to employment opportunities and facilitates the 
mastery of other essential skills (Karpati, 2011). Digitalization constantly creates and transforms jobs throughout 
the labor market. Digital literacy skills give students the ability to thrive in this dynamic digital environment. 
The Personal Data Protection Bill ( Rancangan Undang-Undang Perlindungan Data Pribadi/RUU PDP ) under 
development in the Indonesian House of Representatives considers introducing a minimum age of 17 years for 
setting up a social media account without parental consent (Sari, 2020). This policy is intended to protect children 
from harmful internet content, but it will have the effect of reducing opportunities to build digital literacy that will 
allow them to innovate and thrive in the modern world. Equipping children with digital literacy will help them to 
be digitally resilient, to make responsible decisions, and to optimize the benefits of spending their time online. 
2 The Indonesian Consumer Empowerment Index (IKK) measures consumers’ ability to empower themselves. The IKK index is grouped into 5 scoring 
systems: 1. Aware—recognize their rights and obligations as consumers (0.0–20.0); 2. Understand—understand their rights and obligations to protect 
themselves (20.01–40.0); 3. Capable—able to decide the best choices as consumers and prioritize local products (40.1–60.0); 4. Critical—actively defend 
their rights and prioritize local products (60.1–80.0); 5. Empowered—actively defending consumers’ interest in interacting with the market (80.1–100.0).5
Teaching Digital Literacy Skills in Indonesia 
Digital literacy is strongly dependent on basic literacy skills—reading and writing comprehension. Unfortunately, 
Indonesia consistently performs poorly in literacy. Fifteen-year-old Indonesian students surveyed in the 
Programme for International Students Assessment (PISA) 2018 ranked 71st out of 79 countries. Only 30% 
demonstrated at least level 2 proficiency3 in reading, compared to the OECD average of 77% (OECD, 2019). On 
the other hand, 70% of Indonesian adults living in Jakarta perform at or below level 1 in literacy, according to the 
Survey of Adult Skills (PIIAC) (OECD, 2016). These surveys highlight that, while the majority of Indonesians can 
understand simple texts using basic vocabulary, they have difficulty understanding and critically evaluating long 
and complex texts. 
A contributing factor toward low literacy levels is the lack of emphasis on critical thinking skills in the school 
curriculum. The National Curriculum 2013 mandates the implementation of High Order Thinking Skills (HOTS) 
but it is not well-integrated into or widely taught during teacher training in Indonesia (Ilyas, 2015). In practice, 
Indonesian education focuses on older approaches to learning, such as memorization (WENR, 2019; UNICEF, 
2017).
In addition to the problems of low literacy and poor critical thinking skills in the general population, digital 
literacy education is largely missing from Indonesian schools. Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) was included as a compulsory subject in the National Curriculum 2006 (also known as Kurikulum Tingkat 
Satuan Pendidikan  or KTSP), but content was limited to basic skills such as how to use a computer, computer 
applications, and devices to support study activities. In 2013, the Ministry of Education removed ICT from the list 
of compulsory subjects in the National Curriculum 2013 with the intention of integrating ICT learning across all 
school subjects (Bona, 2018). However, many public schools responded by dropping the subject altogether (Purbo, 
2017). Teachers of other subjects were unable to incorporate ICT into their lesson plans because their own ICT 
skills and knowledge were insufficient, whereas ICT teachers were confused by the removal of the subject from 
the National Curriculum 2013 (Subekti, Yudha, & Luqman 2016). As a result, many Indonesian students have 
received no education in ICT.
The inequality of Internet access across the different regions of Indonesia and the socioeconomic conditions of 
Indonesians are the major structural challenges for the improvement of digital literacy. First, the percentage of 
households that can access the Internet is the highest on the most densely populated island of Java while it is 
much lower in the eastern parts of Indonesia (Statistics Indonesia, 2019b), as illustrated in Figure 2. 
3 PISA 2018 has a scale of 1–6 to indicate reading proficiency. The scale 1 consists of 1a, 1b, 1c, indicating the proficiency of understanding simple text 
with literal meaning. Scale 2 indicates the ability to identify the meaning of moderate-length text. Scale 3 indicates the ability to understand multiple texts. 
Scale 4 students can understand indirect cues and nuances in a single or multiple texts. Scale 5 students are able to compare the meaning of multiple, 
lengthy texts. Scale 6 indicates the ability to understand long and abstract texts and use multiple criteria to validate the information. 6
Source: Statistics Indonesia (2019b)Figure 2. 
Internet Access (percent) per Household by Province in Indonesia (2019). 
Internet users are predominantly households with higher incomes. They are more likely to afford and access 
devices and internet subscriptions (Bachtiar et al., 2020). Lack of Internet access is strongly linked to low levels of 
digital literacy. Inexperienced users are unlikely to be as competent or resilient as those who use the Internet on a 
daily basis. Expanding access, especially to disadvantaged communities, is crucial for digital literacy improvement.
The inequality of access is also visible in the education sector. According to Statistics Indonesia (2018), only 
69% of primary and junior secondary schools and 74% of senior secondary schools have access to the Internet. 
This results in low and widely varying levels of ICT competence and digital literacy among Indonesian teachers 
(Widodo & Riandi, 2013 cited in Koh et al., 2018). DKI Jakarta
Kepulauan Riau
Kalimantan T imur
D.I. Yogyakarta
Banten
Kalimantan Utar a
Bali
Jawa Bar at
Riau
Jawa  Tengah
Kepulauan Bangka Belitung
Kalimantan Selatan
Sulawesi Uta ra
Jawa  Timur
Gorontal o
Sulawesi Selatan
Kalimantan T engah
Sulawesi  Tenggara
Jambi
Sumater a Bara t
Sumater a Utar a
Lampung
Bengku lu
Papua Bara t
Sumater a Selatan
Nusa T enggara  Barat
Aceh
Kalimantan Bara t 
Sulawesi  Tengah
Sulawesi Bar at
Maluku
Maluku  Utara
Nusa T enggara  Timur
Papua93.33
87.96
84.11
83.68
82.25
80.72
79.59
77.55
76.00
75.16
74.80
74.35
74.06
73.24
72.68
72.62
71.84
71.21
70.81
69.67
68.91
68.68
67.36
66.62
66.42
65.25
65.16
64.71
61.66
59.09
58.52
53.61
49.83
31.317
Current Efforts to Mainstream Digital Literacy in 
Indonesia
Improving digital literacy is one of five priorities in the government’s plan to accelerate the digital transformation 
in Indonesia (Cabinet Secretariat of the Republic of Indonesia, 2020). However, there is no solid set of policies or 
clearly targeted outcomes related to digital literacy (The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2020b).
Efforts to increase digital literacy start from the basic level of increasing general literacy by nurturing the ability 
to understand, interpret, create, and communicate texts. They must also involve critical thinking skills and the 
ability to critically observe, analyse and interpret information and the logical connection between ideas, to support 
rational individual decision-making processes. Finally, and following a more specific definition of digital literacy, 
they require the ability to find, evaluate, use and create content on digital platforms.
Dealing with such a complex set of necessary skills involves programs and activities spread across government 
agencies. In Indonesia, this includes the Ministry of Education and Culture, the Ministry of Religious Affairs as well 
as the Ministry of Communication and Informatics. 
In order to promote general literacy, the government has initiated programs such as the National Literacy 
Movement (Gerakan Literasi Nasional/GLN), established by the Ministry of Education and Culture (MOEC) in 2016. 
It includes the promotion of literacy in three areas: literacy in schools (Gerakan Literasi Sekolah/GLS), family 
(Gerakan Literasi Keluarga/GLK), and society (Gerakan Literasi Masyarakat/GLM). GLN was mandated through 
MOEC Regulation No. 23/2015 on Developing Character on Students with the purpose of synchronizing all literacy 
programs that have been running in each MOEC directorate and expanding public involvement in the development 
of literacy culture in Indonesia. The main focus on this movement is to cultivate reading habits of students.  
The GLN guidelines also addresses digital literacy and defines it as the skills to make use of information from 
digital sources in an accountable manner. It includes the aim of developing digital learning habits and improving 
the use of digital media in school education (GLN, 2017), but it does not seek to increase the skills to critically 
analyze and navigate digital sources. The evaluation of digital literacy according to the GLN guidelines merely 
assesses whether stakeholders have integrated digital sources and media in the learning process and their daily      
life (MOEC, 2017). 
Several MOEC regulations are of relevance in this context. Increasing digital literacy is not being directly 
addressed in the National Education Standards4, but critical thinking skills are included. MOEC Regulation No. 
20/2016 specified them as the basic competency standard required for primary and secondary school graduates. 
MOEC Regulation No. 21/2016 on the Standard of Content for Primary and Secondary Education also mentioned 
critical thinking skills as one of the indicators for mastering school subjects.   
While MOEC Regulation No. 22/2016 on the Standardized Process of Primary and Secondary Schools demands 
that the learning process must include activities of observing, questioning, and analysing, which are essentially 
critical thinking skills, these skills have not become an indicator to assess students’ competence in MOEC 
Regulation No. 23/2016 on the Education Assessment Standard.
4 National Education Standards are the minimum standards in Indonesia’s education system. They consist of eight standards: 1). Standard of content; 2). 
Standard of process; 3). Graduate competence standard; 4). Teachers and educational personnel standard; 5). Standard of facilities and infrastructure; 
6). Management standards; 7). Financing standards; 8). Educational assessment standards.8
A basic level of digital literacy training addresses the technical competence to use digital devices and software. In 
that regard, MOEC Regulation No. 37/20185 reintroduced ICT as an optional subject at the primary school level and 
made it a compulsory subject for junior and secondary middle schools (SMP/SMA) beginning in the 2019 academic 
year. However, deficiencies of the ICT curriculum with respect to digital literacy remain. The curriculum puts a 
strong focus on understanding and improving technical competence in areas such as programming, using office 
applications, and writing blog posts, while there is insufficient emphasis on how to responsibly and critically use 
these technologies.  The national curriculum has to be based on the National Education Standards, which include 
critical thinking skills. However, MOEC Regulation No. 37/2018MOEC does not integrate critical thinking skills in 
the ICT subject.  
For the schools under the Ministry of Religious Affairs (MORA) such as Madrasah6, MORA Regulation No. 184/2019 
on Guideline of Curriculum Implementation in Madrasah has yet to include digital literacy in the curriculum. The 
subject that seems most suitable to convey digital literacy is informatics ( informatika ), but it is an optional and not 
a mandatory subject on junior and senior secondary levels of Madrasah. It is not offered on the primary education 
level. As for other institutions of Islamic education, such as Pesantren ,7 the curriculum is designed by the Kyai or 
prominent figures in the institution without the intervention of MORA (Azzahra, 2020). Pesantren  may teach ICT 
skills, but the exact number of pesantren  teaching ICT remains unknown. Most Pesantren  are traditional by nature 
anyway and unlikely to address digital technologies. There is no information available on how many Pesantren  are 
equipped with necessary facilities such as Internet and computers.   
Despite the lacking focus on digital literacy skills in the national curriculum, some schools, especially those 
operated by the private sector, have integrated digital literacy in advanced ICT classes. They go beyond the 
national curriculum requirements, when they teach 21st century skills such as digital citizenship, critical thinking 
and problem solving (Sampoerna Academy, n.d; British School Jakarta, n.d). Still, this will only be accessible 
for students from upper-income families. Most schools in Indonesia are not equipped with digital facilities and 
lack the human resources to teach students digital literacy and not just the functionalities of digital devices. 
Mainstreaming digital literacy must, therefore, go beyond the initiatives of individual schools and requires 
significant support from the government. 
More specifically addressing digital literacy, Ministry of Communication and Informatics (MOCI) initiated the 
National Digital Literacy Movement ( Gerakan Nasional Literasi Digital  or Siberkreasi ) to improve digital literacy 
skills in Indonesia. Siberkreasi is a multi-stakeholder initiative aimed at reducing misinformation and negative 
contents on the Internet through public awareness activities by private businesses, civil society organizations, 
etc.  As part of the movement, MOCI also provides online references and digital sources through the website 
literasidigital.id in the form of videos, articles, and e-books on digital literacy. It also encourages the government 
to include digital literacy in the school curriculum (MOCI, 2019a). 
As of 2019, 20,472 people had participated in offline Siberkreasi  programs, including seminars, workshops, and 
talk shows in 25 provinces. Audiences included both students and adults (MOCI, 2019b).  
5 This policy brief specifically addresses the curriculum after the ICT subject has been reintroduced
6 Madrasah is an Islamic education institution that teaches the national curriculum and uses methods similar to formal schools but also incorporate 
weekly hours of Islamic instructions. Madrasah are found on all levels of school education: primary (Madrasah Ibtidaiyah/MI), junior secondary 
(Madrasah Tsanawiyah/MTs), and senior secondary (Madrasah Aliyah/MA)
7 Pesantren  is a culturally-rooted Islamic educational institution in Indonesia characterized by its boarding school element and traditional method of 
teaching Islamic theological materials. 9
However, the scope of this program remains limited and it is unknown whether it has improved digital literacy. 
There is no program evaluation incorporated into Siberkreasi  and digital literacy has not yet been added to the 
school curriculum. 
In 2021, MOCI and its Siberkreasi  partners plan to publish a Digital Literacy Module 2021-2024 which covers four 
aspects of digital literacy, namely digital skills, digital safety, digital ethics, and digital culture.8 This module is 
supposed to provide practical tips on improving digital literacy skills. There will also be equipped with evaluation 
parts in every chapter to assess users’ understanding. 
8 The module is yet to behad not been published during the at the time of writing  process of this policy brief10
Policy Recommendations
• Create a comprehensive inter-ministerial 
framework for digital literacy
 MOCI and MOEC have cooperated in organizing 
events on digital literacy, however, despite 
the fact that both address the improvement of 
digital literacy, the National Literacy Movement 
and Siberkreasi  are largely separated from one 
another. There is a need to streamline efforts in 
a comprehensive inter-ministerial framework.  
• Improve digital literacy education in the school 
curriculum
 As ICT education was reintroduced in schools 
in 2019, MOEC and MORA should adjust the 
curriculum to fit the demands of the digital age. 
Students must be prepared to be responsible 
and literate digital citizens and consumers. 
The curriculum should prioritize cultivating the 
ethical and responsible use of technology as 
well as navigating myriad information in the 
digital settings.
 The curriculum should prioritize responsible 
information use and sharing, identification 
of trustworthy sources of information, and 
protecting students during their online activity. 
These skills are more relevant than the dated 
ICT content in the curriculum.
 Teaching material must be simplified and 
adjusted to the specific age groups in school, 
while also involving parents to guide and 
support their children in online activities. 
• Cultivate critical thinking across all school 
subjects
 Critical thinking skills are a crucial prerequisite 
to improving digital literacy. Critical thinking 
is necessary for understanding and verifying 
information from online sources. In developed 
countries such as Finland and Switzerland, 
critical thinking is an integral aspect of 
education. MOEC and MORA should rethink and 
provide guidance on how to better integrate 
critical thinking skills across all learning 
activities, while learning lessons from the 
shortcomings of this strategy for ICT education. 
Practices such as working collaboratively with 
peers, using HOTS content and questions for 
assignments and exams, and cultivating a 
habit of questioning, analyzing, and crafting 
arguments in discussion should be part of every 
classroom. • Include digital literacy and critical thinking in 
teachers’ training
 Digital literacy materials should be included in 
teachers’ training. Without improving the low 
overall ICT competence and critical thinking 
pedagogy among teachers, they will not be able 
to play their part in improving the digital literacy 
of students.   
• Equipping the parents with basic digital 
literacy skills
 Developing responsible online behavior starts 
at home. To be able to supervise the online 
activities of their children, parents must 
themselves know how to navigate social media, 
find reliable news, and critically assess the 
content. Parents need to have basic digital 
literacy skills because they are also not immune 
to digital threats. MOCI’s Siberkreasi  needs to 
create training modules and offer courses that 
target parents. 
• Cooperating with the private sector to 
formulate relevant curriculum content 
 The digital space is dynamic and ever-changing. 
The education sector has difficulty keeping up. In 
order to improve the dynamics of digital literacy 
education, MOEC and MORA should coordinate 
with MOCI and engage in partnerships with 
private sector experts. The private sector has 
been engaged in public seminars and talk 
shows through MOCI’s Siberkreasi  program, but 
not in improving the school curriculum. These 
external experts can help the government to 
formulate relevant indicators for the digital 
literacy contents skills in the school curriculum. 
• Improving access of technology to support 
digital inclusion
 Improving Internet access and technology, 
especially in rural parts of Indonesia, should 
remain a government priority in order to address 
the digital disparity and open up opportunities 
for disadvantaged families. MOCI is planning 
to equip about 12,000 villages with Internet 
access. Private sector involvement, which has 
been considered, should be encouraged. MOEC 
and MORA should also cooperate with the 
private sector to equip schools, especially in 
rural areas, with Internet access, laptops, and 
computers.11
References
Azzahra, N.F. (2020). Effects of the Pesantren Law on Indonesia’s Education System – A Projection . Center for Indonesian Policy 
Studies. https://repository.cips-indonesia.org/media/296490-effects-of-the-pesantren-law-on-indonesi-c21490a3.pdf
Bachtiar, P . P ., Diningrat, R. A., Kusuma, A. Z. D., Al Izzati, R., & Diandra, A. (2020). Who is the digital economy for? Towards 
an Inclusive Digital Economy in Indonesia. The SMERU Research Institute. https://www.smeru.or.id/sites/default/files/
publication/rr_ecdi_id_0.pdf 
Bona, M. F. (2018, September 3). Once removed, ICT Taught Again in 2019. Beritasatu.com. https://www.beritasatu.com/
nasional/508445/sempat-dihapus-tik-kembali-diajarkan-pada-2019#:%7E:text=Jakarta%20%2D%20Mata%20pelajaran%20
Teknologi%20Informasi,2013%20(K%2D13).&text=Namun%2C%20berganti%20nama%20menjadi%20informatika,dua%20
jam%20pelajaran%20per%20pekan
British School Jakarta. (n.d). Digital Literacy.  https://www.bsj.sch.id/school/primary-school/years-1-to-6-curriculum/digital-
literacy
Bulger, M., & Burton, P . (2020, February). Our Lives Online Use of social media by children and adolescents in East Asia - opportunities, 
risks and harms . UNICEF East Asia and the Pacific Regional Office. https://www.unicef.org/indonesia/media/3106/file/Our-
Lives-Online.pdf
Cabinet Secretariat of the Republic of Indonesia. (2020, August 22). In addition to the use of technology for health, these are 5 
agendas for the acceleration of national digital transformation. Cabinet Secretariat of the Republic of Indonesia . https://setkab.
go.id/selain-pemanfaatan-teknologi-untuk-kesehatan-ini-5-agenda-percepatan-transformasi-digital-nasional/
Data Reportal. (2020). Digital 2020: Indonesia . https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-indonesia
Economist Intelligence. (2020). Economist Intelligence Unit . https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/explore/countries/ID/
performance/indicators/readiness/literacy 
Economist Intelligence Unit. (2020b). Digital 2020: Indonesia. Economist Intelligence Unit. https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/
explore/countries/performance/readiness/literacy/support-for-digital-literacy?highlighted=ID
Hootsuite, We are Social. (2021). Digital 2021: Global Overview Report . https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2021-global-
overview-report
Greene, J. A., Yu, S. B., & Copeland, D. Z. (2014). Measuring critical components of digital literacy and their relationships with 
learning. Computers & Education, 76 , 55–69. https://doi.org10.1016/j.compedu.2014.03.008
Google, Temasek, Bain & Company. (2020). e-Conomy SEA 2020 At full velocity: Resilient and racing ahead. https://storage.
googleapis.com/gweb-economy-sea.appspot.com/assets/pdf/e-Conomy_SEA_2020_Report.pdf
Ilyas, H. P . (2015). Critical Thinking: Its Representation in Indonesian ELT and Education . White Rose University Consortium. 
https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/12688/1/Final%20Thesis%20-%20Hamzah%20Puadi%20Ilyas.pdf 
Karpati, A. 2011). Digital literacy in education . UNICEF Global Development Commons. https://gdc.unicef.org/resource/digital-
literacy-education
Ministry of Communication and Informatics. (2019). GLND Siberkreasi . Directorate General of Information Applications. https://
aptika.kominfo.go.id/2019/07/gnld-siberkreasi/
Ministry of Communication and Informatics. (2019b). Digital Literacy .  Directorate General of Information Applications. https://
aptika.kominfo.go.id/2019/08/literasi-digital-2/
Ministry of Education and Culture (n.d.). Overview of the National Literacy Movement . National Literacy Movement. https://gln.
kemdikbud.go.id/glnsite/tentang-gln/
Ministry of Trade. (2016). End of Year Report on Analysis Optimization of Indonesian Consumer Protection . Research and 
Development Agency of the Ministry of Trade. http://bppp.kemendag.go.id/media_content/2017/08/LAPORAN_AKHIR_
ANALISIS_OPTIMALISASI_PERLINDUNGAN_KONSUMEN_DI_INDONESIA.pdf
Ministry of Trade. (2020). Consumer Protection Supports Economic Improvement . Nasional.  Ministry of Trade. https://www.
kemendag.go.id/storage/article_uploads/E6XUiPXlW9DdMgwydyLq1ElGKw7ENQ8fFzNbnmtK.pdf12
Nielsen. (2020). Digital Consumers Show Positive Growth Trends . https://www.nielsen.com/id/en/press-releases/2020/digital-
consumers-show-positive-growth-trends/
OECD. (2019). PISA 2018 Result . Organization for Economic So-Operation and Development. https://www.oecd.org/pisa/PISA-
results_ENGLISH.png
OECD. (2016). Skills Matter: Further Result from the Survey of Adult Skills . Organization for Economic So-Operation and 
Development. https://www.oecd.org/skills/piaac/Skills-Matter-Jakarta-Indonesia.pdf
OECD. (n.d.) PISA 2018 TecReport Proficiency Scales . Organization for Economic So-Operation and Development. https://www.
oecd.org/pisa/data/pisa2018technicalreport/PISA2018%20TecReport-Ch-15-Proficiency-Scales.pdf
Purbo, O.W. (2017). Narrowing the Digital Divide. in E. Jurriens & R. Tapsell (Eds). Digital Indonesia: Connectivity and Divergence.  
ISEAS Publishing. 75-92
Sari, H.P . (2020). Patient law plan in Medsos Consumer Age Control Regulation, House of Representatives Mention Child 
Protection Forms. Kompas.com. https://nasional.kompas.com/read/2020/11/21/18571491/ruu-pdp-atur-batas-usia-
pengguna-medsos-dpr-sebut-bentuk-perlindungan-anak?page=all.
Sampoerna Academy. (n.d.) A Different Approach of Learning . https://www.sampoernaacademy.sch.id/en/our-approach/
Statistics Indonesia. (2020a). Indonesia Telecommunication Statistics 2019. Badan Pusat Statistik.
Statistics Indonesia. (2020b). Portrait of Indonesian Education 2020. Badan Pusat Statistik. 
Subekti, A., Yudha, S.S., & Luqman H.T. (2016). Understanding and the Role of ICT Teachers in the Implementation of the 2013 
Curriculum in Senior High Schools.  Indonesian Journal of Curriculum and Educational Technology Studies 4(1) : 25-31. http://
dx.doi.org/10.15294/ijcets.v3i1.8675
Tran, T., Ho, M.-T., Pham, T.-H., Nguyen, M.-H., Nguyen, K.-L. P ., Vuong, T.-T., Nguyen, T.-H. T., Nguyen, T.-D., Nguyen, T.-L., Khuc, Q., 
La, V.-P ., & Vuong, Q.-H. (2020). How Digital Natives Learn and Thrive in the Digital Age: Evidence from an Emerging Economy. 
Sustainability, 12 (9), 3819. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12093819
UNCTAD. (2020). Covid-19 Has Changed Online Shopping Forever Survey Shows . United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development. https://unctad.org/news/covid-19-has-changed-online-shopping-forever-survey-shows
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Funds (UNICEF). (2017). Access to Internet and Digital Literacy . UNICEF. 
https://www.unicef.org/csr/css/UNICEF_CRB_Digital_World_Series_ACCESS.pdf
Widodo, A., & Riandi. (2013). Dual-mode teacher professional development: challenges and re-visioning future TPD in Indonesia. 
Teacher Development, 17 (3), 380–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/13664530.2013.813757
WENR. (2019). Education in Indonesia. World Education News and Reviews . https://wenr.wes.org/2019/03/education-in-
indonesia 
World Economic Forum. (2019). How Finland is fighting fake news in the classroom . World Economic Forum. https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2019/05/how-finland-is-fighting-fake-news-in-the-classroom/13
The Center for Indonesian Policy 
Studies (CIPS) is dedicated to providing 
policy analysis and practical policy 
recommendations to decision-makers 
within Indonesia’s legislative and 
executive branches of government.
 
As a strictly non-partisan and non-profit 
think tank, CIPS promotes social and 
economic reforms that are based on 
the belief that only civil, political, and 
economic freedom allow Indonesia to 
prosper.
Our works relies on your support. Visit 
www.cips-indonesia.org/donate
to support CIPS. Jalan Terogong Raya No. 6B Cilandak, 
Jakarta Selatan 12430, Indonesia
www.cips-indonesia.org
 Center for Indonesian Policy Studies
contact@cips-indonesia.org
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Nadia Fairuza Azzahra  is a Researcher at Center for Indonesian 
Policy Studies. She is currently involved in research related to 
education. Previously, she was an intern in the Embassy of the 
Republic of Indonesia in Manila, Philippines. She also had experience 
in working at Indonesia’s education startup company. She is a graduate 
of Muhammadiyah University of Yogyakarta with a Bachelor’s Degree 
in International Relations.
Felippa Amanta  is Head of Research at CIPS. She received her 
Bachelor in Sociology degree from University of California, Berkeley, 
and Master of Public Administration from the Australian National 
University. Previously, Felippa worked as a Program Associate at the 
Institute for Research on Labor and Employment, UC Berkeley, and at 
the Women and Youth Development Institute of Indonesia in Surabaya.
This publication was prepared with the support of the “Consumer Protection 
in ASEAN” (PROTECT) project, which is implemented by the Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH and 
funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(BMZ) of Germany.
