Authors: Anita Ghimire, Fiona Samuels and Samjhana Bhujel1
This brief is part of a series of publications on adolescents working in adult entertainment in Nepal. Findings on the lives 
of adolescent girls and boys working in the sector can be found in the accompanying report ; and cross-border sex work 
between India and Nepal is explored in this brief . 
Overview
While digital technology can help adolescents promote their rights, access information and participate in society, it also 
comes with risks of exploitation and abuse. There is a dearth of information on how adolescents working in the adult 
entertainment sector (AES) use the digital technology and its impact on their well-being. This brief aims to bridge the 
information gap to safeguard vulnerable adolescents working in the AES from the negative impacts of technology use and 
help them to leverage technology for their protection. 
The scale of the challenge
Understanding how vulnerable adolescents use technology and what impact it will have on them will be important in helping 
build adolescents’ capabilities. There is a dearth of data on this for Nepal and this report aims to fill that gap by discussing 
technology use amongst adolescents working in the Adult Entertainment Sector, a sector where these adolescents are 
highly vulnerable to physical, sexual, economic and emotional violence.
Key recommendations
• NGOs should make more use of social media and digital technology to raise awareness among adolescents in Nepal 
about career counselling and risky jobs such as in the adult entertainment sector.
• Digital literacy interventions for girls and boys in schools and for those working in the adult entertainment sector would 
reduce the risk of online exploitation.
• Programmes should use social media to target ‘hard to reach’ girls and boys in the AES and develop long-term, cost-
effective interventions.
• NGOs/INGOs and the government should revise their monitoring strategies to ensure data on online sex work is captured.
1 Suggested citation: Ghimire, A., Samuels, F. and Bhujel, S. (2020) ‘Use of digital technology among adolescents in the adult enter -
tainment sector in Nepal.’ Policy Brief. London: Gender and Adolescence: Global Evidence .
Use of digital technology among adolescents in the 
adult entertainment sector in Nepal
Focus group discussion with adolescents working in the adult entetrainment sector in Nepal © Fiona SamuelsPolicy Brief
November 20202Methodology 
This brief is based on data from 9 life history, 40 in-depth, 
and 45 key informant interviews, as well as 28 focus group 
discussions and 3 case studies. The 211 participants included 
girls and boys engaged in the AES , people of all ages from 
their home towns, key informants and boys working in hotels 
(India only). The interviews took place in 4 Nepali districts: 
Sindhupalchowk (as the home town), Kathmandu, Jhapa and 
Sunsari (as destinations for work in the AES); in Delhi in India 
(for cross-border AES work); and at 2 points on the India-
Nepal border in Jhapa. Associated AES websites, social 
media, Phulchowki Media and YouTube videos were also 
analysed.
The study follows the Gender and Adolescence: Global 
Evidence (GAGE) conceptual framework,2 which examines 
issues through a context lens – the family, household, 
community, state and global contexts in which adolescents 
are situated (see Box 1). 
Literature review and background 
information 
Why is a focus on adolescents important for 
Nepal?
Adolescents (aged 10–19 years) make up 16% of the 
world’s population (UNICEF, 2019), and 22% of Nepal’s 28.5 
million citizens (UNFPA, 2017). There are 3,207,821 male 
and 3,199,583 female adolescents in Nepal (NPCS and  
CBS, 2012). 
Despite its young population, citizens of working age 
(15–64)3 currently outnumber dependents in Nepal due to 
falling birth and mortality rates. This demographic dividend, 
which began in 1995, has created a window of opportunity 
for growth and sustainable development that will continue 
until 2047 (Amin et al., 2017) (see Figure 1). 
Nepal has one of the fastest ageing rates in the world and 
will be classed as an ageing society4 by 2028 and as an aged 
2 For details on the conceptual framework please refer to GAGE consortium (2019) Gender and adolescence. Why understanding adolescent capabilities, 
change strategies and contexts matters. Second Edition. London: Gender and Adolescence: Global Evidence.
3 NPCS and CBS. 2019. National labour force survey 2018/2019. Kathmandu: Nepal Planning Commission Secretariat and Central Bureau of Statistics.
4 Where people aged 65+ account for more than 7% of the population.
5 Where people aged 65+ account for more than 14% of the population.society by 2054 (UNFPA, 2017).5 There are currently enough 
people of working age to support the older population, but 
this is expected to change over time. In 2015, there were 11.1 
people of working age for every older person – by 2050, this 
will halve to just 5.6 people (Amin et al., 2017). The working 
population will also need to support other groups, such as 
people with disabilities and vulnerable indigenous groups. 
The government wants children and adolescents to be 
far more productive than today’s adults by the time they 
enter the workforce (ibid.) and views adolescents as central 
to the country’s development agenda. A national youth policy 
(MoYS, 2015) outlines why investment in the capabilities of 
adolescents is going to be critical in the coming decades:
• adolescents alive today will need to be self-sufficient in 
retirement, as the younger population will be too small 
to support them 
• as life expectancies increase, adolescents will need to 
plan for a longer retirement Box 1: The GAGE programme 
GAGE is a nine-year (2015–2024) mixed methods 
longitudinal research programme, exploring gendered 
experiences of adolescents. It follows lives of 20,000 
adolescents in six focal countries in three regions of the 
world: Ethiopia and Rwanda in Africa; Bangladesh and 
Nepal in Asia; and Jordan and Lebanon in the Middle East. 
GAGE aims to fill the vast evidence gap on ‘what works’ 
to enable poor adolescent girls to emerge from poverty 
and fast-track social change for themselves, their families 
and communities, and their countries. GAGE’s research 
addresses two broad questions:
• What do adolescents’ lives look like as they evolve over 
the second decade of life and how are their experiences 
gendered? 
• What impact have change strategies (e.g. through 
programme interventions) had on adolescents’ 
development?3• adolescents will need to contribute more throughout 
their lives to support the ageing population – the 65+ 
age group will become the largest group in 22 years and 
will increase rapidly thereafter.
Technology use among adolescents in South 
Asia and Nepal
The literature on adolescents and digital technology is patchy 
(see Livingstone et al., 2017), but studies have explored 
internet access; agency; digital skills; patterns of use; IT for 
education and information (Ibegbulam et al., 2018; Zelezny-
Green, 2018); identity; social and romantic relationships; 
negotiations with clients among adolescent girls (Onyima 
and Egbunike, 2018); and psychosocial well-being, health and 
violence (Stonard et al., 2014; Carson et al., 2018). 
Globally, there are 3 billion internet users and 7 billion 
mobile phone subscriptions – South Asia accounts for more 
than half of the latter (CWIN and ECPAT, 2015). While there 
is no age-disaggregated data on the use of technology in 
Nepal, over 75% of internet users in South Asia in 2011 were 
students and 25% of children send over 50 messages a day 
(ibid.). Figures from Nepal’s Telecommunications Authority 
show that the number of mobile phone subscriptions (38.3 
million) was larger than the total population (28.5 million)  
in 2018.6 
6 https:/ /english.onlinekhabar.com/number-of-mobile-phone-users-in-nepal-is-34-higher-than-population.html.
7 gadgetframe.com/blog/nepali-people-ahead-of-india-in-technology-use-72-nepali-uses-mobile-phone. 
8 Ibid.Phone use is one area where the gap between rural/
urban, class and ethnicity in an otherwise very unequal 
society is almost non-existent (except for gender – 80% 
of men and 65% of women use mobile phones).7 In 2018, 
more than half of Nepal’s population used a smartphone – 
this is expected to rise by 10% each year (Nepali Telecom, 
2020) – 65% were online, 60% use social media and 58% 
access news through such sites.8 In January 2018, Nepal had 
nearly 9.3 million Facebook users and more than 6.4 million 
registered YouTube users (Ministry of Communication and 
Information Technology, 2018). 
In Nepal, studies have at looked adolescents and 
internet use (UNICEF, 2018; Acharya 2016), including in 
relation to education (Acharya, 2016), school-based sexual 
and reproductive health (Shaivitz, 2017), and acceptance 
of violence among adolescent girls (UNICEF, 2018). As a 
result of technology, the way today’s adolescents socialise, 
learn and interact is very different from previous generations. 
However, this rapid growth in technology and internet access 
has had both positive and negative impacts on adolescents 
and children in Nepal. It offers them a means to promote 
their rights, access information and participate in society, 
but it also brings risks of surveillance, exploitation and further 
exclusion (Livingstone et al., 2017). Other than gaming, 
adolescents are active on social media. They create public Figure 1: Forecast demographic changes in Nepal by age group
Source: National Planning Commission and UNICEF, 2017
4profiles and build online relationships on social sites like 
YouTube – a site also used by traffickers to lure children 
into sex work (Gupta et al., 2017). 
Digitalisation in the AES, including for sex 
work 
The use of technology in sex work globally started in the 
1980s with online ads (Cunningham and Kendall, 2011). 
As countries cracked down on red light districts and 
street-based sex work, much of this work migrated online 
(Campbell et al., 2018; MacPhail et al., 2015; Cunningham 
and Kendall, 2011). Over time, digitalisation transformed 
the whole sex industry: outreach increased for both sex 
workers and clients, new online sex services were created, 
and the way sex work is marketed and organised changed. 
Digitalisation also changed employment arrangements, 
leading to a shift from formal employment such as that 
based in hotels and cabaret bars to more informal self-
employment (Cunningham and de Angelo, 2017; Sanders 
et al., 2016). 
Studies on the AES in Nepal largely focus on the 
involvement of minors (Dank et al., 2019; Frederick et al., 
2010; Risal et al., 2018; Shakti Samuha, 2008), international 
trafficking (Safer Migration Project (SaMi/HEL VETAS Swiss 
Inter-cooperation Nepal, 2018); protection of women; 
gender and identity issues, such as citizenship of children 
born to victims of trafficking; and trafficked women (Poudel 
and Luintel, 2003; Maiti Nepal, 2010; Richardson et al., 
2016). Apart from three studies conducted recently by the 
Freedom Fund (2018, 2019), the use of digital technology in 
the AES and its implications for programming in Nepal has 
not been explored in any depth. Most programmes fail to 
recognise the impact of digitalisation, and focus solely on 
the establishment-based AES. Understanding technology 
use is critical to ensuring policies and programmes address 
issues faced by girls and boys in this rapidly changing 
industry. 
Studies have included cases where children involved 
in the AES in Nepal have been asked to take photos 
and videos by their clients (Sath Sath, 2018; CWIN and 
ECPAT, 2015). The internet also gives children access to 
pornographic images videos. Additionally, middle-aged 
men send young girls and boys nude images on Facebook, 
indicating online sexual exploitation of children (Sath Sath, 
2018). The same study finds that men/boys create fake 
profiles and online identities to establish relationships with 
girls/women and lure them into sharing intimate pictures in 
order to blackmail them for money and sex.Research findings
How adolescent girls use digital technology 
for work in the AES 
The majority of girls reported using social media for work, 
although some prefer face-to-face contact due to fears of 
online abuse. Common apps include Facebook, Messenger, 
YouTube and imo, while the use of Viber and Instagram, 
according to key informants, is increasing among young 
girls entering the sector. 
There is a general belief that being active on social 
media attracts more clients. Girls therefore share music, 
videos, photos and public posts to increase followers, and 
while Facebook does not allow explicit content, they also 
post sexual content. 
Girls mostly own modern digital phones or smartphones 
– laptops, tablets and other devices were not commonly 
owned. Apart from company profiles on Facebook, girls 
post personal music videos, photos, TikTok videos or public 
group messages to increase followers. Aside from those 
working in Dohari, girls reported having two mobile phones 
and two Facebook accounts; one for work and the other for 
family and non-work friends. Girls working in Dohari have 
only one account and the account is in their real name, as 
they are on the lookout for contacts in the music industry 
to enhance their careers. 
Girls who engage in the cross-border AES use 
Messenger to stay in contact with clients in India when 
they are working in Nepal. Relationships with Nepali clients 
who travel for foreign employment are maintained through 
Facebook, Viber and imo. Maintaining contact ensures they 
send gifts and money, remain loyal customers and engage 
their services when they come to Kathmandu. 
While technology has not entirely dismantled 
establishment-based AES venues, it does offer alternative 
ways for girls to work and connect with clients. This applies 
to commercial sex work as well. Female migrants who 
travel for foreign employment also use apps that connect 
domestic workers to customers and integrate social sites 
like Facebook and Instagram to find clients for sex work: 
I have heard it internationally from journalists, not in Nepal 
but, there is an application called ‘SALES’ where the 
middleman provides women domestic worker or even 
CSW to clients.
Key informant interview, Kathmandu
In their free time, girls use the internet and their phones to 
keep in touch with family and friends back home, as well 
as new friends in the urban areas where they work. The 
girls watch videos on YouTube to improve their singing and 
dancing skills so that they can perform better at work. They 
also reported making prank calls to random boys for fun.5How boys, middlemen and employers use 
digital technology
Boys who work in the AES do not have to attract clients as 
their jobs in the AES are usually in cooking, security and 
administrative and financial work of the establishments. 
Even if boys work as dancers and singers (such as in Dohari9 
and dance bars), they are not pressured to bring in clients 
like the girls. (For details see our accompanying report ). 
They therefore use Facebook for personal communication. 
Middlemen and employers use social media and 
digital technology to recruit new girls and move them 
between employers and clients including for cross-border/
international adult entertainment work. The middlemen 
who supply girls communicate with them through social 
media to offer them jobs. As they earn a higher commission 
for younger girls, they are constantly incentivised to recruit 
young girls into the industry. They do this by adding village 
girls on Facebook, communicating with them regularly, and 
luring them to urban areas to work in the adult entertainment 
industry. Employers also use digital technology to live-
stream videos and post photos of celebrities, models and 
artists to attract girls and boys to work in the industry and 
clients to their establishments.
Employers use technology to move girls between cities 
in Nepal to respond to the demand for ‘fresh faces’. After 
a girl has worked in a city for a few months, the middleman 
or employer will connect her to clients, middlemen and 
employers in another city and send for a replacement. All 
these arrangements happen over the phone. The same 
process is used for moving girls to India. We also found that 
girls will invite their friends if they find the work is good in a 
new location. After a few months, they often move together 
to work in another hub. 
Internet access among girls and boys working 
in the AES
Access to the internet is mixed. Although Wi-Fi is often 
free at their place of work, boys and girls are usually only 
allowed to use the internet to contact clients. As explained 
above, boys are usually not engaged in entertaining clients 
but have security and management roles and as such their 
use of the internet is not seen as necessary for bringing 
in customers, unlike for girls. Hence, employers are strict 
about not letting boys use internet during their working 
hours. (For details see our accompanying report .) When 
not at work, girls and boys either buy a monthly data pack 
or use passwords to the Wifi given by fellow tenants. They 
cannot afford unlimited home internet subscriptions. 
9  Dohari are duet houses where groups of girls and boys sit opposite to one another and the lead sings duets. The songs are flirty and conversational 
and are composed during the performance itself as an answer to the remark of the opposite group who takes the lead in singing.Our employer will scold us if we use phones during work. 
Boys mostly go to the restroom to use internet and 
mobile. Once inside the restroom, they play games on 
the mobiles or use Facebook.
Focus group discussion with boys working in dance 
clubs, Kathmandu.
How girls in the AES communicate with 
clients 
Initial client conversations commonly take place via text 
message, while illiterate girls use Messenger and imo. Once 
the girls have met the clients a few times, they will video call 
or chat with them over Messenger. It is a common practice 
to have two SIM cards/phone numbers – one personal, 
the other for business – to avoid family members hearing 
about their work. 
Yes, I am afraid that parents will know about me. When 
my husband comes to Kathmandu I change my number. I 
have been using two SIM cards; one is for my clients and 
the other one is for my family.
In-depth interview with girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Kathmandu.
Clients forcing girls to share their phone numbers is a 
common challenge for girls. Employers also encourage 
girls not to refuse the clients. Girls only share work numbers 
with trusted clients that they have met a few times in case 
they end up harassing them or being impolite. If they do not 
trust them, but they are a good source of income (regular, 
pay well, important to the employer), girls will offer to call 
them instead of sharing their numbers. The contacts of 
trustworthy clients are saved to avoid fake and unwanted 
calls and their other non-work number that is used to 
contact family members is not shared with clients even if 
they ask for it. Yes, I am afraid that parents 
will know about me. When my 
husband comes to Kathmandu I 
change my number. I have been 
using two SIM cards; one is for my 
clients and the other one is for my 
family.
(In-depth interview with girl engaged in 
freelance sex work, Kathmandu)6I give [them my number] if the person seems nice. If the 
person and his behaviour don’t look nice, I don’t give. 
Interviewer: Can you identify by looking? Can you know 
their behaviour? How do you know? 
Some people are soft-spoken while some are very 
aggressive. The aggressive people try to force us while 
the people with good habit will obey us.
In-depth interview with a girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Jhapa. 
Girls working in the AES establishments and freelance 
primarily use Messenger to communicate with clients. As 
with mobile phones, initial contact happens via text. Once 
comfortable, the girls switch to voice and video calls. Girls 
with low literacy use Messenger voice calls. 
When communicating via social media, clients often 
request sexualised video calls (involving flirting or the 
performance of sexual acts) or ‘private’ pictures. Most girls 
were cautious about accepting calls or sharing sensitive 
content, unless it was with a regular, trusted client. However, 
those who are open to sharing such contents perceive this 
as necessary to keep clients happy for their own financial 
benefit. They also feel it is good for work and part of their 
duty to employers to accept such requests. 
He asks me to send pictures and then I send. He sends 
his picture. We then start to comment on each other’s 
picture. 
Interviewer: Do you do video call?
Yes, I do. 
Interviewer: Doesn’t he ask you to show him your private 
pictures? 
No, he has not asked for that yet.
In-depth interview with girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Jhapa.Girls entering the AES who have completed secondary 
school tend to use imo and Viber instead of Facebook. 
They believe these apps are safer, as clients cannot 
contact them unless they have their number. On Facebook, 
one does not necessarily need a phone number to call. 
However, if the clients have their numbers, they can call 
them over Viber or imo unless the girls block them. 
I use Facebook and there are numerous people calling 
me on Messenger. So, I usually prefer Viber and imo 
because strangers cannot directly contact without my 
phone number. On Facebook, the boys sometimes sent 
pictures of their private parts.
Focus group discussion with girls engaged in freelance 
sex work, Sunsari.
Use of imo groups
The study finds that imo groups are location specific 
(‘Kathmandu Girls and Boys’ and ‘Rodhi ghar Butwal (duet 
singing house, Butwal)’), interest based (‘let’s chat with 
couple’, ‘Indonesian and Philippines girls’, and ‘Dohari’), or 
random (‘Everyone’s dear and fun group’). Anyone can join 
these groups. Some are international, while others have 
only local members. 
Fake accounts were active in all the imo groups looked 
at. A review of the messages in group chats finds that 
conversations are flirty, usually have double meanings and 
include the exchange of sensitive and sexual images. Any 
user can start a private chat from a group chat. Requests 
for private chats with girls are common. It seems that clients 
make contact with girls through groups, and then move on 
to private chats to negotiate sex, meeting time/place and 
payment. 
The study finds that imo groups used by sex workers 
appear to have been created by girls (as administrators). 
However, key informants were of the opinion that men or 
boyfriends who work as middlemen often open and operate 
the groups using a girl’s name. Invitations are sent to boys 
who in turn invite their male peers, increasing the size of the 
group. Typically, an administrator will connect a group to 
several other groups to expand their networks and connect 
users to new groups.  I give [them my number] if the 
person seems nice ... Some people 
are soft-spoken while some are 
very aggressive. The aggressive 
people try to force us while the 
people with good habit will  
obey us.
(In-depth interview with a girl engaged 
in freelance sex work, Jhapa)
 I usually prefer Viber and imo 
because strangers cannot directly 
contact without my phone number. 
On Facebook, the boys sometimes 
sent pictures of their private parts
(Focus group discussion with girls engaged 
in freelance sex work, Sunsari)7YouTube and online TV channels
Our analysis of YouTube channels owned by girls working 
as freelance sex workers finds that girls upload video 
interviews, photos and contact information to publicise 
their work and attract new clients. Online TV channels such 
as ‘Pulchowki Media’ also provide links to sex work. The 
channel was closed and the owners arrested in 2019 for 
paying girls for highly sexualised scripted interviews. The 
government has also closed YouTube channels which show 
restricted pornographic content. 
Positive impacts of digital technology on sex 
workers
For girls and boys working in Dohari, social media gives 
them exposure and a way to showcase their talent. They 
join professional groups like ‘National Dohari Association’ 
on Facebook to connect with people who might progress 
their careers. They believe that this opens avenues to 
participate in Dohari programmes in other cities or abroad. 
Similarly, girls feel that YouTube has helped them improve 
their dancing and singing skills (through watching new 
films), helping them perform better at work.
In Jhapa, we found freelance sex workers from relatively 
wealthy families (who were influenced to enter into sex work 
through friendship circles) used technology to exclude 
middlemen once they had established relationships with a 
few well-off clients. This gives them the freedom to choose 
clients as well as increase their earnings. First, the girls 
meet groups of clients through hotel staff or middlemen 
who work in hotels. One they have worked with a group, 
they then make personal arrangements (instead of using 
a middleman) with selected clients. This can increase their 
income considerably, as expressed by one girl:
I make around 2-3 lakhs in a month if I save.
Interviewer: In one month? You make that much money? 
In the job?
Yes.
Interviewer: Do you go around?
Figure 2: A typical active imo group linked to 
the AES by age group
Source: AnitaGhimire/NISER
Box 2: Case study: NGO uses social media to reach sex workers
In Jhapa and Sunsari, NGOs are updating their engagement strategies and using technology to reach girls who may otherwise 
have been excluded from programmes. Here, NGOs are using social media to target women and girls with health and 
awareness campaigns. Sahara Nepal, a national NGO based in Jhapa that works with vulnerable groups, noticed a decrease 
in establishment-based sex work – that women and girls were soliciting in digital spaces. In response, they trained staff to 
identify and join social networks used by sex workers. Once established within the networks, they shared messages on sexual 
and reproductive health and rights, alternative livelihoods programmes, and HIV prevention and testing. They start with web 
messages, and subsequently provide information via webchat. Sex workers who previously did not want to identify themselves 
now come to drop-in centres. Based on insights from joining these networks, Sahara Nepal offered HIV testing in the community 
to enable sex workers to be discreetly tested in their own home. This resulted in a considerable increase in people accessing 
HIV tests and key informants feel that this has reduced the gap between the estimated and actual numbers of people living with 
HIV in Nepal. 8No, it’s through the contact. So the thing is at first I came 
in contact with one hotel where I used to do business 
with 15–20 people per day. I collected guest from that 
process. Before they used give 5,000 to the broker and 
4,000 to us. Now with the same guest I get 10–15,000 
or 7–8,000.
Interviewer: How do you do it yourself? Through your 
mobile?
Yes.
Interviewer: How do you make contact? Can you please 
tell me in detail?
I tell them that I am available outside the hotel. They take 
my number and call me later.
In-depth interview with a girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Jhapa.
Some girls have used a mobile phone to escape trafficking/
forced sex work by calling the police. According to key 
informants, girls also use phones to call their contacts in 
NGOS for help if the police arrest them or treat them badly.
Negative impacts of the internet and 
technology on sex workers
The study finds social media has several negative impacts, 
particularly for girls. According to key informants, it widens 
girls’ social circles, connecting them to new peer groups 
who lead them into sex work. Similarly, social media has 
made it cheaper and easier for middlemen to reach out 
and befriend girls, assess their lives, see if they are destitute 
and lure them into sex work.
Social media makes it easier for men to track girls down 
online. They find out their names in Dohari restaurants or 
dance bars when they perform on stage. Unlike other girls, 
performers in Dohari in particular use their real names on 
Facebook so that music producers can easily find them. 
They subsequently feel forced to accept unsolicited 
friendship requests from men for the sake of business 
or pushed by their employers. This opens up avenues for 
abuse by clients, including unwelcome calls, messages 
and pornographic content. Similarly, in adult entertainment 
venues, girls are under pressure to attract as many clients 
as possible. Even if they initially resist, we found they end up sharing numbers and social contacts making them 
vulnerable to future online abuse. 
Social media also gives clients continuous access to 
girls. Respondents said that clients send pornographic 
videos out of working hours. They feel pressured to 
respond, even if they are not working and spending time 
with family. Some girls were followed by clients even after 
they had left the sector to get married and eventually the 
marriages ended when the husbands and their families 
came to know about their previous engagement in the AES. 
Access to technology has changed the needs/aspirations 
of clients, as well as the range of services they expect. 
For example, clients used to only have contact with girls 
inside establishments. Now, they expect them to always 
be available, including during out-of-work hours. As girls 
are not allowed to use their phones at work, this can create 
tension with regular clients who feel ignored. They become 
hostile, send vulgar images and videos or threaten them via 
instant messaging services. 
We also found that social media increases the risk of 
exploitation from intimate partners. Boyfriends/husbands 
use social media to coerce girls into sex work and extort 
their earnings. According to the girls, their partners open 
accounts in their name and negotiate with clients, forcing 
them to provide the agreed services. This can be under 
harsh conditions, such as sex with multiple people at 
the same time. Girls often only become aware of these 
accounts much later and thus also suffer the emotional 
violence of betrayal by people close to them. 
Some girls feel freelance sex work and advertising 
online is dangerous and could risk exposure. They find 
it safer working in establishments like hotels and using 
middlemen who offer protection and negotiate with clients 
on their behalf:
I didn’t give him my number even though he was a regular 
customer. If he wants to meet me he can come here but I 
don’t want to take risk meeting him outside. If I meet him at 
the hotel the owner is responsible if something happens 
to me, but if I meet him outside who will be responsible?
In-depth interview with a girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Jhapa.
Girls who leave the sector are constantly afraid that their 
boyfriends or husbands will find out about their former work 
in the sex industry using the internet. Key informants said 
that for single mothers, the fear that their children (and the 
parents of their children’s partners) will find out about their 
sex work is a strong motivation to change jobs. Technology 
makes it possible to find out someone’s work history long 
after the event – a major fear among women who have left 
the sector. Before they used give 5,000 to 
the broker and 4,000 to us. Now 
with the same guest I get 10–
15,000 or 7–8,000.
(In-depth interview with a girl engaged 
in freelance sex work, Jhapa)9They (women who have now left the sector) say things 
like, ‘Now my daughter is married. I worked as sex worker 
so I could bring them up. What will happen to her life if her 
in-laws find that her mother was doing such work? So, I 
left the sector.’
Key informant interview, Jhapa. 
Boys who engage in substance abuse also use social media 
to exploit girls. Key informants who helped file cases against 
violent partners shared that boys who abuse substances 
entice girls into relationships via social media to extort 
money for drugs. They film sex videos with the girls and 
threaten to post them online or expose their work as sex 
workers:
A boy made a video of my friend. He hasn’t posted it on 
Facebook yet. She was telling that he has clicked her 
pictures too.
Interviewer: Why do they make videos? What type of 
people are they? Are they married people? 
The drug addict boys make that [videos]. 
Interviewer: What do they do with the videos? Do they 
blackmail girls or what do they do? Yes. They do so to get money.
In-depth interview with a girl engaged in freelance sex 
work, Jhapa.
In Kathmandu, girls working in establishments said that 
they are forced to share explicit images to attract clients 
to the establishment. Those engaged in freelance sex work 
also send images to attract and keep clients. In Jhapa 
and Sunsari, where all respondents were freelance sex 
workers, sharing pictures and doing video calls seems to be 
common. This might make girls more vulnerable to abuse 
by middlemen and clients.
Some girls who have attended NGO trainings talk about 
their right to privacy and said they refuse to send videos 
to clients. We can see, therefore, that girls have a certain 
amount of power and control in their negotiation with 
clients. However, we are not sure if in practice girls can keep 
up with the pressure from clients and their own financial 
needs. This is may be a result of awareness training and 
female empowerment interventions. 
We tell the clients in a very straightforward manner that 
it is not the place to take selfies and we would not allow 
it. After that, if they want to spend time with us they 
can or else just leave. A client was taking a video in his 
mobile. Instantly I went near him and seized his mobile 
then slapped him.
In-depth interview with a girl engaged in sex work, 
Jhapa. A client was taking a video in his 
mobile. Instantly I went near him 
and seized his mobile then slapped 
him.
(In-depth interview with a girl 
engaged in sex work, Jhapa)
Anti-trafficking checkpoint at Nepal–India border © NISER10Conclusions and recommendations
As in other parts of the world, technology is increasingly 
being used in Nepal’s adult entertainment industry and 
is changing its structure and how the AES is organised/
mediated, particularly in relation to sex work. All girls and 
boys working in the sector have access to mobile phones 
and the internet. Facebook, Messenger and imo are the 
most commonly used apps, while younger and more 
educated workers increasingly use Viber, Instagram and 
YouTube. 
Technology has changed the nature of client interaction, 
opened up new avenues for girls who are looking to enter 
the industry and has facilitated cross-district and cross-
border sex work. It is also used outside of work to keep in 
touch with family and friends. Girls typically have two SIM 
cards and two Facebook accounts to keep their families 
from finding out about their work. 
The positive effects of technology for sex workers 
include the decreased influence of middlemen and greater 
decision-making powers (and sometimes income). Girls 
use technology to limit exposure to abusive clients and 
dangerous situations. Programmes have also started using 
technology to target freelance sex workers, who tend to be 
hard to reach.
On the negative side, it has made the recruitment of 
adolescents into sex work cheaper and easier, exposed 
adolescents working in the sector to pornography, opened 
up avenues for middlemen and sexual partners to exploit 
girls, and has made it difficult for girls to establish a family 
life once they have left the industry. 
The research also finds that technology pushes more 
adolescents into sex work, as middlemen have increased 
access to girls online. In addition, girls and boys become 
curious about joining the sector after seeing online ads and 
live videos produced by adult venues. Technology has not 
totally displaced establishment-based sex work, but it has 
expanded the scope of the adult entertainment sector and 
the volume of sex work. Recommendations for donors, civil society and NGOs 
include the following: 
• As technology use is widespread, it can be leveraged 
to raise awareness of the risks associated with 
entering the adult entertainment sector  and promote 
alternatives, such as encouraging young girls to stay in 
education or take vocational training.
• Digital literacy classes for girls and boys working in 
this sector , as well as those in school, would help raise 
awareness of the risk of exploitation online and promote 
safety precautions.
• Programmes should use social media to target 
‘hard to reach’ sex workers  who are at increased risk 
from clients, middlemen and partners (ie, those who 
do not work in establishments, are not unionised and 
are not linked to NGOs). Lessons should be taken from 
programmes already engaged in such activities. 
• NGOs/INGOs and the government should revise 
their monitoring strategies to ensure data on online 
sex work is captured.  Their interventions should also 
shift from targeting girls who work in establishments 
to account for the growing trend of girls working on a 
freelance basis using personal contacts. 
• NGOs have expressed the need for long-term 
commitment and resources for successful 
reintegration/rehabilitation of former sex workers. 
Technology could provide low-cost dissemination and 
programming solutions to maximise existing resources. 
• Current training programmes are overly focused 
on running beauty parlours and tailor shops. These 
should be broadened to cover other skills such as 
hotel management, driving, and mobile phone and TV 
repairs to provide instant jobs and encourage young 
people to find alternatives to working in the AES.11References
Acharya, S. (2016) Internet usage of teenagers in Nepal 
for educational purposes: An analysis of Internet usage 
behaviour of 15-17-year-old students at selected schools 
in Kathmandu . Thesis. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.18670.87360
Amin, S., Bajracharya, A., Bongaarts, J., Chau, M., Melnikas, 
A.J. (2017) Demographic Changes of Nepal: Trends and 
Policy Implications . Final Report. Kathmandu; Nepal Plan -
ning Commission, Government of Nepal
Campbell, R., Sanders, T., Scoular, J., Pitcher, J. and Cun -
ningham, S. (2018) ‘Risking safety and rights: online sex 
work, crimes and “blended safety repertoires.”’ British 
Journal of Sociology . 70(4): 1539–1560 
Carson, V., Hunter, S., Kuzik, N., Gray, C., Poitras, V.J., 
Chaput, J.-P. … Tremblay, M. (2016) ‘Systematic review 
of sedentary behaviour and health indicators in school-
aged children and youth: an update.’ Applied Physiology, 
Nutrition, and Metabolism . 41(6): S240-S265, https:/ /doi.
org/10.1139/apnm-2015-0630
Cunningham, S. and de Angelo, G. (2017) ‘Signals, Screens 
and Vertical Differentiation: The Case of Commercial 
Sex Work.’ Presented at COST Prospol conference on 
Displacing Sex for Sale, 29–31 March, University of Aal -
borg, Copenhagen
Cunningham, S. and Kendall, T.D. (2011) ‘Prostitution 2.0: 
The changing face of sex work.’ Journal of Urban Eco -
nomics 69(3): 273–287
CWIN & ECPAT Luxembourg (2015) Preparatory study for 
situational analysis of commercial sexual exploitation 
of children in Nepal: A preliminary report . Luxembourg: 
ECPAT Luxembourg 
Dank, M., Vincent, K., Hughes, A., Dhungel, N., Gurung, S. 
and Jackson, O. (2019) Prevalence of Minors in Kath -
mandu’s Adult Entertainment Sector . Kathmandu, Nepal: 
Freedom Fund
Frederick, J., Basnyat, M. and Aquettant, J. (2010) Traf -
ficking and Exploitation in the Entertainment and Sex 
Industries in Nepal: A Handbook for Decision Makers . 
Kathmandu: Terre des Hommes Foundation
Government of Nepal, Ministry of Information and Commu -
nication Technology – GoN, MoICT (2018) 2018 Digital 
Nepal Framework: Unlocking Nepal’s Growth Potential. 
Kathmandu: GoN, MoICT
Government of Nepal, National Planning Commission 
(NPC) and UNICEF (2017) Demographic Changes of 
Nepal: Trends and Policy Implications. Kathmandu: Gov -
ernment of Nepal, NPC, UNICEF
NPC and Central Bureau of Statistics – (2012) National 
Population and Housing Census 2011. Kathmandu: Gov -
ernment of Nepal, NPC, CBSIbegbulam, I.J.,  Akpom, C.C., Enem, F.N. and Onyam, D.I. 
(2018) ‘Use of the Internet as a Source for Reproductive 
Health Information Seeking Among Adolescent Girls in 
Secondary Schools in Enugu, Nigeria.’ Health Information 
and Libraries Journal , 35(4): 298–308
Livingstone, S., Nandi, A., Banaji, S. and Stoilova, M. (2017) 
Young adolescents and digital media Uses, risks and 
opportunities in low- and middle-income countries: a 
rapid evidence review . London: Overseas Development 
Institute (ODI)
MacPhail, C., Scott, J. and Minichiello, V. (2015) ‘Technology, 
normalisation and male sex work.’  Culture, Health and 
Sexuality 17(4): 483–495
Maiti Nepal (2010) Youth led study on the vulnerability of 
young girls working in restaurants, bars and massage 
parlors in Kathmandu . Kathmadu. Maiti Nepal
Ministry of Youth and Sports – MoYS (2015) Youth Vision 
– 2025 and Ten- Year Strategic Plan approved by Nepal 
Government (Council of Ministers) 2072/6/19 (October 
6, 2015). Kathmandu. Ministry of Youth and Sports
Nepali Telecom (2020) ‘Number of mobile phone users in 
Nepal is 34% higher than population.’ Webpage. Available 
at: english.onlinekhabar.com/number-of-mobile-phone-
users-in-nepal-is-34-higher-than-population.html
Onyima, J.K. and Egbunike, C.F. (2019) ‘Smart phone is a 
expectation-laden trophy: adolescent girls–adults’ mo -
bile phone tensions and changing sexuality negotiation.’ 
Journal of Youth Studies  22(6): 729–751
Poudel, M. and Luintel, Y. (2003) ‘Strategies and practic -
es of advocacy: Gender advocacy against trafficking in 
women in Nepal.’ Occasional Papers in Sociology and 
Anthropology  8: 59–76
Richardson, D., Laurie, N. and Poudel, M. (2016) ‘Women 
and Citizenship post-trafficking. The case of Nepal.’  The 
Sociological Review 64(2): 329–348
Risal, S., Hacker, E. and Sutra (2018) Minors in Kathman -
du’s adult entertainment sector: What’s driving demand? 
Kathmandu: Freedom Fund. 
Safer Migration Project – SaMi – and HEL VETAS Swiss 
Intercooperation Nepal (2018) Journey of a Lifetime: A 
Study on Women and Girls Migrating for Work in Enter -
tainment Businesses . Lalitpur: SaMi/HEL VETAS Swiss 
Intercooperation Nepal
Sanders, T., Connelly, L. and Jarvis King, L. (2016) ‘On our 
own terms: The working conditions of internet-based sex 
workers in the UK.’ Sociological Research Online  21(4): 
1–14This policy note is an output of the GAGE programme which is funded by UK Aid from the UK government. However, 
views expressed and information contained within do not necessarily reflect the UK government’s official policies 
and are not endorsed by the UK government, which accepts no responsibility for such views or information or for 
any reliance placed on them.
ISBN: 978-1-913610-28-9
SathSath (2018) ‘Online Child Sexual Abuse.’ Webpage. 
Available at: www.sathsath.org/onlinechildsexualabuse/
Shaivitz, M. (2017) ‘Mobile App in Nepal Helps Adolescents 
Access Credible Information on Sexual and Reproductive 
Health.’ Blog. 17 April. Available at: healthcommcapacity.
org/mobile-app-nepal-helps-adolescents-access-cred -
ible-information-sexual-reproductive-health/
Shakti Samuha (2008) A Study on the Condition of Slavery 
among Women and Girls Employed in the Restaurants 
and Massage Parlors of Kathmandu Valley . Kathmandu: 
Shakti Samuha
Stavropoulou, M. and Gupta-Archer, N. (2017) Adolescent 
girls’ capabilities in Nepal: the state of the evidence on 
programme effectiveness . London: Gender and Adoles -
cence: Global Evidence
Stonard, K.E., Bowen, E., Lawrence, T.R. and Price, S.A. 
(2014) ‘The relevance of technology to the nature, prev -
alence and impact of Adolescent Dating Violence and 
Abuse: A research synthesis.’ Aggression and Violent 
Behaviour , 19(4): 390–417The Freedom Fund (2018) Central Nepal Annual Report. 
2017 . Kathmandu: The Freedom Fund
The Freedom Fund (2019) Central Nepal Annual Report. 
2018 . Kathmandu: The Freedom Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund – UNICEF (2018) Access to 
Communication Media and the Acceptance of Violence 
Among Adolescent Females in Nepal: Nepal Multiple In -
dicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2014 further analysis re -
port . UNICEF Nepal Working Paper Series WP/2018/003. 
Kathmandu: Nepal
UNICEF (2019) ‘Adolescent demographics.’ Webpage. 
Available at: https:/ /data.unicef.org/topic/adolescents/
demographics/ 
United Nations Population Fund – UNFPA (2017) Population 
Situation Analysis of Nepal: with respect to sustainable 
development . Kathmandu: UNFPA
Zelezny-Green, R. (2018) ‘“Now I want to use it to learn 
more”: using mobile phones to further the educational 
rights of the girl child in Kenya.’  Gender and Development , 
26(2): 299–311