Authors: Gautam Bastian, Iacopo Bianchi, Mayra Buvinic, Markus Goldstein,  
Tanvi Jaluka, James Knowles, Joao Montalvao and Firman Witoelar 
KEY MESSAGES 
• In Tanzania and Indonesia, we promoted the expansion of 
mobile savings accounts among women microentrepreneurs 
and provided them with business related training.  In 
doing so, we simultaneously relaxed supply- and demand-
side constraints to savings that women might face. 
• In both countries, the training enhanced the impact of promoting 
mobile savings. In Indonesia it led women to save more overall, 
including a nascent use of mobile accounts, and report greater 
decision making power within the household. In Tanzania, it led to 
substantially higher mobile savings, new businesses and products, 
more capital investment, labor effort, and better business practices.
• However, these short-term impacts have yet to translate 
into higher business profits. In Indonesia, we observe increased 
household welfare, but no discernible effects on business outcomes 
shortly after the training ended. In Tanzania, the increased business 
investments were not accompanied by greater profitability.
Savings can help businesses expand, by enabling them to finance lumpy investments 
and absorb unexpected shocks. However, several barriers stand in the way of 
women firm owners in developing countries who want to increase their savings. ARE MOBILE SAVINGS THE 
SILVER BULLET TO HELP WOMEN 
GROW THEIR BUSINESSES?GENDER 
INNOVATION LAB
The Africa Gender 
Innovation Lab (AFRGIL) 
and the East Asia Pacific 
Gender Innovation 
Lab (EAPGIL) carry 
out impact evaluations 
and inferential research 
to generate evidence 
on how to close the 
gender gap in earnings, 
productivity, assets and 
agency. The impact 
objective of the GILs 
is to increase take-up 
of effective policies 
by governments, 
development 
organizations, and the 
private sector in order to 
address the underlying 
causes of gender 
inequality. The labs aim 
to do this by producing 
and delivering a new 
body of evidence and 
developing a compelling 
narrative, geared towards 
policymakers, on what 
works and what does 
not work in promoting 
gender equality.
Policy Brief Issue 29
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedFor instance: social pressures women might face 
to share their incomes with friends and family 
members, the high transaction costs of traditional 
savings products, and implicit or explicit biases from 
financial service providers against women as potential 
good customers. If despite these barriers women 
manage to set aside some savings, any effective 
use of these funds towards business expansion 
may take time to materialize, compete with other, 
more urgent uses, or be hindered by human capital 
limitations such as limited entrepreneurial ability. 
HERE’S WHAT WE DID
We designed two randomized control trials: 
one in Tanzania, the other in Indonesia. In both 
countries, we tested the impact of two interventions, 
separately and together, in alleviating some of 
the constraints impeding savings and business 
growth among women microentrepreneurs. The 
first intervention (“mobile savings” intervention) 
expanded access to mobile savings bank accounts. 
The second intervention (“business training” 
intervention) provided training to improve business 
skills and financial literacy. The specifics of each 
intervention differ by country, as follows.
Tanzania
In Tanzania, the mobile savings  intervention promoted 
M-Pawa: a mobile banking product linked to M-Pesa 
that allows customers to save money on an interest-
bearing mobile savings account. It also gives customers 
access to uncollateralized instant microloans. The 
intervention invited women microentrepreneurs for a 
training session on M-Pawa. At the end of the session, 
we helped women create an account with M-Pawa. We 
also offered them the option to set personal savings 
goals and receive weekly SMS savings reminders. 
This latter feature attempted to relax possible 
psychological barriers related to limited attention 
that could lead to under-adoption of the product.
The business training , designed and implemented 
by TechnoServe, lasted for 12 weekly group sessions. 
The training was designed by TechnoServe and it 
was explicitly adapted to women business owners. The goal was to teach and motivate women to set 
business goals, identify business opportunities, put 
ideas into practice, and mobilize finance (with a 
focus on savings). The curriculum also emphasized 
the importance of fostering personal effectiveness 
and perseverance, as well as the benefits of a 
more gender equal society. Additionally, it covered 
standard good business practices. The face-to-
face group training was supplemented with an 
interactive mobile phone learning platform.
The research design  in Tanzania allows us to identify 
the impacts of the mobile savings intervention, with and 
without the business training. To do so, we randomly 
assigned about 4,000 women microentrepreneurs 
(operating in Dodoma and Mbeya) into three groups: 
(i) 1,000 women were invited to the mobile savings 
intervention only, (ii) 2,000 women were invited to 
both the mobile savings and the business training 
interventions, and (iii) 1,000 women served as a control 
group. All women were first surveyed in June-July 2016. 
The interventions run from August-November 2016. 
Follow-up surveys took place at one year and at 18 
months after the baseline survey. For the analysis we 
also exploit administrative data on M-Pawa transactions 
made available by Vodacom for all women in the study.
Indonesia
In Indonesia, the mobile savings  intervention also 
promoted access to a new branchless banking 
mobile savings product, but that was dependent on 
the successful operation of a new mobile banking 
network. Unlike in Tanzania where we worked 
directly with women business owners, in Indonesia 
the intervention targeted local bank agents and 
included men and women entrepreneurs. It provided 
agents with enhanced financial incentives for 
signing up new customers, as well as training on 
the product and the importance of targeting female 
customers. The intervention thus targeted the supply 
side of the market for mobile savings, whereas in 
Tanzania we directly targeted the demand side. 
The business training , designed and implemented 
by Mercy Corps Indonesia, invited microentrepreneurs 
for an average 3 hours-long training session on financial literacy with a focus on mobile savings. This 
group session was followed by three group mentoring 
sessions to reinforce the training with practice.
The research design  in Indonesia allows us to identify 
the impacts of the two interventions, separately 
and together. To do so, we followed a two-stage 
randomization procedure. The first stage randomized 
the mobile savings intervention across about 400 
villages (in East Java): the villages were either paired 
with bank agents receiving high (Rp. 10,000, around 
$0.77) or low (Rp. 2,000, or $0.15) monetary incentives 
for signing up new customers. The second stage 
randomized women microentrepreneurs within both 
types of villages into two groups: about 1,600 women 
were invited to the business training intervention, and 
about 1,200 women served as a comparison group. 
Microentrepreneurs were surveyed in two waves, 
with the first wave surveyed in January-February 
2017 and the second in July-November 2017. The 
results below are restricted to half the sample, where 
a majority of the women (77%), were re-interviewed 
in early 2018, a month or less after the last group 
mentoring session (as delays resulted from operational 
challenges in setting up the network, now resolved). 
HERE’S WHAT WE FOUND 
Tanzania
The mobile savings intervention led to firms 
saving more on M-Pawa, and the business training 
enhanced this impact.  Transaction-level data shows 
women in the mobile savings only group saved two 
times more money weekly on M-Pawa than women in 
the control group, while those in the mobile savings + 
business training group saved almost four times more.
Borrowing from M-Pawa also increased. The 
mobile savings intervention led to a 14pp statistically 
significant increase in the likelihood that women 
received a mobile loan. This impact is slightly higher 
among women who received the additional business 
training intervention, though not significantly different.
The increase in mobile savings and loans appear 
to crowd out other types of savings and credit. Survey data show that there are no systematic 
effects on overall savings or loans. Firm owners 
appear to have shifted both savings and loans to 
the mobile platform from other sources, including 
cash savings at home. So although savings balances 
haven’t increased, they appear to be more secure.
The mobile savings intervention led to firms 
opening new businesses.  Women in the mobile 
savings only intervention are 4pp more likely to grow 
their business activities by operating a second business. 
This impact is higher among women who receive the 
additional business training intervention, though not 
significantly different from the mobile-savings only group.
The mobile savings intervention also led to an 
increase in women’s intra-household decision-
making power vis-à-vis their husbands.  Self-
reported data from women who were encouraged 
to open mobile-savings accounts indicates that 
they have greater decision-making power over 
business and household expenditure allocations 
compared to women in the control group. This 
evidence is consistent with mobile savings 
accounts offering greater privacy and security. 
The business training further led to better 
business practices (such as record keeping and 
financial planning), more labor effort and capital 
investment. The marginal impact of adding business 
training to the mobile savings intervention was a 4pp 
increase in the number of good business practices , 
a 2-hour increase in time the woman devotes to work 
per week, and a 23% increase in capital investment. 
Indonesia
The business training increased women’s 
knowledge of mobile money and 
mobile savings and their likelihood of 
opening a mobile savings account. 
The business training in combination with 
the mobile savings intervention led women 
to increase total savings and mobile 
savings. These women increased total savings 
balances by about 24%, including a statistically 
significant 4% increase in mobile savings FOR MORE INFORMATION, 
PLEASE CONTACT
Markus Goldstein  
(AFRGIL)  
mgoldstein@worldbank.org
Elizaveta Perova  
(EAPGIL)  
eperova@worldbank.org
This work was partly funded by a generous grant from the Exxon Mobil Foundation to the Center for Global 
Development. This work has also been funded in part by The Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE), a World 
Bank Group multi-donor trust fund expanding evidence, knowledge and data needed to identify and address key 
gaps between men and women to deliver better development solutions that boost prosperity and increase opportunity 
for all. The UFGE has received generous contributions from Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, 
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and the United States..
The researchers would like to acknowledge the ExxonMobil Foundation’s pivotal role in the creation of “She Counts”—a 
global platform that seeks to put financial services in the hands of women business owners. The researchers are 
privileged to provide the evidence that feeds into this partnership.
Photo credit: Marijo Silva and the “She Counts” global platformbalance. Women who only received training and women who were only 
exposed to better paid agents also increased total savings (11 and 7%, 
respectively), but these increases were not statistically significant. 
Women who received training and were served by high-incentive 
agents reported being more empowered, reflected in an index 
of household decision-making.  This empowerment effect seems 
to have been mediated by the increase in savings and mobile savings, 
providing privacy and enhancing women’s economic self-reliance. 
The combination of the two interventions also had positive economic 
welfare effects and increased women’s self-confidence, but there 
were no discernible effects of either intervention alone or combined 
on women’s business outcomes.  Both interventions independently 
increased household assets – women who received training reported a 20% 
increase in household consumer durables (including smartphones and TV 
connection) and women served by high-incentive agents reported a 24% 
increase in these durables. These women likely invested at least part of their 
increased savings in durable household assets. An outstanding question is 
whether increased savings will also be invested in the business over time. 
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED SO FAR?
Our results suggest that easing supply-side constraints increases the uptake 
of mobile savings accounts by women microentrepreneurs in developing 
countries, and has beneficial economic empowerment effects. However, the 
evidence also shows that without relaxing complementary demand-sided 
constraints that women might face, access to mobile savings accounts 
per se is no silver bullet. Providing women with complementary business 
training bolsters the effectiveness of mobile savings accounts, although 
this is still not enough to improve business profits in the short run. We 
plan to conduct additional follow-up surveys for both the Tanzania and 
Indonesia projects to track longer run effects on business performance.
The first draft of this policy brief was released in September 2018.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/africa-gender-innovation-lab
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/east-asia-and-pacific-gender-innovation-lab