Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 134  Considerations for Design and Production of Digital Books for Early 
Literacy in Ethiopia  
 
 
TERESA M. DOBSON  
University of British Columbia  
 
MARLENE ASSELIN  
University of British Columbia  
 
ALEMU ABEBE  
CODE Ethiopia  
 
Abstract  
This paper considers the implications of digital text production models for the development 
of reading materials for emergent and early readers in the Ethiopian context. We draw  from 
several theoretical frameworks and also from comments of Ethiopian academics, writers, 
and publishers to ground descriptions of Ethiopian contexts of language and literacy. We 
then present three different models for the production and curation of digital stories for 
children and contemplate how these models align with existing literacy traditions and 
practices. We also raise questions about the potential effects on the development of literary 
culture and children’s literature in Ethiopia of projects a imed at rapidly producing large 
corpora of literature for children. Ultimately, we pose complicated cultural and linguistic 
questions that need to be taken into consideration to provide appropriate and original early 
literacy materials in Ethiopia.  
 
Keywor ds 
Ethiopia, early literacy, children’s literature, digital texts  
 
 
Introduction 
Low literacy rates in some majority world contexts are deemed problematic, 
particularly by the Euro -Western world, and have precipitated intervention in the form of 
literacy programs (Wickens & Sandlin, 2007). Such programs promote the use of digital 
texts as an essential component of urgently needed early literacy programs, primarily as a 
means to reduce publication costs and increase knowledge mobility ( United States Agency 
for International Development [USAID] , 2017). These recommendations are set against a 
backdrop of a history of donated, context -insensitive books from the Global North that 
have had little impact on access. Much of the digital material trickling down into the hands 
of children in the Global South are cultural and linguistic downloads from the same foreign 
publishers of donated print books, which raises ethical concerns about the appropriateness 
of texts for children and the development of a local culture of  children’s literature. And yet 
a small portion of new texts generated through emergent digital projects do originate 
internally with local writers, illustrators, and publishers —thereby promising more 
relevance.  Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 135  This paper considers the cultural, linguist ic, and technological implications of 
digital models of text production and curation with a particular focus on the Ethiopian 
context of language and literacy. To establish this context, we describe Ethiopia’s linguistic 
and cultural diversity, as well as Ethiopian traditions and practices around early reading, 
book culture, and storytelling. We then present analyses of digital book production projects 
producing storybooks for children in Ethiopian languages. Multiple theoretical framings 
inform our discuss ion of the deeply complex historical, political, religious, social, and 
economic context of Ethiopian language and literacy. It is this context that digital book 
production projects need to take into account  if the aim is to provide a means of access to 
original, culturally and linguistically relevant literacy materials for emergent and early 
readers in Ethiopia.  
We also include information and perspectives from Ethiopian academics, writers, and 
publishers, who emailed answers to a series of questions about their experiences with stories 
and their views of contemporary children’s reading materials in Ethiopia. Perspectives offered 
through the activities described above illustrate and extend descriptions of th e Ethiopian 
context of language and literacy derived from literature. Subsequently, we planned a focus 
group discussion with our seven participants about the implications and possibilities of digital 
book production at the College of Educational and Behavi oral Studies at Addis Ababa 
University. At the request of the Dean of the College, however, we changed the focus group 
structure to that of a presentation on a local digital book production project. This presentation 
was open to all faculty and graduate st udents. Comments and questions from attendees inform 
the second half of this paper. 
 
The Ethiopian Context: Literacy and Linguistic Diversity in Ethiopia 
According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation  
(UNESCO) Institute of Statistics (UIS, 2016), the rate of literacy in Ethiopia has 
dramatically increased over the past 25 years and continues to rise steadily. Figures 
published for 2015 suggest that almost 70% of youth are now literate (in comparison to a 
reported rate for  youth of less than 34% in 1994 and about 55% in 2007; see Table 1). Over 
the past few decades there has also been a marked increase reported in literacy rates among 
girls and women, to the point that the literacy gap between men and women between the 
ages of 15 and 24 is now reported to be less than 3% (see Table 2). Joshi and Verspoor 
(2012) observe that one impetus for change has been the goal set by the Ethiopian 
government of becoming a “middle -income country” by 2020 to 2023 ( MoFED, 2010) . 
Such a goal , Joshi and Verspoor note, is only possible in countries with high rates of 
literacy among both men and women and a sufficient number of secondary graduates to 
support a middle -income economy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 136  Table 1  
 
Ethiopian Literacy Rates by age for the years  1994, 2007 and 2015 as reported by the 
UNESCO Institute of Statistics (UIS, 2016).  
 
Literacy Rates  
By Year  15–24 years 
(%) 15 and older 
(%) 65 and older  
1994  33.59  27.01  no data  
2007  54.98  39 13.63  
2015  69.49  49.03  14.47  
 
Table 2  
 
2015 Ethiopian literacy rates by age and gender, as reported by the UNESCO Institute of 
Statistics (UIS, 2016).  
 
Literacy Rates 
2015  Total (%)  Male (%)  Female (%)  
 
15–24 years  69.49  71.13  67.82  
15 years and 
older  49.03  57.28  40.97  
65 years and 
older  14.47  22.51  7.52 
 
As acknowledged by the UIS itself, potential shortcomings of any set of national 
statistics such as those cited above relate to how literacy is defined and the methods by 
which literacy data is collected. In International Literacy Statistics: A Review of Concepts, 
Methodology and Current Data (UIS, 2008), author Roy Carr -Hill draws on the work of 
New Literacy Studies scholars in observing that literacy  
 
only has meaning within its particular context of social practice and does not transfer 
easily across contexts; there are different literacy practices in different domains of 
social life, such as education, religion, workplace, public services, and family and 
community activities. They change over tim e and these different literacies are 
supported and shaped by different institutions and social relationships. (UIS, 2008, 
p. 25)  
 
The question of how literacy rates have been defined and measured over the past 25 years 
in Ethiopia is beyond the scope of this paper; suffice it to say that the above statistics are 
offered with the caveat that they are not infallible. Collecting reliable literacy data in 
Ethiopia is challenging for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that the nation is 
one of great linguistic and cultural diversity. In responding to the 2007 census, for example, 
citizens reported over 90 languages as mother tongues and identified themselves as 
belonging to over 85 distinct ethnic groups (Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia, 2010). Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 137  In a working paper on the medium of instruction (MoI) in Ethiopian schools, Vujich 
(2013) offers an overview of key language poli cies over the past 75 years that have 
influenced literacy practices and achievement in school. Drawing on Getachew and Derib 
(2006), he notes that the “first official Ethiopian educational language policy emerged in 
1944 in the form of a directive that Amh aric was to be the general language of instruction,” 
and that in 1955 Amharic was also “made the official language in Ethiopia’s revised 
constitution, thus extending its use beyond the education sector to the political, legal, and 
administrative spheres” ( Vujich, 2013, p. 3). Notably, however, Amharic has never been 
the language of the majority in Ethiopia. Census data collected in 2007 shows that only 
29% of the population reported Amharic (or “Amaringa”) as a “mother tongue.” Afaan 
Oromo was in fact the m ost common reported mother tongue (34%), while the remainder 
of the population (37%) reported over 90 other languages as mother tongues ( Central 
Statistical Agency of Ethiopia, 2010) . Ultimately, the shift toward an Amharic -speaking 
state, which has been i nterpreted by historians as a nation- building and power -
consolidation effort on the part of then Emperor Haile Selassie (Getachew & Derib, 2006; 
Smith, 2008; Vujich, 2013), has led to a complex scenario whereby many Ethiopian 
children —particularly those in  regions where Amharic is not dominant (e.g., Oromia, the 
Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region [SNNP], Somali, and Tigraydid) —
have not had access to education in their first language. Further, at the same time Amharic 
was set as the medium of instruction (MoI) in early schooling, English was promoted as 
the MoI in upper primary and secondary schools, as well as in teacher training institutions 
(Heugh, Benson, Bogale, & Yohannes, 2007; Vijich, 2013) . This meant children had to 
learn yet anoth er language to gain access to upper elementary and secondary schooling.  
Vijich notes that while the “socialist- inspired revolution of 1974 resulted in a 
formal reversal of Selassie’s homogenising policies,” in practice, Amharic “remained the 
language of in struction in primary schools, principally because teachers most often spoke 
Amharic and were not trained in the use of local mother tongues” (Vijich, 2013, p. 3). The 
status quo—primary education in Amharic —was nevertheless gradually contested. Data 
collected by the ministry of education in the mid -1980s showed that performance in science 
and technology of students with Amharic as a mother tongue was markedly higher than 
that of students with other first languages, and the disadvantage of the MoI for non -
Amharic speakers was identified as a likely cause (Vijich, 2013).  
This perspective is in line with developing understandings of the importance of the 
mother tongue in education (see, for example, an extensive review of research on this topic 
in the recent L andscape Report on Early Grade Literacy [Kim, Boyle, Zuilkowski, & 
Nakamura, 2016]) . As Cummins (2001) observes,  
 
When the mother tongue is promoted in school . . . the concepts, language, and 
literacy skills that children are learning in the majority lang uage can transfer to the 
home language. In short, both languages nurture each other . . . Bilingual children 
perform better in school when the school effectively teaches the mother tongue and, 
where appropriate, develops literacy in that language. By contr ast, when children’s 
mother tongue is encouraged to atrophy and its development stagnates, children’s 
personal and conceptual foundation for learning is undermined. (Cummins, 2001, p. 
18) Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 138  Cummins further notes that the challenge for educators and policymakers in highly 
multilingual settings “is to shape the evolution of national identity in such a way that the 
rights of all citizens (including school children) are respected, and the cultural, linguistic, 
and economic resources of the nation are maximized” ( p. 18). To do other than offer 
education in the mother tongue, particularly to children attending school in the very 
communities their ancestors have inhabited for generations, violates the UN Convention on 
the Rights of the Child  (UNCRC), which states tha t education of children shall be directed 
toward the “development of respect for the child’s parents, his or her own cultural identity, 
[and] language and values,” and that a child “shall not be denied the right, in community 
with other members of his or her group, to enjoy his or her own culture, to profess and 
practise his or her own religion, or to use his or her own language” (United Nations, 1989, 
Articles 29.1.c and 30). The African Charter of Rights and Welfare of the Child, adopted 
in 1990 by the Or ganisation of African Unity, builds on the principles of the UNCRC—
also emphasizing that children’s education should include “the preservation and 
strengthening of positive African morals, traditional values, and cultures” (OAU, 1990, 
Article 11).  
In keepi ng with these perspectives, in 1994 a new policy emerged in Ethiopia 
guaranteeing children the right to primary education in their first language: “Cognizant of 
the pedagogical advantage of the child in learning in mother tongue and the rights of 
nationali ties to promote the use of their languages, primary education will be given in 
nationality languages” (Government of Ethiopia, 1994). Even now, however, the 
implementation of this policy remains challenging in areas of high linguistic diversity for 
a numbe r of reasons, including (1) the difficulty in finding teachers fluent in local 
languages; (2) the challenge of offering teacher training in those languages; (3) the paucity 
of reading materials suitable to the context; and (4) the expense of translation when local 
reading materials are not available. In the next section of this paper we focus on the third 
of these challenges —the paucity of reading materials —considering in particular the 
availability of storybooks that might support early literacy development.  
 
Early Reading, Book Culture, and Storytelling in Ethiopia  
Many researchers have argued that early literacy acquisition is best supported by 
the extensive reading of storybooks, particularly those that are closely connected to 
children’s home and community environments. Bronfenbrenner’s ecological systems 
theory ( 1979; Bronfenbrenner & Morris , 2007), for example, explains the interplay of 
various embedded contexts (e.g., social, legal, economic, and religious) on human 
development. For young children’s development, the most immediate and influential 
environment is the microsystem, consisting of the child’s family and close community. 
Applying this perspective to the selection of early reading materials for children, it is 
widely acknowledged that the stories children hear and learn to read should include those 
in wh ich they can see themselves and their worlds —the microsystem. Such stories are 
those that describe characters with whom children can easily relate engaging in 
recognizable activities, such as familiar childhood games or customary family and 
community pract ices. As development progresses, early childhood educators scaffold 
children’s reading materials to extend beyond immediate family and community contexts. 
Acknowledging and drawing on children’s funds of knowledge (Moll & Greenberg, 
1990) in early learning  settings respectfully and effectively supports literacy development, Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 139  especially with children of diversity (Moll & Gonzalez, 1994). Moll and his colleagues 
define funds of knowledge as “those historically accumulated and culturally developed 
bodies of knowledge and skills essential for household or individual functioning and 
wellbeing” (Moll & Gonzalez, 1994, p. 443). Similarly , the schema theory of reading 
proposed by Anderson and Pearson (1984) posits that comprehension requires the ability 
to relate reading or viewing to one’s own schema or knowledge, which includes content 
knowledge and knowledge of textual forms. Recognizing the funds of knowledge and 
schemata students bring to classroom settings and providing reading materials that are both 
linguistic ally meaningful and culturally relevant allows beginning readers not only to 
identify with characters, settings, and events, but also to understand vocabulary and cultural 
themes. Thus, along with the rise of multicultural children’s picture books have bee n 
discussions of cultural authenticity —in relation to both written content and illustrations 
(Fox & Short, 2003). Although some argue for specific definitions, Smith and Wiese 
(2006) broadly define cultural authenticity as “the extent to which the reteller , adaptor, or 
illustrator (1) remains reasonably true to the original printed source, (2) accurately and 
respectfully represents the values and beliefs of the cultural group, and (3) responsibly 
depicts geographical, historical, and cultural details” (p. 72).  
In the Ethiopian context, there is not a long tradition of the publication of the sorts 
of early reading materials described above—that is, illustrated books for children. This is 
not because there is no history of literacy and book production in Ethiopia. On the contrary, 
as Winslow (2015) observes, the Ethiopian tradition of manuscript production is one of the 
longest in the world, and scribal practices that are centuries old are still practiced where 
they have been lost elsewhere: “ Isolationist for a  period of almost 700 years due to 
geopolitical and religious factors, [Ethiopia] has preserved many practices intact from the 
medieval period, including the production of parchment manuscripts” (p. 1). Consequently, 
Winslow remarks, contemporary scholars of manuscript culture look to Ethiopia for an 
understanding of medieval book production techniques . 
 
  
Figure 1. Evidence of a long history of literacy and book culture in Ethiopia: (1) A scribe 
in Lalibela preparing texts for sale to tourists; (2) a parchment manuscript (date unknown), 
written in Ge’ez, located in a high -mountain, rock -hewn church approximately 16km from 
Lalibela. Photos: T.M. Dobson personal archives, 2010. 
 
Historically, the primary script used for manuscript production in Ethiopia was 
Ge’ez, a language for writing liturgical, scholarly, and literary work that is no longer in 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 140  general use beyond t he church ( Scelta & Quezzaire- Belle, 2001) . Elsewhere, in most 
settings outside the church, communications were in oral form. Notes McCann (2001), “ the 
written form as a bureaucratic exercise did not supplant the oral tradition until well into the 
modern era” (p. 85) . Not surprisingly, therefore, book culture in Ethiopia is still strongly 
tied to its liturgical and scholarly origins, and books are serious objects for serious content 
(Figure 1). Publishing storybooks  for children is a unique notion for many  in Ethiopia. 
Storytelling for children instead remains a primarily oral genre. In an effort to get 
a sense of perspectives on and experiences with early literacy texts in Ethiopia, we sought 
input from seven Ethiopian citizens involved in education and book production. These 
participants, all professionals, included a member of an NGO working in early literacy 
projects, university faculty in education, an author of children’s books in major indigenous 
Ethiopian languages, and a local publisher. Planned Sky pe interviews were not possible 
due to challenges with connectivity, so participants answered questions via email. Asked 
about the most common types of stories in their own homes growing up, they listed riddles , 
songs, indoor and outdoor games , animal stor ies, and fables . 
The functions of these stories, according to one participant, are “to teach kids how to 
socialize, to make critical thinkers, learn manners, and to entertain. Riddles, for instance, 
help children to think critically” (Participant: NGO Memb er). Another intimated that 
storytelling is primarily didactic in nature. Children are expected to attend carefully during 
storytelling sessions, right up to the point that the message is made clear:  
 
Grandparents are more willing than parents to tell stor ies to children. When a 
grandparent tells a story, children sit around her/him and listen. Usually they sit 
rounding the fireplace in home. When the teller tells orally from his/her memory, 
children listen with strict discipline. They can smile, gesture, a nd even laugh. But 
they do not shout, move from place to place, and push each other. They listen until 
the teller finishes and tells message of the story. (Participant: Professor of Childhood 
Studies)  
 
Participants identified the tellers of these stories a s family and community members, 
including grandmothers, mothers, fathers, uncles, aunts, and neighbours. One participant 
remarked that siblings also tell the stories to one another, a point that is also emphasized 
by Jirata (2013) in his work on the oral t radition among the Guji -Oromo in Southern 
Ethiopia. Most remarked that the stories they recall were told orally from memory, 
regularly in the evening before bed. One reported hearing stories through radio and 
television, observing “there was a popular stor yteller called Ababa Tesfaye on a TV 
children’s show in my time” (Participant: Publisher).  
Another participant, a published Ethiopian YA author who responded to our 
questions via email, captured the richness of storytelling sessions by noting the different  
environments in which his mother and father orated:  
 
My father came from an Oromo family and he used to tell us about his home town, 
and my mother came from Amhara family and she used to tell us about her home 
town. 
In Ethiopia extended coffee ceremony is  common and neighbors are called as 
most house wives are around and find excuses to start telling about it. Sometimes my Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 141  mother speaks about the same story again and again. I had a very strong 
grandmother —even neighbors were afraid of her. Most believed she was more than 
100 years old. She was like a legend. My mother told stories about her 
grandmother —passed away at 118 years old. Unsure though as no birth certificates —
could get clues of her age by what she spoke about (historically). Even men were 
afraid of her. She was very logical. She was part of a relatively well off countryside 
family. She was very bossy and supervised the men over their work. She was ahead 
of her time by assuming the responsibility herself for men’s work and anyone’s work. 
She remain s center topic of stories today.  
My father had a business and my siblings and I used to go to where the restaurant 
business is located. He used to tell stories about his home town not necessarily for us 
but for customers and others. Then we used to listen what he had to say. Father was 
Oromo —when he came to the city he suffered exploitation. He started a restaurant 
business in Addis and was forced to change his name to Amharic to get customers. 
His wife was Amharic —at the time, this was a cultural no -no to give a daughter to 
an Oromo man. From my father’s stories I learned about things more indirectly than 
directly as he wasn’t necessarily talking to me but to his customers and friends and I 
would be around pretending to play but also listening. (Participant : Ethiopian Writer; 
no editorial changes have been made to these notes)  
 
Notably, in keeping with the Ecological Systems Theory discussed earlier, which stresses 
the immediacy and import of the microsystem, the stories alluded to here are of hometowns 
and important people therein. Over the lengthy process of preparing coffee —roasting, 
grinding, boiling, filtering, pouring —the women “find excuses to start telling about it, ” the 
neuter pronoun here presumably referring to the recurring story of the legendary 
grandmother and her prescient behaviours that pushed the boundaries of ge nder roles. The 
story is not explicitly didactic and formal, as is the case in another participant’s earlier 
description of children sitting attentively and waiting for the “message.” Nor are the 
father’s stories examples of direct instruction specifically  intended for children; rather, 
children glean from these adult stories by eavesdropping while pretending to play.  
If we view emergent and early reading materials as most appropriate when they 
reflect the microsystem, then it stands to reason that initial efforts at publishing children’s 
literature in Ethiopia have drawn on the stories of the oral tradition commonly told in the 
home and community. When we asked our participants to list appropriate subjects or topics 
for young children’s books, they proposed that literature for early reading should be about 
animals, the environment or surroundings (e.g., trees, rivers, etc.), holidays, “people in the 
localities,” stories with morals, and “the common story topics.” Regarding to the last 
suggestion, the partici pant in question named several Ethiopian fables that are recognizable 
as part of the oral tradition, including a biblical tale: “The Monkey and the Lion,” “The 
Wise Man and Foolish Man,” and “The Clever Children.”  
In writing about the oral tradition of th e Guji -Oromo in southern Ethiopia, Jirata 
(2013) notes:  
 
The concept of “oral practice” signifies oral tradition as comprising cultural genres 
that include myths, legends, folktales, jokes, proverbs, riddles, chants, blessings, 
curses, insults, folk songs and folk beliefs. The concept of “oral process” denotes oral Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 142  tradition as events of social interaction and entails performances such storytelling, 
riddling, singing, dancing, joking, and chanting. Thus, oral tradition can be 
understood as cultural practices produced and reproduced through oral interactions. 
(p. 4)  
 
Given this complexity, story forms for very young children, which by necessity are orally 
transmitted, are regularly the last to make the transition to writing in any culture and are 
still deemed nascent in many traditions of writing (e.g., Salisbury &  Styles, 2012). A 
reticence to render such oral practices into writing in any context stems at least partially 
from the fact that performative elements are difficult, if not impossible, to transmediate. 
The bridge from oral to written forms is made in children’s books to some degree through 
a reliance on illustration to support and extend verbal content. This multimodal element of 
children’s texts inevitably becomes a factor in the cost and ease of their production, both 
in print and digital environments. In the next section, we discuss several initiatives having 
an impact on access to early storybooks in Ethiopia. 
 
Digital Texts for Young Readers in Ethiopia 
As noted earlier, we hoped to plan a follow -up focus group session with our seven 
participants at Ad dis Ababa University in May, 2016; however, we were asked by the Dean 
to open the session to all faculty and students, and to convert the format to a more formal 
presentation on the production of digital books for early literacy  in Ethiopia. Thirteen 
facul ty and graduate students —in fields related to education and early childhood 
development —along with one NGO representative attended our May, 2016 workshop, 
“Consideration for the Production of Digital Books for Early Literacy in Majority World 
Contexts.” In this presentation, we contemplated the ways literacy is being fostered, 
particularly in reference to the lack of readily available children’s storybooks in Ethiopian 
indigenous languages. We also introduced three approaches to digital access that may lead  
to increased availability of early reading materials: (1) the International Children’s Digital 
Library (ICDL); (2) the CODE Ethiopia Digital Books and Family Literacy Project; and 
(3) two crowdsourcing projects aimed at generating large multilingual digital corpora —
namely, Bloom Library and the African Storybook Project. Because the seminar room did 
not have connectivity, we presented all these projects as screen captures via a data 
projector. Below is a discussion of these projects in consideration of the  responses from 
our workshop participant group.  
 
The International Children’s Digital Library (ICDL) . The ICDL is an open- access 
curated collection of books that is primarily designed as a read -only platform. The ICDL 
goal, as stated on their website,  
 
is to build a collection . . . that represents outstanding historical and contemporary 
books from throughout the world. Ultimately, the Foundation aspires to have every 
culture and language represented so that every child can know and appreciate the 
riches o f children’s literature from the world community. ( International Children’s 
Digital Library , 2017, para. 3)  
 Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 143  With 4,619 volumes in 59 languages, this project, having launched in November 2002, is 
about halfway to the stated goal of collecting 10,000 volume s in 100 languages (Druin et 
al., 2003; ICDL, 2017). Users are not invited to author stories, although they can add 
metadata to existing stories in the form of keyword tags. The ICDL Collection 
Development Policy (2005) makes clear that the primary focus i s making available existing 
published volumes that are  
 
- currently available in print and within copyright;  
- out of print but within the copyright protection of the country in which they were 
published; or  
- freely available in the public domain; there  is no explicit solicitation for new 
materials. (International Children’s Digital Library, 2005)  
 
In other words, this is primarily a print digitization project geared toward creating an open 
educational resource in the form of a digital corpus of previous ly published children’s 
books in multiple languages.  
The ICDL was prescient in terms of recognizing the need for a resource of this type; 
however, the requirement of negotiating copyright for most of the volumes added slows 
the growth of the collection—at a time when there is immediate need for early reading 
materials in some contexts. Additionally, by collecting already published work, the project 
is not aimed at the root problem discussed earlier —that there are few if any published 
storybooks in many lang uages used as a MoI in early education within and beyond 
Ethiopia. At the time of writing this paper, there were only two books listed by country as 
“Ethiopian” in the ICDL. Both—Fafi’s Sheep  and Lion’s Tale —are traditional stories in 
Amharic that were ori ginally published (in 2005 and 2006, respectively) by the Ethiopian 
Books for Children and Educational Foundation. 
 
The CODE Ethiopia eBooks and Family Literacy Project. The second project we 
introduced was the CODE Ethiopia eBooks and Family Literacy Project. This began as a 
small- scale pilot, intended to complement national reform in education aimed at improving 
access and equity in early childhood care and education (Et hiopian Ministry of Education, 
2016). The project initially targeted children aged 3 to 6 and their families in three rural 
areas where appropriate reading materials for the target group were unavailable. The 
primary objectives were to develop culturally a nd linguistically meaningful early reading 
materials written and illustrated by local writers and artists; to provide access to and guided 
experience with the texts in a family literacy program; and to invite communities to write 
stories relevant to their contexts, thereby fostering an interest in the writing of stories within 
communities (Abebe, 2015; Asselin, Dorion, & Abebe, 2015; CODE Ethiopia, 2015).  
Ethiopia -based librarians, writers, and CODE Ethiopia members initially selected 
six stories common to  the oral tradition. Abebe (2015) notes that these were made available 
in two local languages, Amharic and Afaan Oromo, and that the themes of the stories 
“related to animals, school life, and friendship” (n.p.). Notably, most are moral or religious 
tales with a strong didactic element. Colonial influence in the Ethiopian oral tradition is 
also evident in the selection of Wondime Yakob (Brother Jacob or  Frère Jacques ), 
described on the project site as the “Amharic version” of the well known French nursery 
rhyme with a melody that is “almost the same as the French one” (CODE Ethiopia, 2015). Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 144  Although the rhyme is heavily adapted to the point that it is dissimilar to the original rhyme 
in most respects, the story describes the morning routine of a brother and sister who wake 
each other up and later go to school to acquire knowledge.  
Although this CODE Ethiopia pilot work was initially couched as a digital book 
project, the book production model is consistent with contemporary approaches to print 
publication. CO DE Ethiopia deemed a dual -platform approach a necessity —that is, all 
books must be produced in such a way that multiple copies of each text can be distributed 
in either print or digital formats. In this respect, a conventional design approach for 
Western m onographs is employed: Books are construed as artefacts with a title page, front 
matter, and multiple pages featuring text and image with margins (see Figure 2). Printed 
versions can be produced quickly —for home reading or if hardware or power fails —via 
photocopier (see Figure 3). Given this model, there is limited opportunity to explore the 
multimodal affordances of digital platforms —affordances such as audio and video features 
that might be better suited to a setting with a strong oral tradition. Instead,  the bulk of 
digital materials produced might be described as “print adaptations” (Joyce, 1996). Both 
print and digital versions of the books produced in the context of this project are distributed 
under a Creative Commons Attribution- NonCommercial license.  
 
 
Figure 2. Fantu ena ekiduwa (Fantu and her Plan) is the story of a Grade 1 student who 
tells about her daily activities.  
 
 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 145   
Figure 3. Printed copies of the Afaan Oromo version of New Year and Children (Ayyaana 
Waggaa fi Daaimman ). 
 
Beyond production of the six books, there was a focus on building a corpus of 
context -sensitive texts by inviting each  of the three communities involved in the pilot to 
contribute two stories commonly told in their own contexts. CODE Ethiopia selected and 
edited three of the resulting stories and had them illustrated by the project illustrator, 
Atilabachew Reda. Original books from this project, along with the three contributed by 
communities, have now been translated into six Ethiopian languages. Each translation was 
treated with extreme care for sensitivity to context, including attendance to local dialects 
and customs, as well as reworking of illustrations to reflect local settings. Consider, for 
example, three unique covers for the Amharic, Afaan Oromo, and Somali versions of New 
Year and Children (Figures 4 –6). The nine books have been prepared in PDF formats and 
are loaded onto tablets for use in ongoing literacy projects managed by CODE Ethiopia. 
They have also been acquired by the African Storybook Project. Those who attended the 
session commented favourably on this project and the demonstrable feasibility of the 
approach with regard to future literacy and collection- building endeavours.  
 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 146   
Figure 4. Amharic version of New Year and Children, with cover reflecting traditional 
dress of the Amhara Region. 
 
 
Figure 5. One of two (given the unique dialects of this language) Oromo versions of New 
Year and Children, with a cover reflecting dress common in the Dire Dawa area.  
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 147   
Figure 6. Somali version of New Year and Children, with cover reflecting Muslim dress 
common in the Somali Region.  
 
Outsourcing to the c rowd: Bloom Library and the African Storybook Project . The 
third and fourth approach we introduced were crowdsourcing initiatives that harness the 
collective wisdom of communities in the quest to develop large corpora rapidly —
specifically, Bloom Library and the African Storybook Project (ASb). Both projects a llow 
users to read, download, translate, and create stories. Like ICDL, Bloom has a global scope, 
while ASb has an African focus. Bloom sets out the problem that both projects aim to 
address on its splash page, observing that literacy educators are regular ly faced with too 
few books in localized indigenous language settings to successfully foster literacy:  
 
We know that it takes stacks  of titles to make reading worthwhile and give the 
practice needed to develop true literacy. The problem has been who will make all 
those books? How will we find the time? Where will we get the content? So we 
settle for the possible and hope for the best. (Bloom Library, 2017, para. 1)  
 
Therefore, a key challenge addressed by such projects —similar to the CODE Ethiopia 
project —is building interest in story writing and the capacity for bookmaking in local 
communities where collections of reading materials are  not available. To this end, “Bloom 
dramatically lowers the bar” by providing simple -to-use software and a range of book 
templates —“so that many more people can get involved in building a large collection of 
local language books” (Bloom Library, 2017).  
Data from the Internet Archive show that Bloom Library and ASb were launched at 
roughly the same time. (The Archive shows Bloom Library had launched at 
bloomlibrary.org by July, 2014; meanwhile, by September, 2013, ASb had launched a 
preliminary site announc ing its initiative at africanstorybook.org, and provided a site with 
functionality for users by May, 2014.) Both projects have since collected many volumes —
1,151 in the case of Bloom Library and almost 4,000 in the case of ASb. ( Unlike ICDL and 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 148  Bloom Libra ry, there is not a readily apparent count of the total number of books on ASb, 
although up until 1 April, 2017, it was possible to estimate —based on summing the totals 
in each category and assuming books did not regularly appear in multiple categories.)  
The slower growth of Bloom Library despite its global scope is likely a matter of 
accessibility. Bloom Library requires users to download software before reading and 
uploading stories, and this software is only available for PC and Linux standalone 
computers . For creators, Bloom Library also recommends the installation of “The Art of 
Reading,” a curated collection of line drawings, fonts, and a typing script for creators who 
do not have a way to type their own language. The fact that a download is required to create 
and read —and that there is no compatibility for the Mac OS —undoubtedly reduces the 
number of users of and contributors to the Bloom Library. Nevertheless, this approach 
evidently does have benefits; for instance, it offers a way for users to create  offline, which 
is a major consideration for settings with unreliable Internet access. ASb, on the other hand, 
has circumvented such platform wars by opting for a web application based on JavaScript 
and hosted in a Drupal shell. No registration or local software is required to read or 
download ASb books. The only potential impediment to submit or version (i.e., translate) 
a story is the creation of an account. Thus the ASb collection, having removed all barriers 
to access other than connectivity, is growing  most rapidly of all. It is also noteworthy that 
strong promotion of translation or versioning by the ASb has contributed to the rapid 
growth of its corpus, a point to which we will return. 
Both the Bloom Library and ASb growth rates eclipse that of the pr ojects discussed 
earlier (recall that it has taken the ICDL 15 years to collect 4,619 volumes). Clearly the 
“possible” described by Bloom Library, in opting for crowdsourcing over curation, is 
coming to fruition; what is less clear is whether their “hope f or the best” in taking this 
approach is being realized. As Porcello and  Hsi (2013) note in speaking of the variable 
quality of open educational resources (OER), there are benefits and drawbacks to 
crowdsourcing approaches:  
 
On one hand, collections using c rowdsourcing allow a wide range of online users to 
contribute, choosing their own descriptions and keywords to catalog, review, and 
manage OERs. This can produce large and loose collections. Although dedicated 
users from the resulting online communities might be more willing to detail their 
instructional experiences and personal connections to OERs, overall quality may be 
quite variable. On the other hand, having professional staff with disciplinary 
expertise populate, catalog, and maintain curated collecti ons usually results in fine -
tuned, coherent, and smaller collections. Although these collections grow more 
slowly, often with less vocal user communities, they can quickly respond to new 
quality or educational standards. ( Porcello &  Hsi, 2013, p. 240)  
 
As we considered the possibilities of the crowdsourcing projects for the Ethiopian context 
with those in attendance, the question of reimagining texts for different contexts through 
versioning and adaptation became a main point of interest. 
At the time of our  presentation in Addis Ababa, there were no volumes in Ethiopian 
languages in the Bloom Library collection; this continues to be the case. There was, 
however, a growing collection of books on ASb. As noted earlier, connectivity was 
unavailable for our workshop, so we selected four Amharic books as examples and Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 149  included representative screen captures within our presentation. These were as follows: (1) 
Fantu and her Plan,  a CODE Ethiopia book with which the group was familiar; (2) How 
Many?, a counting book w ith simple sketches of insects, birds, and mammals; (3) The Girl 
Who Got Rich, a moral story about two poor, hungry sisters who separately encounter a 
leper woman with magical powers and receive different fates in accordance with their 
treatment of her; an d (4) I Like to Read,  a simple text for early readers about a boy who 
enjoys reading and wanders about his home trying to find family members with whom he 
can share his story.  
Beyond the CODE Ethiopia text, all of the above books are versioned from other 
languages not indigenous to Ethiopia. The counting book, How Many?—written by Clare 
Verbeek, Thembani Dladla, and Zanele Buthelezi and illustrated by Sandra McDougall —
first appeared in Zulu. It was originally produced through the Seed Books project of the 
School of Education and Development and the Centre for Adult Education at the University 
of KwaZulu- Natal, South Africa. The Girl Who Got Rich is by Ugandan author Salaama 
Wanale, written in Lumasaaba and versioned by the same author to Amharic. The 
illustr ations are attributed to “Mango Tree,” which is apparently  “Mango Tree Educational 
Enterprises,” a Ugandan educational consulting firm (L. Doherty, personal 
communication, 14 March 2017). Finally, I Like to Read is written by Letta Machogo in 
Sepedi, with illustrations by Wiehan de Jager, both of South Africa. The Amharic 
translation is by Sehin Tefera and Mezemir Girma.  
 
I Like to Read: One example of versioning for the Ethiopian context . Of the four 
texts, the first three drew little in the way of comment or response. The group was familiar 
with the CODE Ethiopia text. The second two texts, How Many? and The Girl Who Got 
Rich, depicted items or settings that were familiar (local animals in  the first case and the 
traditional tukal homes, common in East Africa, in the latter). The fourth text, I Like to 
Read , drew an audible gasp of surprise. What garnered the group’s attention was not the 
story, but the illustrations. The cover and first pag e spread show a smartly dressed boy in 
a well -appointed home. He is seated in an orange upholstered chair, next to which is a leafy 
plant in a large vase. A landscape painting hangs on the vibrant green wall behind him, and 
it appears there is wall -to-wall carpeting on the floor. “I like to read,” or “I like reading,” 
declares the boy (see Figure 7). On the second page spread he stands at the door of his baby 
sister’s room. He is searching for someone with whom he can read. The baby is sleeping 
soundly in a  white crib, a large soother in her mouth. A mobile comprised of smiling stars 
hangs above the crib. The walls appear to be papered in pink, with a cloud wall appliqué 
positioned next to the crib. “Who can I read to?” the boy asks (see Figure 8). 
 Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 150   
Figure  7. I Like to Read , first page spread.  
 
 
Figure 8. I like to Read , second page spread.  
 
Those in attendance were not familiar with the crowdsourcing approach of the ASb 
that results in stories migrating across contexts through versioning or adaptation. At first 
glance, it would be easy for any reader to overlook metadata and surmise that a story 
written in Amharic should be of Ethiopian origin. But the images, so clearly  not reflecting 
Ethiopian settings, made the book untenable and created discomfort.  
The illustrations are by Wiehan de Jager, a designer from Cape Town, South Africa. 
They reflect mixed design elements, mostly of European origin, from Colonial Revival 
Style (e.g., machine- milled trim and moulding) to Mid -Century Modern (e.g., simple lines, 
geometric patterns, and aesthetic contrast). In Ethiopian homes, however, such design 
features —wallpaper, mouldings, carpeting, mobiles, cribs, and so on— are rare. Many 
homes, especially in rural areas, are “constructed with mud -plastered wooden walls and 
grass roofs,” and a single room may serve for “ sleeping, keeping all household belongings, 
cooking and dining, keeping warm by burning wood, and also for tethering domes tic 
animals at night” (Animut, Balkew, & Lindtjørn, 2013, p. 2).  A 2011 study showed that 
85% of Ethiopian homes have flooring of earth and sand or dung, and that 70% use one 
room for sleeping. Family beds are the norm. Only 19% of rural households have pi ped 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 151  water and 5% of rural households have electricity. Toilets are often shared among several 
households, even in urban settings  (Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia, 2012 , p. 16).  
This reality stands in contrast to the domestic spaces pictured by Wieh an de Jager 
in I Like to Read . He depicts the protagonist wandering through a home comprised of 
multiple rooms —a living room, nursery, and kitchen—before venturing  out to the front of 
the house, where he finds men fixing a car on a paved driveway (Figure 9). This last detail 
is also incongruent with local context, in consideration of the fact that Ethiopia stands near 
the bottom of the cars -per-capita list globally at 2 or 3 vehicles per 1,000 people (e.g., 
Deloitte, 2016, p. 7).  
 
 
Figure 9. I Like to Rea d, seventh page spread.  
 
Illustrations from I Like to Read  provoked comment among presentation attendees 
about the disjuncture between such images and the reality of Ethiopian settings. 
Participants discussed the challenge of finding a balance between generating culturally 
sensitive reading materials and steering clear of ethnocentrism. One individual emphasized 
that texts should be reflective of and consistent with the particular social context of the 
intended readership. Another agreed, stipulating that w hen children learn to read, it must 
be with culturally relevant materials. There was a clear aversion among many present to 
the concept of generic “readers” (texts designed for learning to read) in contrast to 
authentic, context specific stories. Yet one p erson presented another perspective, 
suggesting that stories serve as means of socialization and can be viewed as vehicles of 
ethnocentrism. This prompted the question: “To what extent should or can stories be bias 
or culture -free?” One speaker argued for the merit of stories designed for literacy learning 
that are transferable across cultures, while another suggested stories such as I Like to Read  
are not artefacts of bias but evidence of Ethiopia’s diversity. Still another claimed that 
ethnocentrism is sy stemic and that an exclusive focus on culturally sensitive texts would 
further promote this perspective.  
In considering these responses, it is important to note that the presentation attendees 
were unaware the story was versioned rather than an original w ork in Amharic. Evaluating 
books from various projects was not the focus of the session; the aim, rather, was to put 
forth more broadly the affordances of digital means of knowledge mobilization for early 
Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 152  literacy education in the Ethiopian context. In making book selections, therefore, we did 
not attend to which stories were versioned and which were originally in Amharic, intending 
merely to flick through screen captures to show that a number of Amharic books were 
available and then to invite attendees to look at the ASb site themselves (a plan the lack of 
connectivity in our seminar room prevented). Ultimately, however, we would suggest it is 
very likely that many ASb readers who make keyword searches for stories in particular 
target languages will not be aware if they encounter “unique” or “versioned” stories. 
Without the presence of clear statements indicating the versioning history of the 
narrative—story biographies, if you will —it would be easy for those readers not attuned to 
the way in which the corpus is produced to overlook metadata and, like our audience, find 
an unexpected disjuncture between the context suggested by the text and the context 
suggested by the illustrations.  
In a report on the African Storybook Project, Welch and Glennie (2016a) sta te that 
versioned stories make up the bulk of the corpus. End- of-month statistics from January 
through June 2015 show the ratio of the number of versioned stories to the number of 
unique stories is consistently greater than 3 to 1 (p. 202). I Like to Read  alone had been 
versioned 35 times at the time of the writing of this paper into a range of languages 
indigenous to Africa and otherwise. Furthermore, the story is typically translated not from 
the Sepedi version, which is given the status of being the orig inal story, but from one of 
two English instantiations. Both are also by the story author, Letta Machoga, but have slight 
lexical variations: I Like to Read and I Love to Read . (Notably, our analysis of the versions 
of I Like to Read  was completed before changes to the ASb interface, effected in early 
April 2017, buried the site metadata, at least for the moment, to the point that it is no longer 
possible to trace the versioning history of stories.)  
Welch and Glennie (2016a) explain that the ASb has activel y pursued translation 
as an effective way to build the corpus, noting that each story can be translated into 
“multiple languages for no cost” and that “workshops with local language speakers have 
proved very effective” (p. 203). They remark in particular on a successful translation 
workshop with 24 participants that produced “65 versions of seven existing stories” (p. 
203). In many ways, this is an exciting initiative. In an ASb blog post on versioning, Dorcus 
Wepukhulu, Kenya -based coordinator for the ASb, observes that translation workshop 
participants become involved in complex discussions about matters of translation, 
pondering appropriateness to context, text level, and so on. They consider, for example, 
whether they are engaging in translation or adapt ation, depending on the extent of the 
nature of changes to the text (e.g., whether the aim is to stay as close to original narrative 
as possible or to adapt for context suitability). They grapple with dialects and regional 
preferences, as well as with the appropriateness of oral or written constructions 
(Wepukhulu, 2016). The language work described by Wepukhulu is clearly careful, but the 
matter of how illustrations are managed through the process of versioning is worrisome. 
Wepukhulu ends her writing pondering this dilemma:  
 
There is the issue of whether I can adapt the text and retain the illustrations or could 
I adapt illustrations and retain the text? At the moment it is not possible to do the 
latter. How can I adapt actions/events in a story without having to adapt illustrations 
. . . ? (Wepukhulu, 2016, n.p.)  Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 153  As we have seen in consideration of I Like to Read , the question is broader than this. Even 
if the translation reflects the source very closely —that is to say, if actions and events are 
unaltered  to the extent that this is possible in translation —a failure to bring illustrations in 
line with the intended context could derail meaning for young readers.  
In texts for emergent and early readers, illustrations are integral to meaning making. 
There is much research in this area that is beyond the scope of this paper; suffice it to say 
that picture books work through the integration of visual and verbal meanings (e.g., Painter, 
Martin, & Unsworth, 2013). E mergent readers use pictures as primary clues to construct 
meaning and may benefit from texts in which images reinforce the verbal meaning (e.g., 
Anderson, Hiebert, Scott & Wilkenson, 1985; Clay, 1993; Harste, Woodward, & Burke, 
1984). Books for more advanced readers may evidence increasingly complex use s of 
illustration to reinforce, extend, or interrogate the verbal aspects of the text (Evans, 2015).  
In spite of a wealth of knowledge about the critical role of images in children’s literature, 
both crowdsourcing projects appear to privilege the verbal ov er the visual elements by 
relying on stock illustrations or promoting image reuse. Bloom Library, a project of global 
scale, offers a curated collection of line drawings, The Art of Reading: “ This free collection 
contains more than 10,000 line drawings sui table for use in reading materials” (Bloom 
Library, 2017). ASb has offered a cost -benefit analysis for image reuse:  
 
An important additional dimension is that it is possible to produce these storybooks 
at a fraction of the cost of original titles because t he illustrations are re -usable, and 
the digital tools exist for publishing of a translation in the same format. The African 
Storybook commissions high quality digital illustrations at an average cost of USD 
100 per 12 -page book. Each translation and adapta tion makes use of the same 
illustrations. So the initial investment in the book is spread across the 20 or more 
versions of the book that are created. In addition, the professional illustrations are 
stored in the African Storybook image bank and can be use d not only for translations 
and adaptations of a storybook, but combined to create new storybooks. (Welch & 
Glennie, 2016b, p. 4)  
 
Although ASb project members report that the stories are “written and illustrated by 
Africans” (Stranger -Johannessen, 2017, p. 27), it is not clear that this is in fact the case.  
Listed illustrators for some books, for instance, are widely accessible image banks and 
Internet image search engines such as Google. Even in the case that illustrators and writers 
are African, the ques tion remains as to whether these illustrations and writings are 
transportable across the exceedingly diverse continent that is Africa, as we have seen in the 
case of I Like to Read . Are the drawings of Weihan De Jager, a white designer and specialist 
in co rporate branding living in South Africa, relevant in settings associated with the many 
languages into which the book has now been translated? Suggesting this should be the case, 
as intimated in the cost analysis above, seems dangerously close to the sort of one -size-
fits-all racial, ethnic, territorial or geopolitical essentialism that has long plagued Africa —
putting what is clearly a valuable project in danger of being cast as an engine of neo-
colonialism. Most certainly this cost- saving strategy runs counter to the ASb goal: 
“Children need to have books in a familiar language, with stories that reflect their context 
and experience, as well as their hopes for the future, so that they can connect with them 
emotionally” (Welch & Glennie, 2016a, p. 195).  Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 154  It is not our intent to dismiss the important work of Bloom Library or the ASb, but 
rather to enter into a conversation about the benefits and drawbacks of various 
methodologies for building a corpus of early reading materials that is highly sensitive to 
cultu ral context. While template -driven production approaches, crowdsourcing, open 
licences, and versioning may build a corpus quickly and at a low cost, they are all Western 
models of knowledge production and mobilization that require careful navigation when 
used for the generation of culturally sensitive literary materials for primarily oral contexts. 
Literary culture, children’s literature, and mass literacy has developed over hundreds of 
years in the global North; ultimately, we wonder, what is the effect of  accelerating the 
process in particular settings with newly literate populations? Evidently there is much work 
to be done in examining the limitations and affordances of various models for this proposed 
work.  
 
Conclusion 
Many have represented low literacy rates in majority world contexts as a crisis, and 
a range of literacy programs have been initiated in response—some of which we have 
discussed in this paper. We view these programs as exceedingly valuable in many ways. 
We also recognize, however, even as we acknowledge our involvement in such projects 
(two of the authors of this paper spearheaded the CODE Ethiopia project described earlier), 
that we must continue to engage in critical conversations about the impacts —both positive 
and negative —of various interventions. As Graff (1979) rightly observed almost four 
decades ago, it is not a given that literacy translates to economic, social, and cultural 
success. On the contrary, literacy is often used by those in authority as the “vehicle for the 
efficient training of the population and the maintenance of hegemony” (Graff, 1979, 236). 
As Luke (2008) has observed, “in contemporary human capital models of education,” 
advocated by institutions such as UNESCO, “levels of literacy c ontinue to be taken as 
robust predictors of economic ‘take -off,’ industrial development and, indeed, 
socioeconomic and political enfranchisement” (p. 247). Wickens and Sandlin (2007) 
suggest that in spite of the fact that the literacy community is fully aw are that literacy is 
inherently political—and that many current programs continue social control —there is a 
persistent suggestion that literacy education is vital in all parts of the globe, even in contexts 
with strong oral traditions. Thus, its absence is  met with panicked movements to address a 
perceived lack as quickly as possible.  
Ultimately, in reference to programs of potential relevance in the Ethiopian context, 
we ask the following questions: What are the implications of initiatives that impose 
Western models of literacy in contexts with strong oral traditions? What is the long -term 
effect of rapid injection of literary materials on emergent communities of literary artists 
and illustrators in local contexts? What are the limitations of current appro aches that lean 
toward template -driven, dual -platform publication and perhaps obscure the possibility of 
multimodal approaches? In contexts where the oral transmission of knowledge prevails, 
are there possibilities for more innovative, multimodal approache s that might harness the 
affordances of digital publication? None of these are easy questions, but they are vital as 
we consider conditions for inclusion and equity across multiple communities, languages, 
forums, and expressive modes within the Ethiopian c ontext and beyond.  
  Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 155  References  
Abebe, A. (2015). eBooks and family literacy programme. Retrieved from UNESCO 
website: http://litbase.uil.unesco.org/?menu=4&programme=219  
African Storybook Project. (2015). Retrieved from http://www.africanstorybook.org/  
Anderson, R., Hiebert, E., Scott, J., & Wilkenson, I. (1985). Becoming a nation of 
readers: The report of the commission on reading . Washington, D.C.: National 
Academy of Education.  
Anderson, R. C., & Pearson, P. D. (1984). A schema -theoretic view of basic p rocesses in 
reading. In P. D. Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of Reading Research (pp. 255– 291). 
New York, NY: Longman.  
Animut, A., Balkew, M., & Lindtjørn, B. (2013). Impact of housing condition on indoor -
biting and indoor -resting Anopheles arabiensis density in a highland area, central 
Ethiopia. Malaria Journal , 12(1), n.p.  
Asselin, M., Doiron, R., & Abebe, A. (2015). Applying an ecological model and 
standards for library development to build literacy in rural Ethiopian 
communities. In B. A. Schultz -Jones & D. Oberg (Eds.), Global action on school 
library guidelines  (Vol. 167), ( pp. 133–152). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter  Saur. 
Bloom Library. (2017). Bloom library landing page. Retrieved from 
http://bloomlibrary.org/  
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature 
and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Bronfenbrenner, U., &  Morris, P. A. (2007). The bioecological model of human 
development. In R. M. Lerner & W. Damon (Eds.), Handbook of child 
psychology: Theoretical models of human development  (Vol. 1, 6th ed., pp. 793–
828). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. DOI: 10.1002/9780470147658.chpsy0114  
Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia. (2010). Population and housing census 2007 
report, national . Retrieved from 
http://catalog.ihsn.org/index.php/catalog/3583/download/50086.  
Central Statistical Agency of Ethiopia. (2012). Ethiopia demographic and health survey 
2011. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: Author. Retrieved from 
https://www.unicef.org/ethiopia/ET_2011_EDHS.pdf  
Clay , M. (1993). An observation survey of early literacy achievement . Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann.  
CODE Ethiopia. (2015). Community libraries supporting family literacy: Using digital 
books for preschool children. Retrieved from 
https://codeethiopiadigitalbooks.wordpress.com/  
Cummins, J. (2001). Bilingual children’s mother tongue: Why is it important for 
education? Sprogforum , 19, 15–20. 
Deloitte (2016). Navigating the African automotive sector: Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria. 
Deloitte Africa Automotive Insights Se ries. Johannesburg, South Africa: Deloitte 
Africa. Retrieved from 
https://www2.deloitte.com/za/en/pages/manufacturing/articles/navigating -the-
african -automotive -sector --ethiopia --kenya -and-ni.html  
Druin, A., Bederson, B., Weeks, A., Farber, A., Grosjean, J ., Guha, M., Hourcade, J. Lee, 
J. Liao, S., Reuter, K., Rose, A., Takayama, Y., & Zhang, L. (2003). The 
international children’s digital library: Description and analysis of first use. First Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 156  Monday , 8(5). Retrieved from 
http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1050/970 
Ethiopian Ministry of Education. (2016). Access and equity in early childhood care and 
education. Retrieved from http://www.moe.gov.et/ge neral -education  
Ethiopian Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. (2010.) Growth and 
Transformation Plan (GTP): 2010/11–2014/15. Retrievable from 
http://www.mofed.gov.et  
Evan, J. (Ed.) (2015). Challenging and controversial picturebooks: Creative and critical 
responses to visual texts . London, UK: Routledge.  
Fox, D. L., & Short, K. G. (2003). Stories matter: The complexity of cultural authenticity 
in children’s literature . Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
Getachew, A., & Derib , A. (2006). Language policy in Ethiopia: History and current 
trends. Ethiopian Journal of Education and Sciences , 2(1), 37–62.  
Government of Ethiopia. (1994). Education and training policy . Addis Ababa: Federal 
Democratic Republic Government of Ethiopia. Retrieved from 
http://www.moe.gov.et/documents/20182/42694/Ethiopia+Education+and+Traini
ng+Policy.pdf/0ce903d9- 3ec7 -43fc-9470- 29655d9864d3 
Graff, H. J. (1979). The literacy myth: Literacy and social structure in the nineteenth-
century city. New York, NY: Academic Press.  
Harste, J. C., Woodward, V. A., & Burke, C. L. (1984). Language stories & literacy 
lessons . Portsmouth, N.H: Heinemann Educational Books.  
Heugh, K., Benson, C., Bogale, B., & Yohannes, M. A. G. (2007). Final report: Study on 
medium of instr uction in primary schools in Ethiopia. Commissioned by the 
Ethiopian Ministry of Education . Mother Tongue Based -Multilingual Education 
Network. Retrieved from 
http://mlenetwork.org/sites/default/files/Final%20report%20study%20on%20Med
ium%20of%20Instruction%20in%20primary%20schools%20in%20Ethiopia%20-
%20Heugh%20et%20al%202007.pdf  
International Children’s Digital Library. (2005, March 7). International children’s digital 
library collection development policy. Retrieved from 
http://en.childrenslibrary.org/about/collection.shtml  
International Children’s Digital Library. (2017). International children’s digital library 
mission statement. Retrieved from 
http://en.childrenslibrary.org/about/mission.shtml  
Jirata, T. J. (2013). Children and oral tradition among the Guji -Oromo in Southern 
Ethiopia. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation.) Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway . Retrieved from 
https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/handle/11250/269081 
Joshi, R., & Verspoor, A. (2012). Secondary education in Ethiopia: Supporting growth 
and transformation. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. DOI:10.1596/978- 0-8213-
9727- 5 
Joyce, M. (1996). Of two minds: Hypertext pedagogy and poetics . Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press.  
Kim, Y. -S. G., Boyle, H. N., Zuilkowski, S. S., & Nakamura, P. (2016). Landscape 
report on early grade literacy. Washington, D.C.: United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID ). Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 157  Luke, A. (2008). On the situated and ambiguous effects of literacy. International Journal 
of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 11(2), 246–249. 
McCann, J. C. (2001). Literacy, orality, and property: Church documents in Ethiopia. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Pr ess. DOI:10.1162/00221950152103919 
Moll, L.C. & Gonzalez, N. (1994). Lessons from research with language minority 
children. Journal of Reading Behaviour , 26, 439–456. Interdisciplinary History , 
32(1), 81–88.  
Moll, L. C., & Greenberg, J.  (1990). Creating zones of possibilities: Combining social 
contexts for instruction. In L. C.  Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and education: 
Instructional implications and applications of sociohistorical  psychology  
(pp. 319–348). Cambridge , UK:  Cambridge University Press.  
Organization of African Unity. (1990). African charter on the rights and welfare of the 
child . Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: Organization of African Unity.  
Painter, C., Martin, J. R., & Unsworth, L. (2013). Reading visual narrati ves: Image 
analysis of children’s picture books . Sheffield, England: Equinox Publishing.  
Porcello, D., & Hsi, S. (2013). Crowdsourcing and curating online education resources. 
Science, 341 (6143), 240– 241. 
Salisbury, M., & Styles, M. (2012). Children’s pict urebooks: The art of visual 
storytelling . London, UK: Laurence King Publishing.  
Scelta, G. F., & Quezzaire- Belle, P. (2001). The comparative origin and usage of the 
Ge’ez writing system of Ethiopia . Unpublished manuscript.  
Smith, L. (2008). The politics of  contemporary language policy in Ethiopia. Journal of 
Developing Societies , 24(2), 207–243.  
Smith, J., & Wiese, P. (2006). Authenticating children’s literature: Raising cultural 
awareness with an inquiry -based project in a teacher education course. Teacher  
Education Quarterly , 33(2), 69–87. 
Stranger -Johannessen, E. (2017). The African Storybook, teachers’ resources, and 
pedagogical practices. International Journal of Educational Development , 52, 26–
36. 
United Nations. (1989). Convention on the rights of the  child . Retrieved from 
http://www.unicef.org/crc/  
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation Institute of 
Statistics (UIS). (2008). International literacy statistics: A review of concepts , 
methodology and current data. Retrieved from 
http://www.uis.unesco.org/Library/Documents/Literacyreport2008_en.pdf  
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultur al Organisation  Institute of 
Statistics (UIS). (2016). Ethiopia. Retrieved from 
http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/ET  
United States Agency for International Development . (2017). Global reading network. 
Retrieved from https://globalreadingnetwork.net/about  
Vujich, D. (2013). Policy and practice on language of instruction in Ethiopian schools 
findings from the young lives school survey. Young lives: An international study 
of childhood poverty . (Working Paper 108). Oxford, UK: Oxford Department of 
International Development. Retrieved from 
https://assets.publishing.servic e.gov.uk/media/57a08a21ed915d3cfd0005de/wp10
8_vujic h_language -of-instruction.pdf  Language and Literacy                       Volume 20, Issue 3, 2018                            Page 158  Welch, T. & Glennie, J. (2016a). Open educational resources for early literacy in Africa: 
The role of the African Storybook Initiative. In Miao, F., Mishra, S., McGreal, R., 
(Eds.), Open educational resources: Policy, costs, transformation (pp. 195 –210). 
Paris, France: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
Welch, T., & Glennie, J. (2016b, November). OER contributing to early literacy in 
Africa: Evide nce from Saide’s African Storybook . Commonwealth of Learning. 
Retrieved from http://oasis.col.org/handle/11599/2534  
Wepukhulu, D. (2016, April 29). What are the issues in translating and versioning stories 
for early reading in local African languages? The African Storybook Project Blog. 
[Web log post].  Retrieved from http://research.africanstorybook.org/wordpress/  
Wickens, C. M., & Sandlin, J. A. (2007). Literacy for what? Literacy for whom? The 
politics of literacy education and neocolonialism in UNESCO and World Bank 
sponsored literacy programs. Adult Education Quarterly , 57(4), 275–292.  
Winslow, S. M. (2015). Ethiopian manuscript culture: Practices and contexts  
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation.) University of Toronto, Canada  