Digital Literacy With EFL Student Teachers: Exploring Indonesian Student Teachers’ Initial 
Perception About Integrating Digital Technologies Into a Teaching Unit
Tati Lathipatud Durriyah*, Muhammad Zuhdi
Fakultas Ilmu Tarbiyah dan Keguruan, Universitas Islam Negeri Syarif Hidayatullah Jakarta, Indonesia
Corresponding author:  Tati Lathipatud Durriyah, E-mail: tati.wardi@uinjkt.ac.id 
ABSTRACT
Research found that many student teachers are active users of digital technologies yet they are 
reluctant to make use of digital technologies for literacy teaching purposes. Efforts to prepare 
student teachers for technology integration are pressingly needed. Also needed is data that 
informs us about student teachers’ participation (engagement) with digital technologies and how 
they might utilize those technologies for literacy teaching. The article reports on a classroom 
research project that explored Indonesian student teachers’ initial perception about the use of 
digital technologies for EFL teaching. For one semester, the first author taught a course to a 
group of student teachers at a state Islamic university in Jakarta in which they learned conceptual 
and practical knowledge about digital technologies in teaching and learning. The student teachers 
were tasked to explore digital technologies available and had to integrate those technologies into 
teaching units contained in a junior high English textbook. Popular digital technologies selected 
included Facebook, blogs, Skype, and WhatsApp. Each offers unique potential to facilitate and 
enhance language learning. Student reflections provided insight into their considerations for their 
digital technology selections.
Key words:  Digital Literacy, Qualitative, Student Teachers, EFL, Indonesia
INTRODUCTION
Acquiring literacy is fundamental for one’s development. 
People whose literacy skills are developed are more likely 
to explore and reach their potential (UNESCO, 2006). The 
International Literacy Association (ILA), an authoritative 
world literacy organization, publishes on their website a 
definition of literacy:
 Literacy is the ability to identify, understand, interpret, 
create, compute, and communicate using visual, audi -
ble, and digital materials across disciplines and in any 
context. The ability to read, write, and communicate 
connects people to one another and empowers them to 
achieve things they never thought possible (para.1)
The statement highlights two important points. First, the lit -
eracy teaching currently needed should enable people to com -
municate and connect. Second, people currently use various 
modes of communication including text, audio, graph ics, and 
video. This literacy definition encompasses literacy engage -
ment—also an aspect of digital literacy as students engage with 
digital contexts (e.g., digital technologies). Literacy engage -
ment here is understood to be the manner in which students 
engage in learning (participate) using those contexts (Hafner, 
Chik, & Jones, 2015). It is clear, then, that teaching literacy 
skills that enable people to communicate and connect through 
such modes is a key that drives current literacy education.
Published by Australian International Academic Centre PTY .LTD.  
Copyright (c) the author(s). This is an open access article under CC BY license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)  
http://dx.doi.org/10.7575/aiac.ijels.v.6n.3p.53Indonesian students’ literacy skills are unfortunately not 
well developed. USAID (2008) reported that many Indone -
sian K-12 students displayed low critical thinking ability—
they lacked the ability to reflect and evaluate information 
presented to them. This ability is paramount for students to 
be academically and professionally advanced (Spires & Bart -
lett, 2012). Spires and Bartlett contend that in an increasing -
ly digital environment, students must acquire digital literacy 
skills that enable them to select and use digital tools that are 
suitable  for their purposes. Echoing ILA, Spires and Bartlett 
view digital literacy as “a wide-ranging set of practices that 
enable students to create, share, and understand meaning and 
knowledge” in a digital environment (2012, p. 6).
According to ILA’s 2018 report, digital literacy tops the 
list as the most prescient topic to be addressed in literacy 
education. The report surveyed and interviewed research -
ers and literacy educators from around the world. The re -
port also noted that there should be more attention given 
to strategic efforts for excellent literacy education. One of 
those efforts involves teacher preparation that equips student 
teachers with skills to foster students’ literacy development. 
Specifically one that is concerned with digital technology.
To our knowledge, studies that attempted to investigate 
Indonesian student teachers’ use of digital technology for 
teaching and learning are small in number, and they tend to International Journal of Education & Literacy Studies
ISSN: 2202-9478 
www.ijels.aiac.org.au
ARTICLE INFO
Article history  
Received: January 30, 2018  
Accepted: July 21, 2018  
Published: July 31, 2018  
V olume: 6 Issue: 3  
Conflicts of interest: None  
Funding: None54 IJELS 6(3):53-60
be quite specific in terms of the use of digital technologies 
(e.g., Rodliyah, 2016). Our research is explorative in the 
sense that we asked student teachers about their preferred 
digital technologies when planning to teach. We claim that 
there is a large gap between the available research and our 
need to be informed about digital technology use among stu -
dent teachers.
Objectives and Research Questions
In this research, we sought to address a question related to 
the digital technology use within a teacher education pro -
gram. We were interested in investigating the learning expe -
riences of student teachers enrolled in a course titled Media 
and Language Learning. The course goal was to educate stu -
dent teachers about teaching a subject (English) that is in -
formed by digital literacy. Specifically, our research aimed to 
investigate the student teachers’ perception about the use of 
digital technologies as they learned about theories and prac -
tices related to the use of digital technologies in teaching and 
learning. Our guiding questions were:
1. What kind of digital technologies would student teach -
ers select to integrate into their teaching plan?
2. What were their considerations when selecting digital 
technologies for teaching and learning?
Digital Literacy and Teacher Education
Research on digital literacy is well documented (e.g., Coiro, 
et al., 2008). Recent developments have provided us with 
information about some digital literacy roles in literacy ed -
ucation. Major reports such as the Cambridge Assessment 
Report summarized several conclusions concerning digital 
literacy in literacy education. First, literacy education should 
encompass the teaching of print, media literacy, and digital 
technology. Second, literature is at the core of literacy teach -
ing, and it should be taught within the context of digital dis -
course (Cambridge Assessment, 2013). These conclusions 
emphasize that digital literacy is a vitally important skill that 
students in the digital age should acquire.
What counts as digital literacy? Spires and Bartlett (2012) 
simplify the scope of digital literacy into three categories: 
finding and utilizing digital content, producing  digital con -
tent, and disseminating digital content. These categories 
highlight complex skills and abilities that students must 
obtain. Skills such as critical thought and value judgment 
are very important for locating and utilizing digital content. 
Likewise, creativity, innovation, and understanding of socio -
logical context are very critical for producing and dissemi -
nating digital contents.
A number of studies have explored digital literacy in 
the context of teacher education. Price-Dennis (2016) and 
Price-Dennis and colleagues (2014) investigated some ef -
forts to prepare student teachers to integrate technology into 
literacy teaching. Their findings reveal a gap between the 
availability and use of digital technologies in classrooms. 
The sentiment is shared by literacy researchers with similar 
interests (Bauer & Kenton, 2005; Doering, Hughes, & Huff -
man, 2003; Koc & Bakir, 2010; Lei, 2009; Wright & Wilson, 2011). This gap in technology use is concerning when con -
sidering that technology is available and a part of students’ 
daily lives. Additionally, a lack of accommodation of digital 
technologies use in a teacher education program will not help 
student teachers to imagine how a pedagogy that involves 
digital technologies can be structured and implemented in 
an established learning environment (classrooms). Although 
limited in number, available research notably demonstrates 
that student teachers tend to be more sensitive to the use of 
digital technologies when they are accustomed to and are 
active users of the digital technologies (Collier, Foley, Mo -
guel & Barnard, 2013; Hundley & Holbrook, 2013; Williams 
& Baumann, 2008). We may conclude that what is pressing 
in promoting digital technologies in teacher education is the 
effort to instruct student teachers to learn “about, through, 
and with technology” (Cervetti, Damico, & Pearson, 2006, 
p. 383), including instruction on how to be active participant 
in digital literacy practices (Hundley & Holbrook, 2013). 
Meanwhile, other studies also present us with the possibility 
of managing an online learning environment (Juzwik et al., 
2012) and its relation to promoting student teachers’ confi -
dence in writing skill (Norman & Spencer, 2005).
To summarize, the aforementioned research has informed 
us that it is crucial for teachers to be active users of digital 
technologies in order to benefit from them. Included in those 
benefits is the use of digital technologies within a learning 
environment that enables student teachers to increase their 
confidence in literacy skill learning.
METHODS
Context and Participants
Our research utilized a qualitative paradigm and took place 
within an undergraduate English education program at 
a state affiliated Islamic university in Jakarta. For one se -
mester, the first author taught a course called Media and 
 Language Learning. The 35 enrolled student research par -
ticipants could be described as active users of leading social 
media platforms. For instance, a quick survey conducted at 
the beginning of the course showed that all student teach -
er participants had Facebook accounts and were actively 
logged in. All of them owned digital technology devices 
such as laptops and smartphones, enabling them to access 
digital information and data using a wireless network.
The Course and Data Sources
The course content encompassed basic discussions of tech -
nology in teaching, different kinds of technology, and dig -
ital literacy and its teaching application. The course aimed 
to promote development of Indonesian student teachers’ 
digital literacy. In order to do that, course goals empha -
sized building the student teachers’ conceptual and practi -
cal knowledge about teaching English through the use of 
modern technology. To facilitate this process, the student 
teachers were assigned the text Teaching English Language 
Learners Through Technology  by Erben, Ban, and Castañe -
da (2009). Each week they took turns leading the book Digital Literacy With EFL Student Teachers: Exploring Indonesian Student  
Teachers’ Initial Perception About Integrating Digital Technologies Into a Teaching Unit 55
discussion. Selected chapters from Dudeney, Hockly, and 
Pegrum’s (2013) Digital Literacies  were also assigned and 
discussed to broaden the perspective about technology use 
in teaching that would include digital literacy, especially the 
idea of creating and sharing digital contents. The course as -
signments were directly tied to the use of media technology 
for language learning. They included writing weekly reflec -
tive papers on the readings and classroom discussions. The 
student teachers were assigned to expand teaching units by 
integrating digital technologies relevant to each unit. Work -
ing in groups, they used a grade seven English textbook (an 
official Kurikulum 2013 textbook) to exercise their working 
understanding about technology and learning by way of in -
fusing relevant technologies into units of teaching contained 
in the textbook. The students were encouraged to explore 
available and familiar technology and to make sense of how 
those technologies might be beneficial for learning. All of 
these assignments were submitted to the instructor in both 
paper and electronic copies. The copies become the data 
sources for this research.
Digital Literacy Focus
Digital literacy in relation to the teaching of English in this 
research focused on the integration of digital technologies 
into language teaching (Dudeney et al., 2013; Hockly, 2013). 
In Hockly’s work entitled  Digital Literacies: What are They 
and Why Should We Care?,  Hockly argues that it is impera -
tive for language teachers to teach media literacy skills and 
digital competencies (digital literacy or an “ability to effec -
tively make use of the technologies at our disposal” (2013, 
para. 2). Beyond simply gaining practical technical skills, 
Hockly asserts that digital literacy in EFL teaching will en -
able students to use and create digital products and connect 
to wider audiences of fellow digital readers and writers.
Data Analysis
To analyze our data, we followed a tradition of Grounded 
Theory which enabled us to approach data organically and 
minimize certain theoretical assumptions. We used Ground -
ed Theory’s general principles as put forward by Strauss and 
Corbin (Glesne, 2006) of re-reading the data sources for the 
identification of themes, re-analyzing the data by continu -
ously comparing themes across data (constant comparative 
method), and then using open coding to identify themes and 
patterns of data.
Overall, this process included four phases: first, compar -
ing results with emerging themes; second, testing and rede -
fining the themes; third, continuing to reduce the number of 
themes; and fourth, constructing explanatory theory position 
data.
In the first phase, we categorized our coding following 
a wide range of themes, including the four language skills 
(listening, reading, speaking, and writing) and vocabulary 
teaching. Second, as we coded we learned that a number 
of digital technologies were frequently found across the 
themes. For instance, Facebook was found in the themes of 
writing, reading, and vocabulary teaching. We also collapsed the initial themes that separated technologies being used as 
a tool for instruction and being used for learning activities; 
instead, we focused on describing activities that student 
teachers performed with digital technologies. Therefore, as 
a result of reduction in the third phase, we focused on the 
themes that specified explicitly the kinds of digital technol -
ogies that student teachers preferred in the activities within 
their lessons. Finally, we connected the themes with theo -
retical justification. For instance, in explaining the student 
teachers’ preference for learning in a Facebook closed group 
space (they used it as an electronic classroom that allows 
anyone to engage in active participation), we referred to a 
theory that highlights the importance of providing language 
learners with many opportunities/spaces to use their lan -
guage productively and meaningfully (Erben et al., 2009).
In every phase of data collection and analysis, our goal 
was the data would present us literacy teaching that emerged 
from data sources collected from research participants. Spe -
cifically, we focused on digital literacy put forward earlier by 
Hockley that entails the “ability to effectively make use of 
the technologies at our disposal” (2013, para. 2). We want -
ed to know which of many accessible teaching technologies 
the student teachers preferred as shown within their lesson 
plans.
We then narrated the final themes while guided by these 
research questions: What kind of digital technologies would 
student teachers select to integrate into their teaching plan? 
and What were their considerations when selecting digital 
technologies for teaching and learning?
RESULTS
The main themes that we highlighted from our data involved 
digital technology use for teaching. More specifically, our 
data suggest that the digital technologies appeared to have 
great potential for teaching English language skills. In show -
ing the findings, we discuss the amounts of data that corre -
spond to digital technologies being selected—answering the 
question: What kind of digital technologies would student 
teachers select to integrate into their teaching plan?  Embed -
ded in the discussion are student teachers’ considerations for 
selecting those technologies, answering the question: What 
were their considerations when selecting digital technolo -
gies for teaching and learning?  Our findings discussion will 
follow the following order: Facebook closed groups, blogs, 
Skype (and other V oIPs), and WhatsApp.
Facebook Closed Group
Of all the features in Facebook, a Facebook closed group 
was the student teachers’ most preferred digital technology. 
Creating a closed group is the first step to transform Face -
book into a space for teaching and learning activities. Many 
student teachers in this research claimed that a Facebook 
closed group is an ideal place to facilitate e-classrooms  as 
the platform enables students to have interactive discussions .
According to our student teachers, a Facebook closed 
group offers experiences found in typical online classrooms 
(online class environment). They are free to ‘post’ from a 56 IJELS 6(3):53-60
wide variety of digital formats such as videos and news 
links. They can invite others for discussion in the ‘comment’ 
section. Similar to a regular class, students in a Facebook 
group can conveniently perform activities such as getting 
information from students, disseminating information, and 
reviewing books with ease. Students just need to copy a link 
and share it to a group wall. Images, videos, and video links 
from Youtube can all be posted, and all of these can be used 
for classroom discussion. Students can also post an elec -
tronic document, for example, as part of a class assignment 
submission; they can submit their assignments by upload -
ing electronic copies onto a group wall. They would then 
‘tag’ the teacher to notify him or her that the assignment has 
been submitted. Similarly, teachers can also tag any students 
whose assignments have not been submitted. Many student 
teachers found this seemingly transparent process exciting 
and motivating. For one, they are able to read classmates’ 
work. Furthermore, they enjoyed participating in the Face -
book group since it opened wide opportunities for students to 
comment and to give ‘likes’ (a thumbs-up icon). They argued 
that teachers will benefit from having opportunities available 
to provide additional teaching resources beyond the textbook 
by sharing digital content to a Facebook group wall. A  stu-
dent teacher succinctly stated these aforementioned potential 
benefits of a Facebook closed group as follows: “ Facebook 
closed group as an online platform can be used as a place 
to share materials, discussions between teachers, students 
(and colleagues), collect assignments, and other activities .”
The student teachers felt that a Facebook group’s most 
useful feature lies in its ability to provide a space for inter -
active discussion. One type of interactive discussion they 
planned to do in a Facebook group would look like the fol -
lowing: the teacher writes on a group wall questions related 
to a song and students then comment on these questions (the 
song should have been played earlier in classroom). In an -
other case, the teacher uploads a set of images with differ -
ent expressions which then students will comment on with 
narrative descriptions for each one of those images. Other 
interactive discussions may occur when students exchange 
comments or give feedback on assignments that their class -
mates upload on the group wall. Students will gain benefits 
from both exercising their writing skills as well as learning 
from classmates. For teachers, activities such as these will 
allow them to monitor students’ writing skill development.
Continuing the example activity above, student teachers 
in this study planned an activity involving writing a descrip -
tion about a range of different expressions. They would then 
ask specifically for students to write a descriptive piece using 
adjectives. Other students would have a chance to comment 
on each adjectival description and state which one they found 
well written. Student teachers felt that this peer commenting 
and ‘liking’ would motivate their students to do their best in 
order to earn positive feedback. In short, student teachers in 
this study appeared to be convinced that a Facebook group 
is a good space for interactive activities. Similarly, the stu -
dent teachers suggested that the use of a Facebook group to 
enhance student learning could be maximized. Most specifi -
cally, they planned to use online groups to extend the limited hours of classroom instruction. In their teaching plan, they 
assigned after school online work to maintain the interactive 
discussion about topics yet to be mastered/comprehended by 
students.
Student teachers also expressed feeling less intimidated  
within the Facebook group, and they felt this more com -
fortable  space increased their potential for learning. They 
reflected on their own experiences as active Facebook users 
and noted that they could express their opinions more freely 
there than in a typical classroom. As one student teacher re -
marked, “ We prefer Facebook because in here students tend 
to be active and free to express an opinion when asked by 
teachers .” Many confessed that they often feel too embar -
rassed or intimidated to share opinions in class. One student 
teacher claimed that “ Facebook has an ability to encourage 
students so that they feel comfor table  to express opinions 
without fearing of making mistakes .”
Blogs
Blogs (weblogs or online journals) were quite popular 
among student teachers. Many maintained a blog and wrote 
regularly about a variety of topics that interested them. They 
seemed to nurture their writing habit on a blog, so it is not 
surprising that a blog’s potential for writing skill develop -
ment appeared obvious for many of them. Creating a blog 
involves establishing an account with a blogging platform. 
Many student teachers mentioned Blogspot.com, Wordpress.
com, and Wattpad as popular sites in Indonesia. Some of the 
writing-related activities they planned to do included explor -
ing different  genres of writing . Student teachers discussed 
having their students study the descriptive writing genre by 
writing about their favorite singers. Other genre writing such 
as poetry could be based upon a theme of their choice such as 
parents, friends, and teachers. Student teachers also planned 
to ask students to complete an interactive dialogue activi -
ty on a blog. First students would write a dialogue from a 
picture depicting settings, characters, or an activity). They 
would then write their version of dialogue on their own blog. 
Later, students would visit their classmates’ blogs and leave 
comments, suggestions, and perhaps alternative dialogues. 
The students could use classmates’ feedback and comments 
to revise their writing. Another interactive writing idea 
was to have students develop a letter for correspondence 
to a classmate (letter writing). Unlike the previous activity, 
students would publish a revised letter on their blog. They 
would address it to a classmate whom they intend to become 
a letter recipient.
Student teachers also proposed a blog activity for reading 
and writing connection  (Lee, 2015). The planned teaching 
process would begin with students responding to a reading. 
Through the written summarizing or retelling, student com -
prehension would be apparent, and their writing progress 
within the blog posts would be evident. Their gradual writing 
process would be documented on the blog from beginning to 
final draft. In this case, documenting their writing process on 
a blog would enable students to have a firsthand experience 
of writing as a process and give them control and responsi -
bility for their writing process (a sense of writing ownership).Digital Literacy With EFL Student Teachers: Exploring Indonesian Student  
Teachers’ Initial Perception About Integrating Digital Technologies Into a Teaching Unit 57
Including blogs in their teaching plans may seem natural 
as the student teachers have already used blogs to write and 
document their thoughts and feelings. When blogging, they 
include hashtags (defined by Merriam-Webster web dictio -
nary as “a word or phrase preceded by the symbol # that clas -
sifies or categorizes the accompanying text”). Incorporating 
hashtags within these digital platforms such as Wattpad 
gives them a sense of connection to others who have simi -
lar interests. Clicking on hashtags takes them to other blogs 
where they are able to learn and be inspired by other peo -
ple’s writing. Having a personal space through a blog and 
at the same time wanting to connect with others seemed to 
dominate the student teachers’ preference to integrate blog 
technology into a teaching plan.
Skype
Skype  and other similar V oIPs (V oice over Internet Protocol), 
a digital technology used for live verbal communication via 
the Internet, is popular in Indonesia. The student teachers 
in this study identified Skype’s potential for learning, espe -
cially as a tool to exercise students’ oral English proficiency 
(Erben et al., 2009). Categorized as synchronous technology, 
Skype needs an Internet connection to function. An ideal use 
of Skype for learning is an activity that happens in real-time 
(live) where being spontaneous is part of the learning pro -
cess, as with speaking skills. The student teachers felt Skype 
would work well as a tool for oral English proficiency prac -
tice with peers. Using a Skype-installed smartphone that 
connects to the Internet, students would be able to conve -
niently practice with partners. One student, a regular user of 
Skype and similar V oIPs, cited the popularity of Skype and 
its potential for learning when endorsing the practice: “ For 
teaching speaking skill, I suggest Skype and Google hang -
outs since these two are commonly used in Indonesia. When 
I was in high school my friend and I often used Skype and 
Google hangouts for video call. I think they are also sui table  
for teacher to use the tools both as training and assessing 
speaking skill .”
Skype is also commonly used for conferencing. The stu -
dent teachers preferred Skype technology for its ease of in -
stallation on personal technology devices like laptops and 
smartphones. In addition to its clear voice quality, they ar -
gued that Skype has features that enable them to have a con -
ference in a group (group conference).
WhatsApp
An instant messaging platform, WhatsApp’ s popularity is 
credited to its affordability, immediacy, flexibility of space 
(could contain a long text), and a sense of community 
(Church & Oliveira, 2013). These factors about WhatsApp 
were confirmed in the present study as student teachers 
explained how they planned to take advantage of using 
WhatsApp for teaching and learning purposes. First, they re -
ferred to a ‘group’ feature in WhatsApp that allows them to 
communicate and disseminate information to invited mem -
bers (typically created exclusively for a range of different 
interests). A  WhatsApp group makes it possible for members to distribute documents, video clips, photos, and links to oth -
er sites or information, and even to broadcast news to much 
wider audiences. The following quote is from a student 
teacher describing how she planned to infuse WhatsApp into 
a classroom activity.
	 A	teacher	asks	students	to	go	out	classroom	 to	find	a	
room similar to the description in the book or that have 
been discussed. Students will take a note what they will 
be	findings.	Working	in	a	group,	they	are	free	to	look	for	
a room with a sui table  description. During the search -
ing time, the teacher and students will be connected via 
WhatsApp in one of their digital devices (smartphone 
or Ipad). Using WhatsApp students will share what they 
have found (images and description). After the time is 
up and images being searched are collected, students 
will write a description about each one of the pictures.
The use of WhatsApp in the above activity is not only as 
an immediate communication tool during a dynamic group 
activity, but also as a detailed and transparent process during 
the time students are con figuring their understanding (learn -
ers’ community).
Student teachers enjoyed WhatsApp for its intimacy 
and for the communal experience. They maintained that 
they formed a sense of community when they were in a 
WhatsApp group. This sense of community and intimacy 
within WhatsApp differed from their Facebook group ex -
perience where they felt less privacy. However, the student 
teachers agreed that WhatsApp carries some limitations for 
learning—more so than other technologies like Facebook, 
for instance. In WhatsApp, users have to download videos 
within messages in order to watch them; this is not the case 
with Facebook where users can watch videos instantly from 
the Facebook page. Student teachers also found WhatsApp 
message threads somewhat overwhelming and hard to fol -
low. They were skeptical about using WhatsApp for class -
room discussion and considered a Facebook group to be 
more preferable and conducive for learning.
DISCUSSIONS
This research sought to explore Indonesian student teachers’ 
initial perceptions about digital technologies for teaching 
and learning. Our report focused on digital technologies that 
they selected to include in their teaching plans as well as 
their ideas for including them. When selecting those digital 
technologies, the student teachers referred to their personal 
experiences when explaining what made these technologies 
potential tools for teaching and learning. In other words, 
these digital technologies emerged organically among these 
research participants. For discussions, we will focus on con -
necting the findings with research about potential digital 
technologies that confirms our exploratory research findings. 
We intend to show that the potential of the student teacher 
selected digital technologies has also been found in other 
research contexts and approaches beyond the present study.
The student teachers’ inclusion of Facebook in their 
teaching plans reveals information that echoes the analysis 
advanced by Manca and Ranieri (2013), two Italian schol -
ars who conducted a meta-review analysis on the use of 58 IJELS 6(3):53-60
 Facebook for learning. We will use their review as a refer -
ence in discussing our Facebook findings. (a) Facilitating 
e-classrooms.  Our findings confirmed Manca and Ranieri’s 
review on studies about the way in which a Facebook group 
and some of its identifiable characteristics are useful as a 
learning space. The characteristics that they identified in -
clude being able to share learning resources, to leave com -
ments, to write on walls, and to initiate discussions. The fact 
that a Facebook group provided features such as these deems 
it a good space for learning. (b) Having interactive discus -
sion. To some extent, this finding echoes Manca and Ran -
ieri’s conclusion that a Facebook group’s use for learning 
is overwhelmingly for interactive discussions. Furthermore, 
they have an interesting finding that in having an interactive 
discussion in a Facebook group, students appear to bene -
fit from learning from each other (mutual learning), which 
makes them more aware of exercising critical thinking. (c) 
Providing a safe and less intimidating space . This confirms 
Manca and Ranieri’s research review which concludes that 
Facebook is one digital technology that is able to provide 
supports and facilities to learn as while on Facebook, stu -
dents tend to freely participate, discuss, and share informa -
tion. They also tend to be more open to discussion. Addition -
ally, in some cases, English language learners participated 
and interacted more online than in traditional classrooms 
where they tend to be passive due to language barriers and 
social pressures.
Our blog findings, especially when pertaining to the stu -
dent teachers’ suggestion that they had more sense of own -
ership, echo the research finding by Ducate and Lomicka 
(2008). Ducate and Lomicka’s research showed that a blog 
appears to be helpful skill practice for students who are 
learning to write in a foreign language. Their findings about 
the advantages of writing on a blog are especially evident in 
providing learners a strong sense of belonging and writing 
creativity (ownership and creativity). Ducate and Lomicka 
also point to other benefits of blogs for students; students 
appear to be comfor table  on their blog experimenting with 
language use, a crucial factor in mastering a new language. 
In short, writing on a blog gave students a space where they 
felt more relaxed in experimenting and exercising expres -
sions while learning a foreign language. At the same time, 
though, a blog is by default a public space (unless the set -
ting is changed to private). In this case, a foreign language 
learner who feels comfor table  writing on a blog is somewhat 
connected to teachers and classmates who are able to leave 
comments and offer suggestions. This finding is similar to 
the present study about including tags (hashtags) in a blog 
posting in order to connect with others who share interests.
The student teachers in the study noted Skype’s poten -
tial benefit for developing students’ verbal ability—as in this 
case, oral English proficiency. A  question whether Skype 
presents itself as beneficial for language learning was ex -
amined in an experimental research by Japanese researchers 
Kato, Spring, and Maori (2016) where they assigned con -
trol and experimental groups of students who learned for -
eign languages (English and Japanese). The researchers used 
Skype as a support to provide a meaningful experience in an authentic environment. In using Skype, both groups had na -
tive partners in respective language (American students with 
Japanese native partners and Japanese with American part -
ners) with whom they practiced using structures and activi -
ties developed by the researchers. Their findings showed sta -
tistically significant improvement of communication skills 
(listening and speaking skills) in both groups of language 
learning students. When they communicated, they tended to 
talk longer and were able to respond to the target language 
being spoken. Especially with American students studying 
Japanese, the improvement showed in their ability to speak 
with more varied vocabularies and longer sentences. In 
contrast, control students of both language groups who re -
ceived no Skype practices showed little improvement. Also, 
their qualitative findings explanation is quite convincing in 
affirming the benefits of using Skype as a medium for lan -
guage learning development.
This study’s student teachers appreciated WhatsApp’s 
ability to offer a sense of immediacy and intimacy in a learn -
ing activity. To some extent, WhatsApp serves as a window 
that gives us insights about the student teachers’ personal 
agency in the learning process as well as insights about their 
social interactions and collaborations with others (Dabbagh 
& Kitsantas, 2012). This is perhaps what British researchers 
O’Hara and colleagues (2014) called a process of ‘doings’ 
in WhatsApp where members build connections by shar -
ing brief notes and short narrations and sharing light mo -
ments by communicating thoughts, feelings, news, photos, 
videos, and links. O’Harra and colleagues contend that the 
use of WhatsApp for such activities fits the description of 
a ‘dwelling ’ place in which WhatsApp is a digital platform 
where people/members enjoy being involved in dynam -
ic discussions that cover a wide range of topics and inter -
ests—“dwelling is not simply a place but a ‘doing’ and needs 
to be seen as constituted by things done and felt endlessly in 
the moment-by-moment of togetherness and directionality” 
(p. 11).
CONCLUSIONS
Earlier we cited English teaching specialist Nicky Hockly 
(2013) who insisted that English teachers should incorporate 
digital literacy, competency in digital technologies use, into 
teaching. Our semester long data revealed insights pointing 
to a number of advantages as perceived by the Indonesian 
EFL student teachers. The student teachers in this research 
agreed that digital technologies like a Facebook closed group 
offer inviting environments for students to participate; stu -
dents feel safe to share thoughts in a Facebook closed group. 
Classrooms that integrate digital technologies have a good 
chance to foster students’ ownership in developing writing 
skill (blogs) and to develop spontaneous and authentic oral 
communication (Skype). Finally, student teachers felt that 
the ability of messaging platforms like WhatsApp to offer 
intimacy and immediacy provides the potential to nurture a 
dynamic community of learners where feelings of together -
ness and accessibility are expected. As the authors’ final note, 
the digital technologies mentioned above are categorized as 
synchronous—technology requiring users to be “online at the Digital Literacy With EFL Student Teachers: Exploring Indonesian Student  
Teachers’ Initial Perception About Integrating Digital Technologies Into a Teaching Unit 59
same time in order to communicate in real time” (Erben et al., 
2009, p. 84). This online connectivity requirement may be an 
issue for students in Indonesia who like the student teachers 
in this research would likely be dependent on the free wireless 
network available on a school/university campus. Otherwise, 
they would have to ration their use of limited Internet data 
from smartphones. We are suggesting this as a point of con -
sideration for teachers who are interested in exploring digital 
technology integration into their teaching. Finally, the present 
study limits its discussion on student teachers’ engagement 
with digital technologies for teaching. Therefore, we decided 
that concerns related to data privacy and online security were 
beyond the scope of the current discussion.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research for this paper was supported by Pusat Penelitian 
dan Penerbitan (Puslitpen) Universitas Islam Negeri Jakarta.
REFERENCES
Bauer, J., & Kenton, J. (2005). Toward technology integra -
tion in the schools: Why it isn’t happening. Journal of 
Technology and Teacher Education , 13(4), 519-546.
Cambridge Assessment. (2013). What is literacy? An investiga -
tion into definitions of English as a subject and the relation -
ship between English, literacy and ‘being literate.’ A Re -
search Report Commissioned by Cambridge Assessment.
Cervetti, G., Damico, J., & Pearson, P. D. (2006). Multiple 
literacies, new literacies, and teacher education. Theory 
into Practice , 45(4), 378-386.
Church, K. & de Oliveira, R. (2013). What’s up with 
WhatsApp? Comparing mobile instant messaging be -
haviors with traditional SMS. Mobile HCI 2013–Col -
laboration and Communication . Retrieved from https://
pdfs.semanticscholar.org/3ea1/9dcbe7c8fcde728f -
546d96543ae9e2aa8d07.pdf
Coiro, J., Knobel, M., Lankshear, C., & Leu, D. J. (2008). 
Handbook of research on new literacies . New York: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Collier, S., Foley, B., Moguel, D., & Barnard, I. (2013). Write 
for your life: Developing digital literacies and writing 
pedagogy in teacher education. Contemporary Issues in 
Technology and Teacher Education, 13 (3), 262-284.
Dabbagh, N., & Kitsantas, A. (2012). Personal Learning En -
vironments, social media, and self-regulated learning: 
A natural formula for connecting formal and informal 
learning. Internet and Higher Education , 15(1), 3-8.
Doering, A., Hughes, J., & Huffman, D. (2003). Pre-service 
teachers: Are we thinking with technology? Journal of 
Research on Technology in Education, 35 (3), 342–362.
Ducate, L., & Lomicka, L. (2008). Adventures in the blogo -
sphere: From blog readers to blog writers. Computer As -
sisted Language Learning , 21(1), 9–28.
Dudeney, G., Hockly, N., & Pegrum, M. (2013). Digital lit -
eracies . Harlow: Pearson
Erben, T., Ban, R., & Castañeda, M. E. (2009). Teaching En -
glish language learners through technology . New York: 
Routledge.Glesne, C. (2006). Becoming qualitative researchers: An in -
troduction . Boston: Pearson Education Press.
Hafner, C. A., Chik, A., & Jones, R. H. (2015). Digital lit -
eracies and language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology , 19(3), 1–7. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.
edu/issues/october2015/commentary.pdf
Hashtag. 2018. In Merriam-Webster.com. Retrieved March 
29, 2018, from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dic -
tionary
Hockly, N. (2013, 29 April). Digital literacies: What are they 
and why should we care? Retrieved from https://www.
teachingenglish.org.uk/article/digital-literacies-what-
are-they-why-should-we-care
Hundley, M., & Holbrook, T. (2013). Set in stone or set in 
motion?: Multimodal and digital writing with pre-ser -
vice English teachers. Journal of Adolescent & Adult 
Literacy , 56(6), 500-509.
International Literacy Association. (2018) What’s hot in 
literacy: 2018 report. Retrieved from https://www.liter -
acyworldwide.org/docs/default-source/resource-docu -
ments/whats-hot-2018-report.pdf
International Literacy Association. (2016) Why literacy? Re -
trieved from http://www.literacyworldwide.org/why-lit -
eracy
Juzwik, M. M., Sherry, M. B., Caughlan, S., Heintz, A., 
Borsheim-Black, C., Auerbach, S., & Herbst, P. (2012). 
Supporting dialogically organized instruction in an En -
glish teacher preparation program: A  video-based, Web 
2.0-mediated response and revision pedagogy. Teachers 
College Record , 114(3), 1-42.
Kato, F., Spring, R., & Mori, C. (2016). Mutually benefin -
ical foreign language learning: Creating meaningful 
interactions through video-synchronous computer medi -
ated communication. Foreign Language Annals , 49(2). 
355-366.
Koc, M., & Bakir, N. (2010). A  needs assessment survey to 
investigate pre-service teachers’ knowledge, experienc -
es and perceptions about preparation to using education -
al technologies. The Turkish Online Journal of Educa -
tional Technology , 9(1), 13-22.
Lee, S. (2015). Joining the ‘literacy club’: When reading 
meets blogging. ELT Journal , 69(4), 373-382.
Lei, J. (2009). Digital natives as pre-service teachers: What 
technology preparation is needed. Journal of Computing 
in Teacher Education , 25(3), 87-97.
Manca, S., & Ranieri, M. (2013). Is it a tool sui table  for 
learning? A critical review of the literature on Facebook 
as a technology-enhanced learning environment . Jour -
nal of Computer Assisted Learning , 29(6), 487-504.
Norman, K.A., & Spencer, B.H. (2005). Our lives as writ -
ers: Examining preservice teachers’ experiences and be -
liefs about the nature of writing and writing instruction. 
Teacher Education Quarterly , 32(1), 25-40.
O’Hara, K., Massimi, M., Harper, R., Rubens. S., & Morris, 
J. (2014). Everyday dwelling With WhatsApp. Retrieved 
from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp- 
content/uploads/2014/03/WhatsAppCSCW2014paper.
pdf60 IJELS 6(3):53-60
Price-Dennis, D. (2016). Developing curriculum to support 
black girls’ literacies in digital spaces. English Educa -
tion, 48(4), 337-360.
Price-Dennis, D., Wiebe, M. T., & Fowler-Amato, M. (2014). 
Learning to develop a culturally relevant approach to 
21st century writing instruction.  Teaching/Writing: The 
Journal of Writing Teacher Education , 3(2). Retrieved 
from http://scholarworks.wmich.edu/wte/vol3/iss2/5
Rodliyah, R. S. (2016). Using a Facebook closed group to 
improve EFL students’ writing. TEFLIN Journal, 27 (1), 
82-99.
Spires, H. A., & Bartlett, M.E. (2012) Digital Literacies and 
Learning: Designing a Path Forward . The William & 
Ida Friday Institute, North Carolina State University.
UNESCO Report. (2006). Indonesian Ministry of Education. 
Paper commissioned for the EF A Global Monitoring Re -port 2006, Literacy for Life . Retrieved from http://unes -
doc.unesco.org/images/0014/001416/141639e.pdf
USAID (2008). A  partnership for prosperity, USAID strategy 
Indonesian 2009-2014 (2008). Retrieved from https://
www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/USAID-2010-Part -
nership.pdf
Williams, T. L., & Baumann, J. F. (2008). Contemporary re -
search on effective elementary literacy teachers. In Y . Kim, 
V . J. Risko, D. L. Compton, D. K. Dickinson, M. K. Hun -
dley, R. T. Jimenez, K. M. Leander, & D. W. Rowe (Eds.), 
57th yearbook of the National Reading Conference  (pp. 357-
372). Oak Creek, WI: National Reading Conference
Wright, V .H. & Wilson, E.K. (2011). Teachers’ use of tech -
nology: Lessons learned from the teacher education pro -
gram to the classroom. The Journal of the Southeastern 
Regional Association of Teacher Educators , 2(2), 48-60.