 
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
34 
 
 
 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF LAW, 
GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNICATION 
(IJLGC)  
 www.ijlgc.com  
  
  
 
DIGITAL MEDIA LITERACY IN JORDAN: CHALLENGES AND 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
Mohamad Ahmad Abdallah Abu Halka1, Shafizan Mohamed2* 
1 Department of Communication, Kulliyyah of Islamic Revealed Knowledge and Human Sciences, International 
Islamic University Malaysia   
Email: m87.abuhalaqa@yahoo.com  
2 Department of Communication, Kulliyyah of Islamic Revealed Knowledge and Human Sciences, International 
Islamic University Malaysia   
Email: shafizan@iium.edu.my  
* Corresponding Author  
 
Article Info : Abstract : 
Article history:  
Received date: 01.10.2020  
Revised date: 08.10.2020  
Accepted date: 20.10.2020  
Published date:  06.12.2020  
To cite this document:  
Abu H alka, M. A. A., & Mohamed, 
S. (2020). Digital Media Literacy in 
Jordan: Challenges and Develop ment . 
International Journal of Law, 
Government and Communication,  5 
(21), 34-44. 
DOI:  10.35631/IJ LGC .521004. 
This work  is licensed under  CC BY 4.0  
 Digital media literacy refers to having the ability to use digital technologies 
to participate in and contribute to social, cultural, political, and economic life. 
It includes understanding the impact of recent technologies on society, 
understanding and ha ving the ability to manage digital identities fittingly, and 
having the ability to find, organize, understand, evaluate, analyze and create 
digital information. While the level of digital media literacy in Jordan is still 
in its infancy, there is a positiv e move towards educating the Jordanian 
people about digital media. Recently the Jordanian government has 
developed a national executive plan for digital media literacy to develop 
community awareness and improve its capabilities in dealing with 
information and media sources during the Corona pandemic through the 
Ministry of Culture, Therefore, in this study, we will review the digital media 
literacy in Jordan and we will study the challenges and development of digital 
media literacy in Jordan.  
 
Keywords :  
 
Jordan , Digital Media Literacy , Arab , Education , Technology  
 
 
Introduction  
The concept of media literacy is not new but is definitely important among the researchers in 
the fields of education and the media (Potter, 2010). Several Western educat ional systems 
developed "media literacy" as a way to enable citizens to achieve informed interactions with 
media messages (Alhamadani, 2015).  Along with technological advancements came the 
concept of digital media literacy that emerged as a broader and mor e comprehensive 
 
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
35 
 
education form than the media literacy itself, although it was not a substitute for the concept. 
It was a concept that needed a broader understanding of basic skills; such as reading, writing, 
understanding and using modern technologies (Pa rk & Burford, 2013). Digital skills have  
now become necessary to equip c ommunity members with basic skills that will enable them 
to solve digital issues in their environment and the world at large.  
 
Digital media literacy refers to having the ability to cr eate and use technologies to participate 
in and contribute to social, cultural, political, and economic life. It includes understanding the 
impact of recent technologies on society, understanding and having the ability to manage 
digital identities fittingl y, and having the ability to find, organize, understand, evaluate, 
analyze and cr eate digital information (Hobbs , 2010). Digital literacy involves critically 
participating in technology and developing social awareness. However, a variety of things 
together  with business agenda and cultural understandings will form how technology is 
employed to convey information (Assal, 2016). Having the ability to speak and represent data 
is entirely different in numerous contexts and to different audiences (for example, i n visual, 
audio, or matter modes). This involves finding and choosing relevant information, critically 
evaluating and re -contextualizing data and is underpinned by an understanding of the cultural 
and social contexts during which this takes place. Digital literacy provides the citizens with 
the flexibility to require advantage of the wealth of recent and rising opportunities related to 
digital technologies while additionally remaining aware of what the different challenges 
technology will give. In short, di gital literacy is the ‘savvyness’ that permits to participate in 
the digital realm meaningfully and safely.  
 
In order for the desired benefit of digital media literacy to be realized, it is necessary to 
possess the skills that constitute the measurement to ols for the effectiveness of digital media 
literacy for individuals.  Digital media literacy skills are extensions of media literacy skills 
where the essence of the vocation and competence are to equip citizens the ability to search 
for the right informatio n and using those information efficiently and positively. Individuals 
need skills to get a good understanding of how to create knowledge, express reality and 
engage in civic activities and social work (Hobbs, 2010).  
 
When measuring media literacy competenc y, conventional definitions included skills of 
access, consumption and focuses on interpreting media messages (Auferheide, 1993; Hobbs 
2001).   Buckingham (2007)  defines several of these constructs, explaining:  
Access... includes the skills and competencies needed to locate media content, 
using the available technologies and associated software. ...Understand includes 
the ability to decode or interpret media, for example, through an awareness of 
formal and generic conventions, design features and  rhetorical devices. It also 
involves knowledge of production processes, and of patterns of ownership and 
institutional control, and an ability to critique media, for example, in terms of the 
accuracy or reliability of their representations of the real wor ld. Finally, create 
involves the ability to use the media to produce and communicate one’s own 
messages, whether for purposes of self -expression or in order to influence or 
interact with others  (p. 44) .  
 
However, with the inclusion of digital media, the s kill of production or creation become 
significant. Media creation/production is the skill enabled by digital media in which the 
people are no longer passive audiences, they are also active content creators. Therefore,  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
36 
 
media creation is the main characteris tic that distinguishes digital literacy from media literacy 
(Park, 2012). In 2011, UNESCO concluded that the most common digital literacy abilities are 
awareness, access, evaluation and creation. This statement is agreed by scholars who have 
considered the se skills as measurements of digital media literacy competency (Assal, 2016; 
Fedorove, 2008; Hallaq, 2016).  
 
Jordanians are very much exposed to different types of media. With a population of 10 
million people, there are thirty -eight TV channels, thirty -nine radio stations, and about thirty 
newspapers daily and weekly (Media Commission, 2019). According to the Jordanian 
Department of Statistics (2017), social media usage has reached 93.5%. With this widespread 
media usage particularly online media, the Jor danian audiences are not solely exposed to 
smart data, they are conjointly subjected to the risks of harmful usage and content. This might 
embody violence, extremism, cultural invasion, and incorrect conventional pictures regarding 
status, race, or gender,  additionally to the industrial nature of media messages (Darweesh, 
2006).  
 
The level of digital media literacy in Jordan has been developed in recent years,  there is a 
positive move towards educating the Jordanian people about digital media (Ashdiefat & 
Khasawneh, 2012; Melki, 2015). Jordan Media Institute (JMI) is probably the country’s 
biggest proponent for media literacy. JMI is a freelance media institute  that aims to enhance 
the output of Jordanian media and to promote the name and image of the media profession 
domestically and regionally by establishing medium that helps to circularize the ideas of 
media literacy (JMI, 2018). In this paper , we will revie w the digital media literacy in Jordan 
and we will describe  the challenges and development of digital media literacy in Jordan. In 
section 2 we will explore the history of digital media literacy in Arab world and Jordan. In 
section 3 we will explicate  the challenges of digital media literacy in Jordan. In section 4 we 
will review the recent developments of digital media literacy in Jordan. Finally, in section 5 
we will provide the conclusion and recommendation .    
 
Methodology  
This paper is conceptual in na ture. However the historical analysis provided was done 
through a careful reading of literatures on media literacy in the Arab world generally and in 
Jordan more specifically. This study is also part of the first author’s PhD thesis in which he 
had conduct ed multiple interviews with relevant parties such as media experts and members 
of the Jordan Media Institute (JMI) . Therefore the discussion provided is also based on a 
deliberate input from experts in the area who are very familiar with the media and educ ation 
landscape in Jordan . 
 
History of Digital Media Literacy in The Arab World and Jordan  
The Arab world neglected media literacy for a long time, which led to negative consequences 
that exacerbated the seriousness of political and economic disturbances. Abu-Fadil (2016) 
described the reason for neglecting digital media literacy to the Arab higher education 
systems which have been suffered from the absence of facilities and equipment that require 
digital literacy. Moreover, the individual academic initiati ves that called for media literacy in 
Arab universities have been met with opposition and lack of support from traditional 
academics, while most of these educational systems do not realize the importance of Media 
and digital literacy (Melki and Maaliki, 20 16).  
  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
37 
 
Furthermore, media literacy is at the bottom of the list of Arab priorities, as it reflects the 
state of the media itself, which is a tool of power and indicates a lack of respect for the press 
and its lack of prestige, and this is reflected in the degree of credibility, thus it serves the 
interest of the ruling elites (Saleh, 2009).  However, digital media literacy has been included 
in the curricula of a number of Egyptian universities since 2005, in addition to WeChat 
organizing workshops for final year students at the Faculty of Mass Communication at Cairo 
University on media literacy (Tayie, 2016).  In Palestine, the concept of media literacy was a 
new concept at the level of civil society, so efforts were limited to some initiatives, activities 
and projects that have increased since 2009 (Nuseibeh and Abu Arqoub, 2016).  
 
At the begin ning of the new millennium, i nterest in digital media literacy began in Jordan 
through some official Jordanian initiatives to develop digital literacy, such as the Minis try of 
Education training te achers to use computers by  obtaining the International Computer 
Driving License (ICDL) program, as well as the (INTEL Education for the Future program), 
hoping to provide teachers With computer skills and employing them in the e ducational 
process and using them in obtaining media content that affects digital media literacy 
(Olaimat, 2013).  The Ministry of Education, in cooperation with several bodies, including the 
Center for the Protection and Freedom of Journalists, launched th e (Education Through 
Journalism) program, which was considered the first training in media literacy, in which 
schools invest on daily newspapers to teach many educational materials such as history, 
geography, science, reading, civic education, creatio n and  expression to a group of school 
students. The exercises and activities were are carried out inside the classroom at the rate of 
one session per week to enable students to keep pace with the developments of the age and 
the knowledge revolution and to creat e a spirit of dialogue and interaction with various 
community issues. With the aim of training Jordanian youth, providing them with knowledge 
and skills to deal with the media, facing illiteracy in information and communication 
technology, and promoting fr eedom of expression, the Jordanian National Committee for 
Education, Culture and Science, in cooperation with the UNESCO Office in Amman and the 
Arab Women Media Center, implemented an exploratory project entitled (Introducing the 
concept of media literacy  in Jordanian schools ) With funding from the Swedish government 
in 2013 (Assal, 2016).  
 
The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations (UNAOC) and Google, in cooperation with the 
World Bank Institute, held a training workshop in 2013 entitled Digital Tools f or News 
Gathering and Cross -Cultural Reporting at the Jordan Media Institute in Amman (UNAOC, 
2013, Durra, 2016), which was considered a step towards Introducing the concept of digital 
literacy in Jordan  
 
The International Center for Journalists organized a training course at the Jordan Media 
Institute in 2013 on the use of electronic tools in public service issues, which dealt with 
preparing press reports, building electronic news websites, media ethics in the electronic age 
and social media, and how to em ploy This is in its coverage of issues related to public 
services with the participation of media professionals and journalists from several Arab 
countries (Jordan Media Institute, 2013).  
 
Accordingly, it appears that the stages by which the adoption of th e digital media literacy 
concept by Jordanian official institutes was not part of a clear process and policy based on a 
strategy for developing this concept and benefiting from it while not being adopted by the  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
38 
 
Jordanian government and placing it among its  priorities during the period before 2014. They 
were just initiatives by international institutions and Jordanian civil society institutions.  
 
Challenges That Face the Implementation of Digital Media Literacy in Jordan  
Recently, the concept of digital lit eracy has entered, which is broader and more 
comprehensive than media literacy, but it is not a substitute for it. Rather, it needs a broader 
awareness of basic skills such as reading, writing, understanding, and accessing new 
technologies (Park, 2012)  
 
The state of digital media literacy in the Arab world, including Jordan, is weak, as interest in 
it comes at the bottom of the list of priorities for Arab countries, noting that it reflects the 
state of media itself (Saleh, 2009). On other words, the digit al media literacy in the Arab 
world is still in the initial foundational stages (Melki, 2013).  
 
The challenges facing digital media literacy are summarized by several reasons, including 
political, economic, and social (culture). For instance, The Arab wor ld, including Jordan, 
neglected digital media literacy for a long time, which led to negative consequences that 
exacerbated the seriousness of political and economic unrest (Abu -Fadil, 2016).  Many 
obstacles stand in front of the spread of media and digital  literacy, such as the structure of the 
media, which in turn does not provide the opportunity for a sufficient number of voices to 
participate, and the various political and social situations restrict the flow and availability of 
information, in addition t o the imbalance in the ability of individuals to communicate their 
opinions and voices (Assal, 2016).  Among the factors affecting Digital Media Literacy in 
Jordan are the economic weakness and the high costs of production and publishing with the 
lack of financial support provided for the development of human resources and education, on 
which media literacy depends on  (Saleh, 2009).  
 
Moreover, Arab higher education systems suffer from the absence of facilities and equipment 
that require digital literacy, a nd individual academic initiatives that called for media literacy 
in Arab universities were met with opposition and lack of support from traditional academics, 
while most of these educational systems do not realize the importance of digital media 
literacy.  In addition, it does not feel that it should be integrated into the school curriculum 
(Melki and Maaliki, 2016).  
 
Although Jordanian youth have  the skill and intelligence to use  digital technologies, they 
mostly still  unaware of the dangers of social medi a, and that most of these young people are 
ignorant of  the Internet thr eat such as privacy threat. D espite their extensive use of social 
media, they cannot be described as fruitful producers. Consequently , Jordanian youth who 
used the I nternet have suffere d from the lack of effective application of blogs. Like young 
bloggers in many other developing countries (Mohamed, 2017) they  predominantly blogged 
about  entertainment and light news  indicating  the lack of their awareness regarding the power 
of these mean s in influencing social and political views (Melki, 2015).  Despite the 
challenges, the application of digital media literacy in Jordan y has witnessed remarkable 
developments  during the recent period and this  will be discussed in the next section.  
 
Develop ment of Digital Media Literacy in Jordan  
Recently, digital media literacy has been developed remarkably, as these developments were 
represented in several stages, the beginning of which was in 2010, when the Jordanian  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
39 
 
academics became aware and interested in the concept of digital media literacy and they 
pressured the politicians to  pay closer attention to this concept.  In response, new researches 
and studies were published to delineate and discuss  the concept of digital media literacy .  
Jordanian academics  were focused on identifying  the tools that individuals must possess to 
qualify them to interact with the media in a positive way. For instance, Ash diefat & 
Khasawneh, (2012) studied  the extent to which Jordanian school students possess the concept 
of digi tal media literacy, which gave a simplified picture of the scene. , Assal (2016) studied 
the extent of parents' awareness of digital media literacy and the importance of this concept to 
them because of its potential.  
 
Subsequently, the UNESCO Amman office l aunched a project to support the media in 
Jordan, with funding from the European Union, starting from 2014 until 2017, and the project 
included developing media education capabilities (UNESCO, 2014). In addition  to this , the 
Jordan Media Institute, in part nership with UNESCO, launched the Media and Information 
Education Project in Jordan in May 2016, which comes within the main project to support the 
media in Jordan, which UNESCO began implementing in 2014 with funding from the 
European Union (Jordan Media Institute, 2016).  
 
The project came  in two phases; the first included  the institute’s development of a Jordanian 
public policy paper in the field of media and information educatio n in educational 
institutions. The paper  analyze d the universities curricula  and the extent to which they 
contain media literacy concepts. The paper suggested a strategy that will work to introduce 
these concepts, while the second phase introduced the concept of  Media education in 
educational curricula within the framework of coop eration  with relevant parties that included 
the Ministry of Education and the Jordanian universities. Among others, this Initiative wanted 
to train male and female teachers on media and information literacy skills so that they can  
transfer  the necessary kn owledge  to students of grades seven, eight and nine in a number of 
schools (Jordan Media Institute, 2016)  
 
In 2016, the Jordan Media Institute launched the Jordanian Media Credibility Observatory 
(Akeed) with an important role in providing recipients with digital media literacy skills and 
enhancing th eir presence among individuals The observatory contributed  by verifying and 
monitoring media content published in the Jordanian media to enhance the quality of 
information by stressing on  the elements of object ivity, c redibility and accuracy . It also 
proposed for awareness be imparted to  Jordanians so that they can  verify t hose elements in 
the messages they receive . (Akeed.jo, 2016)  
 
The objectives of the observatory reinforce d the objectives of the existence of digital media 
literacy by protecting individuals and groups from the negative and unethical influences that 
may exist in the media content. It also enhances the accessibility skill of the recipient by 
assigning the human  right to knowledge by being able to achieve objecti vity and separate  
between news and advertisements,  between facts and speculation and the separation of 
information, facts on the one hand, and imagination and emotions on the other hand, and it 
also contr ibutes to providing students and journalists with the tools necessary to enhance 
future media education programs (Durra, 2016).  In 2018, the Jordanian government adopted 
the policy paper on digital media literacy that was drafted by the Jordan Media Instit ute in 
partnership with the European Union and UNESCO. Followed by training for school and  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
40 
 
university students on digital media literacy concepts through several training programs 
funded by external donors and most notably, UNESCO.  
 
Most recently, while be ing affected by the  global Corona pandemic, the government has 
developed, through the Ministry of Culture, an executive plan for "the National Initiative for 
the Promotion of Media and Information literacy for the years (2020 -2023)". Because of the 
dire ne ed to depend on digital technologies caused by the pandemic, the Ministryn develop ed 
a work program to improve society's ability to deal with information sources, news, and 
digital media tools. The strategic objective of the plan is to integrate media and informational 
literacy concepts and skills into the Jordanian educational system, publish them in schools 
and universities, incorporate the activities of cultural and youth institutions and civil society 
institutions, and spread awareness of them through t he media and in the public sphere.  
 
According to the general policy paper presented by the Jordanian government, these are the 
main  reasons why digital media literacy is a  societal necessity in Jordan:  
 
First: Knowledge Transfer Tool  
Digital Media literacy  is a tool for developing and reforming education and a tool for 
transferring knowledge through technology: T oday, t he use of information and 
communication technology (ICT) is  the most prominent and important tool in increasing 
access to education, raising  the quality of education using advanced teaching and learning 
methods, improving learning outcomes, and reforming educational systems management. 
(UNESCO,  2018)  
 
Second: Digital Media Literacy is Considered A Means of Social Integration .  
It can be point ed out that digital media literacy is an effective tool that improves 
opportunities for social harmony and opportunities for societal understanding and 
understanding, as the press and radio were used in early periods in the reproduction of more 
integrated societies that agreed on common large goals without exceeding the value of 
diversity, for example as happened in the Malaysia (Mohamed, 2018). Contemporary 
Jordanian society is now very diverse  mainly  due to the modern formation of society and the 
emergenc e of the state.  The waves of refugees that have not stopped over the course of six 
decades have increased society diversification, and although the state and society have been 
able to digest this diversity and reproduce it in many stations, Jordan still ne eds more in -
depth efforts in support of social integration processes, bridging gap s and some aspects of 
fragility. Thus  communication technology can assist  Jordanians to beco me more integrated 
by sharing and expressing through  digital and social media.  
 
Third: Bridging the Political and Social Participation Gap  
 Learning the skills of sharing information and producing and sharing media content is the 
basic feature of the communication and informat ion revolution, and the events and 
transformations that the  world is witnessing in the last decade confirm that this pattern of 
participation is contributing to determining the level, content and size of participation that 
individuals practice in various aspects of life, foremost of which is social and political 
participation. As is well known, participation is the solid foundation for development and 
modernization when the responsibility base expands. The quality of dealing with information 
and news improves opportunities for political participation, whether elect oral participation or 
participation in public affairs, in addition to the role of digital media education in improving  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
41 
 
citizens' ability to accept equality and  seek it, specifically between g ender, the empowerment 
of women, and strengthening the participat ion of special groups.  
  
Digital media education today defines this way in which more generations can be brought up 
ready for positive and productive participation thanks to the cognitive and cultural cultivation 
of participation based on evaluation, selec tion of ideas and critical thinking.  Jordan suffers 
from a multi -faceted participation crisis, whether in the political or socio -economic 
dimensions, evidenced by the weak electoral participation that did not exceed 37% in the 
2016 Eighteenth Council elect ions. The gender gap in women's participation rates appears 
more obvious and embarrassing, as the rate of Jordanian women's economic participation in 
the labor market is still low and does not exceed 14%, compared with 30% at the Arab level 
and 50% at the global level, and weak and distorted participation extends to other sectors 
such as work. Volunteering and non -profit work, as this sector only accounts for 1.5%, 
compared to 5.5% of the global average ( Jordanian Department of Statistics, 2017).  
 
Fourth: R ationalize Societal Culture in Confronting Extremism and Hate Speech  
Digital media has become one of the open sources today that allows participation for young 
people, young and old, and at a time when the mass media and new information sources 
along with the traditional media have come to dominate a wide area of individuals' times, 
they have been transformed by the political conflict in the Middle East and North Africa 
regions. And others, to effective platforms for spreading extremism and spreading hate 
speech, as many reports indicate that these means have become a trap for hunting young 
people by terrorist organizations, in addition to their role in spreading extremist ideas and 
creating followers for them.  
 
Therefore, Jordanian youth find themselves in the midst of a torrent of information flow, and 
at a time when traditional educational institutions deny them expression, and traditional 
media do not give them real attention, young people find the new media of expression 
available on digita l media, specifically social media, an escape from exclusion and 
marginalization. Its ability does not depend on the inexpensive means it provides and without 
direct censorship, but rather allows anonymity, which has opened the way to anomalous 
expressions  such as expressions of cultural and verbal violence and hates speech on the one 
hand and extremist religious and political discourse.  
 
Digital media literacy contributes to a large extent to developing the capabilities of 
individuals to examine, evaluate,  accept or reject media messages, as what media literacy 
provides makes young people and new youths more immune to political and ideological 
propaganda, at the forefront of which is the distinction between messages with political and 
ideological goals and news. Impartial information makes the recipients more alert and aware 
of extremist messages.  
 
In order to benefit from the integration of digital media education, a plan had to be developed 
Implementation of the national initiative that  according to the Mi nister of Culture (Twissi, 
2020)  includes four areas  which are the  1) Schools, 2) Univesrities, 3) youth and cultural 
institutions and, $0 civil society and the public sphere in cities.  
 
 
  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
42 
 
Area 1: Schools  
It includes training activities and access to about 90% of the Ministry of Education schools in 
the Kingdom's governorates, within 42 directorates of education and training, 3000 male and 
female teachers, and the introduction of digital media literacy concepts and skills to the 
educational curricula in the concerned classes and ensuring their sustainability, reviewing 
them, and developing student activities guides specialized in digital media education. For 
students of basic education and  establishing student clubs specialized in this field.  
 
 Area 2: Unive rsities  
 It aims to build the capacities of a group of faculty members in Jordanian universities, and to 
invite universities to offer specialized courses in digital media education and the 
establishment of university student clubs and parallel activities i n the field of media and 
information education. This  goal includes establishing 30 student clubs in the field of media 
and informational education and  working with teacher training colleges to offer educational 
programs in media and informatics education.  
 
 Area 3: Youth and Cultural Institutions  
 It aims to train and build capacity for members of the youth centers of the Ministry of Youth 
and the cultural bodies of the Ministry of Culture in all parts of the Kingdom, and to enable a 
group of youth centers and young women and cultural bodies to develop units for digital 
media awareness and the production of media and information content.  
 
 Area 4: Civil Society and The Public Sphere in Cities  
The plan aims to administer sub -grants targeting a group of civil society institutions 
interested in launching new and innovative initiatives in the fields of media and information 
education under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture and the Office of the Minister of 
State for Media Affairs, and the implementation of awareness campaigns to spread the 
concepts of media education And informatics through a group of public service media, and 
the creation of a digital platform for free education and training.  
 
Conclusion and Recommendations  
In short , we have  explicated the challenges and development of di gital media literacy in 
Jordan. T he sequence of entering the concept of digital media literacy Jordan was reviewed, 
and the challenges that faced Jordan to apply the concepts of digital media literacy were 
presented. For instance, the digital media literacy programs that were implemented were 
financed and supported by external institutions in addition to the challenge of cultural 
awareness among young people in dealing with digital media correctly and in produc tive way 
was constituted as an obstacle for the digital media literacy in Jordan. The political 
challenges also clearly affected the progress of the development of digital media literacy 
through the various media outlets that represent the decision -makers opinions and control 
what is presented.  As for recent years, specifically, since 2018, government interest in the 
concept of digital media literacy became apparent  through practical steps that were 
manifested by the introduction of training programs in sch ools and universities and the 
development of a strategic plan for digital media literacy 2020 -2023.  
 
In response to the analyses provided, the au thors recommend for the Jordanian  authorities to 
further enhance their digital media initiatives by adopting  the following:   
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
43 
 
1. Establishing a clear digital media literacy curriculum in schools and universities as a 
separate and independent curriculum to be taught in theoretical and practical way, and 
to be designed locally in Jordan to comply with local culture and cu stoms.  
2. The teachers and trainers of digital media literacy must be specialized in digital media 
to provide content related to digital media literacy in a professional and beneficial 
way.  
3. Disseminating media messages through various media outlets explaining the 
importance of digital media literacy Which includes understanding media, 
contemporary communication, news literacy, information literacy, digital citizenship, 
to create a state of public trust and cognitive immunization in the face of rumors  and 
misinformation, and this perspective is committed to promoting the principles of 
human rights, freedom o f expression and gender justice . 
 
The paper concludes by confirming that the potential of digital media literacy in Jordan is 
very positive. If the  government and the relevant authorities maintain their commitment to 
realize the strategic plans that are already in place, it won’t  be long before Jordanians become 
savvy technology users, and Jordan will become the leader on digital media literacy 
especi ally in the Arab world. The authors also propose for more studies to be conducted to 
understand how digital media literacy can be made more effective and relevant when it is 
studied within the context of a particular culture and socio -political backgrounds . Such 
studies can provide more avenues for comparing the applicability of different digital media 
literacy methods and modules.   
 
References   
Abu-Fadil, M., Torrent, J., & Grizzle, A. (2016).  Opportunities for media and information 
literacy in the Middle East and North Africa . The international clearinghouse on 
children, youth and media.  
Alhamadani, B. (2015). Altarbyah alelamyah wa maho al omyyah alraqameyah. Amman: Dar 
Wael publisher.  
Ashdiefat, A., & Khasawneh, K. (2012). The Factors Influencing Media Education in Private  
Schools in Jordan from Students’ Perspective. Specialized educational international 
journal, 1(6) :274-287 
Assal, H. (2016). Parents’ knowledge of media and digital literacy in the Jordanian 
society.  (Unpublished maste r's thesis). Jordan university, Amman.  
Buckingham, D. (2007). Digital Media Literacies: rethinking media education in the age of 
the Internet.  Research in comparative and international education , 2(1), 43 -55. 
Darweesh, A. R. (2006). Moqademah fe elm aletisal. Damietta : Nancy library.   
Department of Statistics. (2017). Retrieved from  http://dosweb.dos.gov.jo/population/   
Fedorov, A. (2008). Media education around the world: Brief history.  Acta Didactica 
Napocensia , 1(2). 
Hallaq, T. (2016). Evaluating online media literacy in higher education: validity and 
reliability of the Digital Online Media Literacy Assessment (DOMLA).  Journal of 
Media Literacy Education , 8(1), 62 -84. 
Hobbs, R. (2010).  Digit al and Media Literacy: A Plan of Action. A White Paper on the 
Digital and Media Literacy Recommendations of the Knight Commission on the 
Information Needs of Communities in a Democracy .  
 
 
Volume 5 Issue 21 (December 2020) PP. 34-44 
DOI 10.35631/IJLGC.52100 4 
Copyright © GLOBAL ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE (M) SDN BHD  - All rights reserved  
44 
 
Jordan Media Institute. (2013), JMI Students participate in the Digital Media Literacy 
Academy. Retrieved from https://www.jmi.edu.jo/en/jmi -students -participate -digital -
media -literacy -academy  
Jordan Media Institute. (2016). JMI Students Take Part in Course at Media and Digital 
Literacy Academy in Beirut . Retrieved fro m 
http://www.jmi.edu.jo/en/details/4417/JMI -Students -Take -Part-in-Course -at-Media -
andDigital -Literacy -Academy -in-Beirut  
Jordan Media Institute. (2018), About Jordan Media Institute. Retrieved from 
https://www.jmi.edu.jo/en/About -JMI 
Media commission. (2019 ). Licensed media in jordan. Retrieved from 
http://www.mc.gov.jo/Pages/viewpage?pageID=34  
Melki, J. P. (2013). Sowing the Seeds of Digital and Media Literacy in Lebanon and the Arab 
World.  Media Literacy Education in Action: Theoretical and pedagogical 
perspectives. BS De Abreu and P. Mihailidis (Eds.). Routledge, New York, USA , 77-
86. 
Melki, J. P. (2015). Guiding Digital and Media Literacy Development in Arab Curricula 
through Understanding Media Uses of Arab Youth.  Journal of Media Literacy 
Education , 6(3), 14-28. 
Melki, J., & Maaliki, L. (2016). Helping Arab digital and media literacy blossom: three years 
of the Media and Digital Literacy Academy of Beirut (MDLAB).  University of 
Gothenburg, Sweden: The International Clearinghouse on Children Youth and Media . 
Mohamed, S. (2017). Blogging and C itizenship: The Malaysian experience.  Journal of 
Advanced Research in Social and Behavioural Sciences , 9  (1),102-114 
Mohamed, S. (2018). The Islamization of the Malaysian media: a complex interaction of 
religion, class and commercialization.  Intellectual Discourse , 26 (2) pp.635 -658 
Nuseibeh, L., & Arqoub, M. A. 5. An Overview from the Occupied Palestinian 
Territories.  Opportunities for Media and Information Literacy in the Middle East and 
North Africa , 55. 
Olimat, A. (2013). waqee istikhdam mualemi alolom lilmustahdathat altiqnologyah fe 
tadresehim be muhafathat almafraq. Almanarah for Research and Study jornal , 20(1), 
465-498. 
Park, S. (2012). Dimensions of digital media literacy and the relationship with social 
exclusion.  Media International Australia , 142(1), 87 -100. 
Park, S., & Burford, S. (2013). A longitudinal study on the uses of mobile tablet devices and 
changes in digital media literacy of young adults.  Educational Media 
Internatio nal, 50(4), 266 -280. 
Potter, W. J. (2010). The state of media literacy.  Journal of broadcasting & electronic 
media , 54(4), 675 -696. 
Saleh, I. (2009). 5. Media literacy in MENA: moving beyond the vicious cycle of 
oxymora.  Comunicar , 16(32), S155 -S155.  
Samy Tayie, S. (2019).  News literacy for a responsible online news experience against 
harmful messages: implications for political engagement of Egyptian and Spanish 
youth . 
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UN ESCO). (2014). 
Support to Media in Jordan. Retrieved from 
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/amman/projects/communication -and-
information/supportto -media -in-jordan/  
 