  
Final version for publication   27/3/2020  
 
 
 
 
 
e-Pact is a consortium led by Oxford Policy Management and co -managed with Itad  
External evaluation of mobile 
phone technology -based nutrition 
and agriculture advisory services in 
Africa  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania : 
Business modelling endline report  
Nigel Scott, Simon Batchelor, and Tom Jones (Gamos)  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
This project is being led by the Institute of Development S tudies (IDS) together with Gamos  and the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) , as part of the e -Pact consortium led by Oxford Policy 
Management (OPM) co -managed with Itad . The IDS project manager is  Jessica Gordon 
[j.gordon@ids.ac.uk]. The report authors  are Nigel Scott, Simon Batchelor  and Tom Jones . For further  
information contact j.gordon@ids.ac.uk . 
 
The contact point  for the client is Luisa Odell  [Luisa.Odell@fcdo.gov.uk]. The client reference number for the 
project is PO6420 . 
 
e-Pact Level 3, Clarendon House  Tel  +44 (0) 1865 207300   
 52 Cornmarket Street  Fax +44 (0) 1865 207301  
 Oxford OX1 3HJ  Email  admin@opml.co.uk  
 United Kingdom  Website  www.opml.co.uk   
e-Pact i  
Acknowledgement s 
The authors would like to thank all of the stakeholders who agreed to take part in this research  and 
to be interviewed . We are grat eful to the GSM Association  (GSMA ), Cardno, the mHealth Tanzania 
Public –Private Partnership  (mHealth Tanzania -PPP) , the Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre  
(TFNC) , the Tanzanian Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children  
(MoHCDGEC ), and the  Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN)  teams for their ongoing 
cooperation , and to  the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO ) and Oxford 
Policy Management ( OPM ) for their continued support  and contributions to this  project . We would 
also thank all stakeholders who were interviewed (often several times) for their time and patience. 
Finally, we would like to thank all internal and external reviewers of draft reports.  
We are also extremely grateful for the ongoing col laborative partnership with the Institute of 
Development Studies (IDS), which is overseeing the evaluation’s qualitative component, led by 
Inka Barnett, and the International Food Policy Research Institute  (IFPRI ) team overseeing the 
quantitative randomise d control trial component, led by Daniel O. Gilligan. Both teams have 
provided invaluable feedback and support toward s the design and tools , as well as comments on 
drafts of this report.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
This project is being led by the Institute of Development S tudies (IDS) together with Gamos  and the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) , as part of the e -Pact consortium led by Oxford Policy 
Management (OPM) co -managed with Itad . The IDS project manager is  Jessica Gordon 
[j.gordon@ids.ac.uk]. The report authors  are Nigel Scott, Simon Batchelor  and Tom Jones . For further  
information contact j.gordon@ids.ac.uk . 
 
The contact point  for the client is Luisa Odell  [Luisa.Odell@fcdo.gov.uk]. The client reference number for the 
project is PO6420 . 
 
e-Pact Level 3, Clarendon House  Tel  +44 (0) 1865 207300   
 52 Cornmarket Street  Fax +44 (0) 1865 207301  
 Oxford OX1 3HJ  Email  admin@opml.co.uk  
 United Kingdom  Website  www.opml.co.uk   
e-Pact ii  
Disclaimer  
This report has been prepared by the e -Pact consortium for the named client, for services specified 
in the Terms of Reference and contract of engagement. The information contained in this report 
shall not be disclosed to any other party, or used or disclos ed in whole or in part without agreement 
from the e -Pact consortium. For reports that are formally put into the public domain, any use of the 
information in this report should include a citation that acknowledges the e -Pact consortium as the 
author of the report.  
This confidentiality clause applies to all pages and information included in this report.  
This material has been funded by UK aid from the UK government; however, the views expressed 
do not necessarily reflect the UK government’s official policies.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
This project is being led by the Institute of Development S tudies (IDS) together with Gamos  and the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) , as part of the e -Pact consortium led by Oxford Policy 
Management (OPM) co -managed with Itad . The IDS project manager is  Jessica Gordon 
[j.gordon@ids.ac.uk]. The report authors  are Nigel Scott, Simon Batchelor  and Tom Jones . For further  
information contact j.gordon@ids.ac.uk . 
 
The contact point  for the client is Luisa Odell  [Luisa.Odell@fcdo.gov.uk]. The client reference number for the 
project is PO6420 . 
 
e-Pact Level 3, Clarendon House  Tel  +44 (0) 1865 207300   
 52 Cornmarket Street  Fax +44 (0) 1865 207301  
 Oxford OX1 3HJ  Email  admin@opml.co.uk  
 United Kingdom  Website  www.opml.co.uk   
e-Pact iii  
Data management  
All intellectual property rights in any materials produced from the evaluation (including publication 
of research findings and any other reports and data) remain the property of IDS and associated 
subcontracted collaborators. IDS and all subcontracted partners undertaking data collection have 
specific arrangements in place for handling data generated from the project in accordance with the 
Data Protection Act (1998), which includes the processing and storage of any sensitive personal 
data and maintenance of privacy. FCDO  has unlimited access to any material produced from the 
evaluation. In order to promote the use and uptake of the evaluation findings , and in line with 
FCDO ’s Enhance and Open Access Policy, the evaluation team is committed to ensuring all major 
report outputs and associated data generated from this project are made publicly available in an 
accessible format. Following approval of the report by FCDO , the endline  report will be made 
available on IFPRI’s and IDS’s websites.  
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact iv  
Executive summary  
mNutrition in Tanzania  
The mNutrition initiative  is a five -year global programme  supported by t he UK Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO ), managed  and supported by the GSM 
Association (GS MA), and implemented by in -country mobile network operators (MNOs) and third -
party providers  that seeks  to use mobile technology to improve the health and nutritional status of 
children and adults in low -income countries around the world. The mNutrition initiative is 
implemented through existing mAgri and mHealth programmes in 12 countries throughout sub -
Saharan Africa and South Asia.  FCDO  committed to conducting an independent evaluation of the 
mNutrition  initiative . Given the scale of the mNutrition service  the decision was made to select two 
countries for inclusion in the evaluation: the mHealth service  in Tanzania and the mAgri service  in 
Ghana. The mNutrition intervention that is the focus of the evaluation in Tanzania , and of this 
report , is an integrated service that combine d an existing SMS -based health communication 
campaign that target ed pregnant women and mothers of young children , known as ‘Healthy 
Pregnancy, Healthy Baby ’ (HPHB) , with approximately 120  nutrition -focused SMS messages in 
Swahili.  The combined service is called Wazazi Nipendeni  and is managed by Cardno and 
delivered through a platform implemented by Rasello . The combined service  sendsout SMS 
messages timed to the stage of pregnancy or age of child. The service  is designed to  provide 
relevant information for pregnant women and children up to the age of five  in order to affect beliefs 
and behaviours in key nutrition -related areas , including infant and young child feeding (IYCF) and 
women’s dieta ry diversity , in recipient households.  
Evaluation design  
The aim of the impact evaluation is to assess the impact, cost -effectiveness , and commercial 
viability of the mNutrition service. The evaluation is being conducted by a consortium of 
researchers from  Gamos , the Institute of Development Studies ( IDS), and  the International Food 
Policy Research Institute  (IFPRI ), and it relies on a variety of different tools and methods to collect 
evidence on the impact of the mNutrition intervention in Tanzania. Broadl y, the evaluation can be 
classified into three distinct but closely integrated components: a qualitative component, a 
quantitative component, and a business model and cost -effectiveness component.   
Given the complexity of the partnerships involved in the m Nutrition projects, Osterwalder and 
Pigneur’s (2010)  inductive approach to business model generation is used as a framework for the 
research (summarised in  Annex C )1. The aim of this endline report is to provide a detailed 
description of each of the building blocks of the business model canvas , based on insights gained 
throughout the duration of the study.  
This business modelling report draws on the quantitative component , which employed a cluster 
randomised controlled trial to identify the causal effect of the service on nutrition knowledge, IYCF 
practices, women’s dietary diversity, and the nutritional status of young children. Surveyed 
households i n villages randomly assigned to the treatment group were offered access to the 
mNutrition content on a mobile phone, free of charge, through a door -to-door, in -person visit; 
households in villages  randomly assigned to the control group did not receive any offer of access 
 
1 The framework is used  to describe a business model in the nine building blocks of the business model canvas. At the 
centre of the canvas is the Value proposition; half of the remaining blocks are customer facing (e.g. customer segments 
and channels), and the other half focus o n the internal workings of the organisation (e.g. activities and partners).  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact v  
to the service.  Baseline and endline surveys were conducted at a two -year interval.  Details of the 
methodology can be found in Gilligan et al., (2019) . 
The history of Wazazi Nipendeni  
The original  GSMA (and FCDO ) vision for the mNutrition p rogramme was to create something 
different to the many exist ing pilots , which  up to that point focused on utilising mobiles and smart 
devices to strengthen health systems .  The intention of the mNutrition programme was  to offer a 
consumer -facing product at scale. The original vision was for a convening space, or clearing 
house, which any party interested in providing health -related services could subscribe to. This 
‘one-stop shop’ would lower the barriers of entry to mHealth services : with infrast ructure and 
agreements with MNOs already in place, any institution wishing to set up an mHealth information 
dissemination service (o r other  related value added services (VAS) ) could do so at relatively low 
cost. This concept was ambitiousand centred around  getting potentially competing organisations to 
collaborate. Eventually, timescales conspired against that concept, and GSMA entered into more 
conventional partnerships with mobile operators. They identified in Tanzania an mHealth Tanzania 
Public –Private P artnership (mHealth Tanzania -PPP) which was supporting a consumer - facing 
product for pregnant women called  Wazazi Nipendeni .  The product was something of an 
exception to the original intention  as it was hosted by a public –private partnership (PPP) that, 
although it ha d agreements with four mobile operators, was independent of any single MNO.  
The Wazazi Nipendeni  service (and the mHealth Tanzania -PPP) can trace its roots back to one of 
the earliest information and communication technologies ( ICT) for devel opment pilot projects 
(Voxiva) , funded by InfoDev . The Voxiva system was deployed in 2001 in Peru, and enabled real -
time data collection, data analysis, and dissemination of response information using public 
payphones. When the President’s Emergency Plan f or AIDS Relief  (PEPFAR ) programme was 
launched in 2003, it partnered with Voxiva as part of a consortium in Rwanda.  PEPFAR was keen 
on working with PPPs , and it set up seven multi -country PPPs in 2007, one of which was ‘Phones 
for Health’ , in which Voxiva  and GSMA were partner s (amongst others) . In 2010, the Phones for 
Health programme set up a local PPP in Tanzania and in 2011 the name was changed to the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP. Then Cardno was contracted to manage the mHealth Tanzania -PPP 
under a five -year agreement covering the period 2015 –2020. Most recently, the appointment of a 
health specialist as the team leader signals a shift in the focus of the PPP away from technology 
and towards public health.  
The Wazazi Nipendeni service  
Insights  into the Wazazi Nipendeni service are described using the structure of the Osterwalder 
and Pigneur canvas .  
Customer segments.  The vast majority  of active users (78%)  were women who had given birth . 
Although men are recognised as a key customer segment, supporters (which includes husbands) 
make up only a small proportion of Wazazi Nipendeni users.  
Value proposition. Evidence from the quantitative study confirm s the quality of messages. 
Between 82.7 % and 91.6 % of households read all the mNutrition content they received  and o ver 
90% of users either always or very often found the messages useful , indicat ing that the messages 
are highly valued . Over 90% of users (93.5% of females and 92.2% of males) would recommen d 
the service . 89% of females and 81% of males self -reported implementing at least one tip  and t he Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact vi  
quantitative study confirmed that that access to the service did lead to changes in some nutrition -
related behaviours . 
Channels . In the 2015 Tanzania DHS sur vey, 53% respondents had heard of Wazazi Nipendeni , 
mostly through the r adio. The single largest reason for not receiving messages was that users had 
lost their SIM. Registration data show that up to  83% of users were registered by partners. This 
highlight s the importance of partners in getting users onto the system.  
Customer relationships . Customer relationships are important for acquisition, retention , and 
compliance. Registration data confirm the importance of field partners and the face -to-face 
interac tion they provide in encouraging users to register for the service. Opt -out rates were lower 
among users who had been registered by partners. High levels of satisfaction and perceived 
quality support high retention levels.  
Revenue streams and indirect bene fits. Average revenue per user ( ARPU ) was higher among 
users. Control households spent an average of TZS 5,300 per month (£1.90/month) on mobile 
phone airtime (including any data bundles), but spending was 10% higher (TZS 510, £0.18/month) 
in treatment com munities. The qualitative study found this was due to women becoming more 
confident in using their phones.  There is no evidence that Wazazi Nipendeni had reduced churn.  
Key resources . The content database was brought by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, with additional 
content generated through the mNutrition programme. This nutrition content is regarded as a public 
good, having been paid for by FCDO . In March 2019, CABI made this content publicly available 
under open access through their Knowledge Bank resour ce. The new technology platform offers 
improved reliability as well as improved monitoring and reporting facilities . The key ‘resource’ in 
convening partn erships has been, and will continue to be, the partnership with the Tanzania Food 
and Nutrition Centre  (TFNC ) and its linkages to  both national nutrition policymakers  and health and 
nutrition interventions launching in the country . 
Key activities . Both TFNC and the mHealth Tanzania -PPP have good networking contacts with 
which  to broker partnerships with fi eld non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and MNOs. This 
face-to-face field presence is important, given that messages play an important role in reinforcing 
and supporting the efforts of health workers.  TFNC also played an important role in localising 
content. 
Key partnerships . Wazazi Nipendeni  is unique in the complexity of the underlying partnerships. 
Partnerships have been crucial to accessing all the resources needed to make the service 
succeed:  Research and design , Content development , Technology platform , Telecoms operators , 
Field partners , Government agencies. During the study, t he mHealth Tanzania -PPP has 
successfully revised agreements with MNOs, negotiated partnerships with new health agencies, 
and migrated the system to a local platform provider,  
Costs and investment . Since the baseli ne study, a more detailed breakdown of costs has been 
provided by partners  and has been used as the basis for the financial analysis.  The per country 
mNutrition budget was just over £1 million (for mHealth projects) but the investment needed to 
replicate t he content was estimated at £312,500 (localising content, user experience (UX) research 
and monitoring and evaluation ). Fixed costs were  dominant, notably administration (staff) and the 
cost of the platform , even when SMS messages were  costed at retail pri ces. 
User numbers . The report includes an analysis of registration data provided by Rasello , which 
contained known anomalies encountered when porting data from the old to the new platforms. A 
‘working’ dataset covers a two -year period between December 2016 and October 2018.  New 
registrations were running at an average of around 20,000/month, whereas people were leaving Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact vii  
the service at less than 1,400/month , i.e. 7% of new users. When combined with the number of 
users already on the service as at November  2016 this gives an estimate of 550,000 active users 
as at Nov ember  2018.  The majority of users (75%) were signed up as pregnant women, 12% were 
general information -seekers, and 3% were supporters of one type or another.  There is a peak in 
registrations of  pregnant women at the three -month mark, which coincides with the first trimester of 
pregnancy . 
Data on the opt -outs suggest that if women used the system throughout their pregnancy, then they 
liked it and continued to use it in motherhood.  Opt-out data te nd to confirm t he TFNC hypothesis  
that women who were assisted with registration might have a stronger commitment to the service, 
stay on the service for longer, be more likely to read the messages, and be more likely to adopt 
improved behaviours.  
Busines s models and sustainability  
Under the current arrangement, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP is funded by public money (from 
international donors), and the service is enabled by the charitable donation of SMS messages by 
the MNOs. The c osts of developing the Wazazi  Nipendeni  service were  covered by  the US Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC ), as part of its public health programmes. The c osts of 
developing the additional nutrition content were  covered by the mNutrition  programme. The service 
is funded and regarded as providing a public good, which it undeniably is.  
In the case of Wazazi Nipendeni , it is difficult to argue a case for financial viability of the mHealth  
Tanzania -PPP because none of the partners generates revenue directly from providing the Wazazi 
Nipendeni  service. Indeed, all parties are prohibited from generating direct revenue because the 
Government of Tanzania has ruled that all health services should be free to consumers. However, 
the quantitative res earch has found that ARPU increased among users, so it is possible to develop 
a business case for MNOs to provide an mHealth  service on the basis of indirect benefits, should 
this be the model that is transferred to another country. Two hypothetical commer cial models have 
been explored in  detail:  
• Commercial content provider : This speaks to the opportunity for replicating an mHealth 
agency, delivering a service similar to Wazazi Nipendeni, in another country.  At 100% revenue 
share with MNOs (i.e. all TZS 510/user/month in increased ARPU goes to the content 
provider), the model suggests the service would break even at the beginning of Year 3. 
However , the rate of return on investment over a four -year time horizon would be negative. 
Given the assumed trajectory  of growth in user numbers, much greater revenues are 
generated if the timescales can be extended. Therefore, at 100% revenue share, the service 
could generate a positive internal rate of return ( IRR) of 4% over a six-year period. However, 
rate of return i s highly sensitive to revenue share : at 90% revenue share (i.e. the MNO retains 
only 10% of the increase in ARPU), the IRR turns negative.   
• MNO in -house service : There is also a hypothetical business case scenario in which an MNO 
in another country sets up  an mHealth service in -house. The key differences from the 
commercial content provider scenario considered above are that the MNO would retain all of 
the additional revenue generated, and there would be no real costs associated with the SMS 
messages sent.  If SMS messages and unstructured supplementary service data  (USSD ) 
sessions are zero -rated, then the service would break even in Year 3, although it would not 
generate enough cash to provide a positive return on investment over a four-year period. 
Assuming the same trajectory of increasing users, the large number of users (rising to 1.1 
million) would generate enough revenue to provide a  19% IRR in a five -year period. However, Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact viii  
it should be noted that Wazazi Nipendeni , as a PPP , has gained users across all four MNOs 
and it is not clear whether an MNO in -house service would reach as many users.  
Wazazi Nipendeni is offered as a national serv ice available through multiple networks and does 
not, therefore, have a particular poverty focus. An MNO providing a service has the flexibility to 
charge SMS and labour at cost price (or lower), which is important for free or low costs services. 
Reach is,  however, limited to customers of the MNO. In a balanced, competitive market, third party 
models can buy SMS from multiple MNOs, which increases their reach in underserved areas 
where only one network is available. Reach is also increased where third party  providers enter into 
agreements with implementing health agencies that focus on vulnerable communities in rural areas 
(B2B models).  
Voice -based services (e.g. outbound dialling) can overcome literacy and language constraints 
among the extreme poor but ar e expensive. The extreme poor could also benefit from emerging 
data based services that use audio and video but these are also expensive and there is a danger 
that they may require a level of digital literacy skills that would render them inaccessible. It would 
appear, therefore, that SMS is the only viable option for free services where minimising cost of 
sales is crucial.  
Conclusions  
• The Wazazi Nipendeni  service offers a strong value proposition to users. It is highly valued by 
users: over 80% of househo lds read the content they received, over 90% of users found the 
messages useful, satisfaction levels were high, and over 80% self -reported implementing at 
least one tip. The quantitative study found that accessing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service had 
modestly improved a range of nutritional outcomes, most notably diets among young children.  
• Field partners play a crucial role in providing a face -to-face presence that supports users by 
getting registered, reinforcing messages, and enhancing the effectiveness of t he service.  
• SMS remains an appropriate channel for delivering information to women. SMS may be 
particularly well suited to the Tanzanian context, given that literacy levels are relatively high (for 
sub-Saharan Africa), and the country is united by the lang uage of Swahili.  
• It is important to target men with awareness -raising so that they are more likely to permit 
partners to access phones. However, it is less important to enrol men as users on the system.  
• The mHealth Tanzania -PPP will need to adopt the most effective channel for reaching the next 
generation of users, given increasing use of smartphones, social media , and the internet.  
• As Wazazi Nipendeni  can trace its roots back to Voxiva in 2001, the study highlights the 
importance of a long history of inve stment, partnerships, and political commitment in nurturing 
a facility to the point where it can successfully implement an information dissemination service 
(and other  service s) at national scale.  
• The ability to broker a complex set of partnerships with a  diverse range of stakeholder groups 
has been crucial to the success of the service. These partnerships have been successful due, 
at least partly, to the personal skills of the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP team.  
• The Wazazi Nipendeni  service yields substantial ind irect benefits to mobile operators in terms 
of increased ARPU. The effect size  had in the quant itative study was at  least a 10% increase in 
ARPU ( TZS 510/month), and is likely to be higher still  at national scale . This is as a result of 
women becoming more confident in their use of phones. There was no evidence that Wazazi 
Nipendeni  users held on to their SIM cards for longer (reduced churn).  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact ix  
• Demonstrating that Wazazi Nipendeni  generates real revenue for operator s opens up 
possibilities for alternative commercial business models. Analysis has focused on two 
hypothetical cases representing opportunities for replicating an mHealth agency, delivering a 
service similar to Wazazi Nipendeni , in another country. An in -house mHealth service 
developed by an MNO appears to be the most attractive proposition for two key reasons. 
Firstly, all of the increase in revenue is retained by the MNO , and secondly, the real cost to an 
operator of sending SMS messages is minimal. Based on an initial investment of £312,500 to 
cover the cost of product development (UX research, monitoring and evaluation, content 
localisation), a scenario based on positive assumptions on operating costs, ARPU and the 
effect size (increase in ARPU), indicate s that a service could provide an IRR of approximately 
70% over a four-year period.  
• Less attractive, although possibly still viable, is an independent content provider model; the 
provider would need to pay a bulk SMS price for all messages sent, and it would need to share 
revenue with each participating operator. A scenario based on posit ive assumptions on 
operating costs, ARPU and the effect size (increase in ARPU), and revenue share (50%) 
indicates that a service could only provide a positive IRR over a 6 -year period.  However, it is 
unlikely that an aggregator could convince an MNO to sh are ‘increased ARPU’ – as an indirect 
benefit ; tracking and allocating such would be a challenge.  
• The business model continues to be a multi -sided platform business model that provides value 
to funders with a health mandate ( Ministry of Health, Community D evelopment, Gender, Elderly 
and Children ( MoHCDGEC ) and CDC) , who pay for the service, thereby enabling users to 
access it free of charge. As the MoHCDGEC  assume s responsibility for more of  the activities 
conducted by the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, the business  model will tend towards a hybrid of a 
government -to-citizen model and the multi -sided platform.  
• Despite vulnerabilities of the current business model to continued funding from CDC, and free 
SMS messages donated  by MNOs , the model articulated by the mHealt h Tanzania -PPP 
appears to be sustainable . The mHealth Tanzania -PPP continues to enter into agreement s 
with new public health programmes , recent policy documents suggest that continued donor 
funding is likely to be forthcoming , and negotiations with CDC for  renewed donor funding are at 
an advanced stage . There may be merit, therefore , in the donor funded business model.  
• In the event that a health information service provider is permitted to levy charges (e.g. in other 
countries), p ossible mechanisms for revenue generation include charg ing NGO/ gov ernment  
clients , sponsoring of messages as a form of advertising (e.g. by fast moving consumer goods  
(FMCG ) companies), and commission from sales of private health sector financial products  
(e.g. life insurance) . 
• Telecommunications companies have come under pressure from the Government of Tanzania 
as part of its anti -corruption campaign. Companies have been required to make shares 
available to the Tanzanian public, and several mobile compani es have been charged with a 
range of charges, including tax evasion. Support for Wazazi Nipendeni  has political capital in 
this context, and operators have now signed agreements directly with MoHCDGEC , rather than 
indirectly with the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP. Previously, operators’ promotion of Wazazi 
Nipendeni has been weak so they should be supported to capitalise on the positive brand of 
Wazazi Nipendeni . 
• Although SMS remains an appropriate medium for reaching women, data -based services may 
split the market.  Emerging mHealth services exploit the potential of the internet, of 
smartphones, of data acquisition and analysis, and of mobile money services.  This is 
consistent with trends in the telecoms market of g rowth in data and mobile money . mHealth Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact x  
services wil l need to be agile as they incorporate emerging technologies into their service 
offering.  
 
 
 
  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xi  
Table of contents  
Acknowledgements  i 
Disclaimer  ii 
Data management  iii 
Executive summary  iv 
mNutrition in Tanzania  iv 
Evaluation design  iv 
The history of Wazazi Nipendeni  v 
The Wazazi Nipendeni service  v 
Busine ss models and sustainability  vii 
Conclusions  viii 
Table of contents  xi 
List of figures and tables  xiv 
List o f abbreviations  xvi 
1 Introduction  1 
1.1 mNutrition  1 
1.2 Objectives  1 
1.3 Research questions of the business modelling component  2 
1.4 Purpose and scope of the business modelling endline report  3 
1.5 Organisation of the report  4 
2 The mNutrition intervention  5 
2.1 Study region context  6 
2.2 Summary of the quantitative component approach  7 
2.3 Summary of the qualitative component approach  8 
3 Evaluation design  9 
3.1 Study design  9 
3.2 Data collectio n methods  9 
3.3 Ethical considerations and approval  10 
3.4 Limitations  11 
4 Wazazi Nipendeni – the background  12 
4.1 The vision for mNutrition  12 
4.2 History of Wazazi Nipendeni  13 
4.3 Partnerships  14 
4.4 Developments  in Tanzania  16 
5 Review of the business model  19 
5.1 Introduction  19 
5.2 Customer segments  19 
5.3 Value proposition  20 
5.4 Channels  23 
5.5 Customer relationships  25 
5.6 Revenue streams and indirect benefits  26 
5.7 Key resources  27 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xii  
5.8 Key activiti es 27 
5.9 Key partnerships  28 
5.10  Costs and investment  29 
5.11  The business model  29 
6 Analysis of users  31 
6.1 Overview  31 
6.2 Growth in user numbers  31 
6.3 Understanding users and partners  32 
7 Financial viability of business models  34 
7.1 Overview of business models  34 
7.2 The financial model  35 
7.3 Public good model  36 
7.4 Commerci al content provider  39 
7.5 In-house MNO service  43 
8 Changes in the mobile ecosystem  46 
8.1 The political economy  46 
8.2 Deve lopments in the market  47 
8.3 Trends in mHealth Innovations  49 
8.4 mHealth innovations  50 
9 Discussion  52 
9.1 Role of governme nt 52 
9.2 Theory of change  52 
9.3 MNOs  56 
9.4 Possible mechanisms for revenue generation  56 
9.5 Trends in mHealth services  56 
9.6 Financial viability and scenarios  57 
9.7 Looking back  58 
9.8 Looking to the future  58 
10 Concl usions  59 
10.1  The product  59 
10.2  Partnerships  60 
10.3  Business models  60 
10.4  Telecoms industry  61 
References  62 
Annex A  Terms of reference  64 
Annex B  Stakeholder contact list  74 
Annex C  Review of the business model  75 
C.1 Introduction  75 
C.2 The Osterwalder and Pigneur framework  75 
C.3 Customer segments  77 
C.4 Value pr oposition  79 
C.5 Channels  82 
C.6 Customer relationships  87 
C.7 Revenue streams and indirect benefits  87 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xiii  
C.8 Key resources  89 
C.9 Key activiti es 90 
C.10  Key partnerships  91 
C.11  Costs and investment  93 
Annex D  Analysis of users  94 
D.1 Overview  94 
D.2 Growth in user numbers  95 
D.3 Understanding users  98 
D.4 Partner programmes  100 
D.5 Stage at registration  102 
D.6 Duration of use of service  104 
Annex E  Cost data utilised for the financial model  108 
Annex F  Technology and mobile business models  111 
Annex G  Technology mHealth innovations  115 
 
  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xiv  
List of figures  and tables  
Figure 1:  Iringa region in Tanzania  ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
Figure 2:  Organisations involved in Wazazi Nipendeni ................................ ..........................  15 
Figure 3:  Mix of active users (as at November 2018)  ................................ ............................  19 
Figure 4:  How often was the mNutrition conten t deemed to be useful?  ................................ . 21 
Figure 5:  Most and least useful mNutrition message topics, by gender  ................................ . 22 
Figure 6:  Trust in sources of health information  ................................ ................................ .... 24 
Figure 7:  Sources of health information  ................................ ................................ ................  25 
Figure 8:  Key partnerships (business model)  ................................ ................................ ........  29 
Figure 9:  Growth in active users  ................................ ................................ ...........................  31 
Figure 10:  Registrations by partner  ................................ ................................ .........................  32 
Figure 11:  Estimated user numbers profile for four -year period ................................ ...............  35 
Figure 12:  Contribution margin ................................ ................................ ................................  37 
Figure 13:  Profits – commercial content provider  ................................ ................................ .... 40 
Figure 14:  Sensitivity of IRR to increase in ARPU ( content provider)  ................................ ...... 41 
Figure 15:  Sensitivity of IRR to ARPU  ................................ ................................ .....................  42 
Figure 16:  Operating costs (four -year period)  ................................ ................................ .........  42 
Figure 17:  Sensitivity of IRR to increase in ARPU (in -house MNO)  ................................ .........  44 
Figure 18:  Sensitivity of IRR to ARPU (10% effect  size) ................................ ..........................  45 
Figure 19:  Market share of voice subscribers (from TCRA data)  ................................ .............  48 
Figure 20:  Growth of internet subscribers (from TCRA data)  ................................ ..................  48 
Figure 21:  3G and 4G coverage as % of population (2018) (Okeleke, 2019)  ..........................  50 
Figure 22:  mHealth theory of change diagram  ................................ ................................ ........  53 
Figure 23    Building blocks in the canvas (derived from Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010))  ....... 75 
Figure 24:  Mix of active users (as at November 2018)  ................................ ............................  77 
Figure 25:  How often was the mNutrition content deemed to be useful?  ................................ . 80 
Figure 26:  Most and least useful mNutrition message topics, by gender  ................................ . 81 
Figure 27:  Which tips from mNutrition content have respondents put in practice, by gender?  . 82 
Figure 28:  Trust in sources of health information  ................................ ................................ .... 85 
Figure 29:  Sources of health information  ................................ ................................ ................  85 
Figure 30:  Receipt of mNutrition messages in the last month, treatmen t group only  ...............  86 
Figure 31:  Monthly registrations  ................................ ................................ ..............................  96 
Figure 32:  Anomalies in opt -out dates ................................ ................................ .....................  97 
Figure 33:  Monthly opt -outs ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 97 
Figure 34:  Growth in active users  ................................ ................................ ...........................  98 
Figure 35:  Registrations by partner  ................................ ................................ .........................  99 
Figure 36:  Sources used for self -registration (no partner)  ................................ .....................  100 
Figure 37:  Categories of users registered  ................................ ................................ .............  100 
Figure 38:  Monthly registrations – NHIF  ................................ ................................ ................  101 
Figure 39:  Monthly self -registrations (no partner)  ................................ ................................ .. 101 
Figure 40:  Monthly registrations – Toto Health  ................................ ................................ ...... 102 
Figure 41:  Stage at registration – pregnant women  ................................ ...............................  103 
Figure 42:  Stage at registration – supporters of pregnant wom en ................................ .........  103 
Figure 43:  Stage at registration – pregnant women (partner and no partner)  ........................  104 
Figure 44:  Age of child at registration (mothers and supporters)  ................................ ...........  104 
Figure 45:  Categories of users leaving the system (with valid opt -out dates)  ........................  105 
Figure 46:  Dura tion in system (users who have opted out)  ................................ ...................  106 
Figure 47:  Duration in system by categories (users who have opted out)  .............................  107 
Figure 48:  3G and 4G coverage as % of population (2018) (Okeleke, 2019)  ........................  111 
Figure 49:  Breakdown of mobile internet connections by technology (GSMA, 2019)  .............  111 
Figure 50:  Connected and unconnected populations in Tanzania (Okeleke, 2019)  ...............  112 
Figure 51:  Breakdown of revenue by service (MTN Ghana) (Esselaar and Stork, 2018)  ....... 113 
 
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xv  
Table 1:  Responses to question ‘How did you hear about the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign?’  23 
Table 2:  Registrations and opt -outs; assisted and self -registrations  33 
Table 3:  Contribution margin for each operator (asymptotic)  38 
Table 4:  Theory of change reviewed  54 
Table 5  Description of Building blocks in the canvas  76 
Table 6:  Responses to  question ‘Have you heard of the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign?’  83 
Table 7:  Responses to question ‘How did you hear about the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign?’  83 
Table 8:  What parties give and get from partnership relationships  92 
Table 9:  Field partners and registrations  93 
Table 10:   Preparation of registration data for analysis  95 
Table 11:   Sources used by partners to register users (top 11)  99 
Table 12:   Proportion of registered users no longer active after two years  100 
Table 13:   Registrati ons and opt -outs; assisted and self -registrations  106 
Table 14    Capital cost items  108 
Table 15    Operational expenditure items  109 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xvi  
List of abbreviations  
Aids Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome  
API Application programming interface  
ARPU  Average revenue per user  
CCBRT  Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in Tanzania  
CDC  US Center s for Disease Control and Prevention  
COUNSENUTH  Centre for Counselling Nutrition and Health Care  
CSR  Corporate social responsibility  
DFID  UK Department for International Development  
DHS  Demographic and Health Survey  
EGPAF  Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric  AIDS Foundation  
FASTA  Fast-track A ntiretroviral (ARV)  Refills Scheme  
FCDO  Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office  
FMCG  Fast moving consumer goods  
GAIN  Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition  
GCP  Global Content Partnership  
GDP  Gross domestic product  
GSM A GSM Association  
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus  
HPHB  Healthy Pregnancy , Healthy Baby  
ICT Information and communication technologies  
IDS Institute of Development Studies  
IFPRI  International Food Policy Research Institute  
ITT Intent to treat  
IVR Interac tive voice r esponse  
IYCF  Infant and young c hild feeding  
JHCCP  Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs  
LATE  Local average treatment effects  
MNO  Mobile network o perator  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact xvii  
MOHSW  Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Tanzania)  
MoHCDGEC  Ministry of Healt h, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children  
(Tanzania)  
NACP  National AIDS Control Programme  
NBS National Bureau of Statistics  
NGO  Non-governmental organisation  
NHIF  National health insurance fund  
OECD  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  
OPM  Oxford Policy Management  
OTT Over the top 
PEPFAR  President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief  
PPP Public –private partnership  
SBCC TWG  Social and Behaviour Change Communication Technical Working Group  
SIM Subscriber Identity M odule  
SMS  Short Messaging Service  
TB Tuberculosis  
TCRA  Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority  
TFNC  Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre  
TTCM  Text to Change Mobile  
TTCL  Tanzania Telecommunications Company Limited  
TZS Tanzania shillings  
UNICEF  United Nat ions Children’s Fund  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
USSD  Unstructured supplementary service data  
UX User experience  
VAS Value added s ervices  
WHO  World Health Organization  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 1  
1 Introduction  
1.1 mNutrition  
mNutrition is a global initiative supported by FCDO , managed by  GSMA, and implemented by in -
country MNOs  and third party providers  to use mobile technology , that s ought  to improve the 
health and nutritional status of children and a dults in the developing world. The potential to utilise 
mobile technology to change attitudes, knowledge, behaviours, and practices around health and 
agriculture for improved nutritional status has been recognised for some time, but to date there 
have been  no rigorous evaluations of m -services at scale. A consortium of researchers from 
Gamos, IDS, and IFPRI were  contracted to conduct a rigorous mixed -methods evaluation to 
estimate the impact of mNutrition on children and adults , and to understand how the co ntext and 
the components of the mNutrition intervention shape its impact.  
In Tanzania, the service, Wazazi Nipendeni, focuse d on the provision of nutrition and health 
information and services to vulnerable pregnant women and caregivers of children under t he age 
of five on their mobile phones , with the goal of improving nutrition outcomes and behaviours for 
mothers and young children.  
1.2 Objectives   
The mNutrition evaluation intends  to understand and measure the impact, cost -effectiveness , and 
commercial viabi lity of the mNutrition product using a mixed -methods evaluation design. The 
evaluation includes a quantitative component, a qualitative component , and a business model 
analysis. The evaluations were  conducted by a c onsortium of researchers from Gamos , IDS , and 
IFPRI. The team  drew  on a number of methods and interlinked workstreams to gather evidence 
about the impact of the mNutrition intervention in Tanzania : 
• a quantitative impact evaluation , employing a cluster randomis ed controlled trial  to determine 
the causal  effect of the service ;  
• a qualitative impact evaluation , which consists of three qualitative data collection rounds (i.e. 
an initial exploratory qualitative study, in -depth case studies at midline , and rapid explanatory 
qualitative  work after the quantitative endline survey data collection) , which  aims to provide an 
understanding of the context, underlying mechani sms of change , and the implementation 
process of mNutrition ; and  
• a business model and cost -effectiveness evaluation  emplo ying stakeholder interviews, 
commercial and end -user data, document analysis , and evidence from the quantitative and 
qualitative evaluations to generate a business model framework and  to estimate the wider 
imputed benefits from the VAS for the range of sta keholders involved.  
The mixed -method evaluation design aims to address the following research questions  specified in 
the terms of reference ( Annex A ): 
1. What are the impacts and cost -effectiveness of mobile phone -based nutrition and agriculture 
services on nutrition, health, and livelihood outcomes, especially among women, children, and 
the extreme poor?  
2. How effective are mobile phone -based services in reaching, increasing the knowledge, and 
changing the behaviour of the specific target groups?  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 2  
3. Has the process of adapting globally agreed messages to local contexts led to content that is 
relev ant to the needs of children, women, and poor farmers in their specific context?  
4. What factors make mobile phone -based services effective in promoting and achieving 
behaviour change (if observed), leading to improved nutrition and livelihood outcomes?  
5. How c ommercially viable are the different business models being employed at country level?  
6. What lessons can be learned about best practices in the design and implementation of mobile 
phone -based nutrition services to ensure (a) behaviour change and (b) continue d private  sector 
engagement in different countries?  
1.3 Research questions of the business modelling component  
The business model and cost -effectiveness component of the evaluation is designed to contribute 
evidence to help answer the first of the broad resear ch questions specified in the terms of 
reference (Annex A ), and can be considered as specific to the following research questions : 
• What are the impacts and cost -effec tiveness of mobile phone -based nutrition services on 
nutrition, health and livelihood outcomes, especially among women, children and the extreme 
poor?  
• How commercially viable are the different business models being employed at country level?  
• What lessons  can be learned about best practices in the design and implementation of mobile 
phone -based nutrition services to ensure (a) behaviour change and (b) continued private sector 
engagement in different countries?  
The mNutrition intervention is being external ly evaluated in two countries.  In Tanzania, where the 
research consortium is evaluating mNutrition within a broader mHealth service , the intervention 
aims to promote behaviour change around maternal and early childhood health and nutrition. The 
target grou p of the quantitative component was  therefore comprised of pregnant women and 
caregivers of children under the age of five years who reside in rural areas of the study region 
(Iringa).  In Ghana, the intervention was implemented via an mAgri culture programm e in which 
nutrition information has been integrated with crop information as part of a package of agriculture 
support services.  The target group were  low-income farmers in rural areas throughout the country.  
The terms of reference refer to the impacts and effectiveness of mobile phone -based services, so 
the scope of the evaluation is the mobile -based service as deployed under the mNutrition 
programme, rather than the incremental impact of support provided through the mNutrition 
programme.  For th e quantitative sample of pregnant women and caregivers of young children in 
rural Iringa that were  selected to participate in the quantitative study, the evaluation focuses on 
estimating the causal effect of access to the mNutrition service .  
The business modelling relies on other components in the evaluation study. To determine whether 
the mNutrition programme  in Tanzania  was meeting its stated objectives and targets, the 
quantitative impact evaluation employ ed a cluster randomis ed controlled tria l to determine the 
causal  effect of the service. That is, the evaluation identif ied how nutrition -related behaviours, 
knowledge, and outcomes were  altered for service beneficiary households relative to their 
counterfactual levels: it sought to determine what the value of the outcome would have been for 
beneficiary households in the absence of access to the mNutrition service . While the quantitative 
evaluation was designed to produce evidence to contribute to the broader research consortium’s 
answers to the first two questions listed in the terms of reference , IFPRI also specified a set of 
primary and secondary research questions that were  answered using information  collected by the 
quantitative research team. For each of the primary and secondary research questions, the 
evaluation focuse d on estimating the causal impact of the offer of access to the mNutrition service  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 3  
and of registration for  the mNutrition content  among households induced to participate in the 
service by the treatment offer . The primary research questions addressed through the quantitative 
evaluation were : 
1. What is the impact of the mNutrition service  on women’s dietary diversity?  
2. What is the impact o f the mNutrition service  on IYCF  practices?  
3. What is the impact of the mNutrition service  on nutritional status for children under 12 
months of age at baseline?  
The three primary research questions specify the main outcomes that were studied under the 
quant itative component of the evaluation. These directly contribute to answering the first overall 
study question of the mNutrition evaluation (see Section 1.2, above). T he impact questions feed 
into the cost -effectiveness analysis presented here.  
The intended audience for the business modelling endline report is FCDO , along with other 
organisations involved in mNutrition and mHealth programmes globally (including local MN Os and 
non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) implementing mNutrition services), national 
governments —in particular, MoHCDGEC  and TFNC  in Tanzania —international agencies and 
donors, and community -level health workers.  It should also be of interest to MNOs that are 
implementing or considering implementing a similar service. The reports from the evaluation will be 
publicly available on IFPRI’s and IDS’s websites.  
1.4 Purpose and scope of the business modelling endline report  
This report is a milestone in the evaluation study : it documents the journey of the Wazazi 
Nipendeni  service in Tanzania  supported by GSMA (and FCDO ) over the duration of the 
evaluation. The report is one of four endline deliverables. This report should be read in conjunction 
with the base line business modelling report (Batchelor  et al., 2017) , the endline cost -effectiveness 
report (Batchelor  et al., 2019) , and the quantitative endline report (Gilligan et al., 2019), which 
provides evidence of  the impact of access to the service on both primary and secondary outcomes. 
The qualitative endline report (Barnett et al., 2019 )2 gives additional insights into consumer 
priorities and behaviours and how the service was used.  
The baseline business modellin g report covered the initial data gathering stage (up to March 
2017). At this point, the GSMA grant was finishing,  but the service continued to develop as it had 
had received direct funding through the mNutrition programme, so progress was in no way 
depend ent on the mNutrition support.  
The findings from the four endline deliverables described above will be combined and triangulated 
in a workshop planned for 20 20. The two -day workshop will examine the insights from the 
quantitative, qualitative, cost -effect iveness , and business modelling components of the evaluation 
and will be attended by the lead partners from IDS, IFPRI , and Gamos responsible for each of 
these components. The main purpose of the workshop will be to disseminate learnings from the 
impact ev aluation in Tanzania . 
 
2 This qualitative research report is commonly referred to simply as the ‘qualitative research’ throughout this report.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 4  
1.5 Organisation of the report  
Section 2 describes the mNutrition intervention in Tanzania while section 3 describes the broader 
evaluation design.  The business modelling narrative tracks changes that have occurred during the 
course of t he study, and  the reasons behind the decisions made, so Section 4 starts by reviewing 
the thinking behind the mNutrition programme and by exploring the history of the mHealth  
Tanzania -PPP. The business modelling canvas is reviewed in Section 5, partly by summarising 
findings from the baseline report, bu t enhanced with further details gathered in the intervening 
period. The mHealth Tanzania -PPP managed to source registration data requested by the team, 
and so, based on these data,  the analysis  presented  in Section 6 provides insights into growth 
trends, how people use the service, and the importance of partners. Estimates of active user 
numbers from this analysis form the basis of the financial model used to explore the financial 
viability of the current business model , as well as hypothetical scenarios that represent possibilities 
for setting up a similar service in another country (Section 7). Telecoms is an important and 
dynamic market, and Section 8 presents an overview of key developments that have taken place 
during the study  period , focusing on the political economy and technical developments. Finally, 
Sections 9 and 10 present a discussion of key issues raised in the report, along with a set of 
conclusions and learnings.  
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 5  
2 The mNutrition intervention  
The mNutrition initiative is a five -year global programme supported by FCDO , managed  and 
supported by GSMA, and implemented by in -country MNOs and third-party organisations , that 
seeks to use mobile technology to improve the health and nutritional status of children and adults 
in low -income countries around the world. The mNutrition initiative was implemented through 
existing mAgri and mHealth programmes in 12 countries throughout sub -Saharan Africa and South 
Asia. The nutrition content aim ed to promote behaviour change around key farm ing practices and 
around dietary and child feeding practices likely to result in improved nutritional health within a 
household.  
In Tanzania, the mNutrition service that is the focus of the evaluation and  of this report was an 
integrated programme that enhance d an existing SMS -based health communication campaign 
targeting pregnant women and mothers of young children , known as HPHB . The mass media 
programme accompanying the service is called Wazazi Nipendeni. The Wazazi Nipendeni 
programme is a CDC -funded pr oject bringing together multiple partners contributing towards 
shared goals. Phase 1 of the service, launched in 2012, was initially developed in coordination with 
the Tanzania Capacity Communication Project, a United States Agency for International 
Develo pment  (USAID) funded service led by JHCCP. Wazazi Nipendeni is one of several 
behaviour change services using methods as diverse as TV drama series, radio distance learning 
for community health volunteers , and several integrated mass media campaigns. The m ass media 
campaign was developed by JHCCP, while the SMS component of the campaign is led by the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP. The PPP was initiated by MoHCDGEC, with financial support from CDC. 
Wazazi Nipendeni is available nationally and on all phone networks.  
The HPHB SMS service sen t free text messages with healthcare information to pregnant women, 
mothers with newborns, and male supporters and general information -seekers in Tanzania to drive 
health -seeking behaviour. The SMS messages were sent in Swahili, to w omen up to 16 weeks 
post-partum on a range of pregnancy and early childhood issues , timed to coincide with the stage 
of the pregnancy and the age of the child. Anyone interested in receiving healthy pregnancy 
information can text the word ‘MTOTO’ (child) t o the short code 15001. Registrants receive 
instructional messages, allowing them to indicate the woman’s current week or month of 
pregnancy (or the age of the newborn baby) during the enrolment process. This process allows the 
recipients to receive specif ic text messages relevant to the time and stage of pregnancy or early 
childhood. The message frequency also varies depending on the life stage of the woman and child, 
ranging from nearly daily during key periods of pregnancy to less than weekly for mothers  of 
children over the age of two. Nutrition -related content was a small component of the original HPHB 
SMS service but was expanded substantially with the addition of the content contributed through 
GSMA under the mNutrition service. mNutrition added rough ly 120 nutrition messages , which are 
delivered to mothers or caregivers of children up to five years old. At the beginning of the study 
period , HPHB and mNutrition were available to households in all regions of Tanzania, on all mobile 
phone networks . Participating individuals receive the text messages free of charge. The resulting 
product is referred to as the mNutrition service in the remaining sections of this report.  
The 120 nutrition messages included in the mNutrition service were  drawn from 42 factsheets on 
nutrition -related behaviours identified as key determinants of outcomes that were developed by the 
Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition ( GAIN ) together with local partners:  the Centre for 
Counselling, Nutrition and Health Care  (COUNSENUTH) and Every1mobile. The information 
contained in these factsheets was then adapted to the context of Tanzania and made mobile -ready 
by the local content providers under the guidance of MoHCDGEC and TFNC. As a part of the 
adaptation process , the message content was tested with potential users in Tanzania, after which Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 6  
the language and substance were adjusted and messages that were identified as not being useful 
were removed from consideration for the final service. The message testing process high lighted 
the importance of replacing technical terminology that was likely to be unfamiliar to the message 
recipients with language that was more commonly used but that still conveyed the evidence -based 
content of the original factsheets. Included in the fi nal service are messages that encourage the 
consumption of iron folic acid tablets during pregnancy and messages that promote vitamin A -rich 
complementary feeding practices , and the inclusion of animal source foods in young children’s 
diets, as well as mes sages providing information on other behaviours accepted as being critical 
determinants of nutrition outcomes. For more details on the intervention, see the baseline report 
(Gilligan  et al.,  2018) . 
2.1 Study region context  
The United Republic of Tanzania is an East African nation with an estima ted population of 57.3 
million (2016), 68 % of whom reside in rural areas (World Bank , 2018) . As at 2018, 64 % of working -
age males and 69 % of working -age females were employed in agriculture (International Labour 
Organizati on, 2018) , with the main agricultural export commodities including tobacco, cashew nuts, 
coffee, cotton, and sesame seed (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , 2018) . 
Tanzania is divided into 31 regions and regions are further subdivided into a total of 169 districts. 
Child undernutrition is a pervasive problem in Tanzania, particularly among young children. In the 
2016 DHS, 34.4 % of children under five were identified as being stunted (height -for-age z -score 
below -2). Wasting is less common, with only 4.4 % of measured children under five having a 
weight -for-height z -score below the -2 threshold. Ov er half (57.7 %) of measured children between 
6 and 59 months of age are anaemic (DHS, 2016) . 
The quantitative and qualitative components of the evaluation took place within the three rural 
districts of the Iringa region in Tanzania: Iringa rural, Kilolo, and Mufindi.  Figure 1 displays the 
location of Iringa region in Tanzania. Iringa became an independent region in 1964, b efore which it 
was a part of the Southern Highland Province. As at the 2012 Population and Housing Census, the 
total population of Iringa region was estimated to be 0.9 million, 73 % of whom resided in a rural 
area. Agriculture is the primary means of livel ihood for most households in the rural parts of Iringa 
region: roughly 89 % of households in Iringa rural, 92 % of households in Mufindi, and 92 % of 
households in Kilolo are involved in agriculture. At the time of the census, a verage household size 
was 4.2 a nd the adult literacy rate was 79 % among the rural population (Population and Housing 
Census , 2012) . In Tanzania more broadly, ch ild undernutrition is a severe problem in Iringa. 41.6 % 
of children under the age of five in the 2016 DHS were stunted. This figure was nearly 7 
percentage points higher than the national average, suggesting child malnutrition may be more 
prevalent in Irin ga than elsewhere in Tanzania. Additionally, 3.6 % of children under five were 
wasted and 40.3 % of children aged 6–59 months of age were anaemic.  
In part, Iringa was selected as the location for the study because of a dearth of existing 
relationships betwee n mHealth Tanzania -PPP and organisations with a presence in the region. 
Consistent with this, the mNutrition baseline qualitative report found that households in study 
villages typically rely on health workers at local health clinics and community health w orkers for 
their nutrition information needs. Often the information from health clinic workers is received during 
antenatal visits, which also involve the provision of non -nutrition -related information, testing, and 
other services, sometimes leaving little  time for issues related to nutrition (Barnett  et al. , 2017) . 
Though at the start of the study there was limited availability of nutrition information and nutrition 
services, the Government of Tanzania has prioritised improving nutrition outcomes nationwide 
through different initiatives —see more detail in the basel ine report (Gilligan et al. , 2018) . Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 7  
Figure 1:  Iringa region in Tanzania  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al., (forthcoming, 2020  
2.2 Summary of the quantitative component approach  
The quantitative evaluation was designed as a cluster randomi sed control trial, with two stages of 
randomi sation : a village -level randomi sation where villages were assigned to a treatment group or 
to a control group , and a household -level randomi sation within treatment villages whereby 
households were  either assigned to receive the mNutrition content on just the mobile phone of the 
primary female or on the mobile phones of both th e primary female and the primary male . In 
villages that were assigned to the treatment group, sampled households were offered access to 
the mNutrition content on their mobile phone, free of charge, through a door -to-door, in -person 
visit. In villages that were assigned to the control group, no offer of access to the service  was 
made. Though registration for the mNutrition service  was possible for all households  regardless of 
treatment assignment , pre-baseline discussions with the organisation implementing t he mNutrition 
service in Tanzania suggested that take-up of the ir existing  service  was low in the study region .  
From the randomly selected sample of villages participating in the evaluation, IFPRI randomly 
assigned households in half the villages to a tre atment group (T) —where sampled households 
received a door -to-door offer of access to the content —and households in the other half of 
participating villages to a control group (C) that did not receive a similar offer. Because the 
assignment of villages was random, any average difference in outcomes between households in 
the two groups can be attributed to the difference in access to the mNutrition service.  
In addition to the village -level randomisation , the evaluation also included a second -stage 
household -level randomisation within treatment villages : households in treatment villages where 
both the mother of the young child or pregnant woman (the primary female) and the primary male  
own distinct mobile phones (and were surveyed) were randomly allocated to ei ther just receive the 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 8  
mNutrition content on the mobile phone of the primary female (T -F), or to receive the mNutrition 
content on the mobile phone of the primary female and the mobile phone of the primary male (T -
F+M). By comparing behaviours and outcomes between treatment households in the T -F+M group 
and those in the T -F group , and contrasting both the T -F and the T -F+M group to households in 
control villages that would have been eligible for the household -level randomisation , it was 
expected that learnin g would be generated about how information flows between spouses.  
2.3 Summary of the qualitative component approach  
The sample selection for the qualitative study was purposive and based on the quantitative 
baseline data. Three sites were selected from the sam ple of 90 treatment villages . At community 
level, the main data collection tools were semi -structured in -depth interviews with treatment 
mothers and fathers (i.e. mothers and fathers who were signed up to receive Wazazi Nipendeni  
plus mNutrition messages ) by the Oxford Policy Management ( OPM ) Tanzania  team during the 
quantitative baseline survey, key informant interviews, and focus group discussions with treatment 
mothers and fathers and elderly women.  In-depth interviews were conducted with mothers who 
had signed up to receive the Wazazi Nipendeni  mNutrition service on their phone or their partners’ 
mobile phone as part of the baseline survey.  In-depth interviews  were also conducted with fathers 
whose partners were signed up to the service, who received me ssages on behalf of or in addition 
to their wives.  Key informant interviews were conducted with influential and knowledgeable people 
in each village, including village chairmen and/or community health workers. The purpose was to 
explore their knowledge, aw areness , and opinion s of the mNutrition messages that people in the 
community had been receiving, and to capture information on current contextual issues relating to 
maternal and child nutrition.  Focus group discussions were carried out with four or five p articipants 
per group. The aim was to select heterogeneous groups of mothers (by occupation, age, number 
of children) who had signed up to the Wazazi Nipendeni  plus mNutrition service.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 9  
3 Evaluation design  
3.1 Study design  
This report is constructed based on  interviews with key stakeholders and access to secondary 
data.  A list of contacts made can be found in Annex B.  
The study has used the Osterwalder and Pigneur framework  to structur e insights into the business 
model (Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2010).  Few business  models in the 21st century are 
straightforward and simple.  Production of a product, sales of the product , and revenue from that 
product are only a part of the overall model.  Revenues are often made based on associated 
advertising, or on the value the product adds to the brand.  The landscape report published as part 
of this study details some of the possibilities for MNOs (Barnett et al., 2016).  
In this report, we use the Osterwalder and Pigneur  canvas as a basis for the analysis . An 
introduction to the  framework is given in Annex C . While this generally works well, we acknowledge 
that the canvas is good for taking a snapshot of business model s, but in this report documenting 
the timeline and history of the product is important.  These business model insights are intended to 
answer the key research question: ‘How commercially viable are the different business models 
being employed at country level? ’  
In a development  sector in which  public funds are increasingly under scrutiny for value for money, 
the rollout of a public good via a private sector commercially sustainable mechanism is very 
attractive.  The heart of the question  just quoted  is predicated on assuring that  future actions taken 
by donors and  the private sector regarding similar products are informed and lessons are learned, 
in order to increase the chances of sustainability.  Hence , while we try to use the Osterwalder and 
Pigneur  framework in an applied manne r, there are times when  we have document ed the ‘back 
story’ that lay behind certain decisions.  
The aim of the baseline report was to provide a detailed description of each of the building blocks 
of the business model canvas as at the  time of  the beginning of the independent study. That report  
also provide d a review of operating experience since the beginning of the mNutrition projec t, on the 
basis that that may have provide d the context for changes that had taken place in the product 
design.  This report builds on the baseline, bringing the canvas up to date.  
3.2 Data collection methods  
The endline report is based on information collected  from multiple sources:  
• qualitative interviews conducted with stakeholders and MNOs in Tanzania ;  
• commercial data provided by stakeholders and MNOs (or brokered by GSMA) ;  
• monitoring data gathered by Altai; 
• data available in published literature ; 
• additional, unpublished information on costs and business models  from g overnment 
stakeholders and alternative service providers ; 
• the quantitative component of the study, led by IFPRI  (Gilligan  et al., 2019) ; and  
• the quali tative component that focused on consumer perceptions, led by IDS (Barnett et al., 
2019) . Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 10  
3.2.1  Processing information  
Evaluation activities carried out by Gamos to inform the endline report s include d the following : 
• Field visits to establish and maintain relati onships with key stakeholders. Interviews conducted 
with key representatives of stakeholder institutions to gather additional data to populate the 
Osterwalder and Pigneur framework. Ongoing communication and field visits undertaken to 
monitor developments in services and to track the commercial justification for changes.  
• Populating the Osterwalder and Pigneur canvas with information gleaned from reports 
previously published under the mNutrition programmes (e.g. UX testing, case studies, rapid 
feedback surve ys, etc.), as well as grey literature.   
• Working with IDS and IFPRI to contribute to the design of both qualitative and quantitative 
instruments (both baseline and endline) to incorporate indicators relating to non -financial 
attitudes of customers to servic es, and to MNOs in particular, such as customer satisfaction 
and brand loyalty. These instruments also explore d attitudes towards alternative services 
offered by other providers, e.g. media, face -to-face extension.  
• Interview ing alternative service provide rs to explore alternative business models (among 
alternative mobile services).   
• Analysing financial data with a view to creating a financial model to test key cost sensitivities . 
The process of enquiry and information collection was flexible and responsive to events on the 
ground, given that the service offerings were constantly evolving  (e.g. the publication of significant 
outputs from the research project ). This component of the evaluation is  therefore  based on 
opportunistic gathering of data from key individuals , such as representatives of the core partners 
and other partners to the project.  
3.3 Ethical considerations and approval  
As an overall guiding principle, the research team sought to conduct themselves in a professional 
and ethical manner throughout the work, with strict respect for  the principles of integrity, honesty, 
confidentiality, voluntary participation, impartiality , and the avoidance of personal risk. These 
principle s were informed by the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development 
(OECD ) (2010) Development Assistance Committee Quality Standards for Development 
Evaluation and FCDO ’s ‘Ethics Principles for Research and Evaluation’ , which have been  followed 
for the duration of the evaluation.   
Overall, this component draw s on the qualitative and quantitative data collected in the other two 
components of the evaluation , which have their own ethical protocols.  The key business modelling  
data sources are stakeholder interviews with MNOs and data collection (commercial and 
monitoring data) from MNOs and other relevant organisations.  
Although most research participants were  familiar with the mNutrition programme, and with the 
principle of a n independent evaluation, this component sought  to obtain the  informed consent of 
participants. This was achieved by  sending them  emails and briefing documents describing the 
research.  In particular, we describe d the relationship between the consortium, FCDO, and GSMA, 
in order to avoid any possibility of deception.  Research activities with participants involve d 
interviews only; there were no observational activities.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 11  
While this evaluation component has not involve d any primary data collection from human su bjects 
at community/ household level, ethical considerations are still considered important for all work 
carried out under this component. In particular, GSMA remain highly aware of the commercial 
sensitivities of their partner MNOs, so the issue of commer cial confidentiality is very important for 
this area of work , given that it relies on the sharing of sensitive commercial data. Therefore, the 
Gamos team has paid specific attention to this issue as part of their ongoing work.   
The Gamos  team is currently operating under the non-disclosure agreement signed by GSMA and 
OPM during the inception phase of the project.  Where relevant, stakeholder respondents were 
informed that a  non-disclosure agreement with their trade association has been si gned, and that 
the interview was bound by it.  All the data being gathered fell within the scope of this agreement 
(e.g. development, business plans, marketing, operations, and finances) although there is a 
provision that such information should be designat ed as proprietary or confidential .3  
For the avoidance of doubt, all internal reports shared by Gamos were marked as confidential and 
were not to be circulated outside of the evaluation team.  Any outside reporting will not contain any 
detail that could be  construed as proprietary or confidential information.  
All external reports were and will be shared with key research participants in early draft form in 
order to establish principles of trust and reciprocity.  This is to ensure that participants have  an 
opportunity to confirm that their views have been reported accurately, and that publications do not 
breach their confidentiality requirements.  
As this component draws on qualitative and quantitative data collected through the other two 
workstreams, appropri ate measures were  taken to ensure that the shared data are anonymised 
and there is no risk of confidentiality breach. For the quantitative data, a unique household ID has 
been assigned to each household which allows for following up with respondents as necessary 
without providing access to any personal information  on datasets that are made available for 
analysis. Similarly, all qualitative transcripts are anonymised  and pseudonyms given, and any 
information that can lead to personal identification has been removed.  
3.4 Limitations  
The methodology relie d on the willingness of key stakeholders to share their data and their 
thoughts.  In a commercial environment , this is not always forthcoming, and a limitation of the report 
is that it relies on these shared data. Risks associated with this transfer of data have been 
mitigated as much as possible by clear communication and follow -up with stakeholders. 
Sensitivities among the major mobile operators, along with structural changes and turnover of staff , 
made it difficult for GSMA and the study team to build rela tionships with MNOs.  Changes in 
relationships and personnel (among all stakeholders) were the principal threats to the mitigation 
strategy. The mHealth Tanzania -PPP has been instrumental in securing the data used in the 
report.  
 
 
3 The agreement permits Gamos  to share confidential information among the team if: 1. they need to know; 2. they have 
entered into a confidentiality agreement; and 3. they are not a competitor.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 12  
4 Wazazi Nipendeni – the back ground  
4.1 The vision for mNutrition  
The original GSMA (and FCDO ) vision was to create something different in mHealth.  They had 
seen many mHealth pilots that utilised mobiles and smart devices to strengthen the health system 
of various countries and to offer a consumer -facing product  at scale . Many pilots existed, but few if 
any, scaled activities that were coordinated with the health service nationwide.  The terms of 
reference state that under the mNutrition programme, GSMA was to provide assistance to MNOs 
and partnerships to scale up services ( Annex A ); FCDO ’s vision, then, was to create a service that 
could achieve scale by being made available to MNO subscribers.  
GSMA’s original vision was for a convening space, or clearing house, which a ny party interested in 
providing health -related services could subscribe to.  The complexion of the institution that would 
manage the clearing house was not specified.  It could be some kind of collaborative membership 
organisation, or it could be managed by  a private sector organisation, typically an aggregator (it 
would anyway require an aggregator to set up the links to each of the MNOs in the country). The 
key feature of this vision was that it would lower the barriers of entry to mHealth services – the 
infrastructure and agreements with MNOs would already be in place so any institution wishing to 
set up an mHealth service could use the arrangement to send mobile -based information at 
relatively low cost.  By creating a focal point for mHealth services opera ting within the country, it 
would also promote coordination, collaboration, and sharing of resources, thereby helping to 
address the all too frequent complaint of duplication of effort. By devolving responsibility for 
content, including the nature of the services to be made available by participating organisations, 
the concept had the potential to support the dissemination of diverse content, and to support 
innovative mechanisms for reaching resource -poor mobile phone users.  
The system was expected to work  as follows:  
1. The managing institution would secure a short code valid on all networks.  
2. The first time users would dial into the system, they would be guided through a series of menus 
and questions to complete their profile.  They would then be routed to re levant information 
based on their profile (e.g. gender, pregnant mother, or mother of child under two). Once 
routed to relevant menus, they would be presented with options regarding which type of 
information they wanted to receive, and within that type of information, they could choose from 
relevant content providers.  
3. Once they had chosen the content provider, the profiling information would be sent to that 
content provider, and the user would be signed up to that partner’s service (which may or may 
not in clude further profiling).  
Services were to be made available on a freemium basis, i.e. certain information was to be 
available to users for free, and they would need to pay for other, premium content. The nutrition 
messages, generated as part of the GSMA mNutrition programme, were to be made available as 
free messages.  
In early 2015, GSMA was negotiating with Green Telecom, a Tanzanian private sector company 
that had been founded just over a year  earlier , about a role as a nutritional messaging service . It 
appeared to offer a good fit with the kind of partner that GSMA was looking for, as it had links to 
each of the mobile operators, and was in the business of developing low -cost mobile solutions to 
enable its clients to reach consumers. The company was fo rmed as a result of a merger between 
an aggregator and a platform developer, so it had all the technical skills needed. In the end, Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 13  
however, GSMA entered into a partnership with Wazazi Nipendeni, which had a proven track 
record in delivering SMS content to  mothers.  
The original concept was ambitious, and centred around getting potentially competing 
organisations to collaborate, which is a time -consuming business. Eventually, timescales conspired 
against that concept, and in the first wave of countries, GSM A entered into what might be regarded 
as more conventional partnerships with mobile operators. The partnership in Tanzania with the 
Wazazi Nipendeni product is something of an exception to this rule, as it is hosted by a PPP that, 
although it has agreement s with mobile operators, is independent of any single MNO.  
4.2 History of Wazazi Nipendeni  
Voxiva was founded in 2001 as a disease surveillance system that enabled health workers to 
submit local reports of disease outbreaks using a phone. This was one of the e arliest examples of 
an ICT -based innovation developed to solve a developing world problem. The system enabled 
real-time data collection, data analysis, and dissemination of response information (back to health 
workers in the field). Initially set up in Per u, the Voxiva system was later replicated in Africa. When 
the PEPFAR programme was launched in 2003, it partnered with Voxiva as part of a consortium in 
Rwanda  (Casas and Lajoie, 2005).   
Voxiva then provided a link from early, pioneering work on exploiting  mobile technology in public 
health to the subsequent Phones for Health programme. PEPFAR was keen on working with PPPs  
as a mechanism for achieving its objectives, and it set up seven multi -country PPPs in 2007  
(PEPFAR , 2008), one of which was ‘Phones for Health’. Phones for Health was a PPP between 
Accenture Development Partners, GSM A, Motorola, MTN, and Voxiva . All fund ing initially came 
through  PEPFAR but was administered by CDC.  Other organisations involved in t he PPP incl uded 
the USAID P rivate Sector Engagement Unit and the Organisation for Global AIDS Co -ordination.  
Although the PPP was o riginally intended to be implemented in 10 countries, only Kenya and 
Tanzania  signed up and committed funding.  
In Tanzania, a ctivities w ere transitioned from Voxiva to local organisations  in 2009. T he transition 
was facilitated through CDC , with management oversight from Phones for Health. In 2010 the 
Phones for Health programme  issued a call for interest in creating a local PPP for mHealt h in 
Tanzania . The CDC foundation described Phones for Health as a pilot, and this next step was 
intended to bring services to scale. In 2011 the name of the local PPP then changed from Phones 
for Health to the mHealth Tanzania -PPP. CDC managed the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP from 2009  to 
2015  and then contracted C ardno to manage the mHealth Tanzania -PPP under a five -year 
agreement covering the period 2015 –2020.  
GSMA has played an instrumental role in the development of the mHealth Tanzania -PPP. It was 
one of the original partner s in the Phones for Health partnership (in 2007). GSMA twice nominated 
the programme as one of the five most successful mobile health interventions, and it was selected 
for an award i n 2014 . This was important as the profile helped to secure the support of mobile 
operators for the service. CDC view s the mHealth Tanzania -PPP as a success story, as it is rare to 
see a successful transition from a centrally held programme to a country -held PPP, and especially 
one in which  there is a true partnership with the national ministry of health.  
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 14  
4.3 Partnerships  
The mHealth Tanzania -PPP evolved as a group with expertise in brokering partnerships, which are 
a defining feature of the Wazazi Nipendeni service. Partners fall into a range  of categories 
(represented in Figure 2): 
• MoHCDGEC  – Multiple departments within the ministry have convened various initiatives 
supported by Wazazi Nipendeni throughou t its evolution.  TFNC is currently operating as a core 
partner in the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, which provides synergy with the expanded nutrition 
content provided by the mNutrition programme.  Wazazi Nipendeni, as an mHealth service, 
offers a good fit with MoH CDGEC’s  eHealth Strategy, and supports the Government of 
Tanzania’s commitments under the Open Government Partnership.  
• Content providers – Over the course of multiple initiatives, various organisations, mostly NGOs, 
have assisted with  the development of content to augment the Wazazi Nipendeni database; 
this includes a number of MoHCDGEC  departments.  
• Mass media organisations – These have worked with content partners to generate multimedia 
outputs; this was largely funded by JHCCP under the Tanzania Capacity and Communications 
Project.  
• Telecoms partners (Airtel, Tigo, Vodacom, and Zantel) – These provide zero -rated SMS 
messages at the heart of the system. This represents the largest single cost item of the service, 
if valued at market rates for SMS messages.  The four largest MNOs in the country have 
partnered with Wazazi Nipendeni; messages are funded through their corporate social 
responsibility ( CSR ) departments and the Vodafone Foundation.  
• Technology platform – The service was origi nally facilitated by the open source Vusion platform 
provided by TTCM , originally a non -profit .4 However, this system had a number of 
shortcomings, many of which were a consequence of the technical setup.  In October 2016 , the 
system migrated to a new plat form commissioned by MoHCDGEC , funded by CDC, and 
provided by a Tanzanian company, Rasello.  
• Implementing partners – These are operational organisations running health campaigns in 
various parts of the country. The content provided by Wazazi Nipendeni supp orts their 
campaigns. Their field presence enables them to enrol people in the system.  
 
 
4 Text to Change has since changed its status to a for -profit social business.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 15  
Figure 2:  Organisations involved in Wazazi Nipendeni  
 
Source: Authors  
The original Wazazi Nipendeni text messaging service did not have the capability to deal with voice 
messages, but voice messages were developed as part of the local content development process 
in Tanzania. Under a separate agreement, GSMA subsequently commissioned HNI  (now Viamo ) 
to incorporate the mNutrition  content into its 321 service, provided in partnership with Vodacom  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 16  
Tanzania . In contrast to Wazazi Nipendeni, the 321 service is a ‘pull’ type of service, whereby 
users dial a short code and navigate through interactive menus to find the information they are 
seeking.  The system mostly plays audio clips to users, rather than sending SMS text messages. 30 
interactive voice response ( IVR) scripts were selected to be integrated into the 321 health service, 
and were recorded.  
4.4 Developments in Tanzania  
The revise d Wazazi Nipendeni  service , including the additional nutrition messages incorporated 
under the mNutrition programme , was officially launched by the Minister of Health, Community 
Development, Gender, Elderly and Children  during World Breastfeeding Week in A ugust 2017 .5  
In line with the strategy articulated at the baseline, MoHCDGEC  continue to assume greater 
responsibility for functions previously carried out by the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, especially the 
technical operations. The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP continu es to work closely with MoHCDGEC  staff 
in the field, and estimate s that there are roughly 1 ,700 health workers currently active in promoting 
and registering women onto the system. The Rasello platform is a tool  that is  paid for and used by 
MoHCDGEC . The mH ealth  Tanzania -PPP continue s to be responsible for the technical 
management of the platform. The ICT Unit in MoHCDGEC  have responsibility for a wide range of 
digital tools used in different aspects of health services, not only those that use mobiles to 
disseminate information to clients . MoHCDGEC  programmes that are now using mobile services 
developed by the  mHealth  Tanzania -PPP include  the following : 
• National Aids Control Programme (NACP ) – Fast-track A ntiretroviral (ARV)  Refills S cheme 
(FASTA), PEDAIDS ( Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation ( EGPAF ) programme) . 
• National Tuberculosis and Leprosy Programm e – TB self -assessment (PATH and Cardno). The 
mHealth  Tanzania -PPP developed and manage s two T AMBUA TB  apps6 that enable users to 
carry out self-screening and information dissemination. Diagnosed TB patients can be 
registered by health workers to receive treatment adherence messages. The mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP is working to integrate records with the national ele ctronic TB and leprosy 
register sy stem. At the moment , anybody reached by the PATH programme will have to fill in 
personal details, but if they also attend a gov ernment  health facility, they will have to fill in 
another paper form with the same details. Integrating data systems will avoid creating duplicate 
data.  
• TFNC  – The dissemination of nutrition information using mobiles ( Wazazi Nipendeni ) is an 
integral part of the Tanzanian Government’s progress in scaling up nutrition -specific 
interventions  (Scaling up Nutrition , 2018) .  
• Reproductiv e and Child Health Section – Wazazi Nipendeni  disseminates information to 
pregnant women and mothers.  
• Electronic Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (e -IDSR) . The development and 
rollout of the mobile reporting tool was led by the MoHCDGEC  Monitoring and Evaluation  Unit. 
The Digital Health Roadmap to 2023 calls for resources to fund a national scale -up from 17 
regions  (MoHCDGEC , 2017) . 
• National Blood Transfusion Text Messaging Service,  led by the National Blood Transfusion 
Services .  
 
5 https://scalingupnutrition.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/03/TANZANIA -JA-2018 -EN.pdf  
6 https://ntlp.go.tz/posts/ntlp -launch -the-tambua -tb-m-health -applications/  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 17  
• National Feedback Mechanism for health services (public feedback on health services 
provided).  The Digital Health Roadmap to 2023 recommends investing in the electronic client 
feedback platform.  
• An early infant diagnosis system  (HIV).  
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP’s relationships with MNOs has  changed. Originally, the mHealth  
Tanzania -PPP signed agreements on behalf of MoHCDGEC  but now MNOs are changing to sign 
agreements directly with MoHCDGEC . For example, Tigo and Halotel have signed new 
agreements to provid e zero-rating of messages with the ministry, rather than with the mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP. Funding from Vodacom is transitioning from the Vodacom Foundation to the 
commercial Vodacom company, which will also be entering into an agreement with the ministry. 
This reflects a growing awareness among MNOs of the value of their support for Wazazi 
Nipendeni , which is important to them given the current political climate (see Section 8.1). This  
shift is consistent with the sustainability plan of the mHealth Tanzania -PPP to transfer 
responsibilities to government agencies.   
Rapid staff turnover within the telecoms industry continues to pose a challenge for the work of  the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP. For example, t here was a change in leadership at Tigo and responsibility 
for Wazazi Nipendeni  was transferred to a completely new team, which changed the CSR priorities 
to education and financial inclusion so that Tigo wanted to discontinue support for Wazazi 
Nipendeni . It is likely that this was linked to changes in the company structure following the 
acquisition by Tigo of a majority stake in Zantel (see Section 8.2). The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, 
with the support of a nutrition officer from MoHCDGEC , had to put a lot of effort into convincing the 
new Tigo team of the value of Wazazi Nipendeni , and eventually secured an ag reement to 
continue their support. Similarly, after time and effort  had been invested  in building relationships 
with the CSR contact at Airtel, that contact then moved on.  
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP continue s to run public awareness campaigns from time to ti me. 
When it runs a particular campaign that is sponsored by a particular MNO it has  to make sure the 
promotional materials only have the sponsoring MNO branding. Some MNOs put a limit on the 
number of messages that they will donate in a year. This will cau se increasing difficulties given the 
current registration growth trend evident in Figure 9. 
Under the arrangement with Rasello, MoHCDGEC  departments and MNOs have been given their 
own dashboards so they can access up -to-date predefined metrics on registrations. However, even 
the dashboard furnished to the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP only gives access to predefined metrics , 
meaning it does not have  direct access to the back -end database. Any request for non-standard 
reports requires a specific request to be made to Rasello to construct a query (there is no 
additional cost for these requests).  
The 2018 PEPFAR country operation plan acknowledges the i mportance of the role that the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP plays in leveraging the support of MNOs. The plan pledges to further 
expand its activities with the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP and emphasises the leadership role of 
government agencies : ‘Expand mHealth PPP and support implementation and expansion of Fast -
Track ARV refills (FASTA) initiatives under NACP and MOH leadership ’ (PEPFAR , 2018) . 
Although the current management contract with Cardno is due to expire in 2020, negotiations 
between the mHealth Tanzania -PPP a nd CDC for a subsequent  phase are already at an advanced 
stage. It is proposed to divide responsibility for the suite of products currently supported by the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP between three main partners:  
• Ministry of Health  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 18  
• Management Development for Hea lth (MDH), a Tanzanian NGO providing research and 
services on public health  
• Management Sciences for Health (MSCH), a public health non -profit working in over 150 
countries,  
This will provide continuity of funding from CDC, as CDC is a major donor to both  of the se 
‘management’ programmes. It is expected that a new management contract will go out to tender, 
possibly for a further 5 years , as is typical for CDC funded programmes.  
Looking to the future, there is a growing recognition of the role of nutrition in HIV programming. 
Good nutrition is important for people who are HIV positive, and good nutrition is required for ARV 
therapies to be successful. Therefore, nutrition is becoming a larger part of ov erall HIV support 
packages. In terms of technology, GSMA and the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP were keen to develop 
the service to include IVR, which  it was thought  would improve reach into poorer communities with 
lower levels of literacy, and would enable users to  actively seek information rather than passively 
receive SMS messages. However, this proved not to be popular when they trialled it and MNO 
partners remain reluctant to zero -rate IVR calls. Nevertheless, they would like to try again with the 
technology. An other idea for providing two -way communication is to work with partners who can 
provide a call centre facility. The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP is considering ways of exploiting the 
reach and power of social media, which is becoming increasingly popular among you ng men and 
women.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 19  
5 Review of the business model  
5.1 Introduction  
This section is structured around the Osterwalder and Pigneur canvas building blocks . This section 
summarises key observations made in the baseline report , supplemented with additional findings 
from the intervening period, as well as finding s from both the qualitative and quantitative studies. 
An introduction to the canvas and a  more detailed description of Wazazi Nipendeni as it relates to 
the framework are  provided in Annex C . 
5.2 Customer segments  
At registration, use rs are allocated to one of four categories:  
• pregnant women;  
• mothers with newborns;  
• supporters (of pregnant women or young mothers); and  
• general interest . 
The registration database provided by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP covers users registered onto the 
system during a two -year period from November 2016 to November 2018. During this time, many 
women who were originally registered as pregnant women had given birth, and were then re-
categorised  on the system as mothers with newborns. Figure 3 shows that these women make up 
the vast majority of active users.  
Figure 3:  Mix of active users (as at November 2018)  
 
Source: Authors  
• Phone ownership and access are key to a ccessing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service. Having 
at least one household member that owned a phone was part of the screening criteria for 
the quantitative study, so it cannot provide any insights into linkages between the service 
and phone ownership.  
• In terms  of access, men were reluctant to let their wives have phones, fearing they would 
be used to facilitate affairs, and women themselves recognised that phone ownership can 
cause problems in the family because of trust issues. Among young, married women, who 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 20  
are the primary customer s egment, it tends to be husbands who control their access to 
phones, either through consent to ownership, by buying a handset/ SIM for their wives, or 
by sharing their own phones with their wives.  
• The qualitative study highlighted the importance of enlisting men’s support for (if not 
participation in) the Wazazi Nipendeni  service as a means of facilitating women’s access to 
content. For example, the quantitative study  found that women’s access to Wazazi 
Nipendeni  messages was less reliable if husbands received the messages, as they often 
did not share  them  with their partners. They also found that men often disagreed with some 
content, particularly that on family planning, in which case they would withhold access to 
the messages and would not share information with their partners.  
• As a national service that is available through multiple networks, Wazazi Nipendeni  is 
available all across the country, wherever there is network coverage. It does not, therefore, 
have a particular poverty focus . However, the majority of users were signed up by field 
partners, who tend to focus p rogrammes on rural and low income communities .  
5.3 Value proposition  
The aim of the original Wazazi Nipendeni multimedia campaign was to encourage women to avail 
themselves of health services targeted at improved neonatal health outcomes.  Content had been 
developed over a number of previous partnerships, each of which had a slightly different thematic 
focus , including:  
• prevention of mother -to-child t ransmission of HIV/ Aids; 
• antenatal care ; 
• family planning ; 
• malaria prevention ; 
• nutrition (for mother and baby) ;  
• danger signs ; 
• having an individual birth plan ; and  
• post-partum care.  
The GSMA mNutrition project strengthen ed the service by contributing substa ntial additional 
nutrition content . Added content cover ed life stages up to five years.  
A key feature of the GSMA mNutrition programme content generation process was the procedures 
put in place to ensure quality of information. TFNC was instrumental in ensuring that the content 
was accessible and consistent with national nutrition strategies. UX research was conducted early 
on in the project to ensure that messages were appropriate , how they might fit with  different types 
of consumers (the archetypes ), and how to improve the customers ’ experience of the service : 
• GeoPoll  tested a small sub -sample of messages for comprehension and relevance.  
• ThinkPlace  conducted user focused research using human -centred design principles.   
• Frog later conducted further UX research based on in -depth inte rviews . 
Evidence from the quantitativ e study appears to confirm the quality of messages. Value and 
satisfaction metrics among treatment household members were high:  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 21  
• Between 82.7 % and 91.6 % of households read all the mNutrition content they received.  
• Over 90% of users either always or very of ten found the messages useful (see Figure 4). 
Figure 5 shows that information on maternal nutrition was regarded as most useful (but not 
by a large margin).  
• Over 90% of users (93.5% of females and 92.2% of males) would recommend the service 
(likely or highly likely).  
• 89% of females and 81% of males self -reported implementing at least  one tip.  
Figure 4:  How often was the mNutrition content deemed to be useful?  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al., (forthcoming , 2020)   
 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 22  
Figure 5:  Most and least useful mNutrition  message topics, by gender  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al., (forthcoming , 2020 )  
Findings from the quantitative study appear to confirm that users did indeed change their 
behaviours, as it found that accessing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service had improved a range o f 
nutritional outcomes. Diets among young children in the treatment sample had improved , as 
follows : 
• Dietary diversity for children aged 6–35 month s – The number of food categories consumed 
increased by 0.107 (p -value 0.073).  
• The likelihood that children  aged  6–35 months met the minimum dietary diversity – Children in 
the treatment communities were 3.8 percentage points more likely to have consumed from four 
food groups (p -value 0.093).  
• Children aged 6–23 months in the treatment communities were 6 .9 percentage points more 
likely to satisfy minimum acceptable diet.  
Diets among women of reproductive age (primary females) had also improved:  
• The likelihood that the primary females satisfied minimum dietary diversity for women  had 
increased by 4.0 perce ntage points (p -value 0.062).  
Secondary outcomes relating to knowledge and behavioural practices had also improved:  
• There were improved knowledge of IYCF practices  among men.  
• There was a statistically significant impact on the combined household -level measure of 
nutrition knowledge.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 23  
5.4 Channels  
In the 2015 Tanzania DHS  survey  53% respondents had heard of Wazazi Nipendeni.  Note that the 
five year TCCP programme started in 2010 and finished in 2016, so the DHS survey will have been 
conducted when the programme had achieved nearly maximum reach.  Radio was clearly the 
single channel that achieved greatest reach : 87% of people had heard about Wazazi Nipendeni  
from the radio ( Table 1). About a quarter of respondents had heard about the campaign on the 
television , with another quarter  doing so  through printed media ( poster / magazine/ newspaper/ 
billboard).  
Table 1:  Responses to question ‘ How did you hear about the Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign? ’7 
How did  you hear about  Wazazi Nipendeni?  Frequency  
(n=5 ,398) % 
Radio  4,710 87% 
Television  1,463 27% 
Poster/ magazine/ newspaper/ billboard  1,186 22% 
Family/ friend  582 11% 
Community health worker  459 9% 
Health facility  421 8% 
Does not know/ remember  80 2% 
Mobile phone  61 1% 
Internet  17 0% 
Other  1 0% 
Source:  Authors’ own , based on DHS dataset (accessed September 2019)   
During the initial campaign  as part of the Tanzania Capacity and Communication Project (TCCP) , 
printed materials were distributed to a range of health facilities where women come into contact 
with health professionals , e.g. hospitals, health centres, dispensaries. The mHealth  Tanzan ia-PPP 
worked in partnership with the health sector, providing training for health professionals, who were 
then able to help women register on the system. There are three  ways of registering for the Wazazi 
Nipendeni text messaging service  (analysis can be found in Section 6): 
• Assisted by health facility worker – women can be signed up when they come for antenatal 
care visits etc.  
• Assisted by community health workers – community workers can sign women up when they 
visit them in their homes, or other local venue s.  
• Self-registration – instructions were given in the multimedia campaign.  People dial the short  
code and then are guided through a small number of profiling qu estions (category of user, and 
stage of pregnancy/ age of child).  
• Registration data show that 57% of users were registered by partners. It is not possible to 
determine exactly how many of the ‘other’ users actually registered by themselves, but 59% 
were re gistered using USSD, suggesting that they were in fact registered, or at least assisted 
by a health worker . This means that up to  83% of users were registered by partners. Although 
mass media channels can be effective in raising awareness of the Wazazi Nip endeni 
 
7 Multiple response – respondents may have heard of Wazazi Nipendeni through multiple channels, i.e. adds up to more 
than 100%.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 24  
campaign, it is face-to-face contact through partners that is instrumental in signing people up . 
TFNC also believes that people who register with a health professional will have a positive bias 
to comply with messaging, have a better understanding o f how the service works, and be more 
likely to appreciate how they can benefit from the service.  
Figure 6 confirms that health workers are the most highly trusted sources of information on health 
matters (government more so than NGO facilities). It is interesting to note that even among control 
communities, people have high levels of trust in information from  automated text messages, 
confirming that text messages are regarded as being reliable and of high quality. Patterns of who 
people actually get information from ( Figure 7) broadly reflect levels of trust, although they 
emphasise the importance of government health workers.  
Figure 6:  Trust in sources of health information8  
 
Source: Authors  
 
 
8 Percent  who agree they would trust information  from each source . 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 25  
Figure 7:  Sources of health  information  
 
Source: Authors  
The qualitative research identified a number of features of SMS messaging that fits well with 
women’s lifestyles:  
• text messages can be read repeatedly – audio messages may be heard incorrectly ; 
• as messages remain on the phon e, they can be shared with friends and colleagues at any 
time; and  
• text messages are private – they remain on the phone, which tends to be regarded as a 
personal device; audio messages can be overheard by others.  
It should be noted that the SMS channel may be particularly well suited to the Tanzanian context, 
given that literacy levels are relatively high (for sub -Saharan Africa)9, and the country is united by 
the language of Swahili.  
5.5 Customer relationships  
The aims of the customer r elationship s that Wazazi Nipendeni  creates with users can be 
considered to be threefold:  
• Acquisition. Those who were assisted with registration have quite a different relationship with 
the service to those who self -registered. Registration data confirm the importance  of field 
partners; up to 8 3% of users were signed up by partners (see Section  5.4).  
• Retention. Several features of the system minimise pain points that might  promp t users to 
leave a system. The service is free of charge . The system only requires a user’s pregnancy or 
maternal status to be gathered at registration . Content is regarded as relevant and of value. 
Retention levels are high; registration data indicate tha t the number of people opting out of the 
service is equivalent to roughly 7% of new users in a month . 
 
9 The adult literacy rate in Tanzania is 78%, compared to an average for sub -Saharan Africa of 64% (2015 data from 
https://data.worldbank.org ). 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 26  
• Compliance  with improved health practices . High levels of satisfaction and perceived quality 
support high retention levels. Nearly 90% of those who self -reported having ever received the 
content  read all messages received, and over 80% self -reported implementing at least one tip.  
Wazazi Nipendeni has a strong brand, which is quite distinct from the MNOs that support the 
service, and users tend to view it  as a MoHCDGEC  service , as the Government pushed it through 
the media .  
Given that most of the funding for the mHealth Tanzania -PPP comes from CDC, it can be argued 
that the most important relationship is that with CDC. Providing evidence that the service is 
delivering improved health outcomes is important.   
5.6 Revenue streams and indirect b enefits  
Wazazi Nipendeni is free of charge t o users, so there is no direct revenue stream. The service has 
also been made available free of charge to field partner institutions. In 2016 the mHealth Tanzania -
PPP and TFNC held intense negotiations over whether or not Wazazi Nipendeni would be 
permitte d to charge for these information services.  In the end, the Government insisted that health 
information should be made available to citizens free of charge , which constrained opportunities for 
developing commercially sustainable business models. This is a national policy issue.  
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP is currently funded by CDC, although the successful functioning of the 
service depends on contributions by various partner organisations. The service is, therefore, 
vulnerable to any withdrawal of funding fr om CDC . Current funding is planned to 2020. The service 
also depends on the zero -rating of text messages by partner MNOs.   
There is no evidence that Wazazi Nipendeni has resulted in lower churn. The quantitative study 
found no difference in the length of t ime that respondents reported having had their main SIM card, 
there was no difference in the likelihood that they had the same primary phone number as they had 
at baseline (a two -year duration), and there was no difference in the proportion who subscribed to 
the same operator as a t baseline.  
ARPU was higher among users. Control households spent an average of  TZS 5,300 per month 
(£1.90/month) on mobile phone airtime (including any data bundles), but spending was 10% higher 
(TZS 510, £0.18/month) in treatment  communities. The qualitative study found this was due to 
women becoming more confident in using their phones . 
The latest DHS data indicate that 53% of people (across the country) had heard of Wazazi 
Nipendeni  (see Table 6 ). TCRA  data for October 201810 give the total number of subscribers on 
the four partner networks  as 41.0 million. Therefore, 550,000 Wazazi Nipe ndeni  users  represent 
1.3% of the entire subscriber base. Although MNOs supporting Wazazi Nipendeni do not use  the 
reach and positive brand of Wazazi Nipendeni  in their promotional materials, they are beginning to 
recognise the political value attached to their support for Wazazi Nipendeni . By signing 
agreements to support Wazazi Nipendeni  directly with the Government rather than with the 
mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, MNOs are gaining recognition of the value of their contribution.  
 
10 www .tcra.go.tz/index.php/quarterly -telecommunications -statistics  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 27  
5.7 Key resources  
Key resources are d efined as those assets required to create and offer the value proposition . The 
primary assets employed by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP in delivering the text messaging service 
are the content database and the applications platform that sends scheduled messages . 
The current content  comprises the pre -existing database brought by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, 
and additional content generated through the mNutrition programme. This nutrition content is 
regarded as a public good, having been paid for by FCDO . In March 20 19, CABI made this content 
publicly available under open access through its Knowledge Bank resource .11  
The text messaging service originally ran on the Vusion  platform  developed by TTCM in 
partnership with the Praekelt foundation. In October 2016 Waza zi Nipendeni migrated to a new 
platform, created for MoHCDGEC  by a loc al software developer (Rasello).  The new platform is 
able to equip MNOs with their own dashboard so they can track the number of users and 
messages being sent.  
The text messaging service i s designed to serve as part of multimedia campaign s, so the  field 
partner  programmes and  interventions are a key resource required to deliver the full potential of 
the value proposition. To date, 2 4 partners have assisted with registering users in the fiel d (see 
Section 5.9).  
The key ‘resource’ in convening these partn erships has been, and will continue to be, the 
partnership with TFNC and its linkages to  both nation al nutrition policymakers  and health and 
nutrition interventions launching in the country . 
Early in 2019, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP appointed a new team leader. While the previous 
country manag er came from a mobile technology background, the new team leader  is a medical 
professional. This reflects the changing complexion of the PPP, as Government agencies take 
greater ownership of the platform along with associated technical responsibilities.  
5.8 Key activities  
In order to make the business model work, perhaps the most fundamental activity that needs to be 
undertaken is networking. Both TFNC and the mHealth Tanzania -PPP clearly have good personal 
contacts in order to broker partnerships with field NGOs, and to enlist the support of MNOs.  
The Global Content Partnership was mandated to create higher -level, generic content, and little 
provision was made for creating specific, locally relevant messages . Under the original vision, it 
was expected that participating organisations would tailor global content to their own needs. When 
this idea was abandoned, additional funding was made available for Every1Mobile and 
COUNSENUTH to localise content.  
TFNC was the government agency responsible for signing off content at the end of the content 
generat ion process. However, TFNC adopted a much more proactive role, and its involvement has 
continued to deepen throughout the project. When the content generation process was changed to 
facilitate the production of more detailed, localised content, TFNC got mo re involved. TFNC’s 
engagement with and awareness of the programme played an important role in ensuring that 
signing -off procedures went smoothly.  
 
11 https://ckan.cabi.org/data/dataset/nutrition -knowledge -bank  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 28  
Monitoring and evaluation is a key activity , as evidence of the contribution that Wazazi Nipendeni  
makes tow ards positive health outcomes will be instrumental in negotiating partnerships with 
forthcoming health interventions.  
Providing a face -to-face presence when work ing with women is important for achieving positive 
behaviour change. The qualitative study foun d that messages acted as reminders to reinforce 
information provided by health workers, and to reinforce mothers’ existing knowledge.  
Registration, scheduling, and  the dispatch of messages to users  is handled by the technical 
platform . This is sub -contrac ted to Rasello, as the platform provider, and management is being 
gradually transferred from the mHealth Tanzania -PPP to MoHCDGEC . 
Content will need to be regularly updated to keep it relevant , e.g. new drugs and products will be 
introduced, and recommende d practice will be modified. People will quickly lose trust in information 
that is not immediately useful, or , even worse, wrong. One of the partners needs to be given the 
responsibility (and funding) for ongoing maintenance of content.  
5.9 Key partnerships  
The complex set of partnerships brokered by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and TFNC is a defining 
feature of the Wazazi Nipendeni service. Partnerships have been crucial to accessing all the 
resources needed to make the service succeed:  
• Research and design. Wazaz i Nipendeni was o riginally conceived as a prevention of malaria in 
pregnancy campaign,  following an analysis by JHCCP  of the 2010 Tanzania DHS data. The 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP delivered the text messaging service as part of the campaign put 
together by JHCCP  and MOHSW.  
• Content. Content development for the SMS component of Wazazi Nipendeni was led by 
MOHSW , to ensure messages were developed in line with Government recommendations and 
delivered in line with timing guidelines provided by the World Health Organization (WHO). 
Further content was leveraged from the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action .12 Content on family 
planning was leveraged from Mobiles for Reproducti ve Health (m4RH) .13 Content for 
Prevention of Mother -to-Child  Transmission  was designed by EGPAF. TFNC was instrumental 
in securing the support of the SBCC  TWG  for nutrition in approving content.  
• Technology platform. The service was originally run on the V usion open source platform 
developed by TTCM. The system architecture led to problems with reliability, latency, and cost. 
The service was migrated to a new platform in October 2016. It was hosted locally by Rasello 
and was commissioned and paid for by  MoH CDGEC  (with CDC funding).   
• Telecoms operators. The mHealth Tanzania -PPP had identified MNOs as key partners at the 
start. However, MNOs  needed to be convinced of the viability of the concept before committing.  
The Wazazi Nipendeni campaign was launched wit hout explicit support from MNOs , but after 
the service achieved 100,000 users  within 11 weeks  the MNOs entered into agreements . 
• Field partners. The programme launched in November 2012 with a two-month nationwide 
media campaign (radio and TV). A follow -up campaign ran from July 2013 to February 2014 , 
during which field partners promoted the service and assisted with registrations. In addition to 
the 24 field partners (see  Table 9 ) that have formal agreements with the mHea lth Tanzania -
 
12 A PPP , launched in May 2011 by USAID and Johnson & Joh nson , with supporting partners, the United Nations 
Foundation, the mHealth Alliance, and BabyCenter.  
13 A pilot project l ed by Family Health International  360 with MOHSW and funded by USAID.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 29  
PPP (and have a source c ode allocated on the system), other agencies have simply 
incorporated registering women onto Wazazi Nipendeni  into their field processes. Analysis of 
registration data suggests that field partners may have assisted up to 83% of users to register.  
• Governmen t agencies. The Government of Tanzania is committed to a number of relevant 
health policies on nutrition, sexual and reproductive health, and maternal mortality, and to a 
number of information and ICT policies , including open and accountable government, and 
electronic access to health services.  
5.10 Costs and investment  
The baseline report presented set -up and ongoing costs covering a two -year period, mainly 
derived from costs reported by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and GSMA. Now that more detail has 
been provided, these costs have been superseded by a more comprehensive and rigorous 
analysis , which is  presented in Section  7. 
In ad dition to those costs directly associated with the mHealth Tanzania -PPP (both operating and 
capital), FCDO  and GSMA have invested in wider programmatic costs that stimulated and 
supported this action.  It is worth noting that the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP has a history of donations  
and in -kind contributions made over the years by the CDC and programme partners . 
5.11 The business m odel 
It is proposed that Wazazi Nipendeni  is based on a multi -sided platform business model, which is 
commonly associated with IT businesses . This provides a means of making a product free to one 
group of customers, while another group pays.  Wazazi Nipendeni brings together two groups, 
providing a link between funders, who pay for the service, and users who receive the service for 
free (see Figure 8). Funders with a health mandate benefit from improved health outcomes 
achieved by users.  Field -level partners cannot really be considered a third side to the platform 
because they already have their own link to users through their field presence. The relationship 
with Wazazi Nipendeni can be considered as a simple business -to-business transactional 
arrangement as described – Wazazi Nipendeni provides a valuable service, and partners drive 
users to the system . 
Figure 8:  Key partnerships (business model)  
 
 
Sources: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 30  
The s trengths and weakness of the business model can be summarised as  follows : 
• Partnerships are a key feature of the mHealth Tanzania -PPP’s way of working , and have been 
instrumental in securing resources that have made the service a success. The PPP core team 
have continued to forge new alliances with f ield partners as they implement new health 
interventions. Links with the G overnment of Tanzania have been strengthened over the 
duration of the evaluation study as MoHCDGEC  has assumed greater responsibility for the 
technical platform in particular.  
• The v iability of the model is vulnerable to discontinuity in revenue, i.e. it depends on CDC 
funding. On the one hand , five -year fixed -term agreements provide security, but on the other 
hand , the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP is facing uncertainty now the agreement is shortly to expire. 
Nutrition content may not be a continuing priority for CDC, which focuses  on HIV , tuberculosis , 
and malaria in Tanzania .14 Now that it has been shown that the VAS generates substantial 
incre ases in ARPU, it may be possible to argue a case for some kind of revenue sharing 
agreement with MNOs; further research is required to explore viable mechanisms for this.  
• The reach and brand of the service is attractive to field partners. DHS data showed that over 
half of adults were aware of Wazazi Nipendeni  (in 2015), and the quantitative study found that 
13% of people in the control sample had received messages from Wazazi Nipendeni .  
• Wazazi Nipendeni  offers a strong value proposition. Not only are qual ity metric s for the 
messages high (e.g. levels of trust, frequency of reading messages, customer satisfaction 
ratings), but users also report changing their behaviour, so the service is valued by users. The 
quantitative study has shown that the service is linked to improved nutritional outcomes 
(notably an increase in dietary diversity among infants), demonstrating value to partner health 
agencies , such as TFNC , and to donors , such as CDC. Indirect benefits in terms of increased 
ARPU provide a strong commer cial basis to justify the in -kind contribution made by MNOs to 
the service.  
 
 
 
 
14 www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/countries/tanzania/default.htm  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 31  
6 Analysis of users  
6.1 Overview  
The mHealth Tanzania -PPP submitted Wazazi Nipendeni  registration data from the Rasello 
platform  to the authors . The query was performed on 27 March 2 019. A ‘working’ dataset cover ing 
a two -year period (11 November 2016 to 3 November 2018 ) addresses a number of data issues:  
• Creating an additional category that represents women who registered when pregnant but have 
since given birth and have continued us ing the service as a mother with a child.  
• Spikes in registrations . On 10 November 2016, the date when A PI registrations were adopted  
by multiple partners, and a spike in USSD registrations over a three week period in November 
2018.  
• Anomalies with opt -out dates, e.g. over 9,000 records were marked as having opted out on 3 
April 2017.  
The analysis in this section is supported by more de tail given in  Annex D . 
6.2 Growth in user numbers  
Both n ew registrations and opt -outs fluctuate monthly . In the period May 2017 – October 2018 new 
registrations were runn ing at an average of around 20,000/month, whereas people were leaving 
the service at a much lower rate of less than 1,400/month , i.e. 7% of new users. Combining new 
users with people leaving the service gives the cumulative profile of active users presente d in 
Figure 9. 
Figure 9:  Growth in active users  
 
Source: Authors  
In the absence of reliable data , it is not possible to track patterns of growth in users from the 
introduction of the service. The total number of users may be up to 1 30,000 higher than  suggested 
by Figure 9, because many of the o riginal users that were migrated onto the new system have not 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 32  
been included in these numbers. Nevertheless, the patterns of growth and opt -outs remain 
accurate . 
In November 2017, t he mHealth  Tanzania -PPP estimated the number of active users to be 
350,000. This is consistent with the active user numbers in Figure 9, as a dding 130,000 to the 
November 2017 estimate of 200,000 from the chart gives a total of 330,000 , which i s close to the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP estimate . Making an assumption of straight -line growth in active user 
numbers , and assuming a starting base of 100,000 active users (rounded down), the number of 
active users after a two -year period (December 2016 to Nov ember 2018) is estimated at 550,000.  
This figure was validated by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP.  
6.3 Understanding users  and partners  
The majority of users (75%) were signed up as pregnant women (sum of ‘PW’ and ‘PW=>MC’ 
categories in Figure 3). 12% were general information -seekers, and 3% were supporters of one 
type or another.  
The NHIF has brought the largest number of users onto the system ( Figure 10). Among the 11 
partners that registered more than 1,000 users, all apart from UNICEF used either API or USSD 
exclusively (almost). None used t he short  code . When the USSD system was introduced, SMS 
remained the channel the general public could use to register . Among users registered with no 
partner, 62% registered using an API or USSD  (Table 2) suggesting that many could well have 
been registered with the assistance of a field partner. It is not, therefore, possible to determine 
precisely how many users truly self -registered , i.e. without any a ssistance. Up to 83% of all users 
could have been registered with the assistance of some kind of partner if API and USSD 
registrations are included.  
Figure 10:  Registrations by partner  
 
Source: Authors  
 
Registration data provide some insights into the ways in which different programmes work. For 
example, the rate of registrations by NHIF  was roughly constant , whereas self-registrations 
fluctuate widely as people respond to local and national campaigns.  050000100000150000200000250000Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 33  
There is a peak in registrations of pregnant women at the three -month mark, which coincides with 
the first trimester of pregnancy. Users who were supporting pregnant women a lso tended to sign 
up at the end of the first trimester . Users who registered as mothers (and supporters of mothers) 
mostly signed up within the first month after giving birth.  
Most users leaving the system were registered as pregnant women and left before  giving birth. The 
relatively low number of women in the ‘PW=>MC’ category leaving suggests that women who used 
the system throughout their pregnancy liked it, and then continued to use it in motherhood. The 
sub-set of data that represents users who have r egistered and then left the service is relatively 
small (n = 25,300) . 
TFNC hypothesised that women who were assisted with registration might have a stronger 
commitment to the service, stay on the service for longer, be more likely to read the messages, 
and be more likely to adopt improved behaviours. Table 2 sheds some light on the users leaving 
the service. While 12% of those registered by partners using  USSD subsequently dropped out, 
only 0.3% of API registrations opted out. Only the general public continued to register using the 
short  code, so only 38% of those with no partner can be classified as self -registered with some 
confidence. 42% of these users  opted out, which provides some evidence to support the TFNC 
hypothesis.  
Table 2:  Registrations and opt -outs; assisted and self -registrations  
 Source (for registration)  
 API Excel import  Short code  USSD  Total  
No partner  
Number registered  (all) 6,508 973 84,257 132,431 224,169 
% of total regist rations  2.9%  0.4%  37.6%  59.1%  100.0%  
Number opted out  1232  105 35132  42688  79157  
% of total who have opted out  1.6%  0.1%  44.4%  53.9%  100.0%  
% of source who have opted 
out 18.9%  10.8%  41.7%  32.2%  35.3%  
Registered by partner  
Number registered  (all) 233,364 4,898 0 53,062 291,324 
% of total regist rations  80.1%  1.7%  0.0%  18.2%  100.0%  
Number opted out  796 27 0 6204  7027  
% of total who have opted out  11.3%  0.4%  0.0%  88.3%  100.0%  
% of source who have opted 
out 0.3%  0.6%  0.0%  11.7%  2.4%  
Notes: Number opted out is based on records with a valid opt -out date (not necessarily from May 2017 onwards).  
Source:  Authors’ own  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 34  
7 Financial viability of business models  
7.1 Overview of business models  
In the baselin e report ( Batchelor  et al., 2018), it was proposed that the relationships between key 
stakeholders could be regarded as a multi -sided platform business model. This provides a means 
of making a product free to one g roup of customers, while another group pays. When considering 
financial viability, the principal cost components are  as follows : 
Operating costs:  
• mHealth Tanzania -PPP (offices, staff, servers) ; 
• Government agencies (staff costs) ; 
• SMS and USSD costs (MNOs) ; and 
• field partner agencies (staff costs and expenses).  
Fixed costs:  
• developing content (Global Content Partnership and localising of content) ; 
• mNutrition programme support (e.g. GSMA business intelligence) ; and  
• developing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service (mHealth Tanzania -PPP).  
It is difficult to argue a case for the financial viability of the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP because none 
of the partners generate revenue directly from providing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service. Indeed, all 
parties are prohibited from generating direct revenue because the Government of Tanzania has 
ruled that all health services should be free to consumers. However, the quantitative research has 
found that the ARPU increased among users, so it is possible to develop a business case  for 
MNOs to provide an mHealth  service on the basis of indirect benefits  (these are discussed in 
Section 5.6). If there is a commercial case for MNOs to provide an m Health service, then there is a 
case for a third party to provide content on a revenue share basis (as with conventional VAS).  
Under the current business model, MNOs made no investment in developing the Wazazi 
Nipendeni  service, but they have donated the S MS messages and USSD sessions that the service 
depends on. Without any investment, standard financial metrics such as IRR or payback period are 
not relevant. In this case the contribution margin15 gives an indication of financial performance, or 
the contri bution that the product makes to group profit.  
This analysis goes on to consider the financial viability of two scenarios:  
• An independent but commercial content provider: The provider invests in localising content 
(assuming nutrition and maternal health c ontent is in the public domain) and manages both the 
technical systems and arrangements with national health programmes (in the same way as the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP). It provides information services as a VAS to MNOs on a revenue 
sharing basis.  
• An in -hous e MNO service: The MNO invests in localising content (assuming nutrition and 
maternal health content is in the public domain) and sets up an internal product development 
 
15 Per unit revenue (indirect benefit) – variable costs. Contribution margin is often expressed as a percentage, when 
divided by the per unit revenue.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 35  
group to manage technical systems and to make alliances with national health programme s (in 
the same way as the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP).  
A financial model has been created to explore each of these options, based on cost data submitted 
by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, Cardno, CABI, and GSMA.  
7.2 The financial m odel 
The model is based on operating cos t structure and cost data provided by Cardno, supplemented 
by data gathered through interviews. These cost data include a quantification of in -kind 
contributions made by MNOs (donating SMS and USSD sessions) and partner NGOs (mainly 
time).  
Key to the mode l is an estimated profile of user numbers, which is the basis of calculating 
revenues (from indirect benefits) and variable costs. The profile of active users in Figure 9 
suggests numbers are continuing to rise, given roughly constant rates of new subscriptions, and 
relatively low rates of opt -outs. This is likely to be the case for at least five years, at which time 
early users will start to leave the system as their chi ldren reach five years of age.  It is estimated 
that there were over 100,000 active users on the system at the beginning of the period for which 
reliable data  are available, which were  used to calculate the trends in Figure 9 (described in 
Section 6.2). The financial analysis is based on a four -year period, during which the number of 
active users can be expected to continue to rise , as illustrated in Figure 11.16 
Figure 11:  Estimated user  numbers profile for four-year period  
 
Source: Authors  
Cash flow  is calculated from estimates of revenues and variable costs, which depend on the 
customer numbers profile, as well as fixed costs. Details of cost components and estimates are 
presented in  Annex E .  
Cash flow ( operating profit) = revenue – cost of sales – fixed costs  
 
16 Given the concerns over the quality of the early data, the number of active users as at November 2016 has been 
rounded down from 130,000 to 100,000.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 36  
Revenue:  
• Indirect benefits – increase in ARPU . 
Cost of sales : 
• Cost of SMS – nominal value to MNO of text messages sent to  customers (disaggregated by 
MNO).  
• Cost of USSD sessions . 
Fixed costs : 
• Administration expenses (mHealth  Tanzania -PPP) – project management, staff costs, platform, 
travel.  
• Government institutions – in-kind staff costs . 
• NGO partners – in-kind staff costs . 
• Product development – content curation.  
The analysis considers the viability of the service from various perspectives , including the MNOs 
under the current arrangements, but also possible commercial scenarios. Therefore, it considers 
investment costs incurre d in developing the product for roll -out in a specific country. The following 
investment costs have been included in the model ( see Annex E ): 
• global content developme nt; 
• localisation of content – e.g. developing appropriate messages, seeking necessary approvals ; 
and 
• support service provided by the mNutrition programme – formative evaluation, UX consultants.  
Note that no direct grant payments were made to the mHealth Tanzania -PPP under the mNutrition 
programme.  
7.3 Public good m odel 
Under the current arrangement, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP is funded by public money (from 
international donors), and the service is enabled by the charitable donation of SMS messages by 
the MNOs. Given the government’s position that the service cannot be charged for, and the 
increasing role of the MoHCDGEC in the delivery of the service, it is not likely that any shift 
towards a more commercial business model will take place in the foreseeable futu re.  
The c osts of developing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service have been covered by CDC, as part of  its 
public health programmes. The c osts of developing the additional nutrition content have been 
covered by the mNutrition programme. The service is funded and r egarded as providing a public 
good, which it undeniably is. However, the quantitative study has shown that the MNOs are 
reaping tangible, if indirect, financial benefit from the service. This section considers the value of 
this benefit to partner MNOs unde r the current arrangement.  
Financial reporting by the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP quantifies the financial contribution made to 
Wazazi Nipendeni  by each of the supporting MNOs. It does this by estimating the number of SMS 
messages donated by each MNO and then mu ltiplying  that by the consumer retail price of SMS 
messages. In the absence of any payment to Wazazi Nipendeni  for the content, the cost of Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 37  
messages is the only variable cost, but it varies between MNOs according to the different SMS 
retail prices.  
The quantitative research found that ARPU was TZS  510 higher among people who used Wazazi 
Nipendeni  (compared with those who did not use the servi ce). Given an ARPU of TZS 5,300 per 
month ( £1.90 /month) among the control sample, this indicates that the VAS stimulates a 10% 
increase in ARPU. This is supported by the finding from the qualitative research that women 
became more comfortable and confiden t in using their phone when they received messages from 
Wazazi Nipendeni , implying that they then used their phone more, using more airtime.  
Given the user growth profile in Figure 11, the contribution margin flattens out at 2 4% (see Figure 
12). The cost of SMS messages is directly proportional to the number of active users. However, 
the cost of USSD sessions relates to the number of new users, which is assumed to be constant 
despite monthly  fluctuations.  At high user numbers, this cost component becomes a much smaller 
proportion of variable costs, dropping from 9% of variable costs in  Year 1 quarter 1 to 1% of 
variable costs in Year 4 quarter 4. This explains why the contribution margin is lower at lower user 
numbers.  
Note that the variable costs in Figure 12 are based on the aggregated costs across all four MNOs, 
each of which has been allocated different charge rates for SMS messages according to their retail 
prices  (at baseline) . Table 3 shows the sensitivity of contribution margin to SMS price  (at high user 
numbers) .  
Figure 12:  Contribution margin  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 38  
Table 3:  Contribution margin for each operator  (asymptotic)  
MNO partner  SMS price (TZS/SMS)17 Contribution margin (Year 4)  
Vodacom  57.6 29% 
Airtel  69 15% 
Tigo 79 3% 
Halotel  3318 61% 
Source:  Authors’ own  
 
The price attributed to sending SMS messages is clearly highly influential in determining how 
attractive their contribution to Wazazi Nipendeni  appears to operators. So w hat is the cost to an 
operator of sending an SMS? In a study on the impact of consumer  consumption of network 
services (voice, SMS, and data) on network profitability, Blackburn et al., (2013) highlight a trend 
towards flat-rate pricing (as opposed to pay as you go). They point out  that one feature that makes 
this attractive to operators is  that the cost of delivery is a small fraction of the retail price. Keshav 
(2009) concluded that the cost of sending an SMS message was likely to be less than 
$0.003/SMS, or 2% of the per unit price charged to pay as you go customers (in the USA). Lack of 
clarity on the true cost of sending SMS message s continues to plague development cost 
modelling. For example, in a study of an mHealth intervention in Tanzania, Mangaone et al., (2016) 
modelled scenarios using standard SMS charge rates ( $0.03/SMS) , along w ith reduced rates 
($0.02/SMS and $0.01/SMS) , representing negotiated bulk purchasing agreements.   
The analysis up to this point has been based on the retail prices given in Table 3, which can be 
interpreted as representing an opportunity cost to the MNO. However, given that MNO s are 
sending out messages to thousands of users , it could be argued that a bulk SMS price would be 
more realistic . A price of TZS 25/SMS, for example, would give a contribution margin of 70%. If, on 
the other hand, there is no real cost to the MNO of sending SMS messages, then the contribution 
margin tends towards 100%.  
The contribution margin is a measure of how much a product contrib utes to fixed costs and thereby 
to profit (once fixed costs are covered). However, it takes no account of any investment made in 
developing a product, so it cannot be used as a predictive measure of the likely financial viability of 
developing a product; IRR is widely used for this purpose.  
The model indicates that over a four -year period, mobile operators donate texts and USSD 
sessions totalling a nominal value of £3.9 million. However, over the same time period, the indirect 
benefit of ARPU sums to a total of £5.1 million, which represents a real financial gain.  
The other indirect benefit often credited to VAS is a reduction in churn ( Tricarico , 2016 ). However, 
the quantitative research did not find any evidence that people using the Wazazi Nipendeni  service 
had owned their SIMs for longer. Prepaid markets tend to have high churn rates because 
consumers are not ‘tied in’ to contracts; the Tanzanian market is predomi nantly prepaid so high 
churn rates might be expected. However, in rural or underserved markets where signal coverage is 
poor, consumers often find themselves effectively tied in to a single operator by virtue of being able 
to access only one network in the ir geographical location. Therefore, churn tends to be lower in 
rural areas. The quantitative study was carried out in Iringa, which is a largely rural district, so it is 
not surprising to find low rates of churn, making it difficult to measure any differe nces in churn.  
 
17 From mHealth  Tanzania -PPP financial report 2017.  
18 Halotel was not a part ner in 2017 so was not included in the financial report. This is the price given on the website 
(accessed September 2019).  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 39  
7.4 Commercial content p rovider  
The previous section highlighted the financial benefits to MNOs of offering the Wazazi Nipendeni  
service. This opens up possibilities for the content provider to generate revenue through some kind 
of revenue share  agreement with MNOs, which in turn opens up possibilities for spinning off the 
content provider as a commercially viable venture. This section considers the financial viability of 
such a venture as a hypothetical case , based on cost data from the mHealth Tanzania -PPP. It is 
intended to represent the opportunity for replicating an mHealth agency delivering a service similar 
to Wazazi Nipendeni  in another country.  
The model is based on the following assumptions regarding capital costs:  
• Nutrition content deve loped under the GSMA mNutrition programme is publicly available and 
open source, so the ‘raw’ content can be accessed and adapted at no cost.  
• There is a real cost associated with localising content. This includes framing the content in 
messages that are r elevant and readily understandable by users , as well as translating  content  
into local languages. In the case of Wazazi Nipendeni , messages are all in written format for 
disseminating as SMS messages, which avoids the considerable expense of making voice 
recordings that are needed for outbound dialling and other voice -based systems. Securing 
government approval of messages is a major cost. Health services tend to be highly regulated, 
and the experience of Wazazi Nipendeni  is that the health ministry was diligent in ensuring that 
messages were consistent with Government of Tanzania health policies. A good deal of time 
was spent negotiating the balance between making messages factually accurate yet at the 
same time informal and easy to understand.  
• An agency w ould need to invest in product development , as was the case with Wazazi 
Nipendeni , which benefited from UX research and formative evaluation throughout the duration 
of the mNutrition programme (both of which were funded through the GSMA mNutrition 
programm e).  
These costs sum to an investment of £312,500 (see  Annex E ). 
The following assumptions have been applied regarding operating costs:  
• the fixed operating costs associated with running the mHealth Tanzania -PPP will not change ; 
• the content will need to be  continually reviewed and revised in order to keep it consistent with 
development s in government health policy and practice ; and  
• the agency would need to bulk purchase SMS messages from each client operator. A price of 
TZS 25/SMS has been assumed .19  
It is assumed that the hypothetical agency would start from scratch, with no pre -existing users, so 
the model is based on the profile of active users presented in Figure 9. 
Note that no account has been taken of the in -kind contributions made by government agencies 
and partner NGOs, both of whom are critical to the success of a service. It can be argued that any 
government has a vested interest in setting up a service that has  a material benefit for health 
outcomes, and so should forego any potential claims on the cost of the time they invest in 
mediating on behalf of the service provider. Similarly, it can be argued that the cost of the time 
 
19 https://sendsms.co.tz/pricing/  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 40  
invested by partner NGOs, including  marketing and registering users, is outweighed by the benefits 
that the service adds to their field programmes.  
At 100% revenue share with MNOs (i.e. all  TZS 510/user/month in increased ARPU goes to the 
content provider), Figure 13 suggests the service would break even at the beginning of year 3 . 
However , the rate of return on investment over a four -year time horizon would be negative. Given 
the assumed trajectory of g rowth in user numbers, much greater revenues are generated if the 
timescales can be extended. Therefore, at 100% revenue share, the service could generate a 
positive IRR of 4% over a six-year period. However, rate of return is highly sensitive to revenue 
share: at 90% revenue share (i.e. the MNO retains only 10% of the increase in ARPU), the IRR 
turns negative.  
Figure 13:  Profits – commercial content provider  
 
Source: Authors  
Projecting the user growth profile in Figure 9 over a further two years would result in a total of 1.3 
million active users. The population of Tanzania is 54.2 million  (National Bureau of Statistics ( NBS) 
2019)  and the average household size is 4.9  (MoHCDGEC , 2016) , so the number of households 
across the country is around 11.1 million. 16.2% of the population is under five years of age  (NBS, 
2013) , equating to 8.8 million  children under five. If households with children under five had an 
average of two children both aged under five, then the total number of households with at least one 
child under five would be 4.4 million (40% of all households). This rough calculation su ggests that 
a user target of 1. 2 million Wazazi Nipendeni  users may be ambitious but is not impossible.  
As revenue is generated solely from increases in ARPU, the financial viability of such a VAS is 
highly sensitive to that increase. Up to this point, th e analysis has been based on the TZS 
510/month increase in ARPU found by the quantitative study (on a baseline level of ARPU of TZS 
5,300 among the control sample). This is based on the effect of the random offer of access to the 
service in the quantitative study (i.e. comparing ARPU between the treatment and control 
samples). The study found that 66% of the treatment sample and 27% of  the control sample 
reported having received nutrition messages by SMS (in the last two years). The study points out 
that this method of calculation was likely to underestimate effects, but the authors were unable to 
calculate more specific effects with an y reliability because of inconsistencies in the self -reported 
access to the Wazazi Nipendeni  messages. They concluded that this was because respondents 
may not have been able to correctly identify the source of nutrition text messages received.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 41  
Figure 14 shows how sensitive  the financial viability of a service is to this effect size, and  it shows  
that if the effect size was 15%, then a service could be financially attractive over a four-year period. 
Based on the proportions of both samples that reported receiving nutrition message by SMS, the 
effect size could be double (20%), in which case the return on investment would be highly 
attractive.  
Figure 14:  Sensitivity of IRR to increase in ARPU  (content provider)  
 
Source: Authors  
The large number of active users means that financial indicators are highly sensitive to changes in 
ARPU. The ARPU found among the control sample was TZS 5,300, which is consistent with 
published data. Vodacom Tanzania quotes ARPU figures of just over TZS 6,000 (for  the year 
ended March 2019  (Vodacom , 2019) ), and Airtel has publish ed consolidated data covering five 
East African countries  (Airtel Africa , 2019) , quoting an ARPU of $2.4 (December 2018 , TZS 
5,500 ).20 The quantitative study was conducted in Iringa, a rural district, so measured ARPU levels 
would be expected to be below that national average. Figure 15 shows that , if all other 
assumpt ions are held constant, a service would need to reach a user base with an ARPU over TZS 
7,000/month in order to generate a positive IRR over a four-year period . This is unlikely , given that 
these reports , as well as industry analysis  (BMI Research , 2016) , confirm a current trend of 
declining ARPU. This figure is based on generating revenue from a 10% increase in ARPU.  
 
20 Based on an exchange rate of TZS 2,300/$1.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 42  
Figure 15:  Sensitivity of IRR to ARPU  
 
Source: Authors  
The breakdown of operating costs over a four -year period show s how the fixed costs associated 
with running the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and running the technology platform are dominant ( Figure 
16). Analysis shows that cent ral expenses would need to be reduced by 40% (from the levels 
estimated in Annex E ) in order to produce a positive IRR of 4% over a four-year time period (at 
100% re venue share). Again, even at 90% revenue share the IRR turns negative.  
Figure 16:  Operating costs ( four-year period)  
 
Source: Authors  
Consider a scenario in which an independent mHealth VAS provider can develop and deliver an 
information dissemination service under the following assumptions:  
• a 20% reduction in fixed operating costs (staff time and platform costs) ; 
• a nationwide ARPU of TZS 6,000  /month ; 
• a 15% increase in ARPU when consumers use the mHealth VAS ; 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 43  
• a 50% revenue share with MNOs ; and  
• an SMS price of TZS 25. 
These positive assumptions indicate that such as service could generate a positive IRR of 6% but 
only over a six-year period.  
7.5 In-house MNO service  
The quantitative study has shown that consumers using Wazazi Nipendeni  spend more money on 
airtime, estimated to be equivalent to a 10% increase in ARPU. This raises the possibility that an 
MNO could justify creating an mHealth VAS on the basis of this increased revenue. This section 
considers a hypothetical business case scenario in which an MNO in another country sets up an 
mHealth service in -house. The key differences from the commercial content provider scenario 
considered above is that the MNO would retain all of the additional revenue generated, and there 
would be no real costs associated with the SMS messages sent.  
The model is based on the following assumptions regarding capital costs:  
• Nutrition content developed under the GSMA mNutrition pro gramme is publicly available and 
open source, so the ‘raw’ content can be accessed and adapted at no cost.  
• There is a real cost associated with localising content. This includes framing the content in 
messages that are relevant and readily understandable by users , as well as translating  content  
into local languages and securing government approval of messages.  
• The MNO would need to invest in product development , as was the case with Wazazi 
Nipendeni , which benefited from UX research and formative evaluation throughout the duration 
of the mNutrition programme.  
These costs sum to an investment of £312,500 (see  Annex E ). 
The following assumptions have been applied regarding operating costs:  
• The fixed operating costs associated with running the mHealth VAS in -house would be the 
same as for Wazazi Nipendeni . 
• The content will need to be continually rev iewed and revised in order to keep it consistent with 
development s in government health policy and practice.  
• The MNO would be able assign the real cost of sending SMS messages and USSD sessions 
(both have been zero -rated in the analysis).  
• No account has been taken of the in -kind contributions made by government agencies and 
partner NGOs, both of whom would be critical to the success of  such  a service.  
It is assumed that the hypothetical MNO -based service  would start from scratch, with no pre -
existing users, so the model is based on the profile of active users presented in Figure 9. 
If SMS messages and USSD sessions are  zero-rated then the service would break even in year 3, 
although it would not generate enough cash to provide a positive return on investment over a four-
year period. Assuming the same trajectory of increasing users’  numbers in Figure 11, the large 
number of users (rising to 1.1 million) would generate enough revenue to provide a 19% IRR in a 
five-year period.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 44  
As revenue is generated solely from increases in ARPU, the f inancial viability of such a VAS is 
highly sensitive to that increase. Up to this point, the analysis has been  based on a TZS 510/month 
increase in ARPU found by the quantitative study (on a baseline level of ARPU of TZS 5,300 
among the control sample) , i.e. an effect size of approximately 10% . As described above, this is 
likely to be an underestimate and the real effect size could be double ( a 20% increase in ARPU).  
Figure 17 shows how sensitive  the financial viability of a service is to this effect size, and that even 
if the effect size was marginally higher than 10%, then a service could be financially viable in a 
four-year period. Based on the proportions of both sampl es that reported receiving nutrition 
message s by SMS, the effect size could be double (20%), in which case the return on investment 
would be highly attractive.  
Figure 17:  Sensitivity of IRR to increase in ARPU  (in-house MNO)  
 
Source: Authors  
The large number of active users means that financial indicators are highly sensitive to changes in 
ARPU. The ARPU found among the control sample was TZS 5,300, which is consistent with 
published data  as described above. Figure 18 shows  that a service could generate a positive IRR 
over a four-year period if offered to a user base with an ARPU of around  TZS 6,000, which 
appears to correspond more or less to  the Tanzanian market average. The study was conducted in 
Iringa, a rural district, so measured ARPU levels would be expected to be below that national 
average.  This figure is based on generating revenue from a 10% increase in ARPU.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 45  
Figure 18:  Sensitivity of IRR to ARPU  (10% effect size)  
 
Source: Authors  
Consider a scenario in which an in -house mHealth VAS can be developed and delivered under the 
following assumptions:  
• a 20% reduction in fixed operating costs (staff time and platf orm costs ); an MNO would be 
quite capable of setting up their own platform, which could reduce real costs still further ; 
• a nationwide ARPU of TZS 6,000  /month ; and  
• a 15% increase in ARPU when consumers use the mHealth VAS.  
These positive assumptions indicate that such a service would be financially attractive, providing 
an IRR of approximately 70% over a four-year period.  
There are non -financial constraints that an MNO would face if implementing an in -house mHealth 
VAS as d escribed in this section. These relate to relations with government and NGO partners. In 
the case of Wazazi Nipendeni , TFNC was instrumental in securing approval of the messages. Any 
government body would need to be seen to be scrupulous in its dealings wi th a private sector 
organisation, and would be keen to avoid accusations of partisanship. While a government agency 
might be keen to support an enterprise that is clearly for the public good, it may be more measured 
in its support for a private sector vent ure. This depends on the country context; in countries with 
strong policies on ICT and private sector growth, government agencies may be keen to support 
this kind of venture.   
 
 
 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 46  
8 Changes in the mobile ecosystem  
8.1 The political  economy  
The telecommunications market in Tanzania has been subject to continued political influence over 
the duration of the evaluation study. T he Electronics and Postal Communications Act was 
introduced in 2010  and required telecommunications companies to offer at least 25% of their 
shares to the public by floating on the Dar es Salam stock exchange , and to do so within  three 
years  (The Electronics and Postal Communications Act , 2010) . This move was resisted by 
operators and the provision was not enforced at first. However, when a new president was elected 
(at the end of 2015), the bill was amended in 2016 , giving  companies  a further three years to make 
shares available. Vodacom was the first of the operators to comply, listing on the stock exchange 
in August 2017 .21 At the beginning of 2019, Vodacom was still the only company to have 
complied .22  
Tigo in Tanzania is the trading name of MIC Tanzania plc .23 However, ownership of shares in MIC 
Tanzania has been in dispute. Two companies owned by a single businessman ( Golden Globe 
International Services Ltd and Quality Group Ltd .) alleged that they bought shares in 2014 entitling 
them to a 99% stake in MIC Tan zania, although the complex dispute traces its roots back to 
2002 .24 Only in July 2018 did the courts rule that MIC Tanzania was the legal owner of Tigo 
Tanzania .24 Up until that point, the dispute had meant that Tigo was not been able to make 
provision for any public offering of shares.  
Any plans for Airtel to comply with the share offer obligation have also been delayed by a dispute 
over ownership . Celtel acquired a stake in the Tanzania Telecommunications Company Limited 
(TTCL, the incumbent operator) in 2001, and the Government remained the majority owner. The 
successful mobile operator, branded Celtel , was subsequently set up as an independent mob ile 
operator, wholly owned by TTCL. In 2005, the two were legally separated but Celtel retained a 
35% stake in TTCL while TTCL was left with a 40% holding in Celtel .25 Around the same time 
(2005), Celtel was purchased by Zain . Zain was then purchased by Bh arti Airtel in 2010, and has 
since been trading as Airtel. In 2017, the Government made a claim on the ownership of Airtel, 
alleging irregularities in the original privatisation process. This argument is not without merit, as 
one of the problems characteri sing privatisation  processes at this time was a lack of data  (Christen 
et al., 2005) . The matter has only recently been resolved by Bharti agreeing to make a number of 
ongoing payments to the Government , and giving the Government further shares to bring its 
shareholding up from 40% to 49%, leaving Bharti still in control .26  
Another indicat ion of the extent of renewed political  interest in the telecommunications  sector was 
the replacement of the head of the telecoms regulator by the new president , on the grounds that 
TCRA had failed to extract correct tax revenues .27  
Mobile operators  have a lso fallen foul of the judiciary in Tanzania , in line with the p resident ’s anti-
corruption drive and the targeting of multinational companies in Tanzania’s mining and telecoms 
 
21 https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/news/first -tanzania%E2%80%99s -telecoms -operators -goes -public   
22 https://theexchange.africa/why -most -tanzanian -telcos -have -failed -to-float-their-shares/  
23 www.millicom.com/media/3665/millicom -20f-filed-version.pdf  
24 www.thec itizen.co.tz/news/Tigo -IPO-now-imminent/1840340 -4683568 -h8rg56/index.html  
25 www.telegeography.com/products/commsupdate/articles/2005/08/22/ celtel -and-ttcl-part-company/  
26 www.thecitizen.co.tz/news/1840340 -5151278 -8r654i/index.html  
27 www.thecitizen.co.tz/news/President -Magufuli -confirms -Mr-Kilaba -as-the-new-TCRA -boss/1840340 -3410484 -
hx2ojy/index.html  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 47  
sectors  to address tax evasion. In 2018, the CEOs of Halotel and Zantel were cha rged with fraud .28 
More recently , in 2019, f ollowing the arrest of its CEO, Vodacom Tanzania pleaded guilty to the 
charge of intending to avoid paying taxes .29 In April 2019 it made a $2.3 million payment to the 
Government .  
8.2 Developments in the market  
Acco rding to the latest figures published by the regulator, the total number of mobile subscriptions 
has risen from to 40 million in March 2017 to 4 4 million in December 2018.  The population has also 
increased, from 53.0 million in 2016 to 58.0 million in 201930 (representing a growth rate of 3.0% 
per year). T he mobile market continues to mature, as the penetration rate increased from 78% in 
2017 to 81% in 2018  (TCRA , 2019a) . TCRA figures show erratic but continued growth : 
• January 2015 to January 2016 – 22.4% (numbers increased by 7.3 million) . 
• January 2016 to January 2017  – 0.3% (numbers increased by 0.1 million) . 
• January 2017 to January 2018  – 0.4% (numbers increased by 0.2 million) .  
• January 2018 to January 2019  – 9.7% (numbers increased by 3.9 million).  
Mergers have also changed the dynamics of the market. At the time of the baseline study, Zantel 
was one of the MNOs that had signed up to support Wazazi Nipendeni . However, Tigo had bought 
85% of shares in Zantel i n 2015 ,31 leaving the remaining 15% owned by the Government of 
Zanzibar. Zantel continue d to trade under its own brand until recently . At the beginning of 2019, 
Tigo (owned by Millicom) initiated proceedings to acquire this remaining 15% by seeking regulat ory 
approval .32  
Vodacom continues to have the largest market share, and has increased this share from 31.7% 
(March 2017) to 32.4% (December 2018) – see Figure 19. The market share of the combined Tigo/ 
Zantel group rose to 29.4% ( December  2018), substantially narrowing the gap between the second 
player and the market leader.  
 
28 https://uk.reuters.com/article/us -tanzania -telecoms/tanzania -charges -telecoms -executives -with-fraud -in-tax-evasion -
crackdown -idUKKCN1J22PD  
29 www.reuters.com/article/tanzania -vodacom -tanzania/update -2-vodacom -tanzania -pleads -guilty -settles-charges -
against -ceo-employees -idUSL8N21T48S  
30 www.worldometers.info/world -population/tanzania -population/  
31 www.thecitizen.co.tz/news/Tigo -finally -acquires -Zantel/1840340 -2742156 -9lywaf/index.html  
32 www.itwebafrica.com/tanzania/245356 -tanzania -millicom -targets -full-ownership -of-zantel  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 48  
Figure 19:  Market share of voice subscribers (from TCRA data)  
 
Source: Authors  
It is estimated that 45 % of the population of Tanzania is under the age of 15 .33 If they are 
considered to be economically inactive and highly unlikely to own a mobile phone , then the data 
more accurately repr esent s a penetration rate of 147%, meaning that many adults own more than 
one SIM. This tends to reflect a mature market, but also hides uncompetitive market conditions, 
notabl y restricted network coverage in certain areas and off -net tariff premiums (i.e. it costs more 
to call someone on a different network).  
Mobile internet subs cribers have also grown over the period , from 17.3 million in 201 5 to 23.1 
million in 2018  (Figure 20, TCRA , 2019b) . Expressed as a share of mobile subscribers, interne t 
use has increased from 43% of wireless  subscribers  (both mobile and fixed) in 2015 to 52% in 
2018 .  
Figure 20:  Growth of internet subscribers  (from TCRA  data)  
 
Source: Authors  
 
33 www.demographicdividend.org/country_highlights/tanzania/  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 49  
There is an appetite among mobile operators to increase access to the internet and data use. For 
example, in June 2018 TCRA issued broadband licences to Vodacom Tanzania and Azam 
Telecom , with an obligation to achieve population coverage of 60% by 2021, in creasing to 90% by 
2025 .34 
8.3 Trends in mHealth Innovations  
8.3.1  Technology and mobile business models  
The majority of mobile internet connections are 2G, and Tanzania’s broadband coverage lags 
behind its neighbours (see Figure 21). GSMA predict s that mobile data consumption across sub -
Saharan Africa will multiply sevenfold by 2024 (from 1.1 to 8.5 GB/subscriber/month)  (GSMA, 
2019), and this is likely to be driven by 3G technology.  Multiple features are driving data usage  
(see Annex F  for further detail) : 
• Over the top (OTT) services continues to grow. In 2017, 20% of adults in Tanzania used social 
networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter  (Pew Research Cen ter 2018) . Use has grown 
by one -third over the three years from 2014 to 2017.   
• Increased revenue from data services can more than make up for any decline in voice revenue 
from OTT services  (Esselaar and Stork , 2018).  
• Entertainment services . TVs are becomi ng more widespread and the affluent are spending 
more time watching TV and video on mobile devices.  
• Smartphone sales are on the rise . Smartphone ownership stood  at around 13% of adults in 
2017, well below the median for sub -Saharan Africa (33%)  (Pew Resear ch Center, 2018) . 
GSMA estimate s that  the number of handsets will more than double from 2018 to 2025.  
All this suggests that mobile data use is set to grow.   
 
 
34 www.telegeography.com/products/commsupdate/articles/2018/06/26/tanzania -allocates -700mhz -spectrum -to-
vodacom -azam -telecom/  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 50  
Figure 21:  3G and 4G coverage as % of population (2018)   
 
Source:  Okeleke, (2019)  
 
 
Perhaps the most transformational technology that has blossomed since the baseline report is 
mobile money. In 2017, 60% of the population had a mobile money account  (Okeleke , 2019) , and 
TCRA figures show a 40% increase in accounts over a three -year period from 2016 to 2019. M-
Pesa (Vodacom) is the market leader in Tanzania , at 40%  market share , and Tigo Pesa is second , 
at 32%.  Okeleke (2019) estimates that the value of transactions processed through mobile  money 
services in 2017 was $22 billion, equivalent to almost half of the country’s GDP.  
8.4 mHealth innovations  
The Health Data Collaborative35 has done some interesting work on classifying digital health 
interventions, led by the Digital Health and Interoperability Working Group. It propose s that tools 
can be divided into the following high -level categorie s36: 
• interventions for clients (e.g. client c ommunication, health tracking, information services, 
financial transactions);  
• interventions for healthcare providers (e.g. client registration, health records, decision support, 
telemedicine, information management, medication management);  
• interventions fo r resource/ health system managers  (e.g. human resources, supply chains, civil 
registrations, health financing, asset and facility management); and  
• interventions for data services  (e.g. data collection, coding, mapping, and exchange).  
 
 
35 www.healthdatacollaborative.org/  
36 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1GEdfI8AQ_wC _SKAm9DhFlNMEnLKlKIcVC46lEws -
UIs/edit#gid=2135971936  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 51  
Wazazi Nipendeni  assists pregnant women and mothers by providing them with information on 
how to look after themselves and their infant, so it falls into the broad category of client -facing 
tools. Within this category, the Health Data Collaborative give examples of services t hat fall into a 
range of sub -categories (see  Annex G ): 
• Targeted client communication ; 
• Untargeted client communication ; 
• Client to client communication ; 
• Personal healt h tracking ; 
• On-demand information services provided to clients ; 
• Client financial transactions . 
 
The classification makes a clear distinction between services providing unidirectional information 
dissemination to clients (targeted and untargeted) and client -initiated services (peer group, citizen 
reporting , and health information -seeking). Wazazi Nipendeni  is an example of the first of these 
and is a ‘push’ service. The Viamo 3 -2-1 service offered by Vodacom, on the other hand, is an 
example of a clien t-initiated service and is a ‘pull’ service, as it relies on the user to dial a short  
code to access information. In principle, a service could combine both aspects of communication 
as each has its advantages and drawbacks.  
It is interesting to note that most of these examples are based on the SMS functionality of mobile 
phones. This is true even of the tools that deal with financial transactions, as they tend to use a 
platform that manages payments between healthcare providers, but the interaction with th e client is 
done by SMS. This reliance on SMS tells us two things . Firstly , SMS is a good enough means of 
communicating with clients (i.e. constraints such as poor network coverage and illiteracy have not 
rendered the services unfeasible). Secondly, SMS is regarded as the most cost -effective medium 
for communicating with clients. This is closely linked to the first point, as voice -based services 
(such as outbound dialling and call centres) can overcome literacy and language constraints, but 
come at a much h igher cost.  
The classification was drafted in 2017, so more recent examples of mobile health projects exist. 
Many of these are beginning to exploit the potential of the internet , and smartphones in particular, 
of data acquisition and analysis, and of mobi le money services  (some examples are given in  
Annex G ). Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 52  
9 Discussion  
9.1 Role of gov ernment  
The case of Wazazi Nipendeni  underlines the importance of working in partnership  with 
government agencies. The role of M oHCDGEC and a range of departments within the ministry is 
evident in a variety of ways, for example:  
• long-term commitment to the concept of using mobile  phone s to disseminate information to 
clients, starting with the PEPFAR Phones for Health programme in 2007;  
• TFNC involvement in designing locally relevant and accessible messages;  
• TFNC and its contacts was instrumental in securing approval for the content;  
• gove rnment health workers played an active role in promoting the service and assisting women 
with registering;  
• the G overnment was influential in brokering partnerships with field NGO health programmes;  
• MoHCDGEC  commissioned and paid for the new platform;  
• makin g agreements with MoHCDGEC  to support Wazazi Nipendeni  has been of value to 
MNOs in the political economy of the industry;  
• the G overnment is regarded as a trusted provider of information, so MoHCDGEC  branding of 
messages has been important in building the Wazazi Nipendeni  brand, which is important in a 
market plagued by spam.  
9.2 Theory of change  
Steps in the draft theory of change drawn up by GSMA ( Figure 22) have been revie wed in the light 
of the findings from the study  (see Table 4). Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 53  
Figure 22:  mHealth theory of change diagram  
 
Notes. Draft theory of change diagram. © GSMA Intelligence (unpublished) . 
 
Nutrition	Service	Impact	Pathway
Crowding	in	of	the	mHealth	sectorCustomer	Journey
Uptake Usage
Users	use	service	
to	access	infoUsers	use	service	
on	a	repeat	basisUsers	subscribe	
to	service1 2 3Commercial	viability	pathway
Users	acquire	
new	knowledge	
about	nutritional	
practices4
Other	factors
Users	adopt	
improved	
nutritional	
practices5Nutrition	service	goals
Nutrition	service	impactDirect	revenue7Indirect	
commercial	
value
Running	costs9Financial	indicators
Commercial	viability 68
10
11Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 54  
Table 4:  Theory of change reviewed   
Step  Description  Rating  Comment  
1 Users subscribe 
to the service  
 The number of active users has been estimated at 550,000 as at the end 
of 2018. The cumulative number of people reached will be higher still. 
Users registered on the Wazazi Nipendeni  service for free – they did not 
pay any subscription fee. No insights are  available into willingness to pay 
for this kind of information dissemination service. Willingness to pay is 
likely to be low, given that users already have access to much of the 
information through health systems (messages acted as reminders to 
reinforce information provided by health workers, and to reinforce 
mothers’ existing knowledge).  
2 Users use 
service to 
access 
information   Among  respondents who received message s, over 80% read the 
mNutrition conten t. Only 66% of households in the treatment group had 
received messages . 
3 Users use 
service on a 
repeat ed basis   Of users who could identify messages as from Wazazi Nipendeni , only 
19% received messages last month. Most did not know why, but 18% had 
lost SIM/  handset.  
4 Users acquire 
new knowledge 
about nutritional 
practices   mNutrition increased knowledge of IYCF and nutrition for males , and 
increased the combined household -level measure of nutrition knowledge . 
5 Users adopt 
improved 
nutritional 
practices   Over 80% self -reported implementing at least one tip. The study 
assessed IYCF practices and dietary diversity. Wazazi Nipendeni resulted 
in improved children’s dietary diversity scores, the likelihood that children 
satisfied the minimum dietary diversity t hreshold, and the likelihood that 
they achieved a minimum acceptable diet. Women were more likely to 
meet the minimum dietary diversity threshold  (despite no evidence of 
changes in household -level food consumption patterns).  
6 Nutrition service 
impact  
 Wazazi Nipendeni  had no impact on child nutrition as measured by 
anthropometry. The Wazazi Nipendeni  service improved a range of 
nutritional outco mes, most notably multiple indicators associated with 
diets among young children . 
7 Direct revenue  
 TFNC stipulated that the Wazazi Nipendeni  service was to be provided 
free of charge to users.  
8 Indirect 
commercial 
value   The Wazazi Nipendeni service increased ARPU by at least 10%, likely to 
be higher. Wazazi Nipendeni  did not reduce churn (churn tends to be low 
and difficult to reduce in underserved rural areas).  
9 >= running 
costs  
 The theory of change implies that running costs are incurred by the same 
entity that receives revenue. This is not the case with Wazazi Nipendeni , 
where MNOs receive increased revenue but the mHeal th Tanzania -PPP 
incurs costs. At an SMS price of TZS 25, revenue would exceed co sts at 
over 250,000 users.  
10 Commercial 
viability  
 The theory of change implies  that a service would be viable if revenue 
exceeds running costs, but this takes no account of return on investment. 
Wazazi Nipendeni  can trace its roots back through donor -funded 
programmes to 2001. A scenario for setting up a hypothetical in -house 
MNO service indicates it could provide a positive IRR over four years , but 
this has not been proven . Setting up a hypothetical independent content 
provider (like the mHealth Tanza nia-PPP) would be less attractive, 
providing a positive return over six years.   
11 Crowding in of 
the mHealth 
sector  
 Having demonstrated the viability of the PPP, and the reach of mobile 
services, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP has entered into agreements wit h 
other field partners (for Wazazi Nipendeni ), and has developed additional 
mobile services. It is too early to say whether this has increased demand 
(and funding) for mobile services, and  it is too early to expect the private 
sector to move into the marke t.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 55  
Key: 
 Step fully realised  
 Step partially realised  
 Step not realised  
 Insufficient information  
Source:  Authors’ own  
The Theory of Change in Figure 22 reflects an emphasis on commercial sustainability  that is 
consistent with the original Business Case ,37, which  refers to the value of demonstrating 
sustainable business models in reducing risk  for commercial investors. The  role of donor funded 
business models in the mHealth sector at the time was well recognised; the i nitial GSMA scoping 
study presented three services, all of which were classified as having ‘donor funded’ business 
models  (GSMA 2014) .  
The original mNutrition documentation emphasised the role of private sector investment in taking 
mobile services to scale. However, t he experience of Wazazi Nipendeni shows that it is also 
possible for donor funded mHealth services to reach scale. In fact, Wazazi Nipendeni reached 
substantially more users than any of the other mHealth projects supported through the mNutrition 
programme (GSMA 2018). Although negotiations have yet to be concluded, evidence to date 
suggests that the donor funded busine ss model can be effective in attracting further investment, 
albeit from donors rather than the private sector.  
Although not explicit in Figure 22, one of the features o f the mNutrition programme is the potential 
for mobile services to achieve positive outcomes ( “Nutrition service impact ” in Figure 22) among 
poor and disadvantaged groups. It has been pointed out that Wazazi Nipendeni is offered as a 
national service available through multiple networks  and does not, therefore, have a particular 
poverty focus . There are, however, implications for the ext reme poor arising from the different 
business models considered. Two hypothetical models are considered in Section 7 – a third party 
content provider and an in -house  MNO driven model. An independent content provider would 
typically enter into agreements with organisations providing health services on the ground (a B2B 
model), whereas an MNO would offer a service directly to their customers (B2C model). Wazazi 
Nipenden i is an interesting hybrid, as the service is made available to MNO customers and at the 
same time the mHealth Tanzania -PPP has entered into agreements  with agencies implementing 
health programmes on the ground.  
Cost of sales is a key factor in any MNO dri ven model and must be balanced with any increase 
indirect benefits, especially if the service is to be freely available as in Tanzania. Literacy clearly 
presents a barrier to accessing SMS based services. Voice -based services (such as outbound 
dialling and  call centres) can overcome literacy and language constraints but  are prohibitively 
expensive.  
Third party models have the flexibility to buy bulk SMSs from multiple MNOs. The partnership 
agreements that the mHealth Tanzania -PPP has forged with MNOs are a  key feature of the 
service, meaning that it is accessible to customers on all of the major networks. This increases 
reach among the extreme poor who tend to live in underserved areas where signal coverage is 
poor and consumers have no choice of operator a s they can access only one network in their 
geographical location.  The agreements they have made with implementing agencies also 
increases reach among the extreme poor as field partners’ programmes tend to focus on 
vulnerable communities in rural areas.  
 
37 http://iati.dfid.gov.uk/iati_documents/4139050.odt  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 56  
An mhealth service provider will tend to have a focus on the health sector, whereas MNOs have a 
focus on upselling to maximise revenue from a customer segment.  The lower spending power of 
the extreme poor makes it difficult for an MNO to justify investing i n developing services targeted at 
this group. Emerging d ata based services will be instrumental in overcoming literacy barriers  (e.g. 
using audio and video ) but not in the foreseeable future , while data rich services emerging (e.g. 
integrating financial se rvices) will exclude the extreme poor who do not have the digital literacy  
skills needed.  
9.3 MNOs  
The merged entity of Tigo and Zantel has a market share close to that of the market leader, 
Vodacom (se e Figure 19). This threat to Vodacom’s dominant position is likely to result in 
increased competition. As operators look for innovations and opportunities to attract and keep 
customers, they may well prioritise exploring commercial opportunities to capitalise on thei r support 
for Wazazi Nipendeni . Not only Wazazi Nipendeni , but the operators will also be keeping an eye on 
competing and alternative mobile health solutions to spot opportunities . The mHealth Tanzania -
PPP and TFNC will need to liaise closely with supporti ng MNOs to ensure that they continue to be 
satisfied that Wazazi Nipendeni  provides commercial benefits, and to engage in ways such that the 
service can be adapted to meet the changing priorities of MNOs.  
9.4 Possible m echanisms for revenue generation  
Despite  the best efforts of GSMA to prompt innovative thinking on ways of generating revenue, the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP model remains essentially unchanged, save for greater involvement of 
MoHCDGEC . The model may be forced to change if donor funding through CDC is  not renewed 
when the current agreement expires in 2020. Stakeholders commonly mentioned the idea to 
charge field partners. Firstly, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP could charge for providing messages to 
clients registered by the partner ; and, secondly, the mHeal th Tanzania -PPP could charge for the 
time and effort spent developing new, bespoke content for the partner (on a consultancy basis). 
The trouble is that the first of these is a symbiotic relationship – the mHealth Tanzania -PPP 
provides messages while the f ield partner assists women to register in the field, so could partners 
then charge the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP for each user registered?  
Another possibility being pursued is getting private sector partners to sponsor messages as a 
means of advertising. TFNC h as pointed out that it has  guidelines on the types of goods that it 
would permit to be associated with Government -endorsed health messaging, e.g. food products 
would not be permitted.  
The mHealth Tanzania -PPP has also looked at bringing on insurance partn ers, which is an 
interesting idea given the advent of new mHealth services using smartphone apps that use mobile 
money functionality. This opens up possibilities not only for sponsorship, but also for incorporating 
innovative payment features into the heal th messaging service (e.g. discounts on insurance 
premiums for Wazazi Nipendeni  users).  
9.5 Trends in mHealth services  
Although mobile subscriber numbers continue to grow, growth in internet subscribers is much 
greater . The majority of mobile internet connect ions are 2G, and Tanzania’s broadband coverage 
lags behind its neighbours. S martphone ownership stood  at around 13% of adults in 2017, well Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 57  
below the median for sub -Saharan Africa (33%) . This all suggests that m obile data use is set to 
grow  and t here is indeed an appetite among mobile operators to increase access to the internet 
and data use.  Further investment may be forthcoming now that disputes involving the major MNOs 
have been resolved.  
The mobile money industry has grown rapidly in Tanzania , and 60% of the population had an 
account in 2017. Recent mHealth services are beginning to exploit the potential of the internet, and 
smartphones in particular, of data acquisition and analysis, and of mobile money services. 
Integrating mobile money mean s that services can offer users the ability to pay subscriptions, 
make purchases, and access financial services such as credit and insurance. For example, Tigo 
partnered with a micro -insurance compan y, Milvik Tanzania,  to offer the BimaMkononi  mobile 
insur ance service .38 Customers can buy hospital insurance, accident insurance , and life insurance. 
Premiums can be paid using Tigo Pesa or by cash at a Tigo customer service centre. The service 
takes advantage of the mobile money platform, and provides an incen tive for users to join the 
mobile money service.  
9.6 Financial viability and scenarios  
The commercial content provider scenario  discussed  in Section 7.4 is based on the mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP model but generating revenue through a revenue share agreement with MNOs 
(albeit indirect revenue). One of the dilemmas facing VAS developers, especially t hose operating in 
the public goods space, is whether to enter into an agreement with a single MNO, or to make their 
offering available across all networks. Using multiple networks potentially increases the reach of a 
VAS, but it instantly eliminates one of  the indirect benefits of VAS – reduced churn. There is no 
incentive for a consumer to stick with a given operator if a service they like and want to use can 
also be accessed on other networks. For this reason, MNOs are generally only interested in 
enterin g into exclusive agreements. This means that the commercial content provider scenario 
considered  in Section 7.4 may be difficult to broker in practice.  
The alternati ve of an in -house MNO -based service may, therefore, be a more realistic option. The 
financial modelling also suggests it is easier to make a financial case for this model given that all of 
the increase in revenue would be retained by the MNO and the real cost to an operator of sending 
SMS messages is minimal. This is also closer to the majority of projects supported by the 
mNutrit ion programme , which were led by MNOs, although in most cases the MNO entered into a 
partnership with a VAS content provider (Viamo was the VAS provide r in four projects) , rather than 
setting up expertise in house (see GSMA , 2018). One of the potential drawbacks of this private 
sector -led approach is that a government may have reservations about lending its branding to a 
corporate product . 
The scenarios proposed above have been prompted by the increase in ARPU demonstrated by the 
quantitative study. Reduced churn is a further indirect benefit commonly associated with VAS when 
provided by an MNO, yet the quantitative study found no evidence of reduced chur n among 
Wazazi Nipendeni  users. Prepaid markets tend to have high churn rates because consumers are 
not ‘tied in’ to contracts , and the Tanzanian market is predominantly prepaid. However, in rural or 
underserved markets , where signal coverage is poor, cons umers often find themselves effectively 
tied in to a single operator by virtue of being able to access only one network in their geographical 
location. Therefore, churn tends to be lower in rural areas.   
 
38 www.tigo.co.tz/bima -mkononi -insurance  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 58  
9.7 Looking back  
Looking back on the development of the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP and the Wazazi Nipendeni  
service, it is interesting to see how the strategy articulated at the baseline has largely come about, 
with more partners entering into agreements with the mHealth Tanzania -PPP to provide mobile -
based services,  and with the Government getting more involved and assuming more responsibility 
for the platform. As part of this evolution, the primary role of the mHealth Tanzania -PPP appears to 
have shifted from technical to health. The PPP was originally set up to dev elop the software and 
systems needed to deliver a service, but an understanding of public health now seems to be more 
important in dealing with MoHCDGEC  and negotiating partnerships with health partners. It is also 
interesting to note that the current mode l closely resembles the original concept for the ‘one -stop 
shop ’ articulated by GSMA at the beginning of the mNutrition programme. The mHealth Tanzania -
PPP is the ‘go to’ institution in Tanzania that can help programmes entering the country to set up 
mobil e services more conveniently, at a lower cost, and avoiding duplication, rather than setting up 
independent services themselves. The difference is that although the mHealth Tanzania -PPP 
moderates a complex partnership of public and private institutions, it  itself is effectively a public 
body. It is funded by public money through CDC and  it has no desire to become a for -profit 
organisation. The original GSMA vision was for a private body to act as the aggregator, or at least 
as a form of cooperative that wou ld generate revenue to cover costs.  
9.8 Looking to the future  
The mHealth Tanzania -PPP and Wazazi Nipendeni  are now approaching a c rucial point in time . 
Firstly, the agreement providing funding for the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP is due to expire shortly, 
and it is not yet clear whether CDC will continue to fund the PPP beyond this date. Secondly, 
advances in technology are leading to a next generation of mHealth services that are smartphone -
based and delivered over the internet. Increasing broadband coverage and fal ling smartphone 
prices mean that these services will be accessible to more of the population in the next few years. 
Many new services incorporate financial services, which can enable subscriptions, purchases (e.g.  
of pharmaceuticals), and insurance. These emerging services are attractive to MNOs as MNO -led 
mobile money services are a source of increasing revenue. These services tend to be accessible 
only to people with higher levels of digital literacy,  so they carry a risk of opening up a further digital 
divide between better educated users and poorer users. Thirdly, recent changes in the structure of 
the telecommunications market may lead to increased competition and investment. Disputes over 
the ownership of both Tigo and Airtel have been resolved. These disputes prevented these 
companies from complying with the regulator’s requirement to float shares on the local stock 
market, so they will also have impeded any plans for investment in the network or  services . Tigo’s 
takeover of Zantel has increased its market share so that it is closer to the leader, Vodacom, and 
this may result in increased competition between two close contenders for market leader.  
 
 
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 59  
10 Conclusions  
10.1 The product  
The Wazazi Nipendeni  service offers a s trong value proposition  to users. In te rms of the value 
attributed to the service by users, over 80% of households read all the mNutrition content they 
received, and over 90% of users either always or very often found the messages useful. Users also 
expressed high levels of satisfaction with th e service, as over 90% of users would recommend the 
service (likely or highly likely to recommend it to others ). There is evidence that users translated 
information from  the messages int o action. Over 80% self -reported implementing at least one tip , 
most commonly on  complementary feeding . Evidence of behaviour change was confirmed by the 
quantitative study , which found that accessing the Wazazi Nipendeni  service had improved a range 
of nutritional outcome s, most notably multiple indicators associated with d iets among young 
children . 
The success of the early nationwide awareness campaigns was still evident in the high levels of 
awareness of Wazazi Nipendeni  (53%) found by the DHS surveys conducted in early 2016. Most 
respondents to the DHS su rvey had heard about Wazazi Nipendeni  through the radio (87%). The 
quantitative study found that 13% of respondents from the control sample had received messages 
from Wazazi Nipendeni . Awareness levels among the public as a whole would be much higher, 
sugg esting that awareness of Wazazi Nipendeni  remains high. Initial users were encouraged 
through media campaigns to self -register but , more recently, users have been assisted with 
registration by partners and health workers. The relatively limited data on opt -outs from the service 
indicate that users who self -registered were much more likely to opt  out (42% , compared with 0.3% 
of users registered by a partner using the API). This confirms the value of face -to-face contact in 
the registration process, and appea rs to confirm the hypothesis that adherence is likely to be 
higher among users who have been assisted with registration.  
SMS remains an appropriate channel for delivering information to women. Notwithstanding 
limitations associated with literacy and local  languages, the service was highly valued by users and 
messages were commonly read. Having said that, it is noted that SMS may be particularly well 
suited to the Tanzanian context, given that literacy levels are relatively high (for sub -Saharan 
Africa), an d the country is united by the language of Swahili.  
It is important to target men with awareness raising so that they are more likely to permit partners 
to access phones. However, it is less important to enrol men on the system as women’s access to 
Wazazi Nipendeni  messages was less reliable if husbands received the messages, as men often 
did not share the phone with their partners. Men would also not share information with their 
partners if they disagreed with the content, e.g. information on family planni ng. Men were 
registered on the system as supporters (among others), and made up only a small proportion of 
Wazazi Nipendeni users (less than 1%).  
Telecoms markets across Africa are shifting from voice to data, as broadband coverage increases 
and data accou nts for a greater share of operator revenues. Smartphones are becoming more 
common as handset prices continue to fall , and social media , such as Facebook, WhatsApp , and 
Twitter , are becoming popular among the young. Although SMS currently remains the most 
appropriate channel for reaching the majority of the population at present, users tastes are 
changing, and the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP will need to adopt the most effective channel for 
reaching the next generation of users.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 60  
10.2 Partnerships  
The Wazazi Nipendeni  service (and the mHealth Tanzania -PPP) can trace its roots back to one of 
the earliest ICT for development pilot projects (Voxiva). This illustrates the importance of a long 
history of investment , partnerships,  and political commitment in nurturing a facil ity to the point 
where it can successfully implement an information dissemination service (and other services ) at 
national scale. This does not necessarily mean that a start -up could not achieve something similar 
but brokering  the complexity and diversity of the partnerships involved is not a trivial achievement.  
The ability to broker a complex set of partnerships has been crucial in the success of the Wazazi 
Nipendeni  service. Partnerships have been forged with a diverse range of stakeholder groups , 
including Government ministries, multiple programme funders (e.g. CDC, JHCCP), content 
providers (e.g. GAIN, field partners), technology providers, and partner MNOs. These partnerships 
have been successful due, at least partly, to the personal skills of t he mHealth  Tanzania -PPP 
team.  
10.3 Business model s 
MNOs have an opportunity to capitalise on the positive brand of Wazazi Nipendeni  by using it in 
promotional materials. To date, it appears that operators’ promotion of Wazazi Nipendeni  has been 
weak : Airtel re leased a press statement following the publication of the GS MA case study that 
acknowledged the contribution of MNOs; Tigo mention s Wazazi Nipendeni  as part of its CSR 
activities under the Tanzania page of its website; and Vodacom Tanzania Foundation has a  web 
page that describes Wazazi Nipendeni . There are additional possibilities for further engagement 
with Wazazi Nipendeni , such as training freelancers on registering users, and increasing or 
abolishing any caps on the number of messages sent. Further eng agement can be justified based 
on the increases in ARPU found in the quantitative study.  
The quantitative study has shown that the Wazazi Nipendeni  service yields substantial indirect 
benefits to mobile operators in terms of increased ARPU. The effect size in the quantitative study 
area was at least a 10% increase in ARPU  (TZS 510/month) , and is likely to be higher still  
nationally . This is as a resu lt of women becoming more confident in their use of phones. They 
make and receive more calls and SMS messages. This represents a real financial benefit to MNOs 
as a result of their contribution to Wazazi Nipendeni . As the real cost to an operator of sendin g 
SMS messages is low (tending to zero), there is no cost of sale associated with this increase in 
revenue.  The study found no evidence that Wazazi Nipendeni  users held on to their SIM cards for 
longer (reduced churn). This may be at least in part due to t he rural nature of the Iringa district, 
given that churn tends to be lower in rural areas, making it difficult to achieve any differences in 
churn.  
Demonstrating that Wazazi Nipendeni  generates real revenue for operators opens up possibilities 
for alternat ive commercial business models. Analysis has focused on two hypothetical cases 
representing opportunities for replicating an mHealth agency delivering a service similar to Wazazi 
Nipendeni  in another country. An in -house mHealth service developed by an MNO  appears to be 
the most attractive proposition for two key reasons. Firstly, all of the increase in revenue is retained 
by the MNO and , secondly, the real cost to an operator of sending SMS messages is minimal. 
Based on an initial investment of £312,500 to cover the cost of product development (UX research, 
monitoring and evaluation, content localisation), a scenario based on positive assumptions on 
operating costs, ARPU , and the effect size (increase in ARPU) indicates that a service could 
provide an IRR o f approximately 70% over a four-year period.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 61  
Less attractive, although possibly still viable, is an independent content provider model, similar to 
GSMA’s original vision. In this case, the same investment costs have been assumed but the 
provider would nee d to pay a bulk SMS price for all messages sent ( TZS 25/SMS), and it would 
need to enter into some kind of revenue share agreement with each participating operator. A 
scenario based on positive assumptions on operating costs, ARPU , the effect size (increase in 
ARPU), and revenue share (50%) , indicates that a service could only provide a positive IRR over a 
six-year period.  
The business model continues to be a multi -sided platform business model that provides value to 
funders with a health mandate ( MoHCDGEC  and CDC) who pay for the service, thereby enabling 
users to access it free of charge. One of the principal funders was MoHCDGEC , but as it assume s 
responsibility for more of the activities conducted by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, inc luding the 
Wazazi Nipendeni  service, the business model will tend towards a hybrid of a government -to-
citizen  model  and the multi -sided platform, as the field partners will still support both Wazazi 
Nipendeni  and users, and the MNOs will still provide in -kind funding for messages. Although the 
original vision for mNutrition articulated the role of private sector investment in taking mobile 
services to scale, Wazazi Nipendeni shows that it is also possible for a donor funded business 
model to reach scale and  to attract further investment, albeit from donors rather than the private 
sector.  
10.4 Telecoms industry  
Rapid staff turnover within the MNOs  continues to pose a challenge for the work of  the mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP.  When support was given as part of CSR activit ies, it depended on personal 
relationships, so effort was constantly required to establish relationships with new staff. As support 
for Wazazi Nipendeni  becomes integrated as part of commercial operations, which is increasingly 
the case given developments in the political economy of the telecoms industry, the importance of 
personal relationships may diminish.  
Telecommunications companies have come under increasing pressure from the Government as it 
continues to exert pressure as part of its anti -corruption  campaign. Companies have been required 
to make shares available to the Tanzanian public, and several mobile companies have been 
charged with a range of charges, including Vodacom, which was convicted of tax evasion. Support 
for Wazazi Nipendeni  has politi cal capital in this context, and operators have now signed 
agreements directly with MoHCDGEC  rather than indirectly with the mHealth Tanzania -PPP.  
The principal vulnerabilities of the current business model are funding from CDC, and the free SMS 
messages provided by MNOs. Through not yet secure, policy documents propose further funding 
for the services provided by the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP (e.g. the 2018 PEPFAR country operation 
plan says it will expand the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, acknowledging its ability to leverage support 
from the MNOs; scaling up the Electronic Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response  system is 
part of the 2023 Digital Health Investment road map).  The mHealth Tanzania -PPP continues to 
enter into agreem ents with new public health programmes (e.g. PATH). Both the mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP and GSMA have petitioned partner MNOs to analyse user records to demonstrate 
indirect benefits (increased ARPU and reduced churn), but unsuccessfully to date. The quantitativ e 
study provides robust evidence of a substantial increase in ARPU (but no reduction in churn). It is 
hoped that this will be of value to the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP as it negotiate s continued and 
increased support from MNOs in the future.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 62  
References  
Airtel  Africa (2019) ‘Quarterly report on the results for the fourth quarter and year ended March 31, 
2019 ’. 
Barnett, I., Batchelor, S., Gilligan, D., Haddad, L., Hidrobo, M., Ledlie, N., Palloni, G., Scott, N. , and 
Shyam, T. (2017) ‘External evaluation of mobil e phone technology -based nutrition and 
agriculture advisory services in Africa and South Asia: Inception report ’. 
Barnett, I., Faith, B. , and Gordon, J.  (2018) ‘ External evaluation of mobile phone technology -based 
nutrition and agriculture advisory service s in Africa and South Asia. Mobile phones, nutrition 
and health in Tanzania: Qualitative midline study report ’. 
Barnett, I., Faith, B., Mitchell, B., Brockerhoff, S. , and Medardi, D. (2019) ‘External evaluation of 
mobile phone technology -based nutrition and agriculture advisory services in Africa and South 
Asia. Mobile phones, nutrition and health in Tanzania: Qualitative follow -up study report ’.  
Barnett, I., Scott, N., Batchelor, S., and Haddad, L. (2016 ) ‘Dial 'N' for Nutriti on? A Landscape 
Analysis of What We Know About m -Nutrition, m -Agriculture and m -Development ’, IDS 
Working Paper 481.  
Batchelor S., Scott N ., and Sharp J. (2018) ‘External evaluation of mobile phone technology -based 
nutrition and agriculture advisory servi ces in Africa and South Asia. Mobile phones, nutrition 
and agriculture in Tanzania: Business Modelling Baseline Report ’. 
Batchelor S., Scott N ., Clements A., and Jones T. (2019) ‘External evaluation of mobile phone 
technology -based nutrition and agriculture advisory services in Africa and South Asia. Mobile 
phones, nutrition, and health in Tanzania: Cost Effectiveness Endline Report ’. 
Blackburn, J., Stanojevic, R., Erramilli, V., Iamnitchi, A. , and Papagiannaki, K.  (2013 ) ‘Last call for 
the buffet: economics of cellular networks ’. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual International 
Conference on Mobile Computing & Netw orking , pp. 111 –122, ACM.  
BMI Research (2016) ‘Tanzan ia Telecommunications Report Q3 2016 ’. 
CABI (2016) ‘GCP spend to date and projected’, Charlotte Jordan, unpublished . Last edited 14  
November 2016.  
Casas , C., and Lajoie , W. (2005) The Voxiva Story . 
Christen , R., Gökgür , N., Nellis , J., and Rühl , O. (2005 ) ‘United Republic of Tanzania Privatization 
Impact Assessment: Infrastructure .’ 
Esselaar, S. , and Stork, C. (2018) ‘OTTs Driving data revenue growth’ , 22nd Biennial Conference 
of the International Telecommunications Society , Seoul , 24–27 June 2018 . 
Field-Nguer M., Musonda K., Matee N., Mwanza M., Mwita A., Mwingizi D., Rutahindurwa F., and 
Ernest R. (2014). The Tanzania Capacity and Communication Project (TCCP): A Performance 
Evaluation.  
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2018) FAOSTAT Statistics Database ,  
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , Rome.  
GAIN (2016) ‘GAIN/  ESOKO mAgri/ mNutrition Project. Project Sustainability Plan ’, Charlotte 
Jordan , unpublished. Last edited 01  September 2016.  
Gilligan, D., Hidrobo, M., Ledlie, N., and Palloni, G. (2018) ‘Mobile Phones, Nutrition, and Health in 
Tanzania: Quantitative Baseline Report ’. 
Gilligan D., Hidrobo M., Palloni G., and Tambet H. ( forthcoming, 2020) ‘External evaluation of 
mobile phone tech nology -based nutrition and agriculture advisory services in Africa and South 
Asia. Mobile Phones, Nutrition, and Health in Tanzania: Quantitative Endline Report ’. 
GSMA (2014)  Mobile for Development. mHealth Country Feasibility Report: Tanzania . Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 63  
GSMA (2017) 'Personal Communication. Average breakdown of costs per country; Cost estimates 
for Gamos ’. Email received 24  August 2017. Unpublished.  
GSMA (2018) ‘Creating mobile health solutions for behaviour change. A study of eight services in 
the mNutri tion Initiative portfolio’.  
GSMA (2019)  ‘The Mobile Economy West Africa 2019’.  
Independent Comm unications Authority of South Africa  (2017) ‘Number Portability Public Inquiry  
Findings Report ’. 
International Labour Organization (2018) ILOSTAT database . [Data retrieved 18 April 2019 ]. 
Keshav S. (2009) ‘Cell Phone Text Messaging Rate Increases and the State of Competition in the 
Wireless Market ’, Senate  Subcommittee on Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights . 
Mangone, E.R., Agarwal, S., L’Engle, K., Lasway, C., Zan, T., Van Beijma, H., Orkis, J. , and 
Karam, R. (2016 ) ‘Sustainable cost models for mHealth at scale: modeling program data from 
m4RH  Tanzania ’, PloS one 11(1), p.e0148011.  
MoHCDGEC [Tanzania Mainland], Ministry of Health [Zanzibar], NBS, Office of the Chief 
Government Statistician , and ICF  (2016 ) Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey and 
Malaria Indicator Survey 2015 -16, MoHCDGEC, Ministry of Health , NBS, Office of the Chief 
Government Statistician , and ICF , Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Rockville, Maryland, USA . 
MoHCDGEC  (2017) Tanzania Digital Health Investment Road Map 2017 –2023.  
NBS (2013) Population Distribution by Age and Sex . National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of  
Finance Dar es Salaam, and Office of Chief Government Statistician President’s Office, 
Finance, Economy and Development Planning Zanzibar.  
NBS (2019) Tanzania in Figures 2018.  
OECD (2010) DAC Guidelines and Refe rence Series Quality Standards for Development  
Evaluation.  
 
Okeleke , K. (2019 ) ‘Digital transformation in Tanzania: The role of mobile technology and impact 
on development goals’ , GSMA . 
Osterwalder, A. , and Pigneur, Y. (2010) Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, 
Game Changers, and Challengers , John Wiley & Sons , London.  
PEPFAR (2008) ‘The Power of Partnerships: the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief’ , 
2008 Annual  Report to Congress ’. 
PEPFAR (2018) ‘Tanzania Country Operational Plan COP 2018 Strategic Direction Summary’ . 
Pew Research Center (2018 ) ‘Social Media Use Continues To Rise in Developing Countries, but 
Plateaus Across Developed Ones’.  
Population and Housing Census (2012) ‘Iringa Region: Basic Demographic and Socio -Economic 
Profile ’ technical report, NBS. 
Rowntree, O. (2019) ‘Connected Women The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2019’ , GSMA.  
Scaling up Nutrition (2018) ‘Joint -assessment by the multi -stakeholder platform ’. 
TCRA (2019). ‘ Mobile Number Portability Implementation MNP Porting Process’.  
TCRA (2019a). ‘ Quarterly Communications Statistics October to December 2018 ’. 
TCRA (2019b). ‘ Quarterly Communications Statistics April -June 2019’ . 
The Electronic and Postal Communications Act (2010) . 
Tricarico , D. (2016) Agricultural  Value -added Services (Agri VAS) Toolkit 2.0 : How to design, 
develop and market next generation VAS for the rural market , GSMA.  
Vodacom (2019) ‘Preliminary Consolidated financial results for the year ended 31 March 2019’.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 64  
Annex A  Terms of reference  
Call-down Contract  
 
 
Terms of Reference  
 
PO 6420: External evaluation of mobile phone technology based  nutrition and 
agriculture advisory services in Africa and South Asia  
 
Introduction  
 
DFID (Research and Evidence Division) wishes to commission an external impact evaluation of 
mNutrition, a mobile phone technology based nutrition and agricultural advisory  service for Africa 
and South Asia. mNutrition is a programme supported by DFID that, through business and science 
partnerships, aims to build sustainable business models for the delivery of mobile phone 
technology based advisory services that are effectiv e in improving nutrition and agricultural 
outcomes.  
mNutrition is primarily designed to use mobile phone based  technologies to increase the access of 
rural communities to nutrition and agriculture related information. The initiative aims to improve 
knowledge among rural farming communities especially women and support beneficial behaviour 
change as well as increas ing demand for nutrition and agriculture extension services. The 
mNutrition initiative launched in September 2013 will work in 10 countries in Africa (Cote d’Ivoire, 
Ghana, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia) and four 
coun tries in South Asia (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka). The desired impact of 
mNutrition will be improved nutrition, food security and livelihoods of the poor.  
Mobile phone based services have been endorsed by WHO as an effective strategy for beha viour 
change and for driving adherence to anti -retroviral treatment protocols (Horvath, Azman, Kennedy 
and Rutherford 2012). There is currently scant evidence on the impact and cost -effectiveness of 
mobile phone technology based services for nutrition and agriculture and on the sustainability of 
different business models for their provision. A rigorous evaluation of mobile phone technology 
based nutrition services would add significantly to the current evidence base. An external 
evaluation team managed by the Evaluator , independent of the programme delivery mechanism, 
will conduct an assessment of the impact, cost -effectiveness and sustainability of mobile phone 
technology based information and behaviour change messages for nutrition and agriculture.  
Backgro und to mNutrition  
 
Introduction  
Undernutrition is a major challenge to human and economic development globally. It is estimated 
that almost one billion people face hunger and are unable to get enough food to meet their dietary 
needs. Agriculture is a major source of livelihood in many poor countries and the sector has a 
potentially critical role in enhancing health, specifically maternal and child health and nutritional 
status. A well -developed agriculture sector will deliver increased  and diversified farm outputs 
(crops, livestock, non -food products) and this may enhance food and nutrition security directly 
through increased access to and consumption of diverse food, or indirectly through greater profits 
to farmers and national wealth.  Better nutrition and health of farmers fosters their agricultural and 
economic productivity. Current agricultural and health systems and policies are not meeting current 
and projected future global food, nutrition and health needs.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 65  
Despite major investmen t in agricultural and nutrition research and its uptake and application, there 
is significant social and geographic inequality in who benefits from these investments. 
Furthermore, in many developing countries, public extension systems for agriculture, heal th and 
nutrition are inefficient, have limited capacity and have a poor track record of delivery, especially in 
terms of supporting women and girls and the most marginalised populations ( Alston, Wyatt, 
Pardey, Marra and Chan -Kang  2000; Anderson 2007; IFPRI  2010; Van den Berg and Jiggins 
2007).  
Several research and mobile network operators (MNOs) are testing a range of information and 
communication technology (ICT) solutions for improving access to a wide range of information and 
advisory services. Mobile ph one based technologies are among the most promising ICT strategies, 
although current initiatives in nutrition are relatively small and fragmented.  
What is mNutrition?  
Enhancing access to the results of nutrition and agricultural research and development is  
potentially critical for improving the nutrition, health and livelihoods of smallholders and rural 
communities. mNutrition will harness the power of mobile phone based technologies and the 
private sector to improve access to information on nutrition, heal th and agricultural practices 
especially for women and farmers (both male and female). Specifically, mNutrition will initiate new 
partnerships with business and science to deliver a range of services including:  
• An open -access database of nutrition and agri culture messages for use in mobile phone based 
communication (for example, information and behaviour change messages on practices and 
interventions that are known to have a direct impact on nutrition or an indirect impact via for 
example agriculture);  
• A suite of mobile phone based nutrition and agriculture information, extension and registration 
services designed to: improve knowledge and generate beneficial behaviour change in nutrition 
and agriculture; increase demand for nutrition, health and agriculture  goods and services; 
register and identify target populations for support; and, using real -time monitoring, support the 
conduct of nutrition risk assessments by community health workers.  
The impacts of mNutrition are expected to include improved nutrition,  food security and livelihoods 
of the poor, especially women in 10 countries in Africa (Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, 
Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia) and 4 countries in South Asia 
(Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka) . This impact will result from the increased scale and 
sustainability of mobile phone based nutrition and agricultural -based information services, 
delivered through robust public private partnerships in each country.  
mNutrition has two major outcomes. One  outcome will be cost -effective, sustainable business 
models for mobile phone enabled nutrition and agriculture services to 3 million households in 10 
countries in Africa and 4 countries in South Asia that can be replicated in other countries.  Linked to 
this outcome, the second outcome will expect these services to result in new knowledge, behaviour 
change and adoption of new practices in the area of agriculture and nutrition practices among the 
users of these mobile phone based services.   
These outcomes wi ll be achieved through four outputs:  
• Improved access to relevant mobile based health, nutrition and agricultural advisory services 
for 3 million poor people and community health workers across 10 SSA and 4 Asian countries;  
• Launch and scaling of mobile pho ne based health, nutrition and agricultural advisory services 
targeted to poor people and community health workers;  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 66  
• Generation and dissemination of high quality research and evidence on the impact, cost -
effectiveness and sustainability of mobile phone base d advisory services in nutrition and 
agriculture in South Asia and SSA; and  
• Development of locally relevant content for mobile phone technology based  agriculture and 
nutrition services meeting demands from users and community health workers.  
In terms of promoting behaviour change and/or adoption of new practices, mNutrition will seek to 
achieve changes in one or more of the following areas:  
• Adoption o f new agricultural practices that are nutrition sensitive, improve agricultural 
productivity and utilise post -harvest technologies  
• Changes in nutrition practices in either one or several knowledge domains including improved 
maternal nutrition practices dur ing pregnancies; infant and young child feeding practice; and 
micro -nutrient supplementation to children at risk (i.e. Vitamin A, Zinc and Oral Rehydration 
Solution (ORS)).  
mNutrition has started implementation from September 2013. For the 2 countries sele cted for the 
impact evaluation (Tanzania and Ghana), mobile network operators and content providers have 
been identified through a competitive process during the first half of 2014. The MNOs and content 
providers started developing and launching their serv ices during the 4th quarter of 2014 and early 
2015. The mobile phone based advisory services are expected to run at least till 3rd quarter of 
2018.  
mNutrition Project Coordination  
DFID support to mNutrition will be channelled to GSMA, as well as directly to this associated 
independent external impact evaluation. GSMA is a global body that represents the interests of 
over 800 mobile operators. GSMA already works with the major mobile operators across Africa, 
(including Airtel, MTN, SafariCom/VodaCom) with a  collective mobile footprint of more than 67 % 
of total African connections. GSMA has a number of existing development initiatives, including 
mHealth and mFarmer, that are part of GSMA’s Mobile for Development which brings together 
mobile operator members,  the wider mobile industry and the development community to drive 
commercial mobile services for underserved people in emerging markets. GSMA will provide 
technical assistance to mobile phone operators, and support new partnerships with content 
providers t o develop and scale up new nutrition and agriculture message services. GSMA will 
ensure sharing of best practices and promote wider replication and uptake of effective business 
models.  
Objective and Main Questions  
 
The objective of this work is to conduct an external evaluation of the impacts and cost -
effectiveness of the nutrition and agriculture advisory services provided by mNutrition compared to 
alternative advisory services available in the two selected countries (Ghana and Tanzania), with 
particular a ttention paid to gender and poverty issues. The impact assessment is required to 
answer the following questions that relate to impact, cost -effectiveness and commercial viability:  
• What are the impacts and cost -effectiveness of mobile phone based nutrition and agriculture 
services on nutrition, health and livelihood outcomes, especially among women, children and 
the extreme poor?  
• How effective are mobile phone based services in reaching, increasing the knowledge, and 
changing the behaviour, of the specific t arget groups?  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 67  
• Has the process of adapting globally agreed messages to local contexts led to content which is 
relevant to the needs of children, women and poor farmers in their specific context?  
• What factors make mobile phone based  services effective in promoting and achieving 
behaviour change (if observed) leading to improved nutrition and livelihood outcomes?  
• How commercially viable are the different business models being employed at country level?  
• What lessons can be learned abo ut best practices in the design and implementation of mobile 
phone based nutrition services to ensure a) behaviour change and b) continued private sector 
engagement in different countries?  
Further evaluation questions related to other aims of mNutrition wi ll be addressed in at least 1 
country (either Ghana and/or Tanzania):  
• Are mobile phone based services a cost -effective way to register and identify at risk 
populations to target with nutrition support?  
• Are mobile phone based services a cost -effective way f or community health workers to improve 
the quality and timeliness of data surveillance (a core set of nutrition -related indicators)?  
The content for the mobile phone based advisory services will be based on international best 
practices and widely endorsed protocols (i.e. by the World Health Organisation) and evidence -
based nutrition -sensitive agricultural practices identified by international experts. Through an 
iterative multi -stakeholder process, international and country experts will localise and adapt t he 
content to make it relevant to the specific target audience in the 14 countries. The adapted content 
and nature of messages is expected to vary across specific target audiences within and across 
countries. The main purpose of assessing the relevance of the content is not to evaluate the 
overall health and nutrition content but on how this content has been localised and adapted and to 
what extent the needs of the specific target groups within their particular context have been met.  
In assessing the comme rcial viability, it is recognised that evaluating the sustainability/long -term 
financial viability of the mobile phone based advisory services will be difficult as mobile network 
operators may not be willing to provide this potentially commercially sensiti ve information. 
Therefore, GSMA will provide support through its access to aggregated confidential financial 
results of the mobile network operators providing the service. GSMA will provide a financial 
summary report on the commercial viability of the busi ness models without compromising the 
commercial sensitivity of the data for the mobile network operators. The evaluator will assess and 
validate commercial sustainability through an analysis of the aggregated information provided by 
GSMA and additional qua litative business analysis approaches.  
The Evaluator has the option of proposing refinements of the existing evaluation questions during 
the inception phase as part of developing the research protocol. These suggestions will be 
considered by the Steering C ommittee and an independent peer review during the review of the 
research protocol as part of the inception phase.  
Output  
The output of this work will be new and robust evidence on the impact, cost -effectiveness and 
commercial viability of mobile phone based advisory services focusing on nutrition and agriculture 
delivered by public and private partners, and including the development of robust methodological 
approaches to impact assessment of phone based advisory services.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 68  
Recipient  
The primary r ecipient of this work will be DFID, with the beneficiaries being GSMA, governments, 
international agencies, foundations, MNOs and other private companies and civil society involved 
in policies and programmes in nutrition and agriculture that are aimed at i mproving nutritional, 
health and agricultural outcomes. The findings of this impact evaluation are intended as global 
public goods.  
Scope and timeline  
 The scope of this work is to:  
• Develop a research protocol for the external evaluation of mNutrition;  
• Design and undertake an external evaluation of mNutrition in two countries: Ghana and 
Tanzania;  
• Contribute to the communication of the learning agenda, evaluation strategy and evaluation 
results.  
The evaluation will be in two of the 14 mNutrition target coun tries; Ghana and Tanzania. These 
countries have been selected based on the phased start -up of mNutrition programme activities. 
The focus and approach in the two respective countries will be different allowing for a comparison 
of the effectiveness of approa ches applied. In Tanzania, mNutrition will focus on mobile phone 
technology based nutrition and health services and registration and identification of target 
population. In Ghana, the mobile phone technology will focus on nutrition and agriculture sensitiv e 
services .  
In terms of coverage in number of people being targeted for these services, in total 3 million people 
will be reached through mNutrition; including 2 million for nutrition sensitive agriculture advisory 
messages in 4 Asian and at least 2 Afric an countries and about 1 million beneficiaries for mobile 
phone based nutrition services in 10 countries in SSA.   
The evaluation contract period will be September 2014 to 31st December 2019. The development 
of the research protocol must be completed by mon th 4 for review and approval by DFID. Full 
details on tasks and deliverables are provided in sections below.  
Statement on the design of the mNutrition evaluation  
The evaluation design is expected to measure the impact, cost -effectiveness and commercial 
viability of mNutrition, using a mixed methods evaluation design and drawing on evidence from two 
case study countries and the M&E system of the programme.  Overall, the proposed design should 
ensure that the evidence from the two case study countries has high  internal validity and 
addresses the priority evidence gaps identified in the Business Case. Being able to judge the 
generalisability/replicability of lessons learned from the programme is of equal importance and so a 
credible approach to generalization an d external validity will be an important component of the 
overall evaluation design. The final evaluation design and methodology to generate robust 
evidence will be discussed in detail with DFID and GSMA before implementation.  
For assessing cost -effectiven ess, the Evaluator will further fine -tune their proposed evaluation 
approach and outline their expectations in terms of data they will require from implementers. A 
theory based evaluation design, using mixed methods for evaluating the impact has been 
propo sed. During the inception phase, the Evaluator will put forward a robust evaluation design for 
the quantitative work, either an experimental or a quasi -experimental method, with a clear outline Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 69  
of the strengths and limitations of the proposed method relati ve to alternatives. During the 
inception phase, the Evaluator is also expected to identify clearly what will be the implications of 
the design for implementers in terms of how the overall programme would be designed and 
implemented and for evidence to be c ollected in the programme’s monitoring system. The 
Evaluator will also assess the degree to which it is realistic to assess impacts by early 2019 for a 
programme where implementation started mid -2015 and, if there are challenges, how these would 
be managed . 
The Evaluator, in its 6 monthly reports, will be required to provide information to feed into the DFID 
Annual Review and Project Completion Report of mNutrition.  
Gender and inclusiveness  
 
The impact evaluation will pay particular attention to gender and other forms of social 
differentiation and poverty issues. From current experiences, it is clear that access to and use of 
mobile services is differentiated along a range of factors, includin g gender, poverty, geographic 
marginalisation, education and illiteracy levels. Therefore, the impact evaluation will look at and 
analyse differentiated access to and potential utilisation of mobile phone based services for 
improved nutrition and agricultu ral production. Based on the findings, it will identify opportunities 
and challenges in having an impact on women in general and more specifically the poor and the 
marginalised.   
Tasks  
 
The Evaluator  will perform the following tasks:  
A. Finalise a coherent  and robust evaluation approach and methodology based on their 
proposal (inception phase)  
• Conduct landscape analysis of existing experiences in mobile phone based services for 
nutrition and agriculture based on available publications and grey project docum ents to identify 
additional critical lessons and priorities for evidence gathering and programme design and 
implementation;  
• Ensure that gender issues and poverty issues are well integrated into the impact evaluation 
design;  
• Develop robust sampling framewo rks, core set of indicators and research protocols that allow 
the consistent measurement and comparison of impacts across study countries, taking into 
account differences in business models and programmes as needed;  
• Work closely with mNutrition programme t eam in GSMA to familiarise them with impact 
assessment methodology, discuss evaluation approaches, identify and agree on data provided 
by programme monitoring system and possible modifications to design;  
• Identify risks to the evaluation meeting its object ives and how these risks will be effectively 
managed;  
• Review existing evaluation questions and if deemed relevant propose refinement of existing 
questions and/or add other questions;  
• Prepare a research protocol, including an updated workplan, project mil estones and budget. 
The research protocol will be subject to an independent peer review organised by DFID; and  
• Develop a communication plan.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 70  
B. Implement and analyse evaluations of impact, cost -effectiveness and commercial 
viability in accordance with est ablished best practices  
• Based upon the agreed evaluation framework, develop and test appropriate evaluation 
instruments which are likely to include data collection forms for households, community health 
workers, service providers including health and agricultural services, conten t providers and 
private sector stakeholders including mobile network operators. Instruments will involve both 
quantitative and qualitative methods;  
• Register studies on appropriate open access study registries and publish protocols of studies 
where appropri ate;  
• Conduct baselines and end -lines, qualitative assessments and business model assessments in 
both of the two impact evaluation countries;  
• Conduct and analyse the evaluations and present findings in two well -structured reports 
addressing the evaluation questions. The reports should follow standard reporting guidelines 
as defined by, for example, the Equator Network. Primary findings should be clearly presented 
along with a detailed analysis of the underlying reasons why the desired outcomes were/were 
not achieved;  
• The Evaluating Organisation or Consortium may subcontract the administration of surveys and 
data entry, but not the supervision of those tasks, study design, or data analysis; and  
• The country -specific mixed methods evaluation reports, cost effe ctiveness and business 
models studies and final evaluation report will be subject to an independent peer review 
organised by DFID . 
C. Contribute to the communication of the learning agenda, impact evaluation strategy, and 
evaluation results.  
• Develop a comm unication plan outlining the main outputs and key audiences;  
• Conduct lessons learnt workshops in each of the 2 impact evaluation countries and key 
dissemination events; and  
• Assist in communicating the results of the evaluation and contribute to the develo pment and 
communication of lessons learnt about mobile phone based extension approaches in nutrition 
and agriculture.  
Deliverables  
 
The Evaluator  will deliver the following outputs39: 
During the design and study inception phase of maximum 4 months:  
• A publishable landscape analysis report highlighting lessons learnt from existing initiatives on 
mobile phone based advisory services related to nutrition and agriculture by month 4;  
• A updated work plan with project milestones and budget  by end of month 1 (possibly adjusted 
based on the approved research protocol by month 4);  
• A communication plan outlining the key outputs, audience and timeline for review and approval 
by month 4; and  
 
39 Exact timeframe of deliverables will be agreed during the design phase as appropriate.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 71  
• A full research protocol by month 4 for review and approval. The research protocol should be 
registered with appropriate open access study registries;  
Interim reports:  
• 4 biannual progress reports for the External Evaluation as a whole, and for each country 
evaluation, against milestones set out in the workplan;  
 Two desk reviews  submitted by June 2016  
 Two Baseline quantitative reports submitted by April 2017  
 Two Baseline qualitative reports submitted by February 2017  
 Two Cost -effectiveness reports 1 submitted by March 2017  
 Two Business Model reports 1 submitted by March 2017  
 Two Mixed Methods Baseline reports completed by September 2017  
 Two Midline qualitative reports submitted by March 2018  
• All survey data collected during the evaluation provided in a suitable format to DFID for public 
release.  
At project’s end:  
• Two Endline quant itative reports submitted by June 2019  
• Two Endline qualitative reports submitted by August 2019  
• Two Cost -effectiveness report 2 submitted by July 2019  
• Two Business Model report 2 submitted by July 2019  
• Two Evaluation reports submitted by October 2019  
• At least 1 article, based on the findings from the country evaluation reports, published in a 
research journal;   
• A shared lesson learnt paper published and at least one presentation highlighting key lessons 
for similar initiatives of promoting mobile based tech nologies for providing extension services 
and the promotion of uptake of technologies by December 2019.  
Research protocol and all final reports will be independently peer reviewed.  This will be organised 
by DFID. Outputs are expected to be of sufficiently quality so that a synthesis of findings can be 
published in a leading peer -reviewed journal.  
Coordination and reporting requirements  
 
A mNutrition Advisory Group (AG) will be esta blished for the programme which will a) provide 
technical oversight and b) maximise the effectiveness of the programme.  The Advisory Group will 
meet on a bi -annual basis and comprises of representatives of DFID, NORAD and GSMA 
representatives and independe nt technical experts. The Evaluator will be managed by DFID on 
behalf of the mNutrition Advisory Group. The Evaluator will work closely with the mNutrition 
programme team in GSMA and its specific country implementing partners. The Evaluator will:  
• Ensure c oherence and lesson learning across all pilot impact assessments on the key 
evaluation questions and indicators identified.  
• Incorporate a clear code of ethics; incorporate plans for open access publications and public 
access to data sets.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 72  
The Evaluator wi ll work closely with the mNutrition project management team, in particular in the 
design of the overall evaluation framework and the evaluation plan for the specific project 
components and the countries selected for the evaluation. Collaboration and regula r 
communication between Evaluator and mNutrition project management team and implementing 
partners in selected case study countries is crucial as the evaluation design may have implications 
for project implementation and vice versa. The mNutrition project management team will lend 
support in communication as requested by the Evaluator or the Advisory Group. The Evaluator will 
report directly to DFID who will manage the evaluation on behalf of the mNutrition Advisory Group.  
The main point of contact for tech nical matters is Louise Horner, Livelihoods Adviser and Hugh 
McGhie, Deputy Programme Manager for all other project related issues. The mNutrition Advisory 
Group will be the arbiter of any disputes between the evaluation function and the overall 
programme implementation.  
At the end of each 6 months, the Evaluator will submit a brief report outlining key achievements 
against the agreed deliverables. Pre -agreed funding will then be released provided that 
deliverables have been achieved.      
In addition to th e 6 monthly reports outlined above, the Evaluator will provide information to feed 
into the DFID Annual Review of mNutrition. The 6 monthly reports will be a key source of 
information used to undertake the Annual Review and Project Completion Report for th e 
programme. These reviews will be led by the Livelihoods Adviser and Deputy Programme 
Manager, in consultation with the mNutrition AG. All reviews will be made available publicly in line 
with HMG Transparency and Accountability Requirements.   
Mandatory fi nancial reports include an annual forecast of expenditure (the budget) disaggregated 
monthly in accordance with DFID’s financial year April to March.  This should be updated at least 
every quarter and any significant deviations from the forecast notified to  DFID immediately.  In 
addition the Evaluator will be required to provide annual audited statements for the duration of the 
contract.   
Contractual Arrangements  
 
The contract starts in September 2014 and will run till end of December 2019 subject to 
satisfactory performance as determined through DFID’s Annual Review process. Progression is 
subject to the outcome of this review, strong performance and agreement to any revised work 
plans or budgets (if revisions are deemed appropriate).   
A formal break clause in the contract is included at the end of the inception period. Progression to 
the implementation phase will be dependent on strong performance by the Evaluator during the 
inception period and delivery of all inception outputs, including a revised p roposal for 
implementation period.  Costs for implementation are expected to remain in line with what has been 
agreed upon for this contract, with costs such as fee rates fixed for contract duration.  DFID 
reserves the right to terminate the contract after t he inception phase if it cannot reach agreement 
on the activities, staffing, budget and timelines for the implementation phase.   
DFID reserves the right to scale back or discontinue this assignment at any point (in line with our 
Terms and Conditions) if it  is not achieving the results anticipated. The Evaluator will be 
remunerated on a milestone payment basis. DFID has agreed an output based payment plan for 
this contract, where payment will be explicitly linked to the Evaluator’s performance and effective 
delivery of programme outputs as set out in the ToR and approved workplan. The payment plan for 
the implementation phase will be finalised during the inception period.  
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 73  
Open Access  
The Evaluator  will comply with DFID’s Enhanced and Open Access Policy . Where appropriate the 
costs of complying with out open access policy should be clearly identified within your co mmercial 
proposal.  
Branding  
The public has an expectation and right to know what is funded with public money.  It is expected 
that all research outputs will acknowledge DFID support in a way that is clear, explicit and which 
fully complies with DFID Branding Guidance.  This will include ensuring that all publications 
acknowledge DFID’s support.  If press releases on work which arises wholly or mainly from the 
project are planned this should be in collaboration with DFID’s Communications Department.    
Duty of Care  
The Evaluator is responsible for the safety and well -being of their Personnel (as defined in Section 
2 of the Contract) and Third Parties affected by their activities under this contract, including 
appropriate security arrangements. The Evaluato r is responsible for the provision of suitable 
security arrangements for their domestic and business property.  DFID will share available 
information with the Evaluator on security status and developments in -country where appropriate.  
The Evaluator is resp onsible for ensuring appropriate safety and security briefings for all of their 
Personnel working under this contract and ensuring that their Personnel register and receive 
briefing as outlined above. Travel advice is also available on the FCO website and the Evaluator 
must ensure they (and their Personnel) are up to date with the latest position.  
The Evaluator has confirmed that:  
• The Evaluator fully accepts responsibility for Security and Duty of Care.  
• The Evaluator understands the potential risks and h ave the knowledge and experience to 
develop an effective risk plan.  
• The Evaluator has the capability to manage their Duty of Care responsibilities throughout the 
life of the contract.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 74  
Annex B  Stakeholder contact list  
Organisation  Contact  
GSMA  Natalia Pshenichnaya ( head of mNutrition)  
GSMA  Alexander Roche (business intelligence mHealth)  
GSMA  Diana Sang ( representative  for Tanzania)  
GSMA  Willie Ngumi  
GSMA  Mojca Cargo  
GSMA  Kate Zechner  
GSMA  Tobias Wacker ( user research)  
GAIN  Kyla Stockdale (senior programme manager)  
mHealth Tanzania -PPP Muttah Saulo ( monitoring and evaluation ) 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP Ms Janita Ferentinos  
mHealth Tanzania -PPP Peter Maro ( team lead)  
mHealth Tanzania -PPP Said Ali Karume (IT adviser)  
mHealth Tanzania -PPP Mr Francis Chiduo  
Cardno  Violet Ketani (program me manager; P4 Project)  
MoHCDGEC  Walter Ndesanjo (ICT officer, ICT Unit)  
MoHCDGEC  Leyla Bungire (program me officer  – nutrition)  
MoHCDGEC  Hermes Sotter (Ministry of Health eHealth)  
MoHCDGEC  Dr Azma Simba (Ministry of Health)  
MoHCDGEC  Dr Joyceline Kaganda  
MoHCDGEC  Ms Valeria Milinga  
MoHCDGEC  Mr Peter Kaswahili  
MoHCDGEC  Deus Gwanchele  
TFNC  Ms Victoria Kariathi  
TFNC  Elizabeth Lyimo ( maternal, infant and young child nutrition team)  
TFNC  Mrs Maria Msangi  
Nutrition International  Mr Daniel Nyagawa  
Viamo  Hannah Metcalfe  
Family Health International  360 – USAID 
Tulonge Afya  Mr Marcos Mzeru  
Totohealth  Felix Kimaru (CEO)  
IMA World Health  Mr Joseph Mugyabuso  
COUNSENUTH  Ms Belinda Liana  
Tigo Ms Halima Okash  
UNICEF  Ms Tuzie Ndekie  
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 75  
Annex C  Review of the business model  
C.1 Introduction  
This section is structured around the Osterwalder and Pigneur canvas building blocks, 
summarising the key observations made in the baseline report and then supplementing the 
narrative with additional findings from the intervening period, as well as finding s from both the 
qualitative and quantitative studies.  
C.2 The Osterwalder and Pigneur framework  
The O&P framework is commonly used as a framework or canvas for describing a business model.   
Businesses rarely have a simple model of selling a product and gaini ng revenue from that product.  
A simple income vs expenditure model rarely describes the business.  Instead, a product might 
enhance the brand of a company, or enhance the overall experience of the consumer, causing 
them to buy other associated goods or se rvices.  This idea was at the very heart of the submission 
of GSMA to FCDO .  The logical framework of the GSMA grant application, described in the next 
section, discusses indirect benefits or imputed benefits.   
In order to map the various components of th e business model and to capture these indirect or 
imputed effects (beneficial or otherwise), we use the O&P canvas.  The nine elements  (or building 
blocks)  of the canvas form the basis of our analysis below  (see Figure 23). Note that we propose 
amending the framework slightly by splitting the Revenue building block into two components, 
considering cash generated and imputed benefits separately, and splitting Costs into t wo, 
considering operating costs and previous investments separately. This has been proposed 
because of the importance of indirect costs to VAS business models, and because some of the key 
resources brought to partnerships have benefited from prior investme nts. Table 5 presents a 
generic overview of the framework, i.e. the descriptions and example questions illustrate how the 
framework is applied to busi ness models in general, so not all are directly relevant or applicable to 
the Wazazi Nipendeni service.  
Figure 23    Building blocks in the canvas (derived from Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010))  
 
Source: Authors  
Customer
RelationshipsValue PropositionKey Activities
KeyPartners
InvestmentChannels
Imputed 
BenefitsCustomers
KeyResources
Costs Product 
Revenue Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 76  
Table 5 Description of Building blocks in the canvas40 
Canvas 
building block  Description  Example Questions  
Customers  
Customer 
Segments  The business model should define different 
groups of people or organisations to reach and 
serve. Distinct segments will have common 
needs, behaviours, or other attributes. The 
business model should be designed around a 
strong understanding of customer need s.  For who m are we creating value?  
Who are our most important 
customers?  
Channels  How a company communicates with customer 
segments.  Channels are customer touch points 
that shape the customer experience , e.g. 
communication, distribution, sales.  How are we reaching customer 
segments?  
How do they want to be reached?  
Which ones work best and are 
most cost -efficient?  
Customer 
Relationships  The types of relationships a company establishes 
with specific custo mer segments. Relationships 
may be driven by various motivations , e.g. 
customer acquisition, customer retention, boosting 
sales.  What type of relationship does 
each of our Customer Segments 
expect us to establish with them?  
How costly are they?  
How are the y integrated with the 
rest of our business model?  
Offering  
Value 
Propositions  The bundle of products and services that create 
value for a specific Customer Segment by 
satisfying a need o r helping solve a problem.  
Value propositions may be innovative (di sruptive) 
or similar to others, but with added features.  What value do we deliver to the 
customer?  
Which of our customers’ 
problems are we helping to 
solve?  
Which needs are we satisfying?  
 
Business Operations  
Key resources  Those assets required to make the business 
model work.  Resources that allow and enterprise 
to create and offer the value proposition, to reach 
markets, to maintain relationships, and to 
generate revenues. They can be physical, 
financial, intellectual, or human.  What key resources do value 
propositions require?  
 
Key activities  Things a company must do to make it s business 
model work. Activities required to create and offer 
the value proposition, to reach markets, to 
maintain relationships, and to generate revenues.  What activities do  value 
propositions require?  
Key 
partnerships  The network of suppliers and partners that make 
the business model work. Companies forge 
partnerships for many reasons , e.g. reduce risk, 
acquire resources.  Who are our key partners?  
Who are our key suppliers?  
Which key resources are we 
acquiring from partners?  
Which key activities do partners 
perform?  
Finances  
Revenue 
strea ms The cash generated from each Customer 
Segment. Revenue streams will depend on what 
customers are willing to pay. Revenue streams 
can be either one -off payments, or recurring 
revenues.  Each revenue stream may have 
different pricing mechanisms.  For what  value are customers 
willing to pay?  
How are they currently paying?  
How would they prefer to pay?  
How much does each revenue 
stream contribute to overall 
revenues?  
Cost structure  Costs incurred to operate the business model. 
Creating and delivering value, maintaining 
customer relationships, and generating revenue 
all incur costs.  What are the most important 
costs inherent in our business 
model?  
 
40 Authors’ table, generated from Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010).  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 77  
Canvas 
building block  Description  Example Questions  
Which key resources are most 
expensive?  
Which key activities ar e most 
expensive?  
Investment  Number of investors, type of investors, and 
commitments made to investors.  These will 
influence acceptable profit margins, and may 
affect cash flow.  Who has invested in the 
company?  
What kind of returns are 
expected?  
And ove r what timescales?  
Indirect 
benefits  Ways in which the service can benefit the 
company other than by direct revenue generation.  How does service increase 
acquisition and loyalty?  
Does service boost other sales?  
How does service improve brand 
image?  
C.3 Customer segments  
At registration, use rs are allocated to one of four categories:  
• pregnant women;  
• mothers with newborns;  
• supporters (of pregnant women or young mothers); and  
• general interest.  
The registration database provided by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP c overs users registered onto the 
system during a two -year period from November 2016 to November 2018. During this time, many 
women who were originally registered as pregnant women had given birth, and were then re -
categorised on the system as mothers with n ewborns. Figure 24 shows that these women make up 
the vast majority of active users.  
Figure 24:  Mix of active users (as at November 2018)  
 
Source: Authors  
Phone ownership and access are key to accessing the Wazazi Nipendeni service. Having at least 
one household member that owned a phone was part of the screening criteria for the quantitative 
study,  so it cannot provide any insights into linkages between the service and phone ownership. 
The qualitative study found that many women did not own a mobile phone, but across Tanzania as 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 78  
a whole 77% of women own a phone, compared with 86% of men, giving only  an 11% gender gap 
(Rowntree, 2019), although this GSMA report shows that the gap is higher in rural communities.  
In terms of access, men were reluctant to let their wives have phones, fearing they would be used 
to facilitate affairs, and women themselves  recognised that phone ownership can cause problems 
in the family because of trust issues. Among young, married women, who are the primary customer 
segment, it tends to be husbands who control their access to phones, either through consent to 
ownership, by  buying a handset/ SIM for their wives, or by sharing their own phones with their 
wives.  
Given this understanding of household gender dynamics, men are recognised as a key customer 
segment and were targeted in the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign materials, which  focus on the role 
of couples in bringing up children. However, Figure 24 indicates that supporters, the category that 
includes husbands (among others, such as mothers -in-law), make up only a small proportion of 
Wazazi Nipendeni users.  
The quantitative research specifically addresses these gender issues and was designed to explore 
the impact of actively engaging men in health messaging on health outcomes. It included a s econd 
stage of randomisation in which households where both pregnant women and their partner own 
distinct mobile phones were split into two groups – in one group only the woman received the 
messages, and in the other group both men and women received messa ges. The study found that 
‘estimates for the households that received the content on both mobile phones (the T -F+M group) 
are, in general, not distinguishable from zero and occasionally suggest that these households 
perform worse than those assigned to jus t receive the content on the primary female’s mobile 
phone (the T -F group).’ (Gilligan et al., forthcoming, 2020). 
This is a particularly interesting finding as it appears counterintuitive. Notwithstanding the 
characteristics of the sub -sample used for thi s experiment (households in which both the mother 
and father owned a mobile phone tended to be better off), it suggests that women were not 
substantially constrained by their partners in their ability to take action based on messages. Note 
that this findin g does not contradict findings from the qualitative study on the importance of 
enlisting men’s support for (if not participation in) the Wazazi Nipendeni service as a means of 
facilitating women’s access to content. For example, the quantitative study foun d that women’s 
access to Wazazi Nipendeni messages was less reliable if husbands received the messages, as 
they often did not share them with their partners. They also found that men often disagreed with 
some content, particularly that on family planning, in which case they would withhold access to the 
messages and would not share information with their partners.  
As a national service that is available through multiple networks, Wazazi Nipendeni is available all 
across the country, wherever there is networ k coverage. It does not, therefore, have a particular 
poverty focus – it is not specifically targeted at poor or rural families. GSMA found that the service 
was reaching people with less education, primarily due to assisted registrations. Registrations wer e 
assisted by field partners, who were running programmes that tended to focus on more rural areas. 
These users, therefore, tended to have lower income and education levels. Interestingly, the 
quantitative study found some evidence that the effect on child  diets was larger among better off 
households (in the study sample). There are many characteristics of better off households that 
could account for this:  
• they are more likely to have access to other sources of nutrition information, such as 
government health workers, health facilities, or more knowledgeable peers;  
• individuals in wealthier households may have higher rates of literacy and education, making 
them better able to understand messages;  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 79  
• they have more cash to implement recommendations in messages, e.g. purchasing animal -
sourced foods.  
The fact that the service is text based (in Swahili) will mean that it is likely to be of limited value to 
illiterate  sections of the population. The qualitative study found examples of literate men sharing 
messages with their illiterate partners. Having at least one household member who was literate in 
Swahili was one of the screening criteria for the quantitative surve y, so it was not able to explore 
linkages with literacy.  
C.4 Value proposition  
The original Wazazi Nipendeni multimedia campaign directed women to health services, and to the 
text messaging service  provided by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP. The aim of the SMS cont ent was 
to encourage women to avail themselves of health services targeted at improved neonatal health 
outcomes.  This content covered a range of pregnancy and motherhood topics, and included a 
number of nutrition -related messages.  The GSMA mNutrition project strengthen ed the service by 
contributing substantial additional nutrition content . A first set of messages were added that 
coincided with the scope of the Wazazi Nipendeni existing messages (covering pregnancy and up 
to 16 weeks post -partum), and  a further 128 messages were added  later, covering life stages up to 
five years.  
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP brought to the GSMA mNutrition partnerships a pre -existing database 
of messages targeting pregnant women and new mothers, which had been dev eloped over a 
number of previous partnerships, each of which had a slightly different thematic focus. Messages 
cover ed several pregnancy and motherhood related topics, not just nutrition.  The list of topics 
includes:  
• prevention of mother -to-child transmiss ion of HIV/ Aids; 
• antenatal care ; 
• family planning ; 
• malaria prevention ; 
• nutrition (for mother and baby) ;  
• danger signs ; 
• having an individual birth plan ; and  
• post-partum care.  
A key feature of the GSMA mNutrition programme content generation process was its e mphasis on 
quality of information. The global content partnership41 was responsible for identifying relevant 
content and specifying content validation and quality control processes. After the original ‘one -stop 
shop’ concept was abandoned, Every1Mobile (UK -based)  and COUNSENUTH, a Tanzanian NGO 
working in nutrition, worked together to localise the content to make it relevant and accessible to 
Tanzanian users. TFNC was instrumental in ensuring that the content was accessible and 
consistent with national nutr ition strategies. TFNC shared its responsibilities with other members of 
the National Nutrition Social and Behaviour Change Communication Technical Working group 
(SBCC TWG).   
UX research was conducted early on in the project to ensure that messages were ap propriate. 
GeoPoll tested a small sub -sample of messages for comprehension and relevance. It sent SMS 
 
41 CABI, GAIN, Oxfam, the International Livestock Research Institute, and the British Medical Journal . Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 80  
messages to two groups of 25 women, followed by a series of evaluation questions, also sent by 
SMS. ThinkPlace  conducted user focused research using human -centred design principles.  The 
research was based on semi -structured individual interviews and user profiling. They then 
generated a set of four ‘personas’ intended to assist with the design of the messages. Frog later 
conducted further UX research based on in -depth inte rviews with 16 participants, which added an 
additional three personas. These research activities, funded through the mNutrition programme, 
helped with two aspects of product development: the Geo Poll and Think Place activities looked at  
the messages and how they might fit with different types of consumers (the archetypes ), while the 
Frog research considered how to improve the customers ’ experience of the service.  
Evidence from the quantitative study appears to confirm the quality of mess ages. Household 
members in treatment households were overwhelmingly likely to read the mNutrition content they 
received on their phone. Between 82.7% and 91.6% of households read all the mNutrition content 
they received. Not reading any of the received mNu trition messages was extremely uncommon 
(only between 0.1 and 1.3 % of households). This indicates that the messages are highly valued, 
and this is confirmed by the finding that over 90% of users either always or very often found the 
messages useful (see  Figure 25). Figure 26 shows that information on maternal nutrition was 
regarded as  most useful (but not by a large margin). The quantitative study also found that over 
90% of users (93.5% of females and 92.2% of males) would recommend the service (likely or 
highly likely). Conversely, only 1% of users would not recommend the service. Th ese data suggest 
a high level of satisfaction with the content in the mNutrition service.  
Figure 25:  How often was the mNutrition content deemed to be useful?  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al. , (forthcoming, 2020)  
 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 81  
Figure 26:  Most and least useful mNutrition message topics, by gender  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al. , (forthcoming, 2020)  
Perhaps more importantly, most users reported having taken action  based on the messages 
received. 89% of females and 81% of males self -reported implementing at least one tip. The types 
of information that users were able to implement are presented in  Figure 27 . Interestingly, maternal 
nutrition, which was regarded as th e most useful area of information, was least likely to have been 
acted on. There may be additional barriers to adopting these behaviours that information alone is 
not able to overcome.  
Findings from the quantitative study appear to confirm that users did indeed change their 
behaviours, as it found that accessing the Wazazi Nipendeni service had improved a range of 
nutritional outcomes. Diets among young children in the treatment sample had improved, as 
follows:  
• Dietary diversity for children aged 6–35 mont hs – The number of food categories consumed 
increased by 0.107 (p -value 0.073).  
• The likelihood that children  aged  6–35 months met the minimum dietary diversity – Children in 
the treatment communities were 3.8 percentage points more likely to have consumed from four 
food groups (p -value 0.093).  
• Children aged 6–23 months in the treatment communities were 6.9 percentage points more 
likely to satisfy minimum acceptable diet.  
Note that households were included in the baseline sample if they had a pregnant woman or a 
child under the age of 12 months, so by the time of the endline survey children would have been 
aged between 18 to 36 months, so this is the age group for which it might be expected to find the 
strongest effects.  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 82  
Diets among women of reproductive age  (primary females) had also improved:  
• The likelihood that the primary females satisfied minimum dietary diversity for women  had 
increased by 4.0 percentage points (p -value 0.062).  
Secondary outcomes relating to knowledge and behavioural practices had also improved:  
• There were improved knowledge of IYCF practices among men.  
• There was a statistically significant impact on the combined household -level measure of 
nutrition knowledge.  
Figure 27:  Which tips from mNutrition  content have respondents put in practice, by 
gend er? 
 
Source:  Gilligan et al. , (forthcoming, 2020)  
The text messages provide women with information that is consistent with advice given by health 
workers in the field.  Where women are in contact with heal th workers, the text messaging service 
then has the additional benefit of reinforcing  the advice that women receive from multiple sources.  
C.5 Channels  
The multimedia campaign targeted users through a comprehensive range of channels:  
• mass media: TV, radio, new spapers, and magazines;  
• print media: brochures, billboards, and vinyl banners;  
• other promotional items: stickers, tyre covers, t -shirts, bags, kanga;  
• electronic media: SMS service, blog; and  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 83  
• social media: community events, Facebook.  
 
The 2015 Tanzania DHS survey asked respondents about the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign. Over 
half of respondents had heard of Wazazi Nipendeni ( Table 6 ). Radio was clearly the single channel 
that achieved greatest reach : 87% of people had heard about Wazazi Nipendeni from the radio  
(Table 7). About a quarter of respondents had heard about the campaign on the television, with 
another quarter doing so through printed media (poster/ magazine/ newspa per/ billboard).  
Table 6:  Responses to question ‘Have you heard of the Wazazi Nipendeni campaign?’  
Have you heard of Wazazi Nipendeni?  Frequency  % 
No 4,835 47% 
Yes 5,398 53% 
Total  10,233 100%  
Source:  Tanzania DHS Survey (2015)  
Table 7:  Responses to question ‘How did you hear about the Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign?’42 
How did  you hear about  Wazazi Nipendeni?  Frequency  
(n=5,398)  % 
Radio  4,710 87% 
Television  1,463 27% 
Poster/ magazine/ newspaper/ billboard  1,186 22% 
Family/ friend  582 11% 
Community health worker  459 9% 
Health facility  421 8% 
Does not know/ remember  80 2% 
Mobile phone  61 1% 
Internet  17 0% 
Other  1 0% 
Source:  Tanzania DHS Survey , (2015)  
During the initial campaign as part of the Tanzania Capacity and Communication Project (TCCP) , 
printed materials were distributed to a range of health facilities where women come into contact 
with health professionals, e.g. hospitals, health centres, dispe nsaries. The mHealth Tanzania -PPP 
worked in partnership with the health sector, providing training for health professionals, who were 
then able to help women register on the system. There are three  ways of registering for the Wazazi 
Nipendeni text messagin g service:  
• Assisted by health facility worker – women can be signed up when they come for antenatal 
care visits etc.  
• Assisted by community health workers – community workers can sign women up when they 
visit them in their homes, or other local venue s.  
 
42 Multiple response – respondents may have heard of Wazazi Nipendeni through multiple channels, i.e. adds up to more 
than 100%.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 84  
• Self-registration – instructions were given in the multimedia campaign.  People dial the short  
code and then are guided through a small number of profiling questions (category of user, and 
stage of pregnancy/ age of child).  
Registration data show that 57% of users were registered by partners. In addition, a proportion of 
other users will also have been helped to register by government health workers. Partners 
generally register users through the USSD service or the API. It is not possible to determine 
exactly how many of the 43% of ‘other’ users actually registered by themselves, but 59% were 
registered using USSD, suggesting that they were in fact registered, or at least assisted with their 
registration, by a partner. This means that up to  83% of users were re gistered by partners. This 
highlights the importance of partners in getting users onto the system.  
Although mass media channels can be effective in raising awareness of the Wazazi Nipendeni 
campaign, it is partners that are instrumental in converting peop le into users. People may lack a 
sufficiently detailed understanding of the product to convince them to register for themselves, 
whereas some personal contact can help get them signed up. TFNC also believes that people who 
register with a health profession al will have a positive bias to comply with messaging, have a better 
understanding of how the service works, and be more likely to appreciate how they can benefit 
from the service. It is likely to be known and trusted individuals who are most influential i n assisting 
with registrations, e.g. community health workers, and community and religious leaders.  
Wazazi Nipendeni was one of five programmes supported by the Tanzania Capacity and 
Communication Project (TCCP)  (see Section 4.3). This was a multi -media behaviour change 
communications programme aimed at improving a range of health issues, with a focus on HIV 
prevention. The five year programme started in 2010 and fini shed in 2016, so it will have achieved 
nearly maximum reach towards the end of 2015, when the DHS survey referred to in  Table 6  was 
conducted.  
A USAID evaluation gives a total budget for the programme of 56 million USD (Field -Nguer et al., 
2014) . The budge t is not disaggregated by project, but by health issue. At the time, Wazazi 
Nipendeni was addressing maternal and child health, malaria, PMTCT and family planning. The 
total budget allocated to these issues was 19 million USD, so the amount allocated to Wa zazi 
Nipendeni would be some fraction of this. In principle, the user numbers achieved by Wazazi 
Nipendeni could be at least partly a result of this investment. Although awareness of Wazazi 
Nipendeni was high in 2015, this was not evident during the qualit ative studies carried out as part 
of the evaluation. The issues were not raised during focus group discussion, and only in the 
midline survey, which specifically explored implementation issues, was any reference made to the 
legacy of TCCP:  
“Both women live d in towns in other regions during that time and had signed up themselves 
after seeing a poster in the health clinic.”  (Barnett et al., 2018).  
It has been shown above that the majority of users were registered by partners. These figures 
suggest that regist ration is driven by face -to-face interactions with health workers. Further research 
would be needed to specifically investigate the extent to which registrations continue to be 
influenced by any residual awareness of Wazazi Nipendeni  from the TCCP activities . 
Figure 28 confirms that health workers are the most highly trusted sources of information on health 
matters (government more so than NGO facil ities). It is interesting to note that even among control 
communities, people have high levels of trust in information from automated text messages. They 
are more likely to trust an SMS than family members, confirming that text messages are regarded 
as bei ng reliable and of high quality. Patterns of who people actually get information from ( Figure Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 85  
29) broadly reflect levels of trust, although they emphasise the importance  of government health 
workers.  
Figure 28:  Trust in sources of health information43  
 
Source: Authors  
 
Figure 29:  Sources of health information  
 
Source: Authors  
 
At baseline, the qualitative research found evidence that communities were already familiar with 
the use of SMS text messages as a means of disseminating information on health and nutrition 
topics.  Viamo’s 321 service was contracted to provide access to IV R recordings in order to cater 
 
43 Percent  who agree they woul d trust information from each source . 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 86  
for those customers that struggle with written messages. The qualitative research identified a 
number of features of SMS messaging that fits well with women’s lifestyles:  
• text messages can be read repeatedly – audio messages may be heard incorrectly ; 
• as messages remain on the phone, they can be shared with friends and colleagues at any 
time; and  
• text messages are private – they remain on the phone, which tends to be regarded as a 
personal device; audio messages can be overheard by others.  
The quantitative study showed that household members in treatment households were 
overwhelmingly likely to rea d the mNutrition content they received on their phone, indicating that 
sending messages by SMS in Swahili is an effective channel. It should be noted that the SMS 
channel may be particularly well suited to the Tanzanian context, given that literacy levels are 
relatively high (for sub -Saharan Africa)44, and the country is united by the language of Swahili.  
In addition to these features, the quantitative study also found that users had a low attachment to 
their mobile phones (or their SIM, at least). Among p eople who were able to explain why they had 
not received messages (in the previous month), the largest single reason was that they had lost 
their SIM (see  Figure 30 ). 
Figure 30:  Receipt of m Nutrition messages in the last month , treatment group only  
 
Source:  Gilligan et al. , (forthcoming, 2020)  
 
44 The adult literacy rate in Tanzania is 78%, compared to an average for sub -Saharan Africa of 64% (2015 data from 
https://data.worldbank.org ). 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 87  
C.6 Customer relationships  
The aims of the customer relationships that Wazazi Nipendeni creates with users can be 
considered to be threefold:  
• Acquisition. Those who were assisted with registrat ion have quite a different relationship with 
the service to those who self -registered. Their ongoing experience of the service depends not 
only on the content of messages, but also on whatever ongoing support and interaction they 
may continue to enjoy from  the field agency. Registration data confirm the importance of field 
partners and the face -to-face interaction they provide in encouraging users to register for the 
service; up to 83% of users were signed up by partners (see Section 5.4).  
• Retention. Several features of the system minimise pain points that might prompt users to 
leave a system. The service is free of charge so there is no need for any billing or paymen t 
processes, both of which can be tricky and cause customers to drop out of the service. Once a 
user’s pregnancy or maternal status has been captured by the registration process, there is no 
need for the system to gather further information from users. Per haps the most important factor 
is the perceived relevance and value of the content itself. Retention levels are high. 
Registration data indicate that the number of people opting out of the service is equivalent to 
roughly 7% of new users in a month. As the  total number of active users grows, the attrition 
rate becomes increasing ly small when expressed as a percentage of the number active users 
e.g. 0.5% at the end of a four-year period.  
• Compliance. The service will achieve greatest impact if it can successf ully persuade people to 
constructively change their behaviours. This depends on the perceived relevance and value of 
the content, and on the motivation of customers to comply with the messages they receive, 
which depends on the perceived trustworthiness of  the content. High levels of satisfaction and 
perceived quality support high retention levels. Nearly 90% of those who self -reported having 
ever received the content  read all messages received, and over 80% self -reported 
implementing at least one tip.  
The study has not been able to generate any insights into the nature of the ongoing support 
provided by partners because locations for both quantitative and qualitative studies were selected 
on the basis of low registration levels (and no partner presence) .  
Wazazi Nipendeni has a strong brand, which is quite distinct from the MNOs that support the 
service, and users tend to view it  as a MoHCDGEC  service , as the Government pushed it through 
the media . Originally , Wazazi Nipendeni was branded a CDC action, b ut it is increasingly 
MoHCDGEC -branded as MoHCDGEC  adopt s more of the service.  Users do not necessarily 
appreciate that the MNOs are paying for the messages . 
Given that most of the funding for the mHealth Tanzania -PPP comes from CDC, it can be argued 
that the most important relationship is that with CDC. Providing evidence that the service is 
delivering improved health outcomes is important. Although commercial viability was a priority for 
FCDO  in their original concept for the mNutrition programme , it is not clear that this is a similar 
priority for other donors and organisations that have supported the service over the years.  
C.7 Revenue streams and indirect benefits  
Wazazi Nipendeni is free of charge to users, so there is no direct revenue stream. The original 
mNut rition  project design was based on the assumption that users would pay for information (e.g. 
via subscriptions)  and that this would provide opportunities for participating organisations to 
develop commercially sustainable business models , even though nutrition information was to be Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 88  
made available using a freemium model . However, late in 2016 the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and 
TFNC held intense negotiations over whether or not Wazazi Nipendeni would be permitted to 
charge for these information services.  In the end, the Government insisted that health information 
should be made available to citizens free of charge.  
The w illingness of users to pay for health and nutrition information has yet to be tested. However, it 
is political pressure that is the main determinant of business models. G overnments across many 
African countries have insisted that health -related information  should be made available for free , as 
national policies state that health services should be made available for free  at the point of 
delivery . 
A key feature of the Wazazi Nipendeni service is that it has also been made available free of 
charge to field pa rtner institutions running behaviour change interventions within Tanzania, so no 
direct revenue is generated from partner organisations.  
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP is currently funded by CDC, although the successful functioning of the 
service depends on con tributions by various partner organisations. The service is, therefore, 
vulnerable to any withdrawal of funding from CDC. Current funding is planned to 2020. The service 
also depends on the zero -rating of text messages by partner MNOs.  
Phone numbers are u sed as the unique user identifier on the Rasello platform, so users can only 
register one number (although in principle they could self -register as many numbers as they like). 
Tanzania recently introduced mobile number portability (Tanzania Communications Regulatory 
Authority (TCRA), 2019) but it is unlikely that this is common practice. For example, even 10 years 
after number portability was introduced in South Africa, only 2.5% of the subscriber base port their 
number in a year45 (Independent Comm unicatio ns Authority of South Africa , 2017). Registration 
data from Rasello indicate that drop -out rates are low, which also suggests that use rs are not 
readily changing their mobile numbers. The qualitative research found that most people use 
multiple SIMs, swapp ing them into their phone depending on which network has a signal and which 
offers the cheapest tariff, e.g. time of day, off -net tariffs, and bundle features. In the baseline 
report, it was proposed that the Wazazi Nipendeni VAS could offer MNOs indirect benefits 
associate with reduced churn. However, this has proven not to be the case. The quantitative study 
found no difference in the length of time that respondents reported having had their main SIM card 
(both groups had owned their primary SIM for just under three years, and their second SIM for just 
over two years), there was no difference in the likelihood that they had the same primary phone 
number as they had at baseline (a two -year duration), and there was no difference in the 
proportion who subscri bed to the same operator as at baseline.  
The baseline report also proposed that, as a VAS, Wazazi Nipendeni could lead to an increase in 
ARPU among users, and the quantitative study found that this has indeed been the case. Control 
households spent an aver age of TZS 5,300 per month (£1.90/month) on mobile phone airtime 
(including any data bundles), but spending was 10% higher (TZS 510, £0.18/month) in treatment 
communities. The qualitative study found that women using the Wazazi Nipendeni service became 
more confident in using their phones, which explains the increase in ARPU. They were more likely 
to make and receive calls, more likely to have sent and received text messages, more likely to 
have used mobile money services, and more likely to have used their  phone intensively .46 
The latest DHS data indicate that 53% of people (across the country) had heard of Wazazi 
Nipendeni (see  Table 6 ). TCRA data for October 201847 give the total number of subscribers on 
 
45 Annualised porting rate is taken as the total cumulative ports, divided by the number of years since the service was 
launched.  
46 Used their mobile on most days during the past 14 days . 
47 www.tcra.go.tz/index.php/quarterly -telecommunications -statistics  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 89  
the four partner networks as 41.0 million. Therefor e, 550,000 Wazazi Nipendeni users represent 
1.3% of the entire subscriber base. Given the reach and positive brand of Wazazi Nipendeni, it is 
surprising that the MNOs supporting Wazazi Nipendeni do not make greater use of their 
contribution and the Wazazi Nipendeni brand in their promotional materials.  
It does appear that MNOs are beginning to recognise the political value attached to their support 
for Wazazi Nipendeni. In an unpredictable political environment in which the Government can 
potentially impose  regulatory constraints (such as taxes), there is political capital to be gained by 
supporting a public good that plays a part in implementing the Government’s health policy. By 
signing agreements to support Wazazi Nipendeni directly with the Government ra ther than with the 
mHealth  Tanzania -PPP, MNOs are gaining recognition of the value of their contribution.  
C.8 Key resources  
Key resources are defined as those assets required to create and offer the value proposition. The 
primary assets employed by the mHealth  Tanzania -PPP in delivering the text messaging service 
are the content database and the applications platform that sends scheduled messages.  
The current content comprises the pre -existing database brought by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP, 
and additional content  generated through the mNutrition programme. This nutrition content is 
regarded as a public good, having been paid for by FCDO . In March 2019, CABI made this content 
publicly available under open access through its Knowledge Bank resource .48.  
The text mes saging service originally ran on the Vusion  platform developed by TTCM in 
partnership with the Praekelt foundation. In October 2016 Wazazi Nipendeni migrated to a new 
platform, created for MoHCDGEC  by a loc al software developer (Rasello).  The new platform offers 
improved reliability as well as improved monitoring and reporting facilities . For example, the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP has been able to equip MNOs with their own dashboard so they can track 
the number of users and messages being sent.   
The text messaging service is designed to serve as part of multimedia campaign s, so the  field 
partner programmes and  interventions are a key resource required to deliver the full potential of 
the value proposition. To date, 24 partners have assisted with  registering users in the field (see 
Section 5.9).  
The key ‘resource’ in convening these partn erships has been, and will continue to be, the 
partnership with TFNC a nd its linkages to  both national nutrition policymakers  and health and 
nutrition interventions launching in the country . TFNC also acts as the moderator of health and 
nutrition content, bringing to the partnership its technical expertise in this area. The content 
localisation and approval process was acknowledged by stakeholders as going particularly 
smoothly as a result of having TFNC on board.  
Early in 2019, the country manager at the mHealth Tanzania -PPP handed over to a new team 
leader. The country mana ger had been intimately involved in the development of the mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP for nearly 10 years. The interesting feature of the new appointment was that while 
the previous country manager came from a mobile technology background, the new team leader is  
a medical professional. This reflects the changing complexion of the PPP, as it continues to 
encourage Government agencies to take ownership of the platform itself, along with associated 
technical responsibilities. Strengthened health resources in the mHe alth Tanzania -PPP leave it 
better able to engage with health policy issues and to broker partnerships with health sector actors.  
 
48 https://ckan.cabi.org/data/ dataset/nutrition -knowledge -bank  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 90  
 
C.9 Key activities  
In order to make the business model work, perhaps the most fundamental activity that needs to be 
undertaken is  networking. Both TFNC and the mHealth Tanzania -PPP clearly have good personal 
contacts in order to broker partnerships with field NGOs, and to enlist the support of MNOs. The 
strength of personalities is likely to become less important as MoHCDGEC assumes  greater 
ownership of the technical platform and is able to integrate participation in the Wazazi Nipendeni 
system into processes required for health interventions to be implemented in country.  
Under the original vision for the mHealth projects under the mNutrition programme, it was expected 
that content delivered by the Global Content Partnership would simply be made available to all 
partners participating in the mHealth service, and that each participating organisation would use 
their own resources to ad apt the key messages to specifically match their target audience and to 
suit their own objectives. This was subject to an obligation (or expectation) that nutrition content 
would then be made available by participating organisations free of charge to users . The Global 
Content Partnership was, therefore, mandated to create higher -level, generic content, and little 
provision was made for creating specific, locally relevant messages. However, when the original 
‘clearing house’ vision was abandoned, there was t hen a need for a new stream of work to create 
specific, locally relevant messages, in the local language, ready to be integrated into the existing 
Wazazi Nipendeni database of content. This was done by the partnership of Every1Mobile and 
COUNSENUTH. Detail ed testing of mHealth content was never part of the original concept, as it 
was expected that local partners would do this for themselves, so additional funding was made 
available to cover end -user testing as part of the localisation process.  
TFNC was the government agency responsible for signing off content at the end of the content 
generation process. However, TFNC adopted a much more proactive role, and its involvement has 
continued to deepen throughout the project. When the content generation process wa s changed to 
facilitate the production of more detailed, localised content, TFNC got more involved. TFNC’s 
engagement with and awareness of the programme played an important role in ensuring that 
signing -off procedures went smoothly.  
Monitoring and evalua tion is a key activity, as evidence of the contribution that Wazazi Nipendeni 
makes towards positive health outcomes will be instrumental in negotiating partnerships with 
forthcoming health interventions. It is expected that the positive outcomes highlight ed by this 
evaluation study will be of value to the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and to TFNC in this regard.  
Providing a face -to-face presence when working with women is important, not only for assisting 
with registration onto the Wazazi Nipendeni system, but also  for achieving positive behaviour 
change. The qualitative study confirmed that messages may play an important role in reinforcing 
and supporting the efforts of health workers. The study found that messages acted as reminders to 
reinforce information provid ed by health workers, and to reinforce mothers’ existing knowledge. 
Note that even though people may trust information given by text messages ( Figure 28), they are 
still most likely to get information from health workers ( Figure 29).  
The core business of delivering content to beneficiaries depends on the technical infrastructure 
that d eals with registration, scheduling, and the dispatch of messages to users. This is sub -
contracted to Rasello, as the platform provider, and management is being gradually transferred 
from the mHealth Tanzania -PPP to MoHCDGEC.  
Content will need to be regularly updated to keep it relevant , e.g. new drugs and products will be 
introduced, and recommended practice will be modified. People will quickly lose trust in information Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 91  
that is not immediately useful, or , even worse, wrong. Quality assurance processes for any 
revisions ought to be as rigorous as those adhered to during the mNutrition programme . It is not 
clear that any of the partners has the mandate or the funding to undertake  this type of ongoing 
maintenance . 
C.10  Key partnership s 
The complex set of partnerships brokered by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and TFNC is a defining 
feature of the Wazazi Nipendeni service. Partnerships have been crucial to accessing all the 
resources needed to make the service succeed:  
• Research and design. Wa zazi Nipendeni was o riginally conceived as a prevention of malaria in 
pregnancy campaign,  following an analysis by JHCCP  of the 2010 Tanzania DHS data. The 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP delivered the text messaging service as part of the campaign put 
together by JH CCP and MOHSW.  
• Content. Content development for the SMS component of Wazazi Nipendeni was led by 
MOHSW, to ensure messages were developed in line with Government recommendations and 
delivered in line with timing guidelines provided by the World Health Org anization (WHO). 
Further content was leveraged from the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action .49 Content on family 
planning was leveraged from Mobiles for Reproductive Health (m4RH) .50 Content for 
Prevention of Mother -to-Child Transmission was designed by EG PAF. TFNC was instrumental 
in securing the support of the SBCC TWG for nutrition in approving content.  
• Technology platform. The service was originally run on the Vusion open source platform 
developed by TTCM. The system architecture led to problems with re liability, latency, and cost. 
The service was migrated to a new platform in October 2016. It was hosted locally by Rasello 
and was commissioned and paid for by  MoHCDGEC (with CDC funding).  
• Telecoms operators. The mHealth Tanzania -PPP had identified MNOs a s key partners at the 
start. However, MNOs  needed to be convinced of the viability of the concept before committing.  
The Wazazi Nipendeni campaign was launched without explicit support from MNOs , but after 
the service achieved 100,000 users  within 11 weeks  the MNOs entered into agreements . 
• Field partners. The programme launched in November 2012 with a two -month nationwide 
media campaign (radio and TV). A follow -up campaign ran from July 2013 to February 2014 , 
during which field partners promoted the service  and assisted with registrations. In addition to 
the 24 field partners (see Table 9) that have formal agreements with the mHealth Tanzania -
PPP (and have a source code allocated on the system), other agencies have simply 
incorporated registering women onto Wazazi Nipendeni into their field processes. Analysis of 
registration data suggests  that field partners may have assisted up to 83% of users to register.  
• Government agencies. The Government of Tanzania is committed to a number of relevant 
health policies on nutrition, sexual and reproductive health, and maternal mortality, and to a 
numbe r of information and ICT policies, including open and accountable government, and 
electronic access to health services.  
The network of key institutions is presented in Figure 2. The nature of the relationships covered by 
each category of partners is summarised  in Table 8. 
 
49 A PPP , launched in May 2011 by USAID and Johnson & Johnson , with supporting partners, the United Nations 
Foundation, the mHealth Alliance, and BabyCenter.  
50 A pilot project l ed by Family Health International  360 with MOHSW and funded by USAID.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 92  
Table 8:  What parties give and get f rom partnership relationships  
Partnership  Contribution of parties  Type  
 First  set of partners  Second  set of partners   
JHCCP/CDC/ President’s 
Malaria 
Initiative /PEPFAR –
Wazazi Nipendeni  JHCCP/CDC/  President’s 
Malaria Initiative /PEPFAR: 
funding, technical assistance  Wazazi Nipendeni : access to 
women, effective behaviour 
change communication 
channel  Donor  
MOHSW – Wazazi 
Nipendeni  MOHSW: legitimacy, 
authorisation, content  Wazazi Nipendeni : help  to 
deliver nutrition strategy, 
access to women, effective 
behaviour change 
communication channel  Partnership  
CDC – Cardno  CDC: cash Cardno: management 
expertise  Contractual  
Wazazi Nipendeni  – 
mass media campaign 
agencies  Wazazi Nipendeni : cash Agencies: te chnical expertise  Contractual  
Wazazi Nipendeni  – 
mobile content partners  Wazazi Nipendeni : access to 
women, add ed value to 
existing content developed by 
partners  Partners: content, technical 
expertise  Partnership  
Wazazi Nipendeni  – 
tech providers  Wazazi Nipendeni : ICT 
deployment opportunity, 
project funding  Tech providers: technical 
expertise  Partnership  
Wazazi Nipendeni  – 
MNOs  Wazazi Nipendeni : indirect 
benefits (CSR, loyalty)  MNOs: free SMS  Partnership  
Wazazi Nipendeni  – 
implementatio n partners  Wazazi Nipendeni : access to 
women, effective behaviour 
change communication 
channel  Partners: field presence  Partnership  
Notes: In this table, Wazazi Nipendeni is used synonymously with the mHealth Tanzania -PPP.  
Source:  Authors’ own  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 93  
Table 9:  Field partners and registrations  
Partner  Proportion of 
registered  users  
AFRICARE  0.0%  
AFYA C4C  0.0%  
Agri Team Health Tanzania  0.1%  
AMREF  0.1%  
BRN -MOH  0.0%  
Comprehensive Community Based Rehabilitation in Tanzania  (CCBRT ) 1.7%  
EGPAF  0.1%  
HAPA  0.0%  
HIP-Aga Khan  0.2%  
HJFMRI  0.2%  
HKI 0.0%  
HKI-SMS  0.0%  
IHI 0.4%  
JHI 0.1%  
JHPIEGO  0.0%  
Moby  0.3%  
NHIF  44.5%  
Pathfinder  0.5%  
PHARM ACCESS  0.2%  
PSI 0.5%  
SHDEPHA  0.0%  
Toto Health  6.4%  
United Nations Children’s Fund ( UNICEF ) 1.0%  
World Lung Foundation  0.2%  
World Vision  0.0%  
Total  56.5% 
Source:  Authors’ own . 
C.11  Costs and investment  
The baseline report presented set -up and ongoing costs covering a two -year period, mainly 
derived from costs reported by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP and GSMA. Now that more detail has 
been provided, these costs have been superseded by a more comprehensive and rigorous 
analysis , which is  presented in Section  7. 
In addition to those costs directly associated with the mHealth Tanzania -PPP (both operating and 
capital), FCDO  and GSMA have invested in wider programmatic costs that stimulated and 
supported this action.  It is worth noting that the mHealth Tanzania -PPP has a history of donations  
and in -kind contributions made over the years by the CDC and programme partners . 
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 94  
Annex D  Analysis of users  
D.1 Overview  
The mHealth Tanzania -PPP submitted Wazazi Nipendeni registration data from the Rasello 
platform to the authors. The query was performed on 27 March 2019. The dataset contains the 
following fields:  
• unique ID (anonymised);  
• source (me ans of registration, e.g. short code, API);  
• partner (who registered the user);  
• category of user (e.g. pregnant woman, mother with child);  
• stage at registration (months or weeks, representing the stage of pregnancy or age of child);  
• registration date;  
• statu s (active or inactive); and  
• opt-out date (for inactive  accounts ). 
The data required considerable manipulation, primarily because when pregnant women reach term 
(and are assumed to give birth), the original record is flagged as inactive and a new record is 
created with a new category of mother with child. Given that most users are women who have 
given birth while registered as users, there were a large number of ‘paired’ records that needed to 
be reconciled and collated. The working dataset includes addition al categories to reflect these 
hybrid classifications, e.g. PW=>MC represents a woman who registered when pregnant but has 
since given birth and has continued using the service as a mother with a child.  
Registration via USSD and API was introduced to make  the registration process faster and easier. 
Registration by API was initially introduced by NHIF in July 2016, then use of API as a registration 
source was adopted by other partners from 10 November 2016 onwards. Registration by USSD 
appears to have been introduced on 10 November 201651 and registrations were submitted by 
multiple partners. However, there is a spike in registrations on this date. 6,833 records were 
submitted on this date: 78% by USSD and 21% by API.  
There appears to be a further anomaly i n registrations completed by USSD in November 2018. 
There is a spike in the number of registrations completed by USSD during the three -week period 
form 4 November 2018 to 24 November 2018. Most of these have no associated partner. There 
are no further regi strations by USSD after this date, which seems unlikely.  
A ‘working’ dataset has been restricted to all records covering a two -year period between 11 
November 2016 and 3 November 2018. The following numbers of records have been omitted:  
• up to and includin g 10 November 2016 – 40,951; and  
• 4 November 2018 onwards – 50,664.  
The following steps were taken in the preparation of the dataset used in the analysis (and 
summarised in  Table 10 ): 
1. Data were submitted in four files, containing a total of 1,179,500 record s.  
 
51 With the exception of 157 records submitted in  the period  August to S eptember 2016 . Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 95  
2. Paired duplicates were collated , and ID errors were omitted from each file, leaving a total of 
853,000 records.  
3. Files were then merged and paired duplicates across years were collated, leaving a total of 
744,000 records.  
4. Records with various unresolvable data were omitted, leaving a total of 739,100 records. 
Omitted records included those with ‘#VALUE’ in the Registration date field, ‘NULL’ in the 
Source field, outliers in the Stage field, and records with an opt -out date as well as an ‘Active’ 
Status.  
5. Migrated accounts (from the Vusion system) were omitted. Staff at the mHealth Tanzania -PPP 
reported that porting data from the old to the new system was fraught with difficulties, resulting 
in inconsistencies in the data on the new platform. For example, 62% of migrated data records 
contained a single registration date (16 November 2016, which corresponds roughly to the date 
the migration took place). All 88,100 migrated records have been omitted.  
6. Anomalies in November 2016 and November 2018 cast doubt over the integrity of data before 
and after these dates, so only data from the intervening two -year period has been used.  
Table 10:  Preparation of registration data for analysis   
Step  Description  Records  % reduction  
1 Data were submitted in four files  1,179,500  n/a 
2 Pairing and errors omitted  853,000  n/a 
3 Pairing across years  744,000  n/a 
4 Cleaning  739,100  0.66%  
5 Migrated accounts omitted  607,100  17.9%  
6 Isolate two years (11 November 20 16 to 3  November 20 18) 515,500 15.1%  
Source:  Authors’ own  
D.2 Growth in user numbers  
New registrations fluctuate monthly, as shown in  Figure 31 , and opt -outs fluctuate, as shown in 
Figure 33 . In the period May 2017 – October 2018 new registrat ions were running at an average of 
around 20,000/month, whereas people were leaving the service at a much lower rate of less than 
1,400/month, i.e. 7% of new users. Combining new users with people leaving the service gives the 
cumulative profile of active users presented in  Figure 34. Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 96  
Figure 31:  Monthly registrations  
 
Source: Authors  
As with registration dates, there were anomalies with the opt-out dates (see  Figure 32 ). There was 
a spike in opt -outs on a single day: over 9,000 records were marked as having opted out on 3 April 
2017. The majority of these had been registered using the short code (86%). Secondly, there was 
a one -month gap in w hich no opt -outs were recorded (mid -February – mid-March 2017). Therefore, 
only opt -out data from May 2017 onwards have been considered reliable and are presented in  
Figure 33 . 
Note that the rate at which users opted out of the system was an order of magni tude lower than the 
rate at which they were being registered, so missing opt -out data has minimal effect on the trend of 
calculated active users presented in  Figure 34. 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 97  
Figure 32:  Anomalies in opt -out dates  
 
Source: Authors  
Figure 33:  Monthly opt -outs  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 98  
Figure 34:  Growth in active users  
 
Source: Authors  
In the absence of relia ble data, it is not possible to track patterns of growth in users from the 
introduction of the service. The total number of users may be up to 130,000 higher than these 
figures indicate, because many of the original users that were migrated onto the new sy stem have 
not been included in these numbers (step 4 to step 5 in  Table 10 ). Nevertheless, the patterns of 
growth and opt -outs remain accurate.  
In November 2017, the mHealth Tanzania -PPP estimated the number of active users to be 
350,000. This is consisten t with the active user numbers in  Figure 34, as adding 130,000 to the 
November 2017 estimate of 200,000 from the chart gives a total of 330,000, which is close to the 
mHealth Tanzania -PPP estimate. Making an assumption of straight -line growth in active user 
numbers, and assuming a starting base of 100,000 active users (rounded down), the number of 
active users after a two -year period (December 2016 to November 2018) is estimated at 550,000. 
This figure was validated by the mHealth Tanzania -PPP.  
In their study of all eight health services in the mNut rition programme (GSMA, 2018), GSMA 
presents a chart of the total number of users reached from October 2015 to December 2017. In 
this chart, Wazazi Nipendeni users start from a base of zero in January 2016, rising to 770,000 in 
December 2017. However, thes e figures cannot be compared with the figures above because they 
represent the cumulative number of users reached.  
D.3 Understanding users  
The NHIF has brought the largest number of users onto the system ( Figure 35). This figure also 
shows that, to date, other partners have assisted few users to register relative to the number who 
appear to have self -registered (no partner).  
Among the 11 partners that registered more than 1 ,000 users, all apart from UNICEF used either 
API or USSD exclusively (almost) – see Table 11 . None used the short code. When the USSD 
system was introduced, SMS remained the channel the general public could use to register, but 
healthcare partners moved t o using USSD. The USSD facility makes the registration process 
smoother because it can validate healthcare registration numbers in real time, so it can check if 
people enter incorrect registration data. When looking at users registered with no partner, 62%  
were registered using an API or USSD ( Figure 36 ), suggesting that many could well have been 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 99  
registered with the assistance of a field partner. It was reported that many women would have 
been signed up with the assistance of health workers when they visite d clinics. It is not, therefore, 
possible to determine how many users truly self -registered, i.e. without any assistance. It is 
possible that up to 83% of all users could have been registered with the assistance of some kind of 
partner (official partner, o r health workers), if API and USSD registrations were included.  
An inherent difficulty with USSD sessions was that in areas with poor network coverage, the 
connection would be dropped before the registration process could be completed. It was reported 
that some partners resorted to using short codes, although this is not evident in the data from the 
period represented in  Table 11 . The USSD protocol was subsequently changed so that it was able 
to resume the session automatically. This was a concern as most o f the marketing materials for 
Wazazi Nipendeni were based on the USSD functionality.  
Figure 35:  Registrations by partner  
 
Source: Authors  
Table 11:  Sources used by partners to register users (top 11)  
Partner API Excel import  Short code USSD  Total  
NHIF  229,247 0 0 0 229,247 
Toto Health  9 0 0 32,744 32,753 
CCBRT  0 0 0 8,986 8,986 
UNICEF  0 4,898 0 99 4,997 
PSI 2,398 0 0 0 2,398 
Pathfinder  7 0 0 2,369 2,376 
IHI 1 0 0 1,844 1,845 
Moby  1,435 0 0 0 1,435 
World Lung 
Foundation  0 0 0 1,269 1,269 
HJFMRI  1 0 0 1,252 1,253 
PHARM ACCESS  8 0 0 1,217 1,225 
Source:  Authors’ own  050000100000150000200000250000Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 100  
Figure 36:  Sources used for self -registration (no partner)  
 
Source: Authors  
The majority of  users (75%) were signed up as pregnant women (sum of ‘PW’ and ‘PW=>MC’ 
categories in  Figure 37 ). 12% were general information -seekers, and 3% were supporters of one 
type or another. However, data in  Table 12  indicate  that by the end of the two -year period , all of 
the general information -seekers and most of the supporters had opted out of the system.  
Figure 37:  Categories of users registered  
 
Source: Authors  
Table 12:  Proportion of registered users no longer active after two years  
User  Proportion not active  
General information -seekers  100%  
MC 6% 
PW=>MC  0% 
SMC  100%  
SPW  78% 
SPW=>SMC  84% 
Source:  Authors’ own  
D.4 Partner programmes  
Registration data provide some insights into the ways in which different programmes work. For 
example, the NHIF brings the largest number of people onto the system (see  Figure 35), and  
Figure 38  shows that since numbers picked up i n May 2017, the rate of registrations has been 
roughly constant. This is in contrast with self -registrations, the second largest source of 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 101  
registrations, which fluctuate widely as people respond to local and national campaigns  (see Figure 
39). Although Toto Health is a partner that continues to bring small numbers of users onto the 
system, Figure 40 shows the impact on registrations of what appears to be a nine -month 
programme in the field.  
NHIF ran a pilot project in 5 regions  of the country . They went from facility to facility to sign up 
women for a free health insurance scheme. NHIF normally charge premiums, but this was a 
special programme subsidised by a donor, so i nsurance was made free to consumers in the pilot. 
The pilot was completed at the end of 2018. It was regarded as a success, so a follow up phase 
was planned 4 months ago, which is currently waiting for the government to sign.   
Figure 38:  Monthly registrations – NHIF  
 
Source: Authors  
Figure 39:  Monthly self -registrations (no partner)  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 102  
Figure 40:  Monthly registrations – Toto Health  
 
Source: Authors  
 
D.5 Stage at registration  
As part of the registration process, users were asked what stage of the pregnancy a women was at 
(in months or weeks). For mothers (and supporters), they were asked for the age of the child. 
Figure 41 shows that there  was a peak in registrations of pregnant women at the three -month 
mark, which coincides with the first trimester of pregnancy. Note the small number of women 
registering in the 10th month of their pregnancy: this mostly likely represents women who were 
registered at or around the time they gave birth. Users who were supporting pregnant women also 
tended to sign up at the end of the first trimester (see  Figure 42 ).  
Users have been separated out into those who were registered by one of the partners listed in  
Table 9 , and those who apparently self -registered. Section 6.3 analyses those users with no 
partner and suggests that, in fact, it is likely that most of them were a ssisted by some kind of health 
worker. The spike in registrations at the three -month point is most acute among these users (see  
Figure 43 ). This figure also shows that partners tend ed to register women later, from three to six 
months into their pregnancies .  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 103  
Figure 41:  Stage at registration – pregnant women  
 
Source: Authors  
Figure 42:  Stage at registration – supporters of pregnant women  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 104  
Figure 43:  Stage at registration – pregnant women (partner and no partner)  
 
Source: Authors  
Users who registered as mothers (and supporters of mothers) mostly signed up within the first 
month of having a newborn (see  Figure 44 ). 
Figure 44:  Age of ch ild at registration (mothers and supporters)  
 
Source: Authors  
 
D.6 Duration of use of service  
Given the relatively low level of people opting out of the service, the sub -set of data that represents 
users who have registered and then left the service is relatively small (n = 25,300) . Remember that 
the addition of nutrition messages means that users remain registered until the child reaches the 
age of five years, so even children registered early in 2016 have not yet reached the age at which 
they will be automatically removed from the system. In principle, users can opt out of the service by 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 105  
sending t he word ‘Simama’ to the same number used for self -registrations. In practice, many users 
may not be aware of this.  
Figure 45 shows that most users leaving the system were registered as pregnant women, and that 
they left before giving birth. The relatively low number of women in the ‘PW=>MC’ category 
suggests that women who used the system throughout their pregnancy liked it, and then continued 
to use it in motherhood. Note that this analysis omits a large number of users (61,000) who 
registered as general i nformation -seekers (GIS), but for whom there are no valid opt -out dates.  
Figure 45:  Categories of users leaving the system (with valid opt -out dates)  
 
Source: Authors  
TFNC hypothesised that women who were assisted with registrat ion might have a stronger 
commitment to the service, stay on the service for longer, be more likely to read the messages, 
and be more likely to adopt improved behaviours. Although it has not been possible to explore links 
between categories of users and ou tcomes, Table 13 sheds some light on the number of users 
leaving the service. This shows that of the 290,000 users who were registered by a partner, 80% 
were registered using an API and 18% using the USSD number. While 12% of those registered by 
USSD subsequently dropped out, only 0.3% of API registrations opted out. Among those users 
with no partner, 59% were registered by USSD, and may have been genuinely self -registere d, or 
they may have been assisted by a health worker. However, only the general public continued to 
register using the short code, so 38% of those with no partner can be classified as self -registered 
with some confidence. 42% of these users opted out, whic h provides some evidence to support the 
TFNC hypothesis.  
 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 106  
Table 13:  Registrations and opt -outs; assisted and self -registrations  
 Source (for registration)  
 API Excel import  Short code  USSD  Total  
No partner  
Number registered  (all) 6,508 973 84,257 132,431 224,169 
% of total regist rations  2.9%  0.4%  37.6%  59.1%  100.0%  
Number opted out  1232  105 35132  42688  79157  
% of total who have opted out  1.6%  0.1%  44.4%  53.9%  100.0%  
% of source who have opted 
out 18.9%  10.8%  41.7%  32.2%  35.3%  
Registered by partner  
Number registered  (all) 233,364 4,898 0 53,062 291,324 
% of total regist rations  80.1%  1.7%  0.0%  18.2%  100.0%  
Number opted out  796 27 0 6204  7027  
% of total who have opted out  11.3%  0.4%  0.0%  88.3%  100.0%  
% of source who have opted 
out 0.3%  0.6%  0.0%  11.7%  2.4%  
Notes: Number opted out is based on records with a valid opt -out date (not necessarily from May 2017 onwards).  
Source:  Authors’ own  
The majority of users drop out of the system within a month of registering  (Figure 46). It is likely 
that this represents people who try the system and, for whatever reason, decide they do not like it 
and opt out straightaway. The second peak occurs after around eight months’ use of the se rvice. 
Given that most users register around three to six months into their pregnancy ( Figure 41 ), this 
peak corresponds to when their child is aged around two to five months old. The reason for this 
peak is less obvious, but may represent mothers who found the service useful during their 
pregnancy, but not useful for helping with their newborn, so a fter persisting with it for a few months 
of motherhood they then decided to opt out.  
Figure 46:  Duration in system (users who have opted out)  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 107  
For all categories of users, the peak period for leaving the system i s within one month. If this period 
is omitted, and the number of users opting out in a given period is expressed as a proportion of the 
total number of users opting out for each category, then different patterns can be seen for different 
categories of user  (Figure 47 ). The second peak for pregnant women and supporters of pregnant 
women occurs after seven months. The distribution of duration of use of the system among women 
who gave birth while using the system is much smoother. Mothers, supporters, and gene ral 
information -seekers leaving the system had all done so within four months.  
Figure 47:  Duration in system by categories (users who have opted out)  
 
Source: Authors  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 108  
Annex E  Cost data utilised for the financial model  
Capital expenditure  
Table 14  Capital cost items  
Item Estimate (£ ) Source  Description  
Country -level investment  
Localisation of content       62,500  CABI budget  All local content partner payments 
allocated to Tanzania (62,468)  
Staff costs (Global Content 
Partnership)       20,000  CABI budget  All GAIN staff costs allocated to 
Tanzania (20,303)  
Direct costs        0  CABI budget  All GAIN direct costs allocated to 
Tanzania (0)  
mNutrition  programme (country -specific)  
Product development  
Formative evaluation 
(International)       100,000  GSMA 
communications  See average country breakdown 
below  
UX expert and design 
consultants      130,000  GSMA 
communications  See average country breakdown 
below  
mNutrition programme (global)  
Global content development  
Global content partners      250,000  CABI budget  255,910 (per country programme)  
Programme management  
Business intelligence and 
programme management 
(GSMA)      480,000  GSMA 
communications  See average country breakdown 
below  
Source:  Authors’ own  
GSMA mHealth total project  budget average per country52: £1,055,900.  
Breakdown of above cost per country (using Tanzania specifics where available):     
• monitoring and evaluation /business intelligence  £106,200  
• UX       £133,900  
• global content       £255,900  (from CABI budget for CABI  
GCP costs)  
• local content       £82,800 (from CABI budget for  
Tanzania)  
Remainder covers GSMA contributions to business intelligence and programme management: 
£477,000 . 
Operational expenditure  
The f ollowing estimates are based on data supplied by Cardno.  
 
52 Personal communication.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 109  
Table 15  Operational expenditure items  
Item Estimate 
(GBP)  Unit Source  Description  
Fixed costs  
Product development  
Content curation 
(local content 
partner)  34,000 £/year 
(after 
launch)   Lump sum estimate for keeping 
content up to date.  
Marketing expenses  
Marketing events  0 £/qtr   No provision is made for direct 
marketing expenditures, as marketing 
is now done mostly by partner 
organisations through face -to-face 
contact and campaigns that are part of 
other field programme activities i.e. 
cannot be allocated directly to Wazazi 
Nipend eni. 
Administration expenses  
Salaries and 
wages  65,000  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% effort dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni ($55,784/mth)  
Fringe benefits  60,000  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% effort dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni ($51,777/mth)  
Equipment  0 £/qtr Cardno 
communication  0 
Supplies  2,000  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% expenses dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni  ($1,693/mth)  
Contractual 
(Rasello)  82,500  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% expenses dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni ($71,267/mth)  
Travel  1,750  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% expenses dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni  ($1,442/mth)  
Other  4,000  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Assume 50% expenses dedicated to 
Wazazi Nipendeni ($3,340/mth)  
Government 
institutions  7,700  £/qtr Cardno 
communication  Estimate of staff time ($3,333/month)  
NGO partners 
(training and 
development)  23,000  £/qtr Cardno 
communication   ($9,918/mth)  
Variable costs (cost of sales)  
Cost of SMS  57.6 
(Vodacom)  TZS/SMS  mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP 
report  SMS market prices  
Cost of SMS  69 (Airtel)  TZS/SMS  mHealth 
Tanzania -PPP 
report  SMS market prices  
Cost of SMS  79 (Tigo)  TZS/SMS  mHealth  
Tanzania -PPP 
report  SMS market prices  
Cost of SMS  33 (Halotel)  TZS/SMS  Website Prevailing market rate for individual 
customers  
USSD sessions  120 TZS/  
session  mHealth  
Tanzania -PPP 
report  Single price attributed to all MNOs  
Source:  Authors’ own  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 110  
N.B. the price of SMS messages sent is the subject of debate in Section 7.3. The analysis of 
business models starts using retail prices (as claimed by MNOs) in Sectio n 7.3 (Public Good 
model). After discussing the SMS price issue, it then shifts to using a more realistic bulk purchase 
price in Section 7.4. Then in Section 7.5 the price is dropped to zero, on the basis that this is closer 
to the real cos t to an MNO.  
 
The mHealth  Tanzania -PPP provides a range of mobile health services in addition to Wazazi 
Nipendeni :  
• TAMBUA TB  apps for NTLP ; 
• Electronic Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response ; 
• National Blood Transfusion Text Messaging Service ; 
• Nationa l Feedback Mechanism for health services ; 
• Early Infant Diagnosis System  (HIV) ; and  
• NACP FASTA . 
Therefore, the total costs for running the mHealth Tanzania -PPP need to be apportioned. In terms 
of expenditure, Wazazi Nipendeni  accounts for over half of the money as it has higher recurring 
costs (it sends the highest number of messages). However, in terms of employee time, given that 
Wazazi Nipendeni is set up and established, staff effort is currently split roughly 40% on Wazaz i 
Nipendeni  and 60% on other programmes that they are getting off the ground, especially TB 
Tambua and FASTA  TZ, and this has been the case for the last 2 years. T he mHealth Tanzania -
PPP has validated allocating an estimate d 50% of costs to Wazazi Nipenden i as reasonable . 
 
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 111  
Annex F  Technology and mobile business models  
The majority of mobile internet connections are 2G, and Tanzania’s broadband coverage lags 
behind its neighbours (see  Figure 48). This can be interpreted as meaning that m obile data use is 
set to grow.   
Figure 48:  3G and 4G coverage as % of population (2018)  
 
Source:  Okeleke, (2019)  
GSMA predict s that mobile data consumption across sub -Saharan Africa will multiply sevenfold by 
2024 (from 1.1 to 8.5 GB/subscriber/month)  (GSMA, 2019).  Although 4G is growing and there is a 
good deal of excitement about 5G, 3G internet connections are likely to remain  the dominant 
technology for the medium -term future ( Figure 49 ). Indeed, Figure 50 shows the rapid increase 
over recent years in 3G coverage in Tanzania.  
 
Figure 49:  Breakdown of mobile internet connections by technology   
 
 
Source:  GSMA, (2019)  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 112  
Figure 50:  Connected and unconnected populations in Tanzania  
 
Source:  Okeleke, (2019) . 
The influence of over the top (OTT) services continues to grow. In 2017, 20% of adults in Tanzania 
used social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter  (Pew Research Center , 2018) . Use has 
grown by one -third over the three years from 2014 to 2017.  
Esselaar and Stork (201 8) argue t hat with data -driven business models, increased revenue from 
data services can more than make up for any decline in voice revenue from OTT services. They 
present financial data from MTN Ghana as an example of a data -centric business model. Figure 51 
shows how data ha ve generated an increasing share of total revenue, to the point where they are  
likely to generate more revenue than traditional voice and SMS.  
Entertainment services drive a good deal of growth in data use. As TVs become more widespread 
(e.g. d emand for solar home systems is often driven by affordable Light Emitting Diode 
televisions), the affluent are spending more time watching TV and video on mobile devices .53 This 
trend in increased TV and video access is an important feature of the changing  media landscape in 
sub-Saharan Africa countries, and may well have implications for public health communication 
strategies.   
 
53 www.ipsos.com/en/how -digital -driving -media -growth -africa  
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 113  
Figure 51:  Breakdown of revenue by service (MTN Ghana)   
 
Source: Authors ’ own, based on Esselaar and Stork, (2018)  
Smartphone ownership is a key barrier to extending access to mobile internet services. In 
Tanzania , smartphone ownership stood  at around 13% of adults in 2017, well below the median for 
sub-Saharan Africa (33%)  (Pew Research Center, 2018) . Smartphone sales are on the rise, and 
GSMA estimate s that  the number of handsets will more than double from 2018 to 2025. Adoption 
of smartphones in remote rural areas is likely to be relatively slow, not only because of poor dat a 
network coverage, but also because of the relatively poor battery life offered by cheap 
smartphones. Pew research shows that although only 13% of adults had smartphones, 25% were 
using the internet (note that TCRA data suggest the proportion of internet users may be higher, 
although it does not attempt to identify unique users). This indicates that people find alternative 
means of accessing the internet, e.g. free Wi -Fi hotspots, and some feature phones can support 
internet -enabled services. Nevertheless,  the falling price of smartphones will continue to 
strengthen access to data services : for example, MTN ha s ambitious plans to sell a $20 ‘smart 
feature’ phone that uses the KaiOS operating system to create a smartphone user experience 
providing access to Google and social media apps .54  
Data services will be instrumental in overcoming literacy barriers, as well as providing a richer 
information dissemination experience  (e.g. audio and video ). It is likely, therefore, that the reach 
and efficacy of mobile h ealth services targeting the poorest will improve once they can be delivered 
via smartphones. However, p oor network coverage means that this is unlikely to be the case within 
the medium -term future and , in the meantime, voice -based features (e.g. IVR, outbound dialling , 
call centre) are likely to be the most effective media for engaging with remote and low income 
communities .  
In a mature market, in which almost all potential subscribers are signed up with one MNO or 
another, the strategy of VAS is to encourage subscribers on other networks to transfer (churn), and 
to encourage network subscriber s to stay with the MNO that provides a valuable service, rather 
than switch to competing networks.  This applies to most VAS, but not necessarily to Wazaz i 
Nipendeni, as it is available on all of the major networks in Tanzania.  The Wazazi Nipendeni 
service would not, therefore, provide any incentive for a customer to switch network, but it might 
well encourage them to stay with their current provider.  
 
54 www.businesslive.co.za/bd/companies/telecoms -and-technology/2018 -11-14-mtn-to-offer-entry -level-smartphones -
costing -20/ 
Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 114  
Perha ps the most transformational technology that has blossomed since the baseline report is 
mobile money. In 2017, 60% of the population had a mobile money account  (Okeleke, 2019) , and 
TCRA figures show a 40% increase in accounts over a three -year period from 2016 to 2019. M-
Pesa (Vodacom) is the market leader in Tanzania , at 40%  market share , and Tigo Pesa is second , 
at 32%.  Okeleke (2019) estimates that the value of transactions processed through mobile money 
services in 2017 was $22 billion, equivalent to al most half of the country’s GDP.  
 
 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 115  
Annex G  Technology mHealth innovations  
The Health Data Collaborative55 has done some interesting work on classifying digital health 
interventions, led by the Digital Health and Interoperability Working Group. It proposes that tools 
can be divided into the following high -level categories56: 
• interventions for clients (e.g. cli ent communication, health tracking, information services, 
financial transactions);  
• interventions for healthcare providers (e.g. client registration, health records, decision support, 
telemedicine, information management, medication management);  
• interventio ns for resource/ health system managers  (e.g. human resources, supply chains, civil 
registrations, health financing, asset and facility management); and  
• interventions for data services  (e.g. data collection, coding, mapping, and exchange).  
Wazazi Nipendeni  assists pregnant women and mothers by providing them with information on 
how to look after themselves and their infant, so it falls into the broad category of client -facing 
tools.  
This section presents examples of health services falling into sub -categor ies in the health data 
collaboration classification: - 
Targeted client communication  
• Transmit  health event alerts to specific population group(s) : 
 U-Report Ebola Response in Uganda: ‘The following SMS alerts were carefully drafted and 
sent to Kibaale, and t he surrounding districts Hoima, Kiboga, Mubende, Ntoroko, 
Bundibugyo, Kabarole Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Kyankwanzi, and  Ibanda. SMS Alert 1: There 
is an Ebola outbreak in Kibaale. Today and tomorrow I am going to send u some SMSs to 
give u more info about how t o recognise Ebola & how to prevent it... ’  
• Transmit targeted health information to client(s) based on health status or demographics : 
 Alive & Thrive: ‘...sent weekly text and voice messages to the phone of microcredit group 
leader to share messages on breas tfeeding with microcredit group.’  
 MomConnect: ‘...sends stage -based, personalized short message service (SMS) texts to 
each mom in the registry.’  
 EngageTB: ‘Clients who are TB Negative will receive messages about behaviour change to 
help them avoid the spr ead of TB and or being infected by TB.’  
 Mobile Information For Maternal Health: ‘A mobile interactive voice response system that 
provides pregnant women with information on the stage of her pregnancy and suggestions 
to keep her and her baby healthy via twi ce weekly phone calls.’  
 mDiabetes: ‘...an SMS -based information service for people with diabetes during Ramadan 
fasting.’  
• Transmit targeted alerts and reminders to client(s) : 
 EngageTB: ‘Once a client has been confirmed as TB positive, the Lab Technicians w ill 
register the client back into the application and enable the client to receive reminders about 
Directly Observed Therapy (DOT).’  
 
55 www.he althdatacollaborative.org/  
56 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1GEdfI8AQ_wC_SKAm9DhFlNMEnLKlKIcVC46lEws -
UIs/edit#gid=213597193 6 Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 116  
 mTIKA: ‘...send SMS reminders to families when their children are due for immunization 
services.’  
 Moby App: ‘... sends auto mated SMS reminders to clients, reminding them of upcoming 
appointments, missed appointments, and approaching delivery dates so women can 
prepare to deliver in a health facility.’  
 Wired Mothers: ‘Women receive appointment reminders, educational messaging a nd can 
call their primary care providers to discuss non -acute issues.’  
• Transmit diagnostics result, or availability of result, to client(s) : 
 txtAlert: ‘This version of txtAlert  delivers CD4 count results to patients who have been 
tested for HIV but may not return to the clinic to collect their CD4 counts results... ’ 
Untargeted client communication  
• Transmit untargeted health information to an undefined population : 
 WAHA Maternal Health mHealth Programme: ‘Two SMS campaigns were launched, 
targeting the inhabitants of the Tambacounda district... The second campaign targets all 
people, so that they are regularly informed of available medical services within the district .’ 
• Transmit untargeted health event alerts to undefined group : 
 Ebola awareness through SMS: ‘As part of a massive public awareness effort, Senegal’s 
Ministry of Health sent 4 million SMS messages to the general public warning of the 
dangers of Ebola and ho w to prevent it. ’ 
Client to client communication  
• Peer group for clients : 
 Project Khuluma: ‘Peer -led support groups for HIV -infected adolescents to communicate 
amongst themselves on topics they want to discuss. ’  
Personal health tracking  
• Access by client to  own medical records:  
 Digital Weighing Card: ‘This project is therefore seeking to provide a digital copy of every 
child weighing card, such that, it can be accessed via mobile phone whenever needed and 
updated by Community health Workers at any point in t ime.’ 
• Self-monitoring of health or diagnostic data by client:  
 Wearables and fitness trackers: ‘...tracks every part of your day —including activity, 
exercise, food, weight and sleep.’  
 Medopad Patient Monitoring: ‘...you can monitor vital signs, log symptoms , share 
information with your care providers and more.’  
• Active data capture/documentation by client:  
 CycleTel Humsafar: ‘...she enters the date of her last period and the service informs her of 
her fertile days during the cycle. She receives alerts on her “unsafe days” throughout the 
month. ’ 
Citizen -based reporting  
• Reporting of health system feedback by clients:  
 U-Report: ‘Youth can send alerts to key stakeholders about the issues being faced in their 
communities, and feeds back useful information to the U -Reporters.’  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 117  
 MomConnect: ‘Allow women to engage with the health system through help desk tools and 
feedback services.’  
• Reporting of public health events by clients:  
 EbolaTxT: ‘Citizens can report suspected Ebola cases via SMS. ’ 
On-demand information service s provided to clients  
• Client look -up of health information : 
 Hesperian Health Wiki: ‘An online source of clear, actionable, and thorough health 
information accessible via computer or mobile device.’  
 EngageTB: ‘The software enables clients do TB self -screeni ng and access the basic health 
information related to TB via short messages (SMS) through their phones by sending a 
code word “TB” to a network neutral toll free short code, and a list of health facilities that 
have the capability to conduct laboratory tes ts to confirm TB.’  
 m4RH: ‘a set of text messages on family planning methods that users in can access via 
their mobile phones.’  
Client financial transactions  
• Transmit or manage out -of-pocket payments by clients:  
 mHealth for Safer Deliveries: ‘...use mobile banking instead of cash to pay for 
transportation to the health facility when the woman is in labor or in case of complications.’  
 Changamka Maternal Health SmartCard: ‘The maternal health smartcard is a pre -paid card 
that allows the bearer to obtain antenatal, delivery, and postnatal services at listed prices in 
participating maternity facilities.’  
• Transmit vouchers to clients for health services,  or manage vouchers:  
 Mobile Finance to Reimburse Sexual and Reprodu ctive Vouchers: ‘Voucher program's 
transmits SMS money transfer to reimburse social franchise service providers for FP 
services to clients.’  
 Airtel Insurance with MicroEnsure: ‘Airtel rewards loyal customers (who registered for the 
product by dialling a sh ortcode) with free insurance as long as they spent a minimum 
amount of airtime...through monthly SMS communication.’  
 Tanzania National eVoucher Scheme: ‘Web platform that allows clinic workers to issue 
vouchers for long -lasting insecticide -treated nets, re deemed at nearby retailers.’  
• Transmit incentives to clients in relation to health services,  or manage incentives:  
 Interactive alerts/Zindagi Mehfooz: ‘A vaccine registry system that uses SMS reminders to 
caregivers and conditional cash transfers to caregiv ers ... The amount of cash the caregiver 
is eligible to win increases with each subsequent vaccine their child completes. ’  
 
The classification makes a clear distinction between services providing unidirectional information 
dissemination to clients (target ed and untargeted) and client -initiated services (peer group, citizen 
reporting, and health information -seeking). Wazazi Nipendeni is an example of the first of these 
and is a ‘push’ service. The Viamo 3 -2-1 service offered by Vodacom, on the other hand, i s an 
example of a client -initiated service and is a ‘pull’ service, as it relies on the user to dial a short 
code to access information. In principle, a service could combine both aspects of communication 
as each has its advantages and drawbacks.  Mobile phones, nutrition, and health  in Tanzania: Business modelling endline report  
e-Pact 118  
It is in teresting to note that most of these examples are based on the SMS functionality of mobile 
phones. This is true even of the tools that deal with financial transactions, as they tend to use a 
platform that manages payments between healthcare providers, but the interaction with the client is 
done by SMS. This reliance on SMS tells us two things. Firstly, SMS is a good enough means of 
communicating with clients (i.e. constraints such as poor network coverage and illiteracy have not 
rendered the services unfeas ible). Secondly, SMS is regarded as the most cost -effective medium 
for communicating with clients. This is closely linked to the first point, as voice -based services 
(such as outbound dialling and call centres) can overcome literacy and language constraint s, but 
come at a much higher cost.  
The classification was drafted in 2017, so more recent examples of mobile health projects exist. 
Many of these are beginning to exploit the potential of the internet, and smartphones in particular, 
of data acquisition an d analysis, and of mobile money services. Some examples are summarised 
below:  
• Babyl (Rwanda)  is a diagnostic service that uses artificial intelligence and machine learning 
with live doctors and nurses to provide medical consultations to anyone with a mobil e device. It 
has over 2,000,000 registered users and has performed over 650,000 consultations. Users pay 
by mobile money. They phone the service  and book an appointment with a triage nurse . The 
nurse  then tells them if their condition  is treatable digitally . If it is, they get a follow -up 
appointment  with a GP or senior nurse. Clinicians  can arrange lab tests, issue prescription s, 
and make referrals to health facilit ies. 
• OMOMi (Nigeria)  is an app that provides pregnant women and mother s with maternal and 
child health information while connecting them to medical personnel. Its reach is around 40,000 
users. OMOMi (meaning ‘My Child’)  is free to install and generates revenue through a premium 
service on the app called OMOMi Chat -A-Doc. This enables users to pay for 24/7 access to 
online chats with doctors. Payment options include a weekly subscription of 600 Nigerian N aira 
(£1.30) or a monthly subscription of 1,200 Naira (£2.60) . OMOMi is also developing an online 
marketplace where mothers can purchase baby or mother care products from retailers.  
• M-TIBA (Kenya)  is a mobile service that enables users to send, save, and spend funds 
specifically for medical treatment. Users can make contributions on behalf of family, friends, or 
staff, so they can get treatment if needed. Money stored in M -TIBA can only be used to pay for 
treatment and medication at partner clinics and hospitals. Payments are facilitated through M -
Pesa, and funds are managed by UAP Insurance. M -Tiba was set up by a partnership o f a 
health foundation, a mobile operator (Safaricom), and a health finance platform provider. The 
service currently has 4.6 million users and has paid out 844 million Kenyan shillings (£6.5 
million) on 472,000 clinic visits.  
• Docta Ghana (Ghana)  is an app t hat connects people with doctors in Accra. Users can 
request a consultation by entering their health concern, and selecting a doctor and preferred 
time. Users can talk to a doctor or use a video call. The system can also issue prescriptions. 
The consultati on fee is high at around 100 Ghanaian cedi (£15) and can be paid using mobile 
money, or credit, debit or ATM cards.  
 
 
 
 