Medic Mobile
Case study by UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy 
Name Location
Year launchedReachImplementing organizationMedic Mobile
Medic MobileNepal and twenty-two other countries2013
Focus of intervention
Provide an integrated mobile system for 
improving maternal and neonatal healthIn Nepal, 950 community health workers serving nearly 300,000 people of the Himalayas
© Medic Mobile/Lewis Feuer
UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World2
Summary
Nepal has sustained a continued reduction in maternal and under-5 mortality 
rates, but there are still severe disparities between those of different socio-economic status (Nepal, 2015). In 2014, under-5 mortality rates per 1,000 live births were 1.5 times greater for rural than for urban areas, 2.4 times greater for mothers with low levels of education than for mothers with higher education, and 2.6 times greater for the poorest than for the wealthiest Nepali households (Nepal, 2015).
Following this trend in disparity, in 2014 the chance of receiving a full cycle of 
antenatal care (ANC) was twice as high among the wealthiest households and highest educated mothers than for the poorest and least educated mothers (Nepal, 2015). Also, the ratio of institutional delivery or delivery by a skilled attendant for highly educated mothers was over twice that for mothers with 
no formal education, and for the wealthiest households it was over three times 
greater than for the poorest (Nepal, 2015). Fewer than 20 per cent of all new mothers successfully complete the full cycle of three postnatal check-ups after giving birth (Nepal, 2017).
To address this shortfall, Medic Mobile was launched in Nepal in 2013 as a mobile 
phone-based health monitoring solution using a simple data capture interface appropriate for community health workers (CHWs) with low levels of literacy and technical skills. CHWs conduct home visits and register maternal health information directly to their mobile devices to provide increased coverage of ANC among rural women from poor households and with little formal education. A web-based digital dashboard allows CHW supervisors to monitor CHW activity and schedule follow-up services for those with high-risk pregnancies. Since its launch, the programme has been scaled up in Nepal to over 2,500 CHWs, and has been launched in twenty-two other countries, supporting almost 14,000 CHWs worldwide.  The focus of this case study is the Medic Mobile implementation in Nepal.
Through the UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods 
in a Digital World, this case study is part of a series highlighting how inclusive digital solutions can help people with low skills or low literacy levels use technology in ways that support skills development and, ultimately, improve livelihoods – in contribution to achieving the Sustainable Development Goal on education. For more information go to en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative.ABOUT THIS  
CASE STUDYCase Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile3
`
1 By traditional literacy is meant the ability to read and write. Why selected
To ensure that the digital solution is as appropriate as possible, Medic 
Mobile has continually focused on a user-centred design approach, undertaking a range of activities such as user interviews and field visits, focus group discussions and role-playing with supervisors and CHWs, stakeholder and process mapping of current activities, paper-prototyping, usability tests, and pre- and post-tests for education and digital skills. The process followed offers an instructive example of good practice when 
designing with users.
Key takeaways
1 /  Medic Mobile offers an accessible mobile health (mHealth) approach 
to support more connected and coordinated health-care systems.
2 /  Medic Mobile recognizes that the process of user-centered design 
requires extensive collaboration with all types of users and key stakeholders.
3 / The Medic Mobile digital solution provides evidence of effective 
mHealth implementation among communities with low traditional1  and 
technical literacy.UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World4
Context and project origins
In 1997 the government of Nepal instituted 
the national Safe Motherhood Programme, 
with a primary goal of reducing maternal and 
neonatal mortality (of new-borns up to one month) while improving overall health through preventive practices for antenatal care, delivery 
and the postnatal period (Nepal, 2017). While 
overall maternal and child mortality rates have steadily declined over the past fifteen years, limitations in knowledge about services among 
expectant mothers, institutional coverage, 
and service delivery have created disparities between mothers’ experiences along the lines of 
education, wealth and (rural or urban) location.
In addition to the Safe Motherhood Programme, 
the government added a policy in 2006 
underscoring the importance of skilled birth 
attendance (SBA) at all deliveries through the national deployment of trained professionals. As part of its ongoing commitment to maternal and neonatal health (MNH), Nepal has a goal of 
70 per cent of deliveries by institution or SBA by 
2020 (Nepal, 2017). Some constraints that make achieving this goal difficult include inadequate referral mechanisms for receiving care, low coverage of ANC consultations, and lack of access 
to hospitals and health centres (Nepal, 2017). 
Medic Mobile was developed with these specific constraints in mind.
In 2013, Medic Mobile partnered with the Ministry 
of Health in Nepal and One Heart World Wide
2 to 
equip CHWs who conduct routine house visits for 
expectant mothers with basic mobile phones. The 
health workers receive reminders to follow up with mothers for ANC consultations, delivery procedures and postnatal care (PNC) visits. The primary 
objective of the programme was to increase rates 
of full ANC visits and institutional deliveries among expectant mothers. Medic Mobile’s target audience is the network of almost 60,000 CHWs in Nepal.
2 One Heart World Wide is an international non-governmental 
organization (NGO) working to strengthen public health services for mothers and children. www.oneheartworld-wide.org.© Medic Mobile/Lewis FeuerCase Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile5
Figure 1. 
Distribution of CHW pilot sample by educational attainment, 2014Designing with the user 
© Medic Mobile/Lewis FeuerCentral to Medic Mobile’s philosophy and practice 
is following a user-centred design approach, or 
what it calls human-centred design, in partnership 
with CHWs. Prior to pilot implementation, the Medic Mobile team ran two rounds of field tests, creating opportunities for local stakeholders to 
influence system design features. Over 40 percent 
of registered CHWs have no formal schooling (JSI, 2012). Therefore, the Medic Mobile team consciously included key stakeholder feedback from 
communities with low traditional and digital literacy 
as an added measure for ensuring an appropriate mobile health design solution.
Initial design activities included mapping current 
health-care system activities with CHWs and their supervisors to identify constraints and opportunities, 
and validating sketches of the proposed platform 
interface before developing a prototype for field-testing. This process also involved individual interviews with staff at the government agency responsible for all public health programmes in the 
district.
Preliminary design activities led to a pilot 
implementation among seventy-seven CHWs and 
twenty-one supervisors in the Baglung District 
of Nepal. The purpose of the pilot was to test the feasibility of the platform among the sample of CHWs and to solicit feedback for improving its overall usability design. The pilot CHWs ranged in age from 20 to 71, with an average age of about 40. 
The sample for the pilot reflected the educational 
and ethnic distribution in the district (Figure 1).
Almost a third of the sample had no formal 
education and limited reading and writing proficiency, while 12 per cent of the sample 
had higher secondary education or above. The 
CHWs had between none and twenty-one years’ experience of community health work, with an 
average of 12.7 years. The pilot implementation 
stage resulted in critical shifts in the programme objectives and strategies concerning the system’s core technologies.
UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World6
Prior to field-testing, stakeholder groups were divided about 
the type of content to include in the CHW reporting system. 
Given that the tool was developed to improve ANC coverage, 
the field-testing revealed some clear areas that could be cut. Protocol items specific to health facility services that could not accurately be substantiated by self-reports at home 
(such as iron tablets given, and tetanus and diphtheria (TD) 
vaccination administered) were removed from the updated version. The resulting protocol was not only easier for CHWs to administer, but more focused on the intended purpose of the 
design solution.LESSON
 
Focus on the 
content the digital 
tool was designed 
to addressHealth worker motivation. A 
major insight from the focus group sessions was that there was low motivation among CHWs because of a 
perceived sense of isolation from supervisors, and lack of support for their work (Sharma and Holeman, 2017). The group solicited for feedback indicated that the idea 
of linking their efforts to a larger system and receiving 
confirmation was appealing. Medic Mobile used this feedback to incorporate a personalized and automated SMS confirmation each time a report was submitted as a 
means of increasing the visibility of, and acknowledging, 
the CHWs in the health system. The pilot validated the fact that the automated response including a warm greeting 
and salutation using the CHW’s name was better received 
than a generic confirmation. Therefore, Medic Mobile carried this feature over into subsequent iterations of the platform.
Continuous adaptation. An early 
design of the Medic Mobile system included a reporting 
feature for flagging high-risk pregnancies in birthing 
centres. The pilot revealed that CHWs preferred making phone calls to ask for assistance with emergency issues, while they preferred the SMS system for non-emergencies 
and as a useful backup in low-network-coverage areas 
(Sharma and Holeman, 2017). Medic Mobile used this insight to redesign the workflow to allow CHWs to submit the reports after making an initial phone call. This 
underscores the importance of continuous feedback for a 
sustained user-design process.Validation and shifts in programme objectives
Figure 2. CHW submitting data to the Medic Mobile 
reporting system using SMS‘We receive a ‘Thank You!’ 
 as soon as we submit 
anything using [Medic 
Mobile]. We are the 
happiest when we are 
thanked. ’  
– CHW in Baglung© Medic Mobile/Ranju SharmaCase Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile7
Right-sizing the reporting 
system. During the initial field-testing 
process, stakeholder groups debated how much 
information the CHWs should submit through 
the reporting system, with some groups pushing for a more comprehensive reporting protocol. The pilot revealed important insights into what it 
was feasible for CHWs to achieve on the ground. 
Informed by the pilot outcomes, stakeholder groups were able to agree on a more limited set of essential data, and prioritize the primary 
objectives of the reporting system (Sharma and 
Holeman, 2017)Expanding the role of the 
target group.  The pilot implementation 
revealed a need to expand the target group of 
end users. The original design included a web-
based dashboard system for displaying reports and CHW activity, but many CHW supervisors did not have computers and relied on SMS alerts 
from CHWs. The pilot showed the importance of 
their role for scaling up, and made it clear that the community supervisors needed more information to support CHWs. This insight has led to 
modifications in the roles of the CHW supervisors 
and their information needs.
© Medic Mobile/Ranju SharmaUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World8
Feature phones and SIM card 
apps. The initial design of the Medic Mobile 
approach incorporated low-cost feature phones and 
SIM card apps. Compared with smartphone devices, 
feature phones were both more cost-effective to the programme and more familiar to CHWs. Also, CHWs often used SMS for communication in their 
daily lives, and feature phones were more reliable in 
environments with low internet connectivity. Pre-pilot stakeholder interviews called for a comprehensive digitization of the entire MNH protocol. Therefore, the 
team developed a SIM-based app for data collection 
and storage of report protocol. The app resided on the SIM card and ran on the phone. As a comprehensive 
reporting system, SIM app technology was attractive 
for its ability to support menu-driven forms to help mediate responses and ensure accurate data entry. The pilot experience led to three important findings 
regarding the initial design solution:
1   There was a need to validate CHWs’ ability to use 
the feature phone comfortably and adopt the 
SMS design approach. However, the menu-driven 
platform of the prototype presented a challenge 
because of its more technically complicated, multi-step interface.
2   It was necessary to expand the training module 
to include a comprehensive digital literacy component, covering the basic alphabets on the keypad and general operation of the 
feature phones. This needed to be offered prior 
to orienting the CHWs to the more advanced features of the Medic Mobile platform.
3   There was also a need to arrive at a consensus 
for streamlining the data capture process, as described above. Through this pilot experience, Medic Mobile began to explore other SMS-based tools that did not involve a menu-driven platform, and simplified the 
data collection protocol.
Improving the efficiency of the technology
Figure 3. SIM card for running Medic Mobile 
natively on any feature phone
Text forms collect small amounts of structured data using 
ordinary SMS. To submit a text form, a CHW sends an 
ordinary SMS message with values delineated by spaces. A 
CHW might send a text message with content such as ‘P 8 Pabitra’ , where ‘P’ indicates registering a new pregnancy, ‘8’ the number of weeks pregnant, followed by the patient’s 
name. In Nepal, text forms came to be seen as a viable 
option after insight was gained from a SIM-based pilot trial.INSIGHT
 
Co-designing  
for improved 
usabilityData entry with text forms. 
Medic Mobile decided to test the use of web-based text forms that allowed CHWs to enter 
space-delineated lines of text to register data, 
instead of the multi-step menu approach of the SIM app used during the pilot. This switch reduced the number of key strokes needed to send an 
updated report. While SMS-based text forms – 
essentially structured SMS messages – have proved effective in similar studies for maternal health in Rwanda (Ngabo et al., 2012) and family planning in 
Malawi (Vollmer Lemay et al., 2012), stakeholders at 
pre-pilot design workshops were sceptical of this approach based on concerns related to data entry 
© Medic MobileCase Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile9
and poor adoption among CHWs used to the traditional 
paper-based system.
Prioritizing the reporting items captured and streamlining 
the protocol allowed the team to revisit the topic of alternatives to SIM card apps. Further research revealed 
that text forms have two key usability advantages over 
SIM card apps. They reduce hardware procurement costs and improve routine software updates as an alternative to convening CHWs and updating cards one at a time. CHWs 
also reported that communicating through SMS offered 
a more comfortable reporting technique and reduced overall reporting time as opposed to navigating through the menu-driven interface of a SIM app.
Enhanced information for CHW 
supervisors. Medic Mobile discovered that if it 
was to promote the use of the system by CHW supervisors 
for monitoring and supporting CHW engagement, the 
supervisors needed access to more information right 
on their phones. Focus group sessions with supervisors revealed that their priority data need was to verify that all expectant mothers were being registered. Therefore, 
Medic Mobile updated the automated SMS schedules to alert CHW supervisors each time a new pregnancy was registered. The alert was 
accompanied by a comprehensive report of delivery information related to the 
expectant mother, including anticipated 
delivery date, the assigned CHW and upcoming ANC consultations. The supervisor could then integrate the Medic 
Mobile Unique ID with the mothers’ official 
MNH register at the local clinic, and easily account for any discrepancies between the two systems.
Design challenge 
Typing text even in the native language (Nepali) is difficult; CHWs were much more 
comfortable with structured alphanumeric digits.
Responses
 ●All Medic Mobile text forms are structured and require as little text as possible. 
Some examples of forms are: ‘P 12 Rita’ , ‘V 12345’ , ‘F 12345’ , ‘D 12345 H 1’ . 
 ●The date field was also replaced with number of days since last menstrual period (LMP). This change allowed CHWs to type one- or two-digit entries instead of the full date format. Example: Weeks since LMP (12) instead of Date of LMP 
(19/02/2017).
Design challenge 
Remembering simple form syntax can be a challenge. 
Responses
 ●All text forms are very short and simple, with a maximum number of four fields 
required: a) pregnancy status, b) number of weeks pregnant, c) mother’s first 
name, d) additional data point.
 ●Medic Mobile form codes are relatable to the action being performed so that they are easy to remember. All error responses and reminders contain the exact 
syntax of the text form that needs to be sent so that CHWs only need to refer to 
these messages to know what to send and when. INSIGHT
 
Design 
challenges 
created by 
low-skilled 
CHWs, and 
Medic Mobile 
responses
Figure 4. Medic Mobile Unique ID linked to 
official MNH register
© Medic Mobile/Lester Ng10 UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World
The digital solution
Remote registration. Once an expectant mother is identified, the CHW 
registers her information via SMS text form. Medic Mobile’s web application then registers 
the pregnancy, creates a unique patient ID, calculates the expected date of delivery and 
schedules a series of automated reminder messages to the CHW related to ANC and anticipated delivery date.
Antenatal care reminders and advice.  The reminders 
system is scheduled based on the Nepali Ministry of Health’s protocol for recommended ANC visits. SMS alerts are automatically sent to CHWs for follow-up with the expectant mother 
throughout her pregnancy. During the consultation, the CHW provides counselling and 
antenatal education following the adapted government protocols, and reminds the pregnant woman to attend the nearest health facility for an ANC visit. CHWs follow up a few days later to confirm whether the pregnant woman completed her ANC visit at the health facility. If the 
woman has completed her visit, the CHW sends a confirmation SMS text form to the Medic 
Mobile application. If the CHW does not send a confirmation SMS within two weeks of the first ANC reminder, her supervisor is alerted for follow-up.
Emergency forms and birth reports. The platform also 
incorporates a system for supervisors to flag pregnancies with danger signs so that these 
women are more closely supported by the CHWs. Alternatively, if a CHW identifies a danger 
sign during pregnancy, birth or postnatal period, she notifies a professional health-care provider by directly calling them or sending an emergency SMS to the Medic Mobile platform, which then immediately sends out SMS alerts to multiple clinic personnel. After the 
woman gives birth, the CHW confirms her delivery and whether the delivery was performed 
a) at home without a trained health worker, b) at home with a trained health worker, or c) at a health facility certified to provide basic obstetric care services.
Web application and analytics dashboard.  The text 
forms are integrated with the Medic Mobile web application and analytics dashboard, which 
can be translated into local Nepali languages. All the information sent and received by CHWs 
in the form of SMS messages is listed via a web-based application. The analytics dashboard displays preconfigured data reports addressing the CHW supervisor’s needs. The web-based application and the analytics dashboard are monitored by public health administrators at the 
district level.1
2
3
4The Medic Mobile digital solution consists of structured SMS messages submitted by CHWs to a web-
based application for registering expectant mothers. An automated reminder system and reporting 
dashboard supports the accountability between expectant mothers, CHWs and their supervisors. The 
system integrates digitized information from the official MNH register to improve institutional and SBA deliveries as well as ANC coverage for expectant mothers.Case Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile11
DigComp2.1: The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens  
(Carretero et al., 2017), developed by the European Commission, 
provides a common reference on how to describe key areas of 
digital competence and proficiency levels among individuals. 
UNESCO has applied this framework to understand the minimum skills needed to use Medic Mobile as well as thirty-one other digital solutions. Benchmarking digital competences 
is recommended because it provides a knowledge base from 
which to design appropriate solutions as well as to track progress of skills development. Please refer to the forthcoming UNESCO landscape review Digital Inclusion for Low-skilled and Low-literate 
People for the DigComp2.1 mapping and more information.RECOMMENDATION  
Benchmark 
the digital 
competences 
 of users
1
7
*42
8
053
9
#6
During all Medic Mobile trainings, more time is 
spent on case-based exercises than on lectures 
or presentations. Trainees are paired in groups 
based on their technical competency levels and proximity of catchment area so they can continue to support each other if they have any difficulties 
after returning to their communities. Each 
training has a maximum of twenty participants, and there are at least two trainers per session. The initial training spans three days, and begins 
with a baseline questionnaire and pre-test of 
digital competencies. At the end of the training, participants complete a competency post-test to ensure they have the minimum skills needed to operate the Medic Mobile platform independently 
in their communities. After the training, CHWs 
receive an a comprehensive, illustrated user manual demonstrating basic concepts of mobile phone use such as sending and receiving messages and other 
relevant functions (Figure 6). In addition to the 
initial training, CHW supervisors convene monthly meetings to gather CHW feedback and provide continuing training and support. Every three to six 
months a more comprehensive refresher training is 
scheduled with all CHWs.Figure 5. Example of Medic Mobile 
new user registration process© Medic Mobile/Lester NgUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World12
Medic Mobile’s Asia Regional Office is in Kathmandu, Nepal. 
All staff who directly support projects in Nepal and ongoing 
work with the Nepali Ministry of Health are based in the 
country. The team consists of two technical leads who support the setting-up and maintenance of the platform tools, six project managers and their assistants. South Asia 
has one Medic Mobile lead designer for the region. However, 
all team members are skilled in basic user-centred design methods to ensure that each Medic Mobile deployment is aligned with the organization’s core approach.For the Nepal deployment, implementation was governed by the district health office. 
Medic Mobile staff conducted a training-
of-trainers approach among health workers from government health facilities who were public health officers at the district office.
Figure 6. Medic Mobile illustrated 
user manual for CHWs
© Medic Mobile/Ranju SharmaCase Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile13
Monitoring and evaluation strategy
Medic Mobile believes that coordination 
between CHWs and clinics will lead to 
stronger adherence to a full cycle of 
ANC visits and facility-based deliveries, reducing maternal and neonatal mortality. The platform’s analytics dashboard is 
designed to provide real-time data to help 
users spot trends and improve support across the rural health-care system. The Medic Mobile dashboard reports on CHW 
user activity and engagement metrics 
alongside programme outcome metrics. Supervisors use the data to follow up with 
CHWs through phone calls or scheduled 
monitoring visits. Complementing dashboard data with user feedback and field-based observations is an important 
part of support visits. User feedback 
informs not only programmatic revisions but also improvements to the efficiency of the technology.
As part of its monitoring strategy, Medic 
Mobile runs a structured baseline and endline questionnaire  for each training session to ensure participants have 
learned the skills that they require to 
make effective use of the digital platform. As noted earlier, many CHWs are not fully 
confident in their digital skills, so the 
Medic Mobile implementation modality and training curriculum incorporates additional support for CHWs requiring 
additional guidance. For example, CHW 
supervisors schedule more frequent follow-ups with these CHWs, or they are paired with a neighbouring CHW who 
is available to serve as a peer mentor. 
Monthly meetings and reviews are held 
with all CHWs.
Figure 7. Screenshot of the Medic Mobile digital dashboardUNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World14
Data from a recent CHW intake training reinforces the 
need for digital skills training for mobile phone use prior to 
jumping into the Medic Mobile activities. Survey responses 
from 500 CHWs serving more than thirty communities reveal overall fluency with basic or routine functions such as switching on the device and checking the airtime balance. 
However, respondents indicated less familiarity with more 
advanced SMS features which are critical for Medic Mobile administration.INSIGHT
 
Snapshot of CHWs’ 
baseline digital skills
Figure 8. Baseline responses from Medic Mobile 
training questionnaire of 500 CHWs, 2017The Medic Mobile web application is a secure website with protocols in place that follow 
specific guidelines based on country and partner mandates. During the planning phase of 
each project, data security and confidentiality agreements are strictly defined and signed by 
all CHWs.
Many CHWs are learning to use mobile phones for the first time. The Medic Mobile training approach pairs 
high-literacy and low-literacy CHWs to support people 
with lower skills. Qualitative reports suggest that this has improved literacy for some low-literacy CHWs, not only in reading and writing but in basic fluency with important 
communication tools.FINDING
 
 Peer mentoring 
improves skills0% 25%Q1. C an swit ch on phone
Q2. Can check balance
Q3. Can go to menu
Q4. Can go to message
Q5. C an go to in box
50% 75% 100%99%
95%
76%
53%%
57%Case Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile15
Results to date
Figure 9. Endline gain scores from training 500 CHWs, 2017
Preliminary evaluation findings from the pilot 
implementation revealed that users believe the mobile 
application made the CHWs' work easier as they do not have 
to keep constant track manually of the timing for scheduled visits. Given the number of expectant mothers CHWs support monthly, it can be easy to lose track of paper registers. CHWs 
remind pregnant women about recommended clinic visits 
every three, six, eight and nine months. The CHWs may do actual home visits to the pregnant women more often. The reminders help them keep track of the visits.FINDING
 
Medic Mobile 
improves service 
deliveryPilot results.  One year since full deployment of 
the pilot in 2015, seventy-seven CHWs from four villages 
across Baglung District had used the SIM application to 
register 604 pregnant women and 215 births, almost two-thirds (64 per cent) of which were at official birthing centres (Medic Mobile, 2015).
During a series of focus group discussions held as 
a part of the interim qualitative evaluation of the 
programme, the CHWs stated that Medic Mobile’s tools 
had increased the frequency of contact with mothers and newborns, increased routine home visits to provide health services to pregnant women and new mothers, 
achieved timely management of complicated cases, and 
created a sense of achievement provided by immediate acknowledgement of their work (Medic Mobile, 2015). 
In addition to achieving broad adoption of the Medic 
Mobile communication system, the pilot showed that a low-bandwidth mHealth system can reliably organize and automate SMS messages for improved adherence to the prescribed ANC schedule.
CHW digital skills. Post-test results 
from a training conducted with 500 CHWs 
across thirty-two communities revealed the 
strongest overall gains in the more complex mobile phone operations that CHWs initially struggled with most (Figure 9). There were 
40–45 per cent gains in the ability to use SMS 
functions including retrieving specific SMSs and accessing the phones inbox.
Scale-up efforts.  In terms of Medic 
Mobile’s activity metrics, the follow-on to the 
pilot deployment has seen an average CHW 
engagement rate of 60 per cent across Baglung district, which is above the internal programme target for monthly ANC coverage. This engagement rate represents the proportion of 
the 950 trained CHWs using the Medic Mobile 
platform to send at least one ANC report per month. So far, in Baglung itself a total of 6,920 pregnant women have been registered, with 
13,567 confirmed ANC visits and 4,989 deliveries 
confirmed.
0%1%
4%
24%
45%
40%
10%Q1. C an swit ch on phone
Q2. Can check balance
Q3. Can go to menu
Q4. Can go to message
Q5. C an go to in box
20% 30% 50% 40%UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World16
Sustainability and future plans
Medic Mobile supports a growing network of 
implementing partners running community health 
programmes and building new models for CHW 
programmes. The platform is also well positioned to achieve government adoption of the approach and analytics tools due to positive uptake by county 
health management teams in Kenya and district 
health offices in Nepal. Globally, Medic Mobile is deployed across twenty-three countries supporting almost 14,000 health workers.
In Nepal, the programme has expanded to three 
additional districts outside of Baglung, reaching over 2,700 CHWs supported by 200 health facilities. 
In 2018 the programme will be expanding to ten 
further districts in Nepal, with a cumulative reach of 7,000 CHWs.
Some of the districts in Nepal will be using the Medic 
Mobile tools to track immunizations as well. This 
intervention has the potential to reach more than  1 million Nepali women and children in low-income 
and under-served communities, every year.
Medic Mobile aims to scale its model nationally in 
Nepal, with support from the national government and local buy-in and ownership from the district health office. In the medium term, local and district 
governments have expressed a willingness to 
cover ongoing costs. In the long term, recurring costs could be sustained through a combination 
of local, district and national support, along with 
public–private partnerships. Although Medic Mobile will provide targeted support to initial districts replicating the deployment through 2017, the team envisions government staff deploying and managing these systems starting in 2018.
The Baglung intervention serves as a valuable 
example of how local resources can support sustained funding. Recently, local leaders in the 
community have allocated funds to cover the SMS 
costs and the cost of monthly incentives for CHWs. To date, about US$13,400 has been allocated from fifty-nine villages. This is a unique cost-sharing model 
Medic Mobile has implemented with local-level 
administrative bodies, and is hoping to replicate this model at higher levels of administration.
The cost of deployment per CHW is estimated at 
US$150–200 in the first year and US$10–15 each 
subsequent year. Costs associated with this estimate 
include technical assistance and training support, with hardware and software costs decreasing every 
year.
Medic Mobile is experimenting with direct ways to 
incorporate new features and workflows to influence the end users. One feature incorporates routine SMS 
educational messages to help CHWs review their 
skills, and mechanisms to ensure targeted support from their supervisors. This complementary feature to the training is intended to sustain learning on the 
part of the users as well as ensure that the lower-
skilled CHWs are receiving additional and continuous support. An evaluation of the effectiveness of this 
SMS skills support approach will be aligned with the 
initial CHW trainings, and will commence at the end of 2017.
IMPACT
Medic Mobile 
improves digital 
literacy skills53-year-old Sabitri Pun has been a CHW in Baglung for fifteen years. Until very recently, she had never used a mobile phone. During the three-day 
Medic Mobile training, she learned to power on and power off her mobile 
phone, to dial and save phone numbers, to compose structured SMS messages to register pregnancies and report on ANC visits of expectant mothers. Not only has learning to operate a mobile phone made it easier 
for her to monitor the health of pregnant women in her community, she 
reports that she is now comfortable using the device to communicate with her family and extended network of relatives.Case Study: Medic Mobile by Medic Mobile17
Lessons learned and recommendations
Support scientific knowledge 
while respecting cultural beliefs. 
In rural Nepal, traditional beliefs 
sometimes come into tension with efforts to ensure 
that women give birth in health facilities with skilled 
attendants. As trusted community members, CHWs are uniquely placed to introduce biomedical knowledge in ways that respect local practices and cultural beliefs. 
Therefore, supporting CHWs is vital to improving 
health literacy in ways that reflect local priorities.
User-centred design requires 
collaboration.  A rigorous, user-centred 
design process involves putting people first 
and revising throughout every stage of design, 
implementation and scale-up. This requires tight cooperation between several teams: CHWs and partners at the Ministry of Health, Medic Mobile’s project managers and regional designer, and Medic 
Mobile’s globally distributed product managers 
and software developers. Medic Mobile uses a combination of user-centred design and agile development methods. Experimenting with and 
documenting these methods is a priority for Medic 
Mobile’s research group because they see it as an important way of making their design process more 
consistent and rigorous.
Leveraging expertise within the 
user base. One of the primary challenges for 
Medic Mobile implementation has been the traditional 
and digital literacy capacity of the CHWs when 
working with mobile phone and SMS messaging. The team addressed this reality in part by pairing CHWs with weaker literacy skills and peers with stronger skills through a mentor model.Leverage policy agendas 
for sustainable solutions. 
At the policy level, securing support for the 
implementation of mHealth interventions is a 
major challenge. Medic Mobile’s success working 
alongside communities not only helps clarify their implementation needs, but improves the sustainability of effective mHealth solutions by 
informing government policy through evidence.
Scalability does not always 
require iteration with the same technology. 
When pilot 
outcomes do not result in scaling up a 
prototype technology, it does not imply that 
the technology did not play a role in the scaling process. In the case of Nepal, the initial SIM card app played a key role in building a consensus among stakeholders on prioritizing 
data collection needs. Tools that are appropriate 
at pilot stage may be less appropriate when applied at a larger scale, and vice versa. Results of co-design sessions and experimental trials 
of small pilots should be contextualized as 
waypoints on the journey to a more connected, coordinated delivery system.UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World18
Contact information
 
Medic Mobile is a technology non-profit organization that designs, delivers and supports software for health 
workers providing care to communities worldwide.
References
 
Carretero, S., Vuorikari, R. and Punie, Y. 2017. DigComp 2.1: The Digital Competence Framework for Citizens, with eight 
profi¬ciency levels and examples of use. Luxembourg, Publication Office of the European Union.
JSI Research and Training Institute. 2012. Nepal Family Health Program II: Technical brief #1. http://nfhp.jsi.com/
Res/Docs/TB1-FCHV.pdf (Accessed 17 November 2017.)
Medic Mobile. 2015. Pilot and evaluation of the feasibility of SafeSIM: a mobile technology platform for maternal 
health care coordination in Nepal. http://medicmobile.org/assets/downloads/Safe-SIM-preliminary-evaluation_findings-07.2015.pdf (Accessed 15 November 2017.)
Nepal. 2015. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2014, Final Report. Kathmandu, Central Bureau of Statistics 
and UNICEF Nepal. http://unicef.org.np/uploads/files/597341286609672028-final-report-nmics-2014-english.pdf (Accessed 22 August 2017.)
––––. 2017. Annual Report 20172/2073 (2015/2016).  Kathmandu, Department of Health Services.Ngabo, F., Nguimfack, J. and Nwaigwe, F. 2012. Designing and implementing an innovative SMS-based alert 
system (RapidSMS-MCH) to monitor pregnancy and reduce maternal and child deaths in Rwanda. Pan-African Medical Journal, Vol. 13, no. 31. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3542808 (Accessed 17 November 2017.)
Sharma R. and Holeman, I. 2017. Lessons from the scale up of a mobile health initiative in rural Nepal. Paper 
presented at the HCI Across Borders Symposium. Denver, Colo. http://www.hcixb.org/papers_2017/hcixb17-final-4.pdf (Accessed 22 August 2017.)
Vollmer Lemay, N., Sullivan, T., Jumbe, B. and Peabody Perry, C. 2012. Reaching remote health workers in Malawi: 
baseline assessment of a pilot mHealth intervention. Journal of Health Communication, Vol. 17, Sup. 1, pp. 105–17. DOI: 10.1080/10810730.2011.649106.
www.medicmobile.org hello@medicmobile.org
This case study was commissioned by UNESCO and Pearson as part of the UNESCO-Pearson Initiative for 
Literacy: Improved Livelihoods in a Digital World. The views and opinions expressed in this case study are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Authors: Nathan M. Castillo, Education Consultant, and Steven Vosloo, Section of Youth, Literacy and Skills 
Development, Education Sector, UNESCO.
UNESCO is grateful to Medic Mobile for their support in developing this case study.Stay in touch
en.unesco.org/themes/literacy-all/pearson-initiative
www.projectliteracy.comICTliteracy@unesco.org
UNESCO Education Sector
Education is UNESCO’s top priority because it is a basic 
human right and the foundation on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through education with a special focus on gender equality and Africa.
About Pearson 
Pearson is a digital education company, with expertise in 
educational courseware and assessment, and a range of teaching and learning services powered by technology. Our mission is to help people make progress through access to better learning. We believe that learning opens up opportunities, creating fulfilling careers and better lives. The Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized agency 
for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides guidance for the implementation of this ambitious goal and commitments.
About Project Literacy 
Project Literacy is a global campaign founded and 
convened by Pearson to make significant and sustainable advances in the fight against illiteracy so that all people - regardless of geography, language, race, class, or gender – have the opportunity to fulfill their potential throughthe power of words.
ED/PLS/YLS/2017/14