Media Literacy, Social
Connectedness, and DigitalCitizenship in India: Mapping
Stakeholders on How Parents and
Young People Navigate a Social World
Devina Sarwatay1*, Usha Raman1and Srividya Ramasubramanian2
1Department of Communication, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India,2Department of Communication, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, United States
The ubiquity of digital and social media has led to considerable academic debate regarding
their role in the lives of children and adolescents. The Global North, especially United Statesand Europe, has largely led this discussion in matters of research methods andapproaches, as well as on conversations around screen time, wellbeing, medialiteracy, and digital citizenship. However, it is not clear to what extent and how theseAnglo-Eurocentric approaches to digital literacy and social connectedness translate to thevarious local realities of the Global South, where increasing numbers of young people haveeither direct or indirect access to social media and the internet, but occupy very differentsocial contexts. In India, for instance, low cost mobile phones, cheap data plans, andvernacularization of content have furthered access cutting across socioeconomic strata.What speci ﬁc research priorities might emerge in this context? Which methods can be
employed to study these issues? How can we contextualize existing knowledge to helpsupport young people and their parents maximize the bene ﬁts of this digital/social world
even as we take into account the nuances of the local? In this paper, we mapped localstakeholders and shared insights from in-depth personal interviews with communityleaders from civil society, research and advocacy as well as professionals working withyoung people and parents in India as their work addresses some of these importantquestions. A thematic analysis of interview data helped the researchers scope out issueslike lack of child-centered-design, dearth of knowledge about the opportunities and risksof social media among parents, and confusion on how to navigate this digital/social world.Suggestions about children ’s wellbeing, including what parents could do about this, the
possibility of and the problems with regulation, and the need to focus on how parents canfoster trust and a meaningful connection with young people that would frame theirengagement with technology are made. Future research should consider theserelationships within the new context of the COVID-19 pandemic and related issuessuch as degrees of digital connectivity and access, social isolation, virtual schooling,and parents working from home.Edited by:
Kaveri Subrahmanyam,
California State University, Los
Angeles, United States
Reviewed by:
Nandita Chaudhary,
University of Delhi, India
Shaimaa Lazem,
City of Scienti ﬁc Research and
Technological Applications, Egypt
*Correspondence:
Devina Sarwatay
devina.sarwatay@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Digital Impacts,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Dynamics
Received: 31 August 2020
Accepted: 08 February 2021
Published: 30 March 2021
Citation:
Sarwatay D, Raman U and
Ramasubramanian S (2021) Media
Literacy, Social Connectedness, and
Digital Citizenship in India: Mapping
Stakeholders on How Parents and
Young People Navigate a Social World.
Front. Hum. Dyn 3:601239.
doi: 10.3389/fhumd.2021.601239
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 1ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 30 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fhumd.2021.601239Keywords: India, digital citizenship, social connectedness, parent-child communication, children, young people,
social media, media literacy
INTRODUCTION
The rapid spread of digital/social media has led to considerable
academic debate regarding their role in the lives of children andadolescents. The Global North, especially United States and
Europe, has largely led this discussion in matters of research
methods and approaches, conversations around screen time,wellbeing, media literacy, and digital citizenship ( Ellison et al.,
2007 ;Best et al., 2014 ;Livingstone, 2014 ;Frau-Meigs et al., 2017 ;
Vlaanderen et al., 2020 ). Prior literature in the Global North on
media literacy, social connectedness, and digital citizenship,especially with regard to parent-child relationships, has mostlyfocused on topics such as online risks ( Staksrud et al., 2013 ;
Livingstone, 2014 ;Livingstone et al., 2017 ), health and wellbeing
(McDool et al., 2020 ;Best et al., 2014 ;Ellison et al., 2007 ;
Valkenburg et al., 2006 ), creative expression ( Subrahmanyam
et al., 2020 ;boyd, 2008 ;Hogan, 2010 ;Lenhart et al., 2015 ),
education and learning ( Bennett et al., 2008 ;Burn et al., 2010 ;
Friedman and Friedman, 2013 ), digital safety ( Ringrose et al.,
2013 ;Livingstone et al., 2014 ;Marwick and boyd, 2014 ), and
parental mediation ( Tripp, 2011 ;Duggan et al., 2015 ;Kalmus
et al., 2015 ;Livingstone and Blum-Ross, 2020 ). However, it is not
clear to what extent and how these Eurocentric approaches todigital literacy and social connectedness translate to various localrealities of the Global South, where increasing numbers of youngpeople have either direct or indirect access to social media and theinternet, but occupy very different social contexts as compared totheir counterparts in the Global North ( Rangaswamy and Arora,
2016 ;Banaji, 2017 ).
In India, low cost mobile phones, cheap data plans, and
vernacularization of content have furthered access cuttingacross socioeconomic strata ( Rangaswamy and Arora, 2016 ).
The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India(ASSOCHAM, 2015 ) conducted a survey on social media habits
of children with 4,750 parents in metropolitan cities (SocialDevelopment Foundation, 2015) claiming 95% teens surveyedused the internet, 81% used social media and 72% logged intosocial media more than once a day. It also uncovered underageuse: 65% kids under 13 years used social media. At the same time,
media alarms us with stories like ‘Indian teenagers show risky
behaviour online: McAfee ’(Press Trust of India (PTI), 2014 )o r
‘Addicted to You(Tube): To say that toddlers are nuts about
YouTube would be an understatement ’(Kumar, 2015 )o r ‘One in
three teens lose sleep over gadgets, social media ’(Dutt, 2016 ).
Social media and technology are not always portrayed in a bad
light. There were articles about using social media forassignments and exam preparation ( Pednekar, 2016 )o r
experts wanting to include it in school curriculum ( Pednekar,
2017 )—but positive, or even more re ﬂective, stories are harder to
come by. Perhaps, the older generation mirrors its struggles and
anxieties of navigating through the complex web of social media
on young people and their protective instinct comes to the fore?Children are considered vulnerable and in need of protectionacross almost all disciplines. However, young people ’s
engagement with digital/social media is very different fromthat of adults. Children ’s practices online have evolved
differently because they are (often described as) ‘digital
natives ’(Burn et al., 2010 ). Of course, the impact of the
COVID-19 related lockdown subsequent to March 2020 has
shifted perspectives considerably in relation to some of thesedebates, with focus returning once more (in the populardiscourse) to accessibility and digital literacy and sideliningconcerns around screen time and other related debates.
In this paper, we share insights from in-depth personal
interviews with community leaders from civil society, researchand advocacy as well as professionals working with young peoplein India that address important questions relating to medialiteracy, social connectedness, and digital citizenship in adigital/social world. ‘Digital society ’is conceptualized as being
governed by ‘dataﬁcation ’and ‘platformisation ’asKatzenbach
and Bächle (2019) discussed the work (p. 4 –5) of Mejias and
Couldry who de ﬁned data ﬁcation as a, “cultural logic of
quanti ﬁcation and monetisation of human life through digital
information ”, and Poell, Nieborg and van Dijck who
conceptualized platformization as a “key development and
narrative of the digital society ”. Digital/social media platforms
are now “indispensable infrastructures of private and public
life...shifting cultural practices...becoming the dominant modeof economic and social organisation ”(Katzenbach and Bächle,
2019 , pp.5).
This paper addresses the following research questions:
(1) What speci ﬁc research priorities might emerge in the context
of India around media literacy, social connectedness, anddigital citizenship? How can these issues be studied inrelation to the lived realities of young people and their carers?
(2) How can we contextualize existing knowledge about digital
media use and literacy to help support young people andtheir adult caregivers and maximize bene ﬁts of this digital/
social world, while taking into account nuances of the local bymapping stakeholders and bringing in their voices?
In order to learn more about issues faced by parents and young
people as they navigate a digital/social media world in India, weinterviewed a range of stakeholders working directly or indirectlywith parents and young people, schools and teachers,international institutions and organizations.
MEDIA LITERACY, SOCIAL
CONNECTEDNESS, AND DIGITALCITIZENSHIP
Notwithstanding the recent efforts to expand the scope of media
literacy scholarship, much of the literature on children and mediahas focused on Western countries and on dominant groups
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 2Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiawithin the middle classes, which some scholars have referred to as
WEIRD families: those in Western, Educated, Industrialized,Rich, and Democratic contexts ( Henrich et al., 2010 ;Alper
et al., 2016 ). In Western democracies, citizenship is often tied
to behaviors such as voting, campaigning, volunteering,
petitioning, and protecting individuals ’rights. For instance,
Choi (2016) found that digital citizenship is conceptualized by
scholars in four main ways: in terms of ethics/safety, as political orpersonalized participation, the ability to evaluate information,and critical resistance/activism. Below, we have discussed somekey themes in the existing literature on digital citizenship amongyouth, including safety and privacy, engagement andparticipation, and the role of various stakeholders in differentlearning environments.
Safety and Privacy
One way in which digital citizenship has been conceptualized hasbeen through the lens of safety and privacy. Issues of ethics, mutualrespect, creating a safe environment, and digital rights andresponsibilities were central to such conceptualizations(Mossberger et al., 2007 ;Ohler, 2012 ;Robb and Shellenbarger,
2013;Frau-Meigs et al., 2017 ;Vlaanderen et al., 2020 ). The
discussion around risks and literacy has related mainly toidentifying different kinds of potential risks social media posefor children and youth and ways of mitigating them. Early workhas also been about quelling fears regarding technopanics —moral
panics over contemporary technology and its risks to young
users —e.g., cyberporn and online predators and showing links
between hyped media coverage and consequent content legislation(Cassell and Cramer, 2008 ;Marwick, 2008 ). The nuances of lived
realities were often ignored but recent studies have attempted toaddress these, for example, in Livingstone (2014) and work by
Staksrud and colleagues (2013) and more recent work has startedfocusing on strategies to help children minimize these risks(Livingstone et al., 2017 ;Desimpelaere et al., 2020 ). Some of
these discussions have also revolved around digital rights andresponsibilities, including free expression, respecting intellectual
property, digital etiquette and wellbeing, and lawful use of online
spaces ( Robb and Shellenbarger, 2013 ;McDool et al., 2020 ;
Subrahmanyam et al., 2020 ;Desimpelaere et al., 2020 ).
Concerns regarding safety (including bullying, shaming,
violence, and sexting) of young people on social media werealso important themes in the literature. Safety online has to dowith the environment available to children and youth, just as onewould expect safety at home, in school or at a mall. Livingstone
et al. (2014) found that children encountered solicitation of sex,
porn, violence, bullying, shaming, etc. online. They categorizedthese items into three types of risks: content related, conduct
related and contact related. Ringrose et al. (2013) found a link
between online and of ﬂine lives with gender issues reported in
sexting and shaming (girls especially) on social networking sites(SNSs). Other contextual variables —apart from gender —were
age, existing emotional issues, broader family context, andparents ’familiarity with technology with reference to
adolescents ’excessive internet use and parental mediation in
Europe ( Kalmus et al., 2015 ). Additionally, Marwick and boyd
(2014) described how ‘drama ’operates in teens ’online lives andhow widespread use of social media among teenagers has altered
dynamics of aggression and con ﬂict. Recent scholarship focused
on cyberbullying and how children can intervene to help victimsas well as parents ’role in imparting digital skills ( Vlaanderen
et al., 2020 ;Livingstone et al., 2017 ).
A related concern is that of privacy, which centers around the
control one exerts over the nature and amount of personalinformation that is shared on social media and howknowledge about protecting one ’s privacy online can help
children ( Lee 2013 ;Desimpelaere et al., 2020 ). Youth are
sharing more personal information on their pro ﬁ
les than in
the past. They choose private settings for Facebook, but sharewith large networks of friends. Most teen social media users saidthey aren ’t very concerned about third-party access to their data
(Madden et al., 2013 ).Marwick and boyd (2014) also noted that
social media has changed the ways in which one practices
visibility and information sharing, and offered a model ofnetworked privacy to explain how privacy is achieved innetworked publics. Another more recent study reported thatyoung people did not see their online and of ﬂine lives as
different and there was a relation between face-to-face anddigital interactions and self-esteem ( Palfrey, 2016 ;
Subrahmanyam et al., 2020 ).
Participation and Social Connectedness
Participation has been conceptualized as both political and civic
participation as well as personal or cultural participation. Work
on uses (including expression and presentation) of social mediaby children dealt with self-expression, identity formation, statusnegotiation and peer-to-peer sociality as observed by boyd
(2008) .Hogan (2010) described the splitting of self-
presentation into performances —synchronously situated —and
artifacts —asynchronously exhibited —derived from Goffman ’s
work on dramaturgy. Lenhart et al. (2015) described teens ’use
of social media for romantic purposes like ﬂirting, wooing,
breaking-up, controlling/abusing and sharing a (usuallyofﬂine) relationship online. Participation was also analyzed
from a uses and grati ﬁcations perspective ( Dunne et al., 2010 ;
Quan-Haase and Young, 2010 ).
Within the United States, social connectedness and digital
citizenship have been viewed largely through the lens ofparticipation, creative expressions, and popular culture. Forinstance, Jenkins (2006) argued for policy and educational
interventions to address the “participation gap ”in how young
people access and use media to develop competencies andexperiences to more fully express themselves as engagedcultural citizens. However, other scholars have emphasizedthat it is essential to foreground ethical and social justice
issues by reimagining media literacies and social
connectedness through civic engagement and anti-oppressionliteracies ( Scharrer and Ramasubramanian, 2015 ;Mihailidis
2018 ;Ramasubramanian and Darzabi, 2020 ).
Scholars also found association between social media use and
children ’s wellbeing. While social media use was found to be
strongly associated with social capital, it was not directly linkedwith wellbeing ( Ellison et al., 2007 ;Best et al., 2014 ). Researchers
have noted an absence of robust causal research regarding this
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 3Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiadirect impact. However, McDool et al. (2020) used proxy data to
point to potential adverse effects of increasing time spent onlineon children ’s wellbeing. Nonetheless, given that increase in
social capital enhanced adolescents ’self-esteem, and in turn,
a sense of wellbeing, this perspective merits further research
(Valkenburg et al., 2006 ).Holmes (2009) outlined opportunities
provided by socialization online as it leads to increased socialcapital and support and fosters connectedness, thus making itpossible for young people to have possible positive experiences
in the future. Work has also been done on using social media toengage with youth on health related matters ( Byron et al., 2013 ;
Evers et al., 2013 ;Hswen et al., 2013 ;Hausmann et al., 2017 ;
Coyne et al., 2020 ).Swist et al. (2015) and, more recently, Coyne
et al. (2020) acknowledged the link between children ’ss o c i a l
media use and their wellbeing. In their exhaustive review, Swist
et al. (2015) observed that social media impacts children ’s
physical and mental health, identity and relationships,learning and play, and risk and safety, among other aspectsand those positive and negative i mpacts must be seen in context.
On the other hand, Coyne et al. (2020) , in their eight-year
longitudinal study based on the Flourishing Families Project atBrigham Young University, United States revealed thatincreased time spent on social media was not associated withincreased mental health issues and implored research to movebeyond its focus on screen time. This is especially relevant in thecontext of our pandemic world.
Factors In ﬂuencing Learning Environments
Several external factors in ﬂuence how youth engage with social
media. For instance, access to technology, parental involvement,school curricula, and sociopolitical factors in ﬂuence both
formal and informal learning environments. Using socialmedia to enhance education and learning (especially online)(Friedman and Friedman, 2013 ), addressing the ‘digital divide ’
(differential levels of access to digital devices and networksas well as the capacity to use them in productive andmeaningful ways), suggesting media education as a bridge and
the creation of a ‘third space ’as a way to address the divide
(Burn et al., 2010 ), and advising caution in dealing with the
moral panic related to it ( Bennett et al., 2008 ) were the ideas
dealt with in this theme. Other scholars have emphasized onthe need for formal education of students on the professionaluse, design and implementation of social media systems ( Jacobs
et al., 2009 ).
In the realm of parenting, it was noticed that mothers were
likely to give and receive support on social media and use it as aparenting tool ( Duggan et al., 2015 ). Active parental involvement
was detected when the child had experienced online harm
(Kalmus et al., 2015 ). Parenting strategies re ﬂected anxieties
about online risks and inadvertently contributed to limitingchildren ’s opportunities ( Tripp 2011 ). Clearly, a balance needs
to be found between panicking about risks online andopportunities that a digital/social world offers young people. AEuro-American parenting perspective emphasizes independenceand autonomy, and other evidence ( Ho et al., 2008 ;Smetana
2017 ) points towards cultural differences in parenting styles and
its impact on children ’s behavior.Parental mediation was key to in ﬂuencing children ’sb e l i e f sa n d
behaviors ( Gelman et al., 2004 ), thus making the development of
open communication and trust in parent-child relationshipssigniﬁcant to young people ’s wellbeing ( Lee and Chae, 2012 ;
Padilla-Walker et al., 2012 ). This was true in case of media
ranging from television to the Internet ( Livingstone and
Helsper, 2007 ;Clark, 2011 ) and included approaches like
modeling and co-use ( Connell et al., 2015 ;Harrison, 2015 ).
Parental mediation was often categorized into two broad styles:active and restrictive ( Lee and Chae, 2007 )a n d Padilla-Walker
and Coyne (2011) —while accepting this categorization —
characterized it as prearming and cocooning respectively. Theactive/prearming style was a more conversational, open, and trustbased relationship between the parent and child(ren) grounded incommunication, modeling and co-use strategies, whereas a
restrictive/cocooning style was more about rules and restrictions
set by parents for their children to protect them from onlineharms and risks. Livingstone, in her study with Helsper andmore recently in her work with Blum-Ross that extensivelyused interviews with parents, has described parental mediationas active, restrictive, and co-using ( Livingstone and Helsper,
2008 ) and as embrace, balance, and resist ( Livingstone and
Blum-Ross, 2020 ). Livingstone and Blum-Ross also tended to
associate the embrace and resist strategies as potentially riskyin the sense of planning towards the long-term digital futureof young people, favoring balance in a world fraught with
uncertainty.
Beyond Media Literacy Perspectives From
the Global North
While literature reviewed thus far is important for understanding
key themes and factors in ﬂuencing media literacy, digital
citizenship, and social connectedness, it draws almost entirelyon scholarship from the Global North. The paucity in literaturefrom the Global South is only now being remedied. In the case ofIndia, the problem might be partially alleviated by decolonizing
research and the way it is reported, and by building more diverse
networks of scholarship both amongst scholars from within theGlobal South and across regions. Other researchers have arguedfor the need for a global approach to media literacy scholarship ina digital context ( Mihailidis, 2012 ;Byrne et al., 2016 ;De Abreu
et al., 2016 ;De Abreu et al., 2017 ).
Despite acknowledgement of the need to diversify and
internationalize media literacy scholarship, most often it isdiscussed within the context of non-United States Westerncountries in the Global North rather than including countriesand contexts from other parts of the world. Consequently, there
are productive and active collaborations across Europe (fuelled
partly by European Research Council grants) and trans-Atlanticpartnerships. In other words, such internationalization efforts tomedia literacy scholarship often end up unintentionallyreinforcing Euro-centric notions of media literacy constructedand perceived through a Western lens. We need to widen thisview, which situates media literacy as originating from theUnited States, Canada, and Britain, to acknowledge multiplesociocultural locations from which knowledge about literacies
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 4Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiaand media technologies have evolved and continue to evolve. It is
important to further complicate and challenge the dominantEurocentric narrative given the diverse nature of communitieseven in the geographic region that falls into the “Global North ”,
due to historical and contemporary migrations.
Examining central issues in non-Western contexts, Mihailidis
(2009) discovered that ﬁnding support for media literacy work
among decision-makers and policymakers is often a challenge.Several media literacy educators in the Global South continue todraw on curricula developed in United States and Europeancontexts, and stemming from Western models of mediaeducation and a certain cultural understanding of childhood.These curricula tend to focus on democratic practice, freedom ofexpression, and advertising literacies, which might not necessarilybe relevant in all contexts. Additionally, there are other challenges
in terms of building collaborations across various sectors focusing
on children and media such as government, nonpro ﬁts, industry,
and education. A respondent from the Middle East interviewedby Mihailidis cited in his study (2009, p. 14) said, “Media literacy
is about more than just analyzing media messages, and a barrierto entry in the public school system is that there are manydifferent of ﬁcial bodies who believe they should have a say in
the implementation (of media literacy curricula) ”.
Ramasubramanian and Yadlin-Segal (2017) conducted
interviews with scholars and educators from various youth andmedia contexts from around the world to bring to light cultural
differences in de ﬁnitions, practices, resources, and policymaking,
which need to be considered in media literacy scholarship. Forinstance, Livingstone and Bulger (2014) discussed cross-cultural
differences between how children in the Global North access theinternet mostly through a computer whereas those from theGlobal South typically access it through mobile phones, with asingle device often being shared among several members of afamily. They pointed to barriers such as lack of access totechnology, teacher training, parental knowledge, andculturally-relevant or locally produced curricular materials inthe Global South. Similarly, a team of researchers ( Byrne et al.,
2016 ) who examined cross-national data from Argentina,
Philippines, Serbia, and South Africa found that childrentypically accessed the internet at home using mobile phones.They also found that children in South Africa and Philippinesengaged in fewer online practices and had a lower level of digitalliteracy compared to those in Argentina and Serbia.
Within Asian contexts, existing research focused on topics
such as ICT adoption, censorship, cybersafety, and more broadlyon protectionism ( Cheung, 2009 ;Lee, 2010 ;AlNajjar, 2019 ). For
example, AlNajjar (2019) found that in the Middle Eastern
context, much of the discourse surrounding youth media use
has focused narrowly on media risks with little attention paid to
the role of digital media in the betterment of self and society.From a conservative Singaporean context, Yue et al. (2019) called
for more research on digital citizenship from the Global South. Intheir focus group discussions with Singaporean youth, they foundthat media literacy skills in ﬂuence negotiations of public opinions
in ways that challenged mainstream ideologies. Similarly, amongyoung Indonesian Muslim women, they found that issues of piety,religious obedience, and ethical entrepreneurship wereemphasized. Patankar et al. (2017) observed the critical need
for digital literacy in a country like India that is diverse in itspopulace and inequalities and described government efforts tomake rural India digitally literate. Focusing on unemployed
women in India, Mukherjee et al., 2019 , examined the impact
of these programs and their perceived value and found theyenabled rural women to get jobs in, for example, BPOs (BusinessProcessing Outsourcing units). Akram and Kumar (2017) offered
a broad view of the positive and negative effects of social media onsociety, while Kumar and Rangaswamy (2013) drew on actor-
network theory to ﬂip notions of piracy and viewing pirated
content, arguing that it fuels media consumption, technologyadoption, and digital literacy.
Examining Digital Citizenship and Social
Connectedness Within Indian Contexts
Media literacy and media literacy education in India began
receiving government attention only in early 2000s withperceptible growth of the internet, both as a driver of theeconomy (with a focus on skills and capacities) and as a spacefor leisure activity and communication, and, perhaps mostimportantly, in relation to children, as a vehicle forinformation and knowledge dissemination and the potential to“democratise ”access to education, especially in the pandemic
context. The discussion on media and children therefore proceeds
on two occasionally intersecting pathways: one is education
through media and the other is education about media (bothproduction and consumption). Our interest in this project is thelatter. In this regard, the National Curriculum Frameworkproposed in 2005 that education in India should be connectedwith knowledge to life outside school which led to theintroduction of a course on media studies for secondarystudents. The Central Institute of Educational Technologyhelped in creating Media Clubs in schools to promote medialiteracy in India in 2009 –2010 up to 2014 –15 (NCERT, 2017 ),
with further records being unavailable. However, their focus was
on media production —as students brought out school
newspapers as part of the Media Club —rather than a critical
engagement with media. State level bodies implemented andexecuted such media literacy and education activities at lowerlevels. These tend to include literacies about media as well asmedia used to develop multiple literacies —thus confounding the
two pathways mentioned above. For instance the GujaratInstitute of Educational Technology, Education Department,Government of Gujarat produced television programmers forteachers and children of 6 –14 years of age ( GIET, 2010 ) on media
literacy. However, it was found that programs were often
broadcast during school hours, when children could not
watch, although some schools scheduled time for viewing inschool and college (for undergraduate students) ( Govindaraju
and Banerjee, 1999 ).
Different state and central boards of education in India also
periodically share guidelines regarding social media usage atschool and to keep stakeholders noti ﬁed of activities that are
encouraged for children ’s learning. But, there appears to be a gap
between research, praxis, and policy in a manner that
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 5Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiacontextualizes existing knowledge, and helps support young
people and carers maximize the bene ﬁts of this digital/social
world even as we take into account nuances of the local. Currentpolicies do not insist on evidence-based decision-making or draw
on experiences and expectations of a wide range of stakeholders,
and clearly, young people ’s voices are not driving them —nor have
they been expected to, in what has largely been a top-down, non-participatory policy process. Similarly, media is quick to offerbasic parenting advice regarding children ’s online practices,
without attention to speci ﬁc circumstances, sometimes forcing
relationships between the latest fad and its adverse effects.
There is a slowly emerging body of interdisciplinary literature
that looks at the need to build critical skills among young peoplein India. These skills will allow them to negotiate a digitallymediated world, in terms of relationships and political and
cultural realities ( Bhatia and Pathak-Shelat, 2017 ). It will also
help children unpack media representations ( Sreenivas, 2011 )a s
their engagement with social media like YouTube and WhatsAppdeepens ( Sarwatay, 2017 ). Examining attitudes towards
advertising literacy among Indian tweens, Trehan (2017)
found low levels of comprehension of persuasive intent,exaggeration, and misinformation but high levels of celebrityrecognition, visual literacy, and a gender divide in terms ofperceived sexual objecti ﬁcation of women in advertising. As
part of a ten-country comparative study of youth and digitalmedia use, Raman and Verghese (2014) observed that political
and civic socialization of urban Indian youth was largely
dependent on social media —a fact that was similar to their
counterparts in most parts of the world. Such scholarship,being guided by the vision of developing an inclusive andmulticultural mindset, will thus ﬁll out the idea of what it
means to be an informed citizen.
The present study adds to the sparse literature on media
literacy from the Global South, especially in terms of the roleof policymakers such as educators, nonpro ﬁt leaders, and
community leaders. It examines how they shape discoursesabout digital citizenship and social connectedness within the
Indian youth and media context. The uncertainties of the
online world have led parents in India to depend on mediadiscourse, digital/social media, teachers, local parentingexperts, digital media experts, and organizations working withchildren for advice on how to deal with young people ’s
experiences online. Questions of access, uses, practices, risksand opportunities are common but many parents lack accessto well-researched answers. Newspapers largely run storiesmotivated by technopanics; there is a generational digitaldivide, and parents often do not model what theypreach —especially when their mediation follows a restrictive
style. They tend to believe that regulation of some kind is a
solution: at the family level by restricting use or accepting onlycertain kinds of access; at the societal level by depending onschools/teachers; or at the institutional level with governmentalbans or board guidelines.
While some parents and teachers cited media literacy as a
possible solution (Sarwatay, 2017), policy and implementation arelacking in this regard. As children (digital natives) might navigatethrough these digital/social worlds differently than their elders,there is confusion about the dos and don ’ts and, while advice is
available, access to parental mediation and communicationstrategies in a digital world is unequal. As more of ourexistence is digitally data ﬁed, citizenship itself is being digitized
but there are myriad issues of how this existence is structured and
designed and how parents can guide young people and learn fromthem as they navigate through these worlds (ideally) together. Thisis why it is important to examine the underlying systems thatenable young people and their parents in these online worlds. Whathelps them dispel notions fuelled by technopanics? Can regulationhelp? What is the role of media literacy? How can socialconnectedness lead to better communication and engagementbetween parents and children and reduce navigation confusion?How do we become digital citizens even as structures and designsare evolving and getting optimized?
METHODS
In this project, we take an ecosystem-based approach tounderstanding digital citizenship and social connectedness inthe Indian context, using a series of in-depth interviews with aselected group of stakeholders. As literature reviewed in the
previous section suggested, informal and formal learning
environments have shaped how youth engaged with digitalcitizenship, how media literacies are practiced, and how socialconnectedness emerged in various contexts. Various types ofcontextual factors such as family environments, school curricula,sociopolitical climate, and technological access in ﬂuenced how
youth used media to connect, learn, and participate in creative,personal, political, and civic activities. Therefore, it is importantto examine the role of stakeholders such as parents, teachers,social workers, children ’s advocates, and others who shape the
media environment for young people.
Several educational and research organizations as well as the
media in India have shown interest in youth and social media andhave considered —in varying levels of detail —how parents and
children navigate experiences online. Speci ﬁc research priorities
have emerged in the Indian context, and, given the relativerecency of such research in the Global South, most often,quantitative methods like surveys (questionnaires andstructured interviews) have been employed, the main target ofthese being teachers and parents. However, little attention hasbeen paid to other in ﬂuencers of youth and media spaces such as
social workers, industry experts, and children ’s advocacy groups,
all of which also in ﬂuence meso-level and macro-level policies
and practices related to digital media literacy.
From the management of technology and innovation
standpoint ( Tsujimoto et al., 2018 ), one of the signi ﬁcant
ecosystems perspectives is the multi-actor network perspective.The actors are government, universities, consumers, ﬁrms,
policymakers, user communities, etc. and they deal with keyvariables like power, regulation, and knowledge, among others.This multi-actor network is but one aspect of the wider ecosystemof connective media theorized by van Dijck (2013) that includes
invisible technical dimensions of online platforms includingbusiness and commerce aspects as well as infrastructures that
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 6Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiaenable and support online activities as well as social and
democratic dimensions ( van Dijck et al., 2019 ). Experts
interviewed in this study are actors in this network ofconnective media who juggle key variables mentioned above toensure balance in business, social, and democratic dimensions ofthe ecosystem. Interviews as a method to map stakeholders andecosystems have been used across several ﬁelds ( Ginige et al.,
2018 ;Raum, 2018 ;Prieto et al., 2019 ;Woods et al., 2019 ) and was
thus the chosen method for this study as well.
There has been some thoughtful dialogue on issues relating to
digital media and children ’s digital lives; however these
discussions tend to happen in rare ﬁed and often disparate
spaces, and have not yet begun to make a dent on policy. Thispaper attempts to understand how key stakeholders understandthese issues, and what they see as key concerns based on theirdeep understanding of the culture, and socioeconomic contexts inwhich Indian children live their varied lives. In-depth personalinterviews were conducted from October to December 2019 (pre-COVID-19 period) in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India withprofessionals working directly and indirectly with young
people and their parents in India in both informal and formal
learning contexts. These individuals collectively represent a groupthat plays a signi ﬁcant role, some as policymakers and others as
key in ﬂuencers of media discourse and interlocutors of media
practice within and outside educational institutions.TABLE 1 | Details about the participants.
Sr
NoPseudonym Gender Socio-economic
backgroundWork Details
1 ABC Female Upper middle class Civil Society: Child psychologist and parent-
educatorFounder-director of a preschool and consultant for usually well-to-
do families on parenting issues including those related to digital andsocial media usage
2 DEF Female Middle class Civil Society: Social media and parenting
expertInvolved with several social media initiatives some of which focus on
how parenting needs for middle and upper-middle class families
must adapt to a digital/social media world
3 GHI Female Upper middle class Civil Society: Mom-blogger Assists relatively high-end private schools with their web presence,
organizes events related to parenting for the school ’s clientele
which is generally middle to upper middle class
4 JKL Male Upper middle class Professionals: Head, Digital and social media
marketing companyWorks with corporate organizations and schools to cater to their
digital/social media marketing needs, clientele usually comes frommiddle to upper middle class
5 MNO Male Upper middle class Professionals: Cyber lawyer Trains corporate and government employees on cybersafety and
runs an initiative on online safety for schools and colleges across thesocioeconomic spectrum
6 PQR Female Upper middle class Professionals: Advocate and professor Managing director of an organization that works for victims of cyber
crimes, deals with people from different castes and classes
7 STU Male Upper middle class Research and Advocacy: Head, Child rights
centreResearch and capacity building activity at a centre working on child
rights that is supported by UNICEF in a reputed private university
8 VYW Female Upper middle class Research and Advocacy: Director, Centre for
development communicationAssociated with Global Kids Online and UNICEF Innocenti that aims
to reach young people across the spectrum regarding their onlinehabits
9 XYZ Male Middle class Research and Advocacy: Expert in digital
and social mediaInterest in media for social change; his work tends to focus on
organizations engaged with disadvantaged communities/vulnerable people
FIGURE 1 | Participants ’positions across the policy-praxis-
research axes.
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 7Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in IndiaThe main questions that guided the interviews were:
(1) How do they frame and perceive issues related to young
people ’s media literacy, social connectedness and digital
citizenship?
(2) What insights have they gained through working with
parents and children?
In this paper, we de ﬁne media literacy as young people ’s ability
to safely access and use digital/social media for identity andrelationships, learning and play, and consumer and civicpractices. Social connectedness is characterized as the sense ofbelonging between young people and their adult caregivers in adigital/social world. Digital citizenship is closely tied to the twoconcepts above in the broader context of engaging with the
society around them in a digital/social world.
Local ecosystem mapping through interviews was conducted to
better understand how these experts describe and examine thecurrent scenario in India. The nine experts interviewed are brie ﬂy
described (in Table 1 ) with their relative positioning (in Figure 1 )
along the policy-praxis-research axes. Pseudonyms have been usedto protect their identities.
These stakeholders are either directly or indirectly working
with parents and young people, schools and teachers,international institutions and organizations to become part ofthe ecosystem of connective media through their practice,
research, and/or eventually policy and have their ear to the
ground as to how young people and parents navigate a digital/social media world. They come from a relatively privilegedsection of the Indian society to be in a position to impactpolicy directly or indirectly within their local ecosystem whiletheir work covers people across the socioeconomic spectrum.These experts engaged with the ﬁrst author in semi-structured
interviews around the following topics:
(1) New media (speci ﬁcally the Internet, digital/social media).
(2) Children and media in the local context.
(3) Understanding of existing systems, media discourse around
this topic.
(4) Gaps in research, advocacy, policy, and academia.
Informed consent was obtained from participants at the start,
and a scanned copy of the form was sent to them after completionof the interview. Interviews were recorded, and transcribed.Interviews were conducted in English with conversationsometimes slipping into Hindi or Gujarati. An interestingmethodological side-note is that an application was used totranscribe interviews instantly and while it performed fairly
decently in English, it had trouble recognizing the Indian
accent in some places and failed to transcribe non-Englishspoken words correctly. We had to correct those parts bylistening to the recording and editing the mistakes out. With theexception of two, who were interviewed by phone and emailrespectively due to their strict preference, all interviews took placeat their of ﬁces/homes. Interviews were scheduled after explaining the
purpose, with each lasting between 30 min to 1 h. All participantsremarked on the importance of the topic in current times.The interviews began with broad questions aimed at drawing
out their ideas about digital/social media and their understandingof the local children and media landscape. Across participants,there was a common theme of children and adolescents being
inundated by media messages, the compounding effect of digital/
social media, and increased importance of parenting in thesetimes to safeguard children ’s rights. This led to a deeper dive into
issues they outlined to elicit responses related to existing systems,perceived gaps, media discourse, and possible solutions.Responses to these questions varied, re ﬂecting their different
locations.
The child psychologist focused on the importance of goal
setting and communication, those involved with social mediaspoke about co-use and balanced consumption, experts who dealtin cyber crime took a cautionary stance, and academic and
research experts focused on the need for research and
foregrounding children ’s voices. Many asked why this topic
was chosen, perhaps to place it in loop of the discoursesurrounding these issues. Data from interviews wassupplemented with researchers ’observations, background/
peripheral conversation with experts, and ﬁeld notes, suggesting:
(1) Nearly all interviewees had children and brought some
context from existing experiences or voiced concernsabout anticipated problems.
(2) Solutions cited came from personal experience, peer
discussions, events about digital parenting, and other
professional avenues.
(3) Identi ﬁcation of relevance of this topic and gaps in research,
advocacy, policy, and academia stemmed fromreﬂections above.
While guided by literature, we did not approach data with
preexisting themes and used an inductive approach, allowingthemes to emerge from the data. A semantic approach wasapplied to thematic analysis. The transcripts were coded andthemes were generated as shown below.
FINDINGS
In-depth interviews help participants express themselves andguide the interview, thereby allowing the researcher to rectifyand add to the process and remain open to developing ideasfurther, even seeking new directions and interpretations(Brenner, 2006 ;Glesne, 2011 ). A ﬁrst order of themes from
the interview data was extracted which was further
consolidated into a second order which were the basis of thissection. Analysis was done and quotes were pulled frominterviews to give a layered, detailed context. Issues of child-centered-design, dearth of knowledge about opportunities andrisks of social media among parents, and confusion around howto navigate this digital world were some of the themes thatemerged as interpreted from the interview data. Questionswere raised about children ’s wellbeing, including what parents
could do about this, the possibility of (and the problems with)regulation, and the need to focus on how parents could foster
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 8Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiatrust and a meaningful connection with young people that would
frame their engagement with technology.
Main themes from the interview data are shown in Figure 2 .
Respondents pointed to what they saw as problem areas, such astechnopanics, digital divide, navigation confusion, andtechnology design that was not child-centric, but alsoindicated possible approaches to addressing these issues,through regulation, improved parental engagement, and moreopen communication with all stakeholders. These were groupedinto three broad themes, of media literacy, social connectednessand digital citizenship, roughly corresponding to the themes inthe global scholarship as outlined in an earlier section ofthis paper.
Some experts spoke from a cautionary perspective while others
focused on safeguarding young people ’s interests. ABC was
vehemently against giving social media access to very youngchildren observing that handing over phones to toddlers as abehavioral incentive was a bad idea. She also opined thatteenagers are going through a rough phase in life as it is, andparents need to be extra careful when they observe behavioralchanges in their adolescent children, possibly due to digital/socialmedia. DEF was a big believer in co-using digital/social mediawith children as a strategy to digital parenting. While she or herchild had not faced cyber crime personally, she was wary of
coming across unpleasant or dangerous experiences and felt one
needed to be prepared. Many sessions she organized for hermothers ’club focused on this theme. Her mantras were ‘practice
what you preach ’and ‘precaution is better than cure ’and this
reﬂected throughout the interview. GHI and JKL believed parents
exert a lot of control over children ’s media diets (especially
younger children) and they needed to be aware of the digital/social world to make the right decisions for their wards. They hadidenti ﬁed an acute lack of awareness about several issues likeprivacy, safety, tools to safeguard young people online and hence
organized/participated in events aimed at parents to spread
awareness and aid parental mediation regarding children ’s
technology use.
MNO and PQR had seen many cases of cyber crime and
victimization. They were aware of the level of ignorance related torisks in a digital/social world. They hold frequent workshops andtraining/counseling sessions for young people, victims or high-risk individuals or organizations like corporate and governmententities. While STU ’s work is not directly focused on the impact
of social media on young people, he works on children ’s rights
and capacity building which ties in with awareness and training.VYW strongly believes young people ’s attention span and sleep
are adversely affected and this needs research attention. When
confronted with the argument that young people love to bingewatch, she countered with the nuance of viewership vs.engagement and how the latter is getting more super ﬁcial.
XYZ posited a generational shift in media consumption andengagement patterns. Young people are moving towards avisual medium of expression, however many of them strugglewith communicating verbally, he said. He also mentioned a lackof acknowledgment of personal responsibility for your actions onsocial media and opined how that might contribute to increasingcases of cyberbullying.
Based on these interviews and the researcher ’sﬁeld notes, the
average middle-class school-going urban-based young personwith access to digital/social media would have a full day ’s
routine with school, extracurricular, and other activities in amedia rich and dense environment as follows: Waking up in themorning as the radio is playing, tinkering with the smartphone(usually mom ’s) and television, getting to school while passing by
hoardings and billboards, studying in a class with a smartboard/projector/computer, talking about latest on YouTube/TikTok/
FIGURE 2 | Main themes from the interview data.
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 9Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in IndiaSnapchat/Instagram/PUBG with peers, sharing memes,
assignments, tuition timings, banter on WhatsApp,FaceTiming/VideoCalling family and friends, and usinglaptop/computer/internet-enabled television/voice assistant for
education and entertainment.
Parents, on the other hand, oscillated between how much
access should be given to young people in this digital/social worldand were occasionally swayed by media discourse ontechnopanics to limit usage leading to tensions in relationshipswith their wards. This gets further complicated when parentscan’t/don ’t/won ’t practice what they preach and young people
call them out on these contradictions. Parents tend to perceivecomputer/laptop use as productive behaviour while television/smartphone use as unproductive behaviour leading todisagreements and disharmony, sometimes leading to
breakdown of trust and communication between the parent
and child.
While the opening questions helped build context regarding
the local realities, speci ﬁc questions as the interviews progressed,
helped identify the following themes.
Technopanics, Digital Divide, and Hypocrisy
Issues of risks and literacy, health and wellbeing, safety (includingbullying, shaming, violence, and sexting), and privacy were raisedby experts who work directly and indirectly with young peopleand parents, schools, organizations, etc. Lack of (digital/social)
media literacy was cited as one of the reasons why most parents
and some young people were concerned regarding their onlineuses, practices, and experiences. Media discourse also added fueltoﬁre as coverage about social media addiction, challenges like
blue whale and momo ( Pednekar, 2017 ), and safety and privacy
issues were sensationalized. However, this is a challenge that canbe met by inculcating media literacy and digital-smart parentingwhich is an uphill climb because we are still battling technopanics,digital divide and hypocrisy. DEF was frank in her admissionwhen she said, “We held a panel discussion recently on ‘digital
media parenting ’...on what should be the role of parents in
today ’s digital media scenario, how do we cut down on screen
time? But, sometimes we act like hypocrites. We ask them[children] not to use it and as parents we use it so it [a partof the panel] focused on how to balance it [screen time]. ”
MNO had the strong opinion that privacy does not exist in a
dataﬁed world. This problem is compounded by a lack of
awareness regarding online safety among majority citizens.PQR concurred when she opined that usually people becomeaware of risks when something untoward happens.
“The new media forms are much more easily accessible than
the other forms of media and they are up to date. However, we
must also note that such media is also plagued by fake news, non
consensual images, revenge porn contents etc. This makes theyoung minds sometimes glued to such media because they mayhave never seen such things and due to adolescent curiosity theymay be more than willing to share such things in groups secretlywhich may increase the humiliation of the victims. ”
To this end, recognizing the need for steering discourse, the
Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) –a national level
board of education in India managed by the Union Governmentand implemented in several public and private schools
throughout the country —issued the ‘Guidelines for Safe and
Effective Use of Internet and Digital Technologies in Schoolsand School Buses ’(2017) including ‘Tips to stay safe on social
networking sites for students ’(p. 4). This serves as a primer for
ideal online behaviour and can guide parents regardingtechnology mediation at home as well.
Experts also insisted that parents need to set aside their
reservations about the digital divide and not being tech-savvyenough. They have to be more digitally/socially clued in so theycould pass on literacy lessons to children. PQR found patterns inlevels of awareness and corresponding styles of parenting indifferent regions of the country. She reported, “...my
organization receives cases from all across India. However, Ican highlight [patterns] from three regions:..Tamil Nadu, West
Bengal and Gujarat, speci ﬁcally. Parenting style may differ as per
the culture of the region. I have seen that compared to Gujaratand West Bengal, Tamil Nadu parents are more aware andstricter when it comes to using of internet and social media bychildren ...Parents may be busy and they may not be able to
monitor children always. Cyber safety issues still remain laggingbehind when it comes to comparing Southern, Western andEastern regions. ”
Clearly, given the diversity and breadth of India, one may ﬁnd
different trends in different regions. She opined that awarenessregarding cyber victimization was higher in South India
compared to West and East India as they seemed to only
spring to action after a crime has been committed. However,it is important to note that preexisting notions regarding adults ’
or children ’s digital/social abilities in ﬂuenced by technopanics or
digital divide will only exacerbate the problem at hand. This getscompounded when parents give out and act on contradictory setsof norms for uses and practices online as children tend to followin the parents ’footsteps.
Navigation Confusion
ABC was of the ﬁrm opinion that digital and social media
technologies do more harm than good for especially young
and impressionable minds that can be swayed by the glamourand glitz of online platforms if a certain opportunity-basedperspective was not built into young people ’s psyche. She
insisted, “It is our responsibility as parents and teachers to
show the younger generation, through our actions, that theseare but tools you use in life after receiving due instruction in howto effectively utilize them for your bene ﬁt becoming ideal digital
citizens. ”
Reﬂecting on her practice as a child psychologist, she gave the
analogy of children being soft as clay and how we can mold them
through our words and actions. She gave the example of a goal
setting exercise and how it is important to ensure children forgeand follow a certain path for themselves. She added, “And, that we
can’t just teach them this by talking about it, we have to show it to
them to avoid navigation confusion. Digital and social media canwork for or against our children ’s positive experiences depending
on how we have shaped their perspective about it. ”
She elaborated how this works by citing a phenomenon she
has come across many times, especially among teenagers,
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 10Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in India“...because they are in the phase where they want to show off.
They want to show that they are something! ‘I have friends. I have
boyfriends. I have done this ...’as a status symbol. So, for
teenagers, I ﬁrmly believe that, in their formative years, if we
get them into the habit of goal setting, then [social] media can be
of good use because then it will serve as a positive in ﬂuence. Like,
when they follow celebrities on social media they will focus onhow Virat Kohli (cricketer) became such a great sportsperson,what does Bill Gates (businessman) say [about becomingsuccessful]. But, if this connection [between goal setting andhow social media is perceived and can be used for our bene ﬁt],
has not been established, then they [teenagers] get into the showoff mode where they try to put up a show of that which doesn ’t
exist! ”
What she is saying can be tied to our existing understanding
that technology is neither good nor bad and it depends on how we
use it. Opportunities and risks exist in a digital/social world justlike they did before and we need tools like goal setting to utilizethe affordances to our advantage. DEF agreed as she ruminatedabout ‘sharenting ’–parents sharing about kids ’lives and their
photos and videos online —as she goes back to issues of hypocrisy
and lack of policies to protect children from online risks. Sheinsisted that we are confusing children when we create socialmedia accounts for infants and then insist they shouldn ’t use
these platforms because they are bad for them. She also attributeda lack of awareness among parents and young people about safely
navigating online to making contradictory and/or restrictive
decisions. She believed cybercrime is hard to face,“Consequences of cybercrime also affect you mentally, so we
must know about online safety precautions. Every school andcollege should have sessions on cybercrime. ”
She mentioned that while guidelines (like the CBSE ones
above) are helpful, we need more to spread awareness andhelp parental mediation of children ’s technology use. This is
because parents in India can sometimes go from one extreme ofsharenting and making accounts for underage children to anotherextreme of announcing blanket bans for adolescents usually based
on academic performance and feedback. This can confuse young
people and raise questions like: How do we navigate in this socialmedia world? What can be the consequences of navigationconfusion? How can we stop negative consequences? Thesewere also some of the questions raised by the stakeholders.The next issue gives us more insight into the genesis of thisnavigation confusion.
Technology and Child-Centered Design
Digital and social media are considered ideal platforms forconnection, communication, and community building.
However, sometimes platforms can alienate people even as we
have a false sense of security from being on the application orwebsite as we take its bene ﬁts for granted. GHI shared how
websites she creates for schools to keep parents clued in onattendance, homework, and performance of students, sometimesfosters a deeper disconnect while maintaining the illusion ofinformation richness. This is where an emphasis on socialconnectedness becomes important. Issues of technology andchild-centered design enable you to have access to (sometimeslarge scale aggregated) data, but you miss out on nuances that are
unique to an individual. She shared, “...there is no
communication between the teacher and the parents.Everything is updated on the website or application; in a way,
technology does lessen the burden, but there is no personal touch.
But it depends on the school as well. I have enrolled my daughterin a school that uses technology [like smart board, WhatsAppgroups] but also believes in personal connection andcommunication. ”
Navigating a digital/social media world also depends on the
intrinsic composition of the platform. JKL who heads an onlinemarketing ﬁrm insisted that a lack of child-centered-design is to
blame for risks faced by young people and added that low levels ofawareness among adults is also problematic. He cited examples ofcyber crimes and cyberbullying and made his case by explaining,
“Online safety is currently not taken too seriously until they
become victims or someone closer [to them] becomes a victimand at that time they surrender [to the situation] and say ‘Oh I
should do that [take precautions]. ’...we are not [a] kids-driven
[society]...like [for e.g.] ﬁnding a restaurant that has kid-friendly
food! You only realize these things when you experience them. ”
GHI insisted that technology is only an enabler and it is our
responsibility to lean toward or away from it to balance thecommunicative aspect of our relationship with and surroundingchildren. She posited that there is a three-way relationshipbetween parents, children and teachers/schools and this triad
is mediated by technology and personal communication. The
child needs to be at the focal point of this triad and technologyshould help, not harm while centering young people in amediated communication design. Social media technologiesrespond to user behaviors; their affordances can be shaped bydeliberate (and informed) patterns of use. We can either createsilos and echo chambers or actively seek multiple perspectives tofoster understanding.
Regulation and Policymaking
Media literacy is often cited as one of the solutions to risks that
new media bring along with its bene ﬁts. However, is it too much
to ask of individuals to be aware of everything and itsrepercussions? Should the industry self-regulate? Should thegovernment bring legislative regulation? VYW agreed that thisproblem needs industry and government involvement and added,“If we give free rein to corporate and media companies they do
what they do and then every time [something new comes out], theindividual or parent has to constantly worry about what new[impact] it will have on me or my kid ...But at the same time
censorship and regulation will always be problematic, right? ”
XYZ, who is also part of a think tank on digital media
platforms, asserted the importance of keeping discourse
around digital and social media and its impact on society aliveand current. He urged, “It’s important to bring experts together to
put forth their ideas and perspectives on how digital and socialmedia is impacting people ’s health and mental wellbeing. Young
people are digital natives and we are witnessing a generationalshift in the way these new media technologies are being used. ”
However, experts pointed that young voices are distinctly
absent in the policymaking process. A possibility in regulation
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 11Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiacould be evidence-based policy and decision-making where
digital natives participate along with older generations.However, currently there is a massive gap between whathappens on ground vs. legislation or even advocacy around
these issues. Illustrative in this regard are recent bans on
TikTok and PUBG, etc. popular platforms, which youngpeople used for identity creation, self-expression, communitybuilding, among others. While current bans are for politicalreasons, earlier bans (due to sensationalist media stories) werelater lifted, only to be reinstated again. Many young people,especially from marginalized backgrounds, used these platformsand these decisions overlooked impact on said audiences/users.
Social Connectedness and Engagement
Social connectedness in a digital/social world depends on our
communication and engagement with and demonstration of it to
our children. ABC emphasized, “[Social] media is absolutely ﬁne
because that ’s the world we live in where everything is digital and
that’s how it ’s going to be and there is nothing to worry about. But
as a parent or educator or school, which direction do you showyour children towards? Do they think [social] media is a resourcefor learning or to show off? ”DEF echoed the sentiment,
“Parenting in a digital and social media world is just like a
coin with two sides...the internet has everything from porn to[tips on] parenting. It is up to us where we draw the line andchoose and tell our kids what is good and bad. Kids are after all
kids and we as parents need to control ourselves and check our
behavior ...practice what we preach. ”
Some experts, though, thought social media for very young
children was a complete no-no. If social media was having a badimpact on teenagers, parents were encouraged to limit/rescindaccess for older children too. Nonetheless, the quantity andquality of social connectedness depends on goal setting as youhelp create a systematic template for children to follow. They havea sense of direction and will most likely ﬁnd ways to optimize
opportunities and disarm risks in this online experience,navigating these social worlds without confusion and with
conﬁdence. ABC added, “Assigning speci ﬁc responsibilities to
and setting goals with/for your children ensures they use theirscreen time wisely. And this needs to start at the young age of twoto two-and-a-half years, because this approach becomes the wayof life as your child becomes a teenager. ”
This becomes easier to do when you share a communicative
and engaging relationship with your children. DEF shared, “I
heard a panel expert say, ‘we should always add ‘co-’in front of
everything we do with our kids like co-play, co-sleep, co-read inthe initial years ’...because we cannot completely shun these new
technologies and their exposure in today ’s world. How long will
you not tell your kid not to use any of the gadgets when you
yourself are using it for hours. ”
This brings an interesting dynamic to notions of trust and
communication between parents and children. Parents can bondwith children over the latest online or do things together likewatch a movie. This helps foster and strengthen socialconnectedness and engagement and is in line with parentalmediation techniques like ‘balance ’(Livingstone and Blum-Ross, 2020 ) where the parent-child relationship is about doing
things together and in moderation.
Parental Involvement: Practice What
Preach
The involvement of parents in children ’s digital/social lives is
crucial towards ensuring young people ’s long term wellbeing. A
healthy relationship must be based on communication and trust.It is important that parents practice what they preach andremember that young people have rights in this digital age justas in other spheres of life. STU, who heads an initiative forchildren ’s rights, reiterated, “Children need guidance regarding
their online practices just as they need guidance in education,sports, career, and life; this is their right and digital citizenship is
becoming an essential in our ever-changing world. ”
VYW recounted that ordinary people use media positively
i.e., using media to enhance life, “...getting new friends, getting
new knowledge, making you aware of something that enrichesyour life, making you feel valued as a citizen: all of these things[enhance life]...[it ’s not unimportant] just because it ’s on new
media. ”
She added that parent-child communication can foster
discipline and moderation in use, chalk up multiple optionsfor activities, and ensure certain minimum hours of sleep foreveryone as essential —something that people are missing out on
these days. Parents and young people could navigate a social
world better by understanding how media literacy, socialconnectedness, and digital citizenship can help them with:
(1) A better sense of links between policy, governance, and
regulation.
(2) Social connectedness and engagement with young people.(3) Practicing what they preach.
There could be many social factors along with emergence of
digital and social media contributing to trends in children ’s uses,
practices, and experiences online. Additionally, as PQR noted,
parenting styles may differ as per the regional culture, and giventhe world we live in, MNO reiterated digital parenting as the needof the hour. We need to understand why and how young peopleuse social media to express and present themselves and focus onopportunities like education and learning to make the best use ofthese platforms.
DISCUSSION
A range of issues such as a lack of child-centered-design, dearth ofknowledge about opportunities and risks of social media, andconfusion about navigating this digital/social world emergedfrom a thematic analysis. Based on these insights, we offerways to think about children ’s wellbeing, how adult caregivers
can maximize children ’s wellbeing, the possibility of and
problems with regulation, and recommendations for parents tofoster trust and meaningful connection with young people to
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 12Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiaframe their engagement with technology, while pointing to
research gaps and directions for future scholarship in India.
In most conceptions of society, children are considered a
group that is vulnerable and in need of protection. This
responsibility to protect and care is placed by society largely
on the shoulders of parents and other adults like teachers,caregivers, etc. and more broadly, on the institutions that playa role in children ’s growth and development. Children have from
their very inception been treated as a special group by law,academia and the market, and in this regard, media studiesare no exception. As our review indicated, scholarship hasbeen equivocal and often polarized regarding children ’s media
(especially digital/social media) access, usage and its moderatingrole in identity formation and social interactions, and, morerecently, on how children develop civic, cultural, and political
ideas and notions of citizenship ( Nolas et al., 2016 ). Concerns
articulated in research and policy circles about children ’s
literacies, rights and parental cautions about appropriate andproductive media use/participation have also been re ﬂected in
mainstream media discourse.
In regard to the ﬁrst concern articulated in this paper, of
identifying research priorities speci ﬁc to the Indian context, these
conversations offer some direction that research could take toinform developing digital media literacy programmers thataddress the fears, anxieties, hopes, and everyday realities ofIndian families. As some of the informants in this study have
suggested, this has led to a multi-pronged yet somewhat
uncoordinated response to managing anxieties and promisesof digital media in relation to children in the Indian context.Across all the themes that emerged, a well conceived medialiteracy effort was seen as pivotal to mitigating risks andfacilitating a positive relationship with media for youngpeople. It is interesting that parents too are seen as importantparticipants in such literacy efforts —both as targets of critical
media literacy programs and as facilitators. This may beparticularly important in the Indian context, as parents ’
experiences with media (both digital and pre-digital) vary
widely depending on socioeconomic and cultural milieu.
This brings us to the second research question we set out to
address: how can such media literacy programmers address thenuanced needs of local cultures while working with existing[often civic] literacy gaps? There is also an important —but in
these conversations a less perceptible —shift from the language of
responsibility to that of rights and participation. In such aframework in the context of India, communication rights arerealized through media literacy —where children discover or are
sensitized to issues of representation and participation in digitaland other media through deliberately thought out literacy
programmers designed bearing in mind the very diverse
contexts that Indian children occupy. Shakuntala Banaji ’s
work, for instance, brings into conversation historical ideasabout children and childhood in India with everyday livedexperiences of children from the margins —drawing from this
the understanding that intervention for and about children mustinvolve children ’s voices and recognition of their agency ( Banaji
2017 ). This perhaps is one way to respond to concerns expressed
by some of the stakeholders around the top-down approach totechnology design as well as the relatively little effort put into
actually involving children in conversations around theirmediated/media lives. Such conversations of course cannotignore the fundamental truth about India —that (as is the case
in other diverse cultures) there is no one group of children that
represents the whole, and that even as we think about policybroadly, there must be room for multiple local variations inapplication.
In recent years, some multilateral agencies such as UNICEF
and UNESCO have attempted to de ﬁne and advocate for
children ’s rights drawing on research-based inputs from
activists and academics, taking forward —to some extent —a
media literacy movement that emerged in the wake of thespread of television. In most of these projects there has beenrecognition that children occupy complex worlds and a shared
understanding of these diverse realities based on rigorous
research must inform policy and programmatic interventions.These have engendered partnerships between developmentagencies and academics, with a slowly increasingrepresentation from the Global South. The Global Kids Onlineproject initiated by UNICEF, the London School of Economicsand Political Science, for instance, while starting off with aEurocentric focus, has now broadened to include a network ofresearchers from 15 countries, India among them. Theinterdisciplinary and international nature of such networksholds promise for a widening of the lens that informs policy
in areas such as education and technology development, both key
to realizing any media literacy agenda. However, what seems to bemissing is the link with the state institutions that allow forinterventional ideas to be supported at scale in sustainable ways.
But no matter where one looks, it is dif ﬁcult to escape the
ambivalence that pervades thinking in the area of children andmedia, and the usefulness of media literacy efforts in the face of arapidly changing, increasingly interconnected world wherechildren —and the adults in their lives —seem to have to
continually recalibrate their ways of being, learning andrelating. While some hail social media developments as
opportunities for children to learn and grow, others fear risks
of exposure to a world we do not fully know and understand(Livingstone and Helsper, 2008 ). There is also the fear of the older
generation (parents, teachers, etc.) of being left behind due totheir lack of understanding and ability of maneuvering thesemedia, as compared to the younger generation which is identi ﬁed
as‘digital natives ’(Burn et al., 2010 ). Some also question the skills
of these natives in navigating the complicated world of socialmedia. Hence, the emergence of literature aroundliteracy —ranging from information literacy to media literacy
and digital literacy to social media literacy —to enable children
and parents to skillfully and safely engage with this virtual
environment ( Buckingham, 2006 ;Bennett et al., 2008 ;
Livingstone 2014 ). All these questions acquire different
nuances and meanings in different cultures, and in India, asperhaps in other transitional societies, they must be consideredagainst a range of social, political, and economic issues. In thedeeply paternalistic and patriarchal family structures, forinstance, how might children ’s autonomy and parental
engagement operate? How might social media use, or device
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 13Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiaownership and control vary across demographic categories?
What in fact might social connectedness or digital citizenshipfor children mean in a context where even adults ﬁnd themselves
multiply disadvantaged and disenfranchised? How does media
literacy then work alongside other urgently required literacies to
empower children and facilitate their growth?
There is no doubt that there is a rich and rapidly growing body
of scholarship on children ’s engagement with digital
technologies, and many convincing arguments for robustmedia literacy programs. While opinions will always range andoften fall into sharply divided buckets, together they open upquestions for future research, some of which are alluded to above.As noted earlier, much of the work that is currently drawn uponby researchers, educators and policy makers and cited hereoriginates from the United States and United Kingdom, to a
lesser extent Europe and Australia. In this review, there was one
study from Saudi Arabia, one on Latino immigrants, with a fewfeaturing sections on Asian countries like China and India. In theIndian context, the authors could only ﬁnd limited industry
research on this topic (from organizations like ASSOCHAM,TCS, etc.), some academic research done by students which cameto the foreground because of local/regional newspaper coverageand a spot of mainstream media work circling around sensationalstories, like underage use, social media crises (such as the BlueWhale game and the more recent #BoisLockerRoom incident)and tips to parents. While issues related to digital media use and
practice comes into public attention during such incidents, there
has been little sustained scholarly engagement that spans thespectrum from educators to media scholars to policy makers toprogram implementers —the full complement of perspectives and
disciplinary knowledge that may be required to make medialiteracy in the country an evidence based project.
In terms of methodology, the larger research projects currently
underway in India are modeled on or directed largely by Westernframeworks —including the Global Kids Online project, which of
course offers room for cultural contextualization. Deeperethnographic engagements that allow for a contextualized
understanding of children ’s media practices, and qualitative
interviews with teachers and parents, would help build a morerobust evidence base that can inform policy. It may be worthwhileto think back on efforts such as Newspapers in Educationprograms that were led by the media industry (recognizingtheir need to build a consumer base among younger readers)and understand how they also served as media literacy efforts, soas to gain some sense of what might work today, and with whatkinds of partners —industry, the state, educational institutions,
and parents. After all, digital media are here to stay, and whetherwe like it or not, we need to make productive use of them, as tools,
as environments, or as interfaces.
Despite the considerable technopanic generated around the
negative aspects of social/digital media like violence, bullying,hate, addiction, and privacy there are also positives, including thepossibility of agentic self representation, productive interactionsand rich relational experiences, increased access to education andlearning opportunities, and even employment. We need moreresearch that looks at the differential ways in which mediapenetration and access might affect children ’s opportunities inthis regard, and how media literacy could be a way to mitigate
some of these issues. There is also a need to consider such issues asyoung people ’s understanding of ethics in the digital world, their
adoption of and thoughts about technologies like virtual reality,
augmented reality and arti ﬁcial intelligence and how they use their
networked self to cross over into adulthood —again, all within the
cultural contexts of India. For instance, how might we understandethical decision-making within the framework of a religiouscommunity? What forms does bullying take online wherestudents of diverse backgrounds might be interacting —and can
the lessons from race-based discrimination stand in for caste-based discrimination in India? How can children activate theiragency through and with digital media? The example of UNICEF ’s
Children as Media Producers ( CAMP, 2014 ) suggests that
children even in resource poor contexts can engage with media
technology when given a chance, and when equipped with the
right tools of critical literacy. But to build such media literacyprograms one requires the understanding gained from robustresearch, using methods that are appropriate to a particularcontext and the participants who occupy it.
All these issues have gained a new salience in the global
experience of the COVID-19 pandemic, and its wide-rangingimpact on social life, particularly on children ’s education. As
brieﬂy alluded to earlier, this has brought in a new urgency to the
issue of digital/social media literacy for both children andcaregivers. It also forces us to recognize and address in literacy
programs, the complexities introduced when children need to
learn online, where parental involvement takes on a completelynew texture, and the granularities of lived context (access,connectivity, space, familial structures, and responsibilities)determine the ways in which young people relate not only tothe digital but also to life in general.
The informants in this study offered media literacy as a broad
umbrella approach that could address most of the issues that theythemselves identi ﬁed as problematic in relation to children ’s
engagement with digital media. But they could point to almostno locally generated knowledge that could undergird a culture-
centered approach to media literacy. This then becomes an area
that is ripe for exploration by young scholars in not only mediaand communication but also education, child development,sociology and social policy studies. In other contexts, scholarshave called out the need to decolonize digital culture studies(Risam, 2018 ;Arora, 2019 ); it is important that we begin this
process in relation to media literacy studies as well. Given thatmedia literacy is a “second order ”research area, dependent on
diverse bodies of knowledge including those mentionedpreviously, this would mean that we need to develop creativecollaborations across disciplines and engage not only in extensive
primary research but also actively dialogue across subject borders.
LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION
This paper is a starting point for more dialogue and support ﬁrst,
for developing a culture-centered approach to understanding coreissues, developing argumentation taking into account multiplesocioeconomic realities, and ultimately, for using media literacy
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 14Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiafor active engagement and participation by youth in a pluralistic,
non-Western, democratic context. We acknowledge that a majorlimitation of this study is its dependence on a narrow range ofstakeholders, which gives us only a slight ﬂavor of the range of
opinions and experiences that could inform further research. The
larger project (this data is from) will also bring in additionalinsights from in-depth interviews with children themselves,parents, and educators. Nevertheless, while stakeholderparticipants interviewed were privileged in many ways, theirwork spread across the socioeconomic spectrum which meansthat their views are certainly informed by sensitivity to largerIndian contexts.
Policy formulation in this area, and more importantly
implementation, needs to take a ﬂexible approach that is
sensitive to multiple lived realities of children across India.
Certainly contextual factors like age, gender, family
background, education, income, and rural/urban location feedinto these differences. But this is both the challenge and value ofqualitative research —that while drawing out broad themes likely
to resonate across situations, there is acknowledgment ofvariations therein.
Another limitation is digital learning and social connectedness
have been greatly affected in the pandemic-related lockdown.While this study was conducted pre-COVID-19, future researchmust consider how these relationships affect young people andmedia literacy in India in the context of virtual learning, working
from home, and greater social isolation during the pandemic.
Further research using culture-centered approaches to medialiteracy and digital citizenship are needed within the GlobalSouth, including in India. Additionally, as this study reveals,beyond youth and parents, conducting research on otherstakeholders who shape media and educational policies areimportant to consider within media literacy scholarship inorder to fully understand the various systems, values, andpriorities that shape digital media use by young people.DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets presented in this article are not readily availablebecause this data is part of a long-term project related to thedoctoral thesis of Devina Sarwatay under the guidance of Prof.Usha Raman at the Department of Communication, University ofHyderabad, India. Requests to access the datasets should bedirected to Devina Sarwatay, devina.sarwatay@gmail.com.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s)for the publication of any potentially identi ﬁable images or data
included in this article.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The paper was jointly conceptualized by the three authors. DSconducted the interviews, analyzed the data and wrote asubstantial portion of the literature review and the analysis.UR supervised the study design and wrote portions of theDiscussion. SR contributed to the literature review and helpedframe parts of the analysis. Both UR and SR offered criticalcomments on drafts of the paper and helped rewrite sections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the experts who participated in thestudy and acknowledge the assistance of Emily Riewestahl inproofreading the paper. We are also thankful to our homeinstitutions as well as the editorial team, the reviewers, and thejournal of ﬁces for their support.
REFERENCES
Akram, W., and Kumar, R. (2017). A study on positive and negative effects of social
media on society. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng. 5 (10), 351 –354. doi:10.26438/ijcse/
v5i10.351354
AlNajjar, A. (2019). Abolish censorship and adopt critical media literacy: A
proactive approach to media and youth in the Middle East. J. Media
Literacy Edu. 11 (3), 73 –84. doi:10.23860/JMLE-2019-11-3-7
Alper, M., Katz, V. S., and Clark, L. S. (2016). Researching children,
intersectionality, and diversity in the digital age. J. Child. Media 10 (1),
107–114. doi:10.1080/17482798.2015.1121886
Arora, P. (2019). Decolonizing privacy studies. Television New Media 20, 366 –378.
doi:10.1177/1527476418806092
ASSOCHAM (2015). “76% minors under age of 13 use `Youtube`: ASSOCHAM
Survey ”. Assocham.Org. Available at: http://www.assocham.org/newsdetail.
php?id /equals5400 (Accessed January 22, 2018).
Banaji, S. (2017). Children and media in India. New York and London: Routledge.Bennett, S., Maton, K., and Kervin, L. (2008). The ’digital natives ’debate: A critical
review of the evidence. Br. J. Educ. Technol. 39 (5), 775 –786. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
8535.2007.00793.x
Best, P., Manktelow, R., and Taylor, B. (2014). Online communication, social
media and adolescent wellbeing: A systematic narrative review. Child. Youth
Serv. Rev. 41, 27 –36. doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2014.03.001Bhatia, K., and Pathak-Shelat, M. (2017). Media literacy as A pathway to religious
literacy in pluralistic democracies: designing A critical media educationpedagogy for primary school children in India. Interact. Stud. Commun.
Cult. 8 (2), 189 –209. doi:10.1386/iscc.8.2-3.189_1
boyd, d. (2008). “Why youth (heart) social network sites: the role of networked
publics in teenage social life, ”inYouth, identity, and digital media the john D.
And catherine T. Macarthur foundation series on digital media and learning .1 s t
Edn, Editors D. John and T. Catherine (London: The MIT Press), 25.
Brenner, M. E. (2006). “Interviewing in educational research, ”inHandbook of
complementary methods in education research . 1st Edn, Editors J. L. Green,
G. Camilli, and P. B. Elmore (New York: Routledge), 357 –370.
Buckingham, D. (2006). “Is there A digital generation, ”inDigital generations:
children, young people and the new media . 1st Edn, Editors D. Buckingham and
R. Willet (Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates). .
Burn, A., Buckingham, D., Parry, B., and Powell, M. (2010). “Minding the gaps, ”in
Adolescents ’online literacies: connecting classrooms. media, and paradigms .
Editors Donna E. Alvermann. New York: Peter Lang, 183
–202. .
Byrne, J., Kardefelt-Winther, D., Livingstone, S., and Stoilova, M. (2016). Report
No.: IRR_2016_01. Global kids online: research synthesis 2015-2016. Availableat: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/67965/ (Accessed September 15, 2019).
Byron, P., Albury, K., and Evers, C. (2013). "It would be weird to have that on
Facebook": young people ’s use of social media and the risk of sharing sexual
health information. Reprod. Health Matters 21 (41), 35 –44. doi:10.1016/S0968-
8080(13)41686-5
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 15Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in IndiaCAMP (2014). Children as media producers. youtube. Available at: https://www.
youtube.com/channel/UCodYUsU-lJzU9ZIPdMlum5A (July 24, 2020).
Cassell, J., and Cramer, M.. (2008). “High tech or high risk: moral panics about girls
online, ”inDigital youth, innovation and the unexpected . 1st Edn, Editor
T. McPherson (Cambridge: MacArthur Foundation Digital Media andLearning Initiative).
CBSE (2017). “Guidelines for safe and effective use of internet and digital
technologies in schools and school Buses, ”in Ebook . Editor
Ministry of Education, Government of India (New Delhi: Central Board ofSecondary Education).
Cheung, C-K. (2009). Media education across four Asian societies: issues and
themes. Int. Rev. Educ. 55 (1), 39 –58. doi:10.1007/s11159-008-9111-2
Choi, M. (2016). A concept analysis of digital citizenship for democratic citizenship
education in the internet age. Theor. Res. Soc. Edu. 44 (4), 565 –607. doi:10.1080/
00933104.2016.1210549
Clark, L. S. (2011). Parental mediation theory for the digital age. Commun. Theor.
21 (4), 323 –343. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2011.01391.x
Connell, S. L., Lauricella, A. R., and Wartella., E. (2015). Parental Co-use of media
technology with their young children in the United States. J. Child. Media 9 (1),
5–21. doi:10.1080/17482798.2015.997440
Coyne, S. M., Rogers, A. A., Zurcher, J. D., Stockdale, L., and Booth, M. (2020). Does
time spent using social media impact mental health?: an eight year longitudinalstudy. Comput. Hum. Behav. 104, 106160. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2019.106160
Abreu, D, Belinha, S., and Yildiz, M. N. (2016). Global media literacy in a digital
age: teaching beyond borders . New York, NY: Peter Lang Publishing.
D. Abreu, S. Belinha, M. Paul, Y. L. Alice, J. Melki, and J. McDougall (Editors)
(2017). International Handbook of media literacy education . New York, NY:
Taylor & Francis.
Desimpelaere, L., Hudders, L., and Van de Sompel, D. (2020). Knowledge as a
strategy for privacy protection: how a privacy literacy training affects children ’s
online disclosure behavior. Comput. Hum. Behav. 110, 106382. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2020.106382
Duggan, M., Lenhart, A, Lampe, C, and Ellison, N. B. (2015). Parents and social
media Washington: Pew Research Center, 16.
Dunne, Á., Lawlor, M. A., and Rowley, J. (2010). Young people ’s use of online social
networking sites –a uses and grati ﬁcations perspective. Jnl Res. Interact Mrkting
4 (1), 46 –58. doi:10.1108/17505931011033551
Dutt, A. (2016). One in three teens lose sleep over gadgets, social media: study.
hindustan times Available at: https://www.hindustantimes.com/health-and-ﬁtness/one-in-three-teens-lose-sleep-over-gadgets-social-media-study/story-
FzNGol7SmMnTJaOx0Lv6ZO.html (Accessed January 22, 2018).
Ellison, N. B., Stein ﬁeld, C., and Lampe., C. (2007). The bene ﬁts of Facebook
“friends: ”social capital and college students ’use of online social network sites.
J. Comput. Mediated Commun. 12 (4), 1143 –1168. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.
2007.00367.x
Evers, C. W., Albury, K., Paul, B., and Crawford, K. (2013). “Young people, social
media, social network sites and sexual health communication in Australia ”This
is funny, you should watch it ”.Int. J. Commun. 7, 18.
Frau-Meigs, D., Brian O ’, N., Soriani, A, and Tomé, V. (2017). Digital citizenship
education: volume 1: overview and new perspectives . Strasbourg: Council of
Europe Publishing.
Friedman, L. W., and Friedman, H. (2013). Using social media technologies to
enhance online learning. J. Educators Online 10 (1), 1 –22. doi:10.9743/jeo.2013.1.5
Gelman, S. A., Taylor, M. G., Nguyen, S. P., Leaper, C., and Bigler, R. S. (2004).
Mother-child conversations about gender: understanding the acquisition ofessentialist beliefs: I. Monogr. Soc. Res. Child Develop. 69 (1) , 1 –14. doi:10.1111/
j.1540-5834.2004.06901002.x
GIET (2010). GIET –activities main activities. Gujarat-Education.Gov. Available at:
http://gujarat-education.gov.in/giet/activities/main-activities.htm (AccessedJanuary 22, 2018).
Ginige, K., Amaratunga, D., and Haigh, R. (2018). Mapping stakeholders
associated with societal challenges: a Methodological Framework. Proced.
Eng. 212, 1195 –1202. doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2018.01.154
Glesne, C. (2011). Becoming qualitative researchers: an introduction . 4th Edn.
Boston, MA: Pearson.
Govindaraju, P., and Banerjee., I. (1999). A retrospective view of the countrywide
classroom in India. J. Educ. Media 24 (2), 103 –116. doi:10.1080/
1358165990240203Harrison, K. (2015). Media and the family. J. Child. Media 9( 1 ) ,1 –4. doi:10.1080/
17482798.2015.997513
Hausmann, J. S., Touloumtzis, C., White, M. T., Colbert, J. A., and Gooding, H. C.
(2017). Adolescent and young adult use of social media for health and itsimplications. J. Adolesc. Health 60 (6), 714 –719. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2016.
12.025
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., and Norenzayan, A. (2010). Most people are not WEIRD.
Nature 466 (7302), 29. doi:10.1038/466029a
Ho, C., Bluestein, D. N., and Jenkins, J. M. (2008). Cultural differences in the
relationship between parenting and children ’s behavior. Dev. Psychol. 44,
507–522. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.44.2.507
Hogan, B. (2010). The presentation of self in the age of social media: Distinguishing
performances and exhibitions online. Bull. Sci. Technol. Soc. 30 (6), 377 –386.
doi:10.1177/0270467610385893
Holmes, J. (2009). Myths and missed opportunities. Inf. Commun. Soc. 12 (8),
1174 –1196. doi:10.1080/13691180902769873
Hswen, Y., Murti, V., Vormawor, A. A., Bhattacharjee, R., and Naslund, J. A.
(2013). Virtual avatars, gaming, and social media: Designing a mobile healthapp to help children choose healthier food options. J. Mob Technol. Med. 2 (2),
8. doi:10.7309/jmtm.2.2.3
Jacobs, S., Egert, C. A., and Barnes, S. B. (2009). “Social media theory and practice:
lessons learned for a pioneering course,
”in 2009 39th IEEE Frontiers in
education conference , October 2009, San Antonio, Texas (San Antonio:IEEE), 1 –5.
Jenkins, H. (2006). “Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: media
education for the 21st century, ”inAn occasional paper on digital media and
learning . Editors D. John and T. Catherine (Chicago: MacArthur Foundation).
Kalmus, V., Blinka, L., and Ólafsson, K. (2015). Does it matter what mama says:
evaluating the role of parental mediation in European adolescents ’excessive
internet use. Child. Soc. 29 (2), 122 –133. doi:10.1111/chso.12020
Katzenbach, C., and Bächle, T. C. (2019). De ﬁning concepts of the digital society.
Internet Pol. Rev. 8 (4), 1 –6. doi:10.14763/2019.4.1430
Kumar, D. (2015). Addicted to you(tube). The Hindu. Available at: https://www.
thehindu.com/features/metroplus/society/toddler-talk-addicted-to-youtube/article6823872.ece (Accessed September 15, 2019).
Kumar, N., and Rangaswamy, N. (2013). The mobile media actor-network in urban
India. Proc. Sigchi Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. ,1 9 8 9 –1998. doi:10.1145/
2470654.2466263
Lee, A. Y. L. (2010). Media education: de ﬁnitions, approaches and development
around the globe. New Horizons Educ. 58 (3), 1 –13.
Lee, L. T. (2013). Privacy and social media. Soc. Media Industries ,1 4 6 –165.
Lee, S. J., and Chae, Y. G. (2007). Children ’s Internet use in a family context:
inﬂuence on family relationships and parental mediation. Cyberpsychol Behav.
10 (5), 640 –644. doi:10.1089/cpb.2007.9975
Lee, S. J., and Chae, Y. G. (2012). Balancing participation and risks in children ’s
Internet use: the role of internet literacy and parental mediation. Cyberpsychol
Behav. Soc. Netw. 15 (5), 257 –262. doi:10.1089/cyber.2011.0552
Lenhart, A., Smith, A., and Anderson, M. (2015). Teens, technology and romantic
relationships . Washington: Pew Res. Cent., 1 –77.
Livingstone, S., and Bulger, M. (2014). A global research agenda for children ’s
rights in the digital age. J. Child. Media 8 (4), 317 –335. doi:10.1080/17482798.
2014.961496
Livingstone, S., Kirwil, L., Ponte, C., and Staksrud, E. (2014). In their own words:
what bothers children online?. Eur. J. Commun. 29 (3), 271 –288. doi:10.1177/
0267323114521045
Livingstone, S., Ólafsson, K., Helsper, E. J., Lupiáñez-Villanueva, F., Veltri, G. A.,
and Folkvord, F. (2017). Maximizing opportunities and minimizing risks forchildren online: the role of digital skills in emerging strategies of parentalmediation. J. Commun. 67 (1), 82 –105. doi:10.1111/jcom.12277
Livingstone, S., and Blum-Ross, A. (2020). Parenting for a digital future: how hopes
and fears about technology shape children ’s lives . United States: Oxford
University Press.
Livingstone, S. (2014). Developing social media literacy: how children learn to
interpret risky opportunities on social network sites. Commun. 39 (3), 283 –303.
doi:10.1515/commun-2014-0113
Livingstone, S., and Helsper, E. (2007). Taking risks when communicating on
the Internet: the role of of ﬂine social-psychological factors in young people ’s
vulnerability to online risks. Inf. Commun. Soc. 10 (5), 619 –644. Available at:
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 16Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiahttps://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13691180701657998 (Accessed
11 March 2019).
Livingstone, S., and Helsper, E. J. (2008). “Parental mediation of children ’s internet
use. J. Broadcasting Electron. Media 52 (4), 581 –599. doi:10.1080/
08838150802437396
Madden, M., Lenhart, A., Cortesi, S., Gasser, U., Duggan, M., Smith, A., et al.
(2013). Teens, social media, and privacy . Washington: Pew Internet & American
life project.
Marwick, A. E. (2008). To catch a predator? The MySpace moral panic. First
Monday, [online]. 13 (6). Available at: https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v13i6.2152(Accessed 12 April 2020).
Marwick, A., and boyd, d. (2014). It ’s just drama ’: teen perspectives on con ﬂict and
aggression in a networked era. J. Youth Stud. 17 (9), 1187 –1204. doi:10.1080/
13676261.2014.901493
McDool, E., Powell, P., Roberts, J., and Taylor, K. (2020). The internet and
children ’s psychological wellbeing. J. Health Econ. 69, 102274. doi:10.1016/j.
jhealeco.2019.102274
Mihailidis, P. (2012). News literacy: global perspectives for the newsroom and the
classroom . New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Mihailidis, P. (2009). “The new civic education: media literacy and youth
empowerment worldwide, ”inA report for the center for international media
assistance at the national endowment for democracy (Washington DC:
September: Center for International Media Assistance).
Mihailidis, P. (2018). Civic media literacies: Re-imagining engagement for civic
intentionality. Learn. Media Technol. 43 (2), 152 –164. doi:10.1080/17439884.
2018.1428623
Mossberger, K., Tolbert, C. J., and McNeal, R. S. (2007). Digital citizenship: the
Internet, society, and participation . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mukherjee, T., Ilavarasan, P. V., and Kar, A. K. (2019). “Digital literacy training,
impact & moderating role of perceived value among unemployed women in
India, ”in Proceedings of the tenth international conference on information and
communication technologies and development, January 2019, Ahmedabad,India, 1 –4.
NCERT (2017). CIET central Institute of educational technology. Available at:
https://ciet.nic.in/pages.php?id /equalsprojects-2014-15 (Accessed July 24, 2020).
Nolas, S-M., Varvantakis, C, and Aruldoss, V. (2016). (Im)possible conversations?
Activism, childhood and everyday life. J. Soc.Pol. Psychol. 4 (1), 252 –265. doi:10.
5964/jspp.v4i1.536
Ohler, J. (2012). Digital citizenship means character education for the digital age.
Edu. Dig. 77 (8), 14 –17. doi:10.1080/00228958.2011.10516720
Padilla-Walker, L. M., and Coyne, S. M. (2011). “Turn that thing off! ”parent and
adolescent predictors of proactive media monitoring. J. Adolesc. 34 (4),
705–
715. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2010.09.002
Padilla-Walker, L. M., Coyne, S. M., FraserCoyne, A. M., FraserDyer, A. M. W. J.,
Dyer, W. J., and Yorgason, J. B. (2012). Parents and adolescents growing up inthe digital age: latent growth curve analysis of proactive media monitoring.J. Adolesc. 35 (5), 1153 –1165. doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2012.03.005
Palfrey, J. (2016). “Reframing privacy and youth media practices, ”inEducation
and social media: toward a digital future . Editors C. Greenhow, J. Sonnevend,
and C. Agura (Cambridge: The MIT Press), 113 –130.
Patankar, R., Vyas, S. K., and Tyagi, D. (2017). “Achieving universal digital literacy
for rural India, ”in Proceedings of the 10th international conference on theory
and practice of electronic governance, March 2017, New Delhi, India, 528 –529.
Pednekar, P. (2017). Experts want Mumbai schools to include social media in their
curriculums. Hindustan Times. Available at: https://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/experts-want-mumbai-school-to-include-social-media-in-their-curriculums/story-0upnWHm7XhUtKO6h6zJdGN.html (AccessedSeptember 15, 2019).
Pednekar, P. (2016). Most students in Mumbai use social media for assignments.
Hindustan Times. Available at: https://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai/most-students-in-mumbai-use-social-media-for-assignments/story-BFGHV8VUV0ugAGEM2SIZCO.html (Accessed September 15, 2019).
Prieto, L. P., Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., Martínez-Maldonado, R., Dimitriadis, Y., and
Gaˇsevic, D. (2019). Orchestrating learning analytics (OrLA): supporting inter-
stakeholder communication about adoption of learning analytics at the
classroom level. Australas. J. Educ. Technol. 35, 4. doi:10.14742/ajet.4314
Press Trust of India (PTI) (2014). Indian teenag ers show risky behaviour online: McAfee.
Available at: https://www.livemint.com/Industry/t7jUP4dxW2P9r9lCDNANHP/Indian-teenagers-show-risky-behaviour- online-McAfee.html (Accessed January 22,
2018).
Quan-Haase, A., and Young, A. L. (2010). Uses and grati ﬁcations of social media: a
comparison of Facebook and instant messaging. Bull. Sci. Technol. Soc. 30 (5),
350–361. doi:10.1177/0270467610380009
Raman, U., and Verghese, R. (2014). “Indian youth and social media: modes of
engagement?, ”inSocial media, culture and politics in Asia . Editors L Wilnat and
A. Aw (New York: Peter Lang), 195 –202.
Ramasubramanian, S., and Darzabi, R. (2020). “Civic engagement, social justice,
and media literacy, ”inMedia literacy in a disruptive media environment .
Editors William G. Christ and Belinha S. De Abreu (New York: Routledge),
272–282.
Ramasubramanian, S., and Yadlin-Segal, A. (2017). Stigma: media in ﬂuence
on. Int. Encyclopedia Media Effects, 1 –10. doi:10.1002/9781118783764.
wbieme0159
Rangaswamy, N., and Arora, P. (2016). The mobile internet in the wild and every
day: digital leisure in the slums of urban India. Int. J. Cult. Stud. 19 (6), 611 –626.
doi:10.1177/1367877915576538
R a u m ,S .( 2 0 1 8 ) .Af r a m e w o r kf o ri n t e g r a t i n gs y s t e m a t i cs t a k e h o l d e ra n a l y s i si n
ecosystem services research: stakeholder mapping for forest ecosystemservices in the UK. Ecosystem Serv. 29, 170 –184. doi:10.1016/j.ecoser.2018.
01.001
Ringrose, J., Harvey, L., Gill, R., and Livingstone, S. (2013). Teen girls, sexual
double standards and ‘sexting
’: gendered value in digital image exchange.
Feminist Theor. 14 (3), 305 –323. doi:10.1177/1464700113499853
Risam, R. (2018). Decolonizing the digital humanities in theory and practice .N e w
York: Routledge Companion Media Studies Digital Humanities, 78 –86.
Robb, M., and Shellenbarger, T. (2013). Promoting digital citizenship and academic
integrity in technology classrooms. Teach. Professor 27 (8), 10 –13.
Sarwatay, D. (2017). “Requirement Of Media Literacy Among Children In India. ”
InPresentation, International Association for Media and Communication
Research, IAMCR 2017 , in Cartagena, Colombia from 16 –20 July, 2017.
Scharrer, E., and Ramasubramanian, S. (2015). Intervening in the media ’si nﬂuence
on stereotypes of race and ethnicity: the role of media literacy education. J. Soc.
Issues 71 (1), 171 –185. doi:10.1111/josi.12103
Smetana, J. G. (2017). Current research on parenting styles, dimensions, and
beliefs. Curr. Opin. Psychol. 15, 19 –25. doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.02.012
Sreenivas, D. (2011). Telling different tales: possible childhoods in children ’s
literature. Childhood 18 (3), 316 –332. doi:10.1177/0907568211407531
Staksrud, E., Ólafsson, K., and Livingstone, S. (2013). Does the use of social
networking sites increase children ’s risk of harm?. Comput. Hum. Behav. 29 (1),
40–50. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.05.026
Subrahmanyam, K., Frison, E., and Michikyan, M. (2020). The relation between
face-to-face and digital interactions and self-esteem: A daily diary study. Hum.
Behav Emerg Tech 2 (2), 116 –127. doi:10.1002/hbe2.187
Swist, T., Collin, P., McCormack, J., and Third, A. (2015). Social media and the
wellbeing of children and young people: a literature review. Available at: http://
www.uws.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_ ﬁle/0019/930502/Social_media_and_
children_and_young_people.pdf (Accessed July 24, 2020).
Trehan, K. (2017). Advertising literacy to empower the young media consumers in
India: a critical exploration of the advertised mind. Media Asia 44 (3-4),
149–160. doi:10.1080/01296612.2018.1448522
Tripp, L. M. (2011). The computer is not for you to be looking around, it is for
schoolwork ’: challenges for digital inclusion as Latino immigrant families
negotiate children ’s access to the internet. New Media Soc. 13, 552 –567.
doi:10.1177/1461444810375293
Tsujimoto, M., Kajikawa, Y., Tomita, J., and Matsumoto, Y. (2018). A review of the
ecosystem concept - towards coherent ecosystem design. Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change 136, 49 –58. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2017.06.032
Valkenburg, P. M., Peter, J., and Schouten, A. P. (2006). Friend networking sites
and their relationship to adolescents ’well-being and social self-esteem.
Cyberpsychol Behav. 9 (5), 584 –590. doi:10.1089/cpb.2006.9.584
van Dijck, J., José, D. N., and Poell, T. (2019). Reframing platform power. Internet
Pol. Rev. 8 (2), 1 –18. doi:10.14763/2019.2.1414
van Dijck, J. (2013). The culture of connectivity: a critical history of social media .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vlaanderen, A., Bevelander, K. E., and Kleemans, M. (2020). Empowering digital
citizenship: an anti-cyberbullying intervention to increase children ’s intentions
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 17Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in Indiato intervene on behalf of the victim. Comput. Hum. Behav. 112, 106459. doi:10.
1016/j.chb.2020.106459
Woods, L., Duff, J., Roehrer, E., Walker, K., and Cummings, E. (2019).
Representing the patient experience of heart failure through empathy,journey and stakeholder mapping. Patient Experience J. 6 (1), 55 –62. doi:10.
35680/2372-0247.1324
Yue, A., Nekmat, E., Annisa, R., and Beta (2019). Digital literacy through digital
citizenship: online civic participation and public opinion evaluation of youthminorities in Southeast Asia. Media Commun. 7 (2), 100 –114. doi:10.17645/
mac.v7i2.1899Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential con ﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Sarwatay, Raman and Ramasubramanian. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCBY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided theoriginal author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the originalpublication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. Nouse, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Human Dynamics | www.frontiersin.org March 2021 | Volume 3 | Article 601239 18Sarwatay et al. Media Literacy in India