1 The Gender Labor Market Gap in the Digital Economy
Monserrat Bustelo Luca Flabbi  Mariana Viollaz 
October, 2019 
Abstract 
Recent years have seen an ever-greater expansion of the digital economy , a development that 
may bring new opportunities to workers who were at a disadvantage in the traditional 
economy. We focus on a specific set of workers who belong to such a group: women. We 
study a skill set of particular relevance in the digital economy and estimate their returns in the 
labor market, according to gender, across four Latin American countries. We find that 
information and communication technologies (ICT) skills and science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) skills yield significant positive returns for both men 
and women. However, there is a significant gender gap that favors men on the STEM returns. 
There is also a sizable gender gap regarding the amount of skills accumulated by gender. 
Through an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition, we estimate that up to 80% of the gender gap in 
hourly wages may be due to the lower returns that women receive, relative to men, on their 
STEM skills. If an investment in skills relevant to the digital economy may be beneficial for 
the labor market performance of both men and women, why returns to STEM exhibit such 
strong gender asymmetries remains an open and relevant question. 
 Contact Information: 
Monserrat Bustelo: Inter-American Development Bank, 1300 New York Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC 20577. E-
mail: MONSERRATB@iadb.org  
Luca Flabbi, Department of Economics, University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, 107 Gardner Hall, CB 3305 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305. E-mail: luca.flabbi@unc.eduMariana Viollaz, Department of Public Administration, CIDE, Carretera Mexico-Toluca 3655, Ciudad de Mexico 
and Centro de Estudios Distributivos, Laborales y Sociales (CEDLAS). E-mail: mariana.viollaz@cide.edu  The paper also includes a Web Appendix available at 
https://sites.google.com/site/lucaflabbi/home/research/BusteloFlabbiViollaz2019_OnlineAppendix .xlsx?attredirects=0&d=1 . 2 1 Introduction 
1.1 Motivation
Recent years have seen major changes in global labor markets. Technical innovation is leading to 
-greater expansion of a digital economy , in 
which old jobs are lost, new jobs are created, and even the same jobs are approached differently 
and require different competences. If old jobs are lost but new ones are created, then new 
opportunities may arise for workers who were previously at a disadvantage in the traditional 
economy.1 
In this paper, we focus on a specific set of workers who belong to such a group: women. Gender 
gaps in the labor market have been a significant and persistent empirical regularity in most 
countries around the world (Blau and Kahn, 2017). The digital economy affects this longstanding 
gap and may act to reduce or magnify it, depending on the skills that men and women can acquire 
and deliver in the labor market. Focusing on a set of high-income countries, OECD (2018a) finds 
that differences in skill endowments between male and female workers account for some but not 
all of the wage gap. When controlling for skills relevant to the digital economy, the gender wage 
gap is reduced by 1 to 12 percentage points.2OECD (2018b) also shows evidence of gender gaps 
in skills, tracing some back to human capital acquisition during the schooling years. However, 
among recent generations, the study finds that the gender gap in skills relevant to the digital 
economy is more ambiguous: In some areas, girls outperform boys (e.g., collaborative problem 
solving) but are outperformed by boys in others (e.g., digital-related skills). 
Our report focuses on Latin American countries where no systematic analysis of the interaction 
between the digital economy and the gender gap has been undertaken.3The primary reason for the 
1 A number of reports by multilateral organizations and international think-tanks are making a similar point: for the 
OECD, see OECD (2018a; 2018b); for the World Bank, see Box 2.10 in World Bank (2016); for the ILO, see Ryder 
(2018); for the WEF, see World Economic Forum (2018); for the IDB, see Busso et al. (2017). 
2 See Section 1.3 in OECD (2018a). The highest reduction is for Japan, which has the highest gender wage gap among 
OECD countries at about 40%. 
3 Some country reports are starting to look at gender differences in skill acquisition, but without relating the results to 
gender differentials in the labor market. See, for example, OECD (2016) on Chile. The report  using PIAAC data   
3 
 absence of systematic contributions across Latin America relates to data limitations: 
Representative individual-level data, capable of capturing the skills required in the digital 
economy, are scarce. We are taking a first step in this analysis by using data sets comprising this 
relevant information for four Latin American countries: Chile, Bolivia, Colombia, and El Salvador. 
We have obtained the relevant information by combining two different surveys that collected data 
on skills: the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies  (PIAAC) survey, 
available for Chile in 2014, and the Skills Towards Employment and Productivity  (STEP) survey, 
available for Colombia and Bolivia in 2012 and for El Salvador in 2013.  
After extracting the estimation sample, we document gender gaps in skills endowments and 
estimate returns to skills. We control for a variety of factors, including heterogeneous returns by 
with respect to the endogenous selection of women in the labor market. Finally, we decompose 
the gender gap in the portion resulting from differences in returns to skills and differences in skill 
endowments. 
Two specific skills yield significant returns across the board: STEM ( science, technology, 
engineering, and math ) and ICT ( information and communication technologies ). ICT returns are 
similar across genders, with an increase of one standard deviation in the skill generating a return 
in hourly wages of about 17%. By contrast, STEM returns differ significantly between genders, 
with an increase of one standard deviation generating a 15% return for men and a 9% return for 
women. Results by country show some differences in magnitudes. Returns to STEM are higher 
than the aggregate in Chile and lower than the aggregate in Bolivia, Colombia, and El Salvador. 
We also estimate that higher levels of education imply significantly higher returns for men but not 
for women. The estimates indicate that STEM endowments and returns play an important role in 
explaining the aggregate gender gap in hourly wages; the lower endowments for women may be 
responsible for up to 30% of the gap, while the lower returns for women may account for close to 
80%. 
 
 
, on study skill formation in the Latin American and the 
Caribbean region, provided evidence on the availability and adoption of digital technologies but not on their relation 
to the gender gap.  
4 
 1.2 Structure 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data and the specific indicators we build 
to describe the digital economy. Section 3 provides standard descriptive statistics on the gender 
gaps in the labor market, integrating gaps in skills relevant to the digital economy. Section 4 
provides estimates of the returns to these skills, according to gender. The estimates control for a 
rich set of individual characteristics and, in some specifications, for selection in the labor market. 
We also provide evidence regarding the interaction of the skills with the sectors most exposed to 
the digital economy, as well as with education levels. Section 5 focuses on the gender gap in hourly 
wages and unpacks the extent to which the gap can be accounted for by differences in returns, 
relative to differences in the endowment of digital-economy-relevant skills. Section 6 provides 
final comments and a summary of the results. Appendix A includes details about the construction 
of the variables of interest, Appendix B presents the complete regression results, and Appendix C 
provides results according to country. A Web Appendix includes additional specifications and 
robustness checks. 
 
2 Data 
We combine information from two surveys that collected data on skills at work. First, we use 
information accessible in the  PIAAC survey, available for Chile in 2014. The PIAAC is a survey 
-
processing skills  literacy, numeracy, and problem solving  and gathers data on how adults use 
their skills at work. The survey is implemented by an international consortium, contracted by the 
OECD, and is designed to ensure international comparability of the data. Second, we use 
information from the STEP survey, available for Colombia and Bolivia in 2012 and El Salvador 
in 2013. STEP is a survey collected by the World Bank and gathers data on skills in urban areas 
of low- and middle-income countries. It also shares the main objectives and structure of the PIAAC 
questionnaire. It strives to record the data in a way that renders it comparable across different 
countries. 
Still, two concerns remain regarding the comparability of STEP and PIAAC for our purposes. The 
first relates to differences in sampling: STEP is representative of people aged 15-64, living in urban  
5 
 areas, while PIAAC is representative of people aged 16-65, living in both urban and rural areas. 
represented more heavily in non-urban areas: agriculture, forestry and fishery, as well as mining 
and quarrying.4 Due to the slightly disparate age range between the two surveys, we include 
individuals aged 16-64 in the estimation sample. We also restrict the sample to wage employees 
of the private sector, except for El Salvador, where it is not possible to distinguish between the 
private and public sector. These restrictions generate a final estimation sample with 1,541 
observation for Chile, 510 for Bolivia, 668 for Colombia, and 522 for El Salvador. 
The second relates to differences in survey questions. PIAAC and STEP use different 
questionnaires to collect information. Still, the questions about labor market outcomes, 
demographic characteristics, socioeconomic variables, and ability measures generate variables that 
allow for a high degree of comparability between the surveys. The differences in survey questions 
become more relevant when crafting measures of skills, as eliciting skills is a more difficult, and 
arguably less agreed upon, task than eliciting demographic characteristics or standard labor market 
outc
devote the next section of the paper to describing how we build the relevant skills measures from 
parability across countries and 
surveys. 
Throughout the paper, the unit of observation of the data remains the individual worker. The level 
of analysis operates at both the country level and the aggregate level, pooling all countries into a 
single data set. Typically, we discuss the results from the pooled sample in the main text of the 
paper and report country-level results in the Web Appendix. 
 
 
4 We could not limit our direct focus to the urban population in Chile because PIAAC does not report an indicator for 
urban and rural areas. The only geographic indicator reported by PIAAC is the OECD territorial level 2 region, which, 
for Chile, corresponds to 11 of the 15 regions of the country. We have combined this information with the rural/urban 
indicator contained in a nationally representative household survey for Chile  the 2013 CASEN survey. Based on 
CASEN, we can calculate the proportion of the population in each region living in urban areas. Results show that most 
of the population in each Chilean region is concentrated in urban centers. In most of the regions, more than 90% of 
the population lives in urban areas, with the most rural region (Maule) reporting 67% of urban population. Still, we 
have performed a robustness exercise, where we eliminated regions with less than 85% or 75% of the population living 
in urban areas. Our results were barely affected. 
  
6 
 2.1 Skills measures 
We build the skills measures to summarize the information collected in the numerous relevant 
survey questions and in order to maximize the comparability with previous literature and across 
countries. We focus on skills relevant in the digital economy. The previous literature has identified 
ICT and STEM quantitative skills as critical to thriving in the digital era (OECD, 2018a; OECD, 
2018b). It has also argued that soft, social, and interpersonal skills, jointly with creativity and 
critical thinking, will become critical in future, innovative labor markets (Ryder, 2018; World 
Economic Forum, 2018; OECD, 2018b). To capture both sets of competencies, we follow the 
classification proposed by Grundke et al. (2017) in preparatory work for a series of OECD reports 
on skills and the digital economy.5They define the following six sets of skills using data from the 
PIAAC survey on OECD countries: 
1. ICT skills are those related to ICT use, from reading and writing emails to using Word and 
Excel or a programming language. 
2. Managerial and communication skills  capture strategic management abilities for the 
generation of sustainable competitive advantages, including human resource management 
practices, which encompassnegotiating with people, instructing, advising, and persuading people. 
3. Readiness to learn and creative problem-solving skills  include the ability to solve problems 
in the process of developing organizational capabilities and improving firm performance. 
4. Self-organization skills  t to changes and absorb shocks. 
5. Marketing and accounting skills  include abilities associated with accounting tasks, such as 
reading financial invoices and bills, and with front-of-office marketing tasks, such as interacting 
with clients.
6. STEM quantitative skills  include the ability to apply algebra, simple or complex, and 
prepare charts and tables. 
In Table A1 in Appendix A, we provide details on the exact questions from PIAAC and STEP that 
we use to generate each skill measure and the metric associated with each variable. Variables from 
 
5 See OECD (2018a, 2018b). 
  
7 
 PIAAC derive exactly from the definition proposed by Grundke et al. (2017): We construct the 
same set of measures using the PIAAC for Chile as they did using the PIAAC on the 31 OECD 
countries in their analysis.6 In the STEP surveys for Bolivia, Colombia, and El Salvador, we 
identify the questions aimed at capturing the same skills and that are as close as possible to those 
available in PIAAC.  
The first important difference between the two surveys is that most variables in PIAAC capture 
the , 
while STEP involves a combination of binary questions (whether a person performs a certain task 
at work or not) with some categorical frequency questions as in PIAAC. In order to overcome 
these differences between surveys, we construct the skill measures applying a standardization 
methodology used by previous studies (Acemoglu and Autor, 2011; Almeida et al., 2018). First, 
for each variable associated to a skill category, we calculate the mean and standard deviation and 
standardize the variable by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Second, 
for each worker in the sample, we obtain a score for each skill category by adding all the 
standardized variables obtained in the first step. Third, for all skill measures to have a zero mean 
and standard deviation of one, we do one additional standardization of the six skill categories by 
subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. The standardization is performed 
for each country separately. 
The second important difference concerns the difference in the actual questions. Many important 
questions are extremely similar, for example, those related to ICT skills or STEM skills, but there 
are others with more salient differences. For example, to build marketing and accounting skills, 
PIAAC includes a question on the frequency of selling products or services, but STEP does not. 
Our strategy here has been to base our choices on previous literature using the STEP survey to 
construct skills measures (Di Carlo et al., 2016; Roseth et al., 2016; Lo Bello et al., 2019) or 
combining both PIAAC and STEP to compare across countries (Lewandowski et al., 2019). The 
main difference between these previous studies and our paper is that they have focused on a 
different set of skills, mirroring the measures available in U.S. surveys instead of those available 
in the OECD PIAAC surveys.7 
 
6 The only difference is the exclusion of a variable capturing physical skills that Grundke et al. (2017) included in the 
ICT measure with a negative weight. 
7 They focus on the difference between cognitive and manual skills and between routine and non-routine tasks.  
8 
 2.2 Digital intensity 
In our econometric analysis, we also estimate differential returns, according to the digital intensity 
of each economic sector. Digital intensity refers to the degree in which the production and the 
performance of a given sector has been impacted by the digital transformation, i.e., the same set 
of technological innovations that have made relevant the skills that are the object of this study. The 
process of digital transformation is complex, involving more than a mere investment in computers, 
software, cold computing, or other digital tools, embedding them in production with the 
appropriate human capital and using them when deal (Calvino et al.,  
2018). Looking at digital intensity is important in our context because the skills most relevant to 
the digital economy may be complementary to the technologies and business practices used by 
least, study the heterogeneity on returns by the degree of digital intensity at the sector level.  
We proceed by defining an indicator variable of digital intensity for each of 36 economic sectors 
following the classification established by Calvino et al. (2018) for a subset of OECD countries. 
Using data from the Latin American region to define the digital intensive indicator variable would 
seven variables to describe a given sector as more or less digital-intensive: level of investment in 
ICT equipment, level of investment in software and databases, purchases of ICT services, 
purchases of ICT goods, robot use, revenues from online sales, and intensity of ICT specialists. 
None of these variables are reliably collected for Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC) 
countries, so we use the same indicator defined by Calvino et al. (2018) but apply it to our LAC 
countries. 
To determine the extent to which transferring the OECD classifications to LAC countries 
represents a credible way to proceed, we use the only variable with some correlation to digital 
intensity available on the LAC region. The International Federation of Robotics (IFR) provides 
counts of the stock of robots by economic sector, country, and year worldwide, including the four 
countries under investigation here. We calculate the average number of robots in each economic 
sectors above the median. We compare this classification specification from the 
Latin American region to the one appearing in Calvino et al. (2018) to evaluate the viability of the  
9 
 robot use component of their digital intensive indicator. The comparison indicates a correlation of 
0.8 between the Latin American classification and the OECD classification, lending some weight 
to the use of the OECD classification in our estimates. Still, some important differences exist in 
the intensity of robot use between regions. Table A2 in Appendix A shows the average number of 
operational robots for seven aggregate economic sectors in the Latin American region, in the 
United States, and in Western Europe. The number of operational robots is between 4 and 100 
times larger in the United States and Europe, relative to Latin America. 
In conclusion, the comparison shows that LAC countries and high-income OECD countries are 
generally similar, in terms of the sectors of the economy with high digital intensity, but that the 
degree of intensity is likely to be much smaller in LAC countries than in OECD countries. 
 
3 Descriptive Analysis: The Gender Gap 
We first describe the gender gaps in the labor market and the gender differentials in the relevant 
skills variables. In terms of human capital measures, Table 1 documents the high rates of education 
of the women in our sample, relative to the men: 79% of women are high-educated (upper 
secondary education completed or more), while the percentage is 71% for men.  
In terms of labor market performance, the usual gender gap in earnings emerges: The average wage 
of low-educated women is 83% of the average wage of low-educated men; for the high-educated 
group, the value is 87%. We also find the usual gender asymmetries in the distribution of 
occupation: 32% of women are employed in this occupational category, relative to 16% of men. 
Among men, crafts and related trades is the main occupation, employing about 22% of the 
workforce. In terms of sectors, both women and men are largely employed in the services sector, 
but the percentage for women is higher, reaching 93%, while, for men, it is 86%. A similar pattern 
is found when comparing the percentages of women and men employed in digital-intensive 
sectors. For women, we are looking at 53%, while, for men, it is 50%.  The usual gender gap in 
labor market participation is also confirmed by our data: Figure 1 shows that, on average, 34% of 
women in the sample do not participate in the labor market, compared to 18% of men. There are  
10 
 important differences by education levels: Low-educated women participate at a 54% rate, while 
high-educated women participate at a 73% rate. 
Gender differences, with respect to skills relevant to the digital economy, are reported in Figure 2 
and at the bottom of Table 1. The largest difference relates to STEM, where the average skill level 
for men is 0.12 of a standard deviation above the mean, while the average for women is 0.15 of a 
standard deviation below the mean.8 A smaller disadvantage for women is observed in the context 
of ICT skills, where they hold a value 0.03 of a standard deviation below the mean compared to a 
similar value ,which is, of course, above the mean for men. On all the other three skills, men and 
women do not show noticeable differences. 
 
4 Econometric Analysis: Returns to Skills by 
Gender 
This section presents estimates of the impact of skills on hourly wages, according to gender. We 
also analyze how these returns to skills interact with the digital intensity of the sector in which the 
worker is employed. The interaction is relevant to understand how skills play a role in the process 
ders that while the digital economy 
is expanding, it may have not yet reached all the sectors of the labor market. 
The econometric analysis focuses on estimating equations of the form: 
 
  (1) 
 
where the natural log of the hourly wage of individual i of gender g in country j (wij) is regressed 
on a set of individual-level controls (the vector xij), a measure of the individual skill relevant in the 
digital economy ( sij) and a country-fixed effect ( j
the percentage change in earnings associated with a unit increase in the amount of skill s. 
Following the literature estimating earnings functions, we label this coefficient the return to skills . 
 
8 All the skill indexes are normalized to be mean zero and a standard deviation of one in the overall population. 
11 
 It is worth noting here that the parameters to be estimated are denoted by the superscript g, to 
indicate that we are estimating gender-specific coefficients. In other words, we are estimating 
equation (1) separately by gender.9 
This specification is different, with respect to the one used by OECD (2018a), which performs a 
-specific returns to skills by 
interacting a gender dummy with the skill variable and then estimating on the pooled sample of 
men and women. In terms of equation (1), this is equivalent to having the superscript g, but only 
-specific 
returns on all the variables. Without this flexibility, the returns to skills could capture some of the 
gender-specific impacts of the other covariates. We find that this specification is, indeed, relevant; 
numerous coefficients are significantly different between men and women. In Section 4.4, we 
show the extent to which using the OECD (2018a) specifications instead impacts our results.                                                     
The individual-level controls included in the vector xij are quite parsimonious, due partly to data 
availability and also to the returns we aim to identify. Specifically, the vector includes a constant, 
age and age squared, an indicator variable of completed upper secondary education or more, and 
literacy and numeracy test scores.10 In short, the baseline specification controls for broad human 
capital indicators (age and education), for a proxy of basic cognitive abilities (literacy and 
numeracy scores) and for aggregate differences between the economies (the country-fixed effects). 
The only additional controls available across all data sets, available for our inclusion in the 
specification, are sectors and occupations indicator variables. We decided not to include them in 
the baseline specification for the following reason: Choice of sector and occupation is endogenous 
and, as such, the overall returns to skills may legitimately include the return to the choice of a 
certain occupation/industry cell. Since we are interested in gender gaps in the overall return to 
skills, we have preferred not to decompose the returns in the component due to occupation and 
sector choices and in the component due to differences within a given sector and occupation cell. 
 
9 To simplify notation, we do not add the indicator g to the observed variables, but it is understood that we will include 
in each regression only individuals belonging of a specific gender. 
10 Literacy and numeracy test scores are, unfortunately, not available for all countries. Literacy scores are available 
for Bolivia, Colombia, and Chile, while numeracy scores are only available for Chile. We have therefore decided to 
have them interact with the country  fixed effects in the section for specification, pooling all the countries together.  
12 
 Still, estimating the coefficient conditional on industry and occupation is informative, and we 
present these estimates in Section 4.4. 
 
4.1 Main Results 
The main results on returns to skills are presented in Figure 3. The two main cognitive skills 
relevant in the digital economy ICT and STEM show positive and significant returns for both 
men and women, but, in STEM, the returns are significantly higher for men.11 Specifically, a one 
standard deviation increase in the STEM skill measure implies a 15.1% increase in wages for men 
and an 8.7% increase in wages for women. ICT skill returns are more similar across genders, 
ranging from 16.9% for women to 17.6% for men. The returns to the other skills are lower but still 
positive and significant except for marketing and accounting for women. 
Compared with the returns estimated in OECD countries, the returns to ICT and STEM are higher 
than the estimated average over the pooled set of 31 OECD countries. OECD (2018a) estimates 
returns to ICT skills to be about 12% for women and about 10.5% for men. The returns to STEM 
skills are estimated at 4% and 4.5%, for women and men, respectively. Contrary to the results for 
the four LAC countries, there is a gender gap in returns to ICT, favoring women, while there is no 
significant difference in returns to STEM by gender.12 
We have tried to determine whether the difference in results, with respect to OECD (2018a), 
derives from differences in the specification. As mentioned above, even when the variables 
employed are comparable, the specifications are slightly different: OECD (2018a) estimates that 
by having a gender dummy interacted with skills, while we prefer a more flexible specification, 
where all the returns are allowed to be gender-specific. We have run the specification preferred by 
OECD (2018a) on our data and found that the difference in specification explain only a small 
portion of the difference. We discuss the results in Section 4.4. 
The main results of the returns to skills interacted with the level of digital intensity in the sector 
are presented in Figure 4. The figure reports the additional impact of a given skill when the worker 
 
11 We report point estimates with the dot and the diamond, and the 90% confidence interval with vertical lines. As a 
result, any time that the vertical line does not cross zero, it means that the coefficient is significantly different from 
zero.
12 See Figure 1.7, page 16, OECD (2018a).  
13 
 is employed in a sector with high digital intensity. The exercise is meant to capture the extent to 
which a portion of the overall returns discussed above is due to composition effects across sectors, 
i.e., if the skills have significant and positive returns only in those sectors that are more impacted 
by the digital economy, or if they are equally valuable across all sectors. The figure shows that 
digital intensity does not generally have a significant impact: Most of the coefficients are not 
significantly different from zero, and the point estimates are very close to zero.13 Again, this result 
stands in stark contrast with the findings for OECD countries. OECD (2018a) estimates that 
working in digital-intensive industries increases returns to skill by about 2 to 3 percentage points.14 
The results for our four Latin American countries indicate that either digital intensity is not very 
pronounced in Latin America or that the skills under consideration are valuable across all the 
sectors of Latin American economies. Even with the data at our disposal, we cannot disentangle 
the two explanations, but some of the evidence discussed in Section 2.2 indicate that digital 
intensity is, indeed, less pronounced in Latin America than in OECD countries. Specifically, Table 
A2 in Appendix A shows that the average number of operational robots for seven aggregate 
economic sectors (the only direct measure of digital intensity available for LAC countries) is 
between 4 and 100 times larger in the United States and Western Europe than in Latin America. 
This result is consistent with the analysis based on the broader Digital Adoption Index, reported 
by Busso et al. (2017). The index shows that Latin America lags behind high-income economies 
in terms of availability and adoption of digital technologies.15 In other words, if the sectors of the 
economy with high digital intensity are similar between LAC countries and high-income OECD 
countries, the extent of the intensity is much smaller in LAC. 
To summarize the results obtained by aggregating the data gleaned from the four countries under 
study, (i) we estimated significant and large returns to ICT and STEM, with no significant gender 
differences on the first, but a significant gender gap in favor of men on the second. (ii) For the 
other skill measures, we found positive but lower returns with mainly not statistically significant 
differences between women and men. (iii) The digital intensity of the sectors does not seem a 
crucial factor in determining these returns. 
 
13 The exception are self-organization and marketing & accounting, which have, respectively, slightly smaller and 
slightly higher returns when used in digital-intensive sectors.  
14 See Figure 1.3, page 12, OECD (2018a). 
15 See Figure 4.8, page 95, Busso et al. (2017). 
14 
 In Appendix C, we look at each country in isolation from the others; we actually found results for 
each that are qualitatively similar to the aggregate for Chile, Bolivia, and Colombia but with some 
differences in magnitude. Returns to STEM are higher than the aggregate ofChile and lower than 
the aggregate of Bolivia and Colombia. El Salvador, on the other hand, does not report a gender 
gap favoring men in returns to STEM; both men and women have positive but similar returns. 
Returns to ICT in El Salvador are also a little different than the aggregate, indicating a higher (but 
not significantly so) return for women. Extra returns for working in digital-intensive sectors 
estimated by country confirm the aggregate results: Digital intensity does not significantly increase 
returns to skills. 
 
4.2 Heterogeneous Effects 
We focus on the heterogeneous effect on the individual characteristic most relevant with respect 
to skills formation and acquisition: schooling levels. We focus on upper secondary education, and 
we report the differential effect on the returns of individuals who completed this educational level 
with respect to individuals who completed less. The results are reported in Figure 5. They show 
that higher levels of education yield significantly higher returns for men but not for women. For 
women, the increase in returns never departs significantly from zero, and the point estimates are 
always lower than those for men. In the next section, we discuss whether these differences may be 
due to the different selection in the labor market by gender. 
These results are more mixed when looking at regressions by country (Figure C4 in Appendix C). 
In Chile, we estimate significantly higher returns for high-educated men on all skills except 
readiness to learn. In Bolivia and El Salvador, only half of the skill types demonstrate significant 
increases; in Colombia, only one. What remains broadly similar to the aggregate results is that the 
increase in returns is higher for men than women. The only important exception is Colombia, 
where the point estimate of increase in ICT and STEM is higher for women. However, the 
estimated coefficient is not significantly different from zero in either case.  
      
  
15 
 4.3 Selection in the Labor Market 
Women participate in the labor market less than men. This is a common feature among most labor 
markets, and it holds in our samples. Figure 1 shows that women participate in the labor market 
less than men at all education levels. The Web Appendix shows the results of each country. 
Because participation is non-random  i.e., it is the result of a choice  the women we observe 
working may be systematically different from those not working. If the characteristics over which 
they are different are related to their performance in the labor market, then the return to skills we 
estimated are only representative of the population of women working and not of the entire 
population of women. This bias may affect some relevant policy implications. For example, if a 
policy is successful in increasing the skill levels of women, should we expect the returns 
that were affected by the policy to be more like those of the women currently participating or the 
ones who are not? Because some of the factors related to productivity remain unobserved, it is not 
easy to answer this question. It may therefore be useful to estimate a set of returns that can indicate 
if the estimated returns of women currently working are significantly different from those of the 
overall population of women.16 
We adopt a standard Heckman selection model (Heckman, 1979) to obtain returns that consider 
selection in the labor market. To avoid relaying only on distributional assumptions for 
identification, we adopt an exclusion-restriction: W s number of 
children affects her participation decision but not the wage paid to her.17 
Results are presented in Figure 6 and show relatively small changes with respect to the baseline 
specifications reported in Figures3 and 5. Still, two small differences are worth mentioning. First, 
the point estimate of the return to ICT becomes higher for women than men. However, both in the 
baseline specification and in the selection-correction specification, the differences in returns 
between men and women are not significantly different from each other. Second, the gap in favor 
 
16 Notice that in principle, the same selection problem also applies to men but because a high proportion of men 
participate in the labor market, we follow the common practice of ignoring selection in the labor market for them. In 
other words, even if not all men participate in the labor market, the small proportion of men who do not is unlikely to 
affect the overall estimates very much. 
17 This assumption is common in the literature, but it is not without limitations. If it is true that firms cannot offer 
wage contracts contingent to the presence of children, some evidence shows that the unequal distribution of household 
work between men and women may generate a systematic (and potentially causal) association between wages and the 
presence of children.  
16 
 of men in returns to STEM is reduced because the point estimate for women increases from 8.7% 
to 9.5%. 
By looking at results by country (reported in Figure C5 of Appendix C), we can see that these 
minor changes are mainly driven by Chile. In Chile, controlling for selection increases  
returns to ICT from 18.9% to 24.0% and returns to STEM from 11.0% to 18.3%. Another relevant 
change takes place in Bolivia, where returns to STEM become significantly different 
from zero when controlling for selection. 
With respect to heterogeneous returns, correcting for selection does not qualitatively change the 
results. The results are reported in Figure 7 and should be compared to Figures 4 and 5. Overall, 
they confirm the lack of significantly higher returns for agents working in the digital-intensive 
sector and reiterate that only men have significantly higher returns when they complete upper 
secondary education. 
Finally, estimates obtained by correcting for selection show that this is not the source of differences 
with respect to returns estimated in OECD countries (OECD 2018a). Selection-correction slightly 
increases the differences because it leads to slightly higher returns to ICT and STEM for women. 
 
4.4 Robustness Analysis 
In this section, we provide a robustness analysis along three dimensions. First, we study how the 
results change when we replicate the specifications of the OECD (2018a); we constrain all the 
coefficients to be the same for men and women except for the returns to skills. Second, we study 
how the results change when we control for sectors and occupations. Finally, we check if the results 
controlling for selection are affected by using different exclusion-restrictions in the selection 
model. 
Results constraining all the coefficients to be the same for men and women except for the returns 
to skills are reported in Table B7. This specification consists in running equation (1) on a sample 
pooling together men and women and then interacting the women indicator variable with the 
variable measuring the specific skill under consideration. Our favorite baseline specification 
allows all the coefficients to be gender-specific because it allows for more flexibility. This different 
constrained version lets only the return to skill be gender-specific; as a result, returns to skills may  
17 
 capture some of the gender-specific impacts of the other covariates. By focusing on the two skills 
with the strongest impact in the baseline specification (ICT and STEM), the estimation results in 
the constrained specification are essentially identical to ICT and show a small difference to STEM. 
If, in the baseline specification, returns to STEM are estimated to be 15.2%, those for 
women are 6.7 percentage points lower.  returns on the constrained specification are 
estimated to be 14.9%, whereas those for women are 5.9 percentage points lower. This slightly 
lower gender gap in constrained specification is an indication that allowing for gender-specific 
returns on the other covariates and on country-fixed effects is useful for estimating returns closer 
to consistent values. 
Results controlling for sectors and occupations are reported in Table B8. As mentioned, sectors 
and occupations are important controls given that each sector/occupation cell may require and use 
the skills in the digital economy differently. Conditioning on them may clarify if the differences 
in returns we observed are due to the sorting of men and women over these cells or to different 
returns within cells. Because occupational choices are endogenous and within-sector differences 
may be affected by unobservable characteristics, this analysis remains largely descriptive. In other 
words, the overall returns to skills may legitimately include the return to the choice of a certain 
occupation. The estimation results conditioning on sectors and occupation qualitatively confirm 
the main result in the baseline specification: We estimate significant returns to ICT and STEM, 
with no significant gender differences in the former but a significant gender gap in favor of men 
in the latter. Quantitatively, both ICT and STEM returns are estimated to be lower when sectors 
and occupation controls are introduced. For example, ICT returns decreased from 16.8% 
in the baseline specification to 7.0% in the specification controlling for sector and occupation; the 
corresponding values for men were 17.4% and 7.1%, respectively. These results indicate, probably 
not surprisingly, that a portion of the returns to ICT and STEM is because individuals who possess 
those skills work in a sector and occupation that pay relatively more in comparison to people with 
a lower level of these skills. More interestingly, the gender gap in ICT returns is unaffected when 
we change the specification, unlikethe gender gap in STEM returns. In other words, conditioning 
on the sector and occupation cell,  returns to STEM are estimated to be much greater than 
 returns to STEM than in the economy as a whole. The results suggest that different 
choices of occupation and sector are not the main driver of the overall gender gap in STEM returns;  
18 
 womens occupational choices, vis-a-vis men s, decreasethe gender gap in returns present within 
sector/occupation cells. 
Results controlling for how different exclusion-restrictions affect our selection model are reported 
in Table B9. In our baseline selection model, we used the presence of children as the exclusion-
restriction, a variable very likely to affect the participation decisions of women. However, not only 
fertility decisions are endogenous, but the presence of children may also directly impact wages 
and not only participation. Still, we are limited in terms of data availability on the exclusion-
restrictions we can use in the selection model. Furthermore, the number of children is the only 
variable available on all data sets. However, if we limit ourselves to the STEP countries, we can 
use additional information. Specifically, we use information about whether the mother or father of 
the person answering the survey lives in the household. This presence may be very influential on 
the labor market participation decision of women, either because they can help in household 
production or because they need resources for their care. We therefore built an indicator variable 
for whether the mother or father of the person answering the survey is living in the household. We 
use it as an exclusion-restriction alone and jointly with the presence-of-children variable. 
Estimation results show very little sensitivity to the various exclusion-restrictions. For example, 
the overall STEM return in STEP countries is estimated to be about 5.7% without controlling for 
selection. When controlling for selection, it is estimated to be just a little lower, ranging from 
5.13% when using only the presence of children as an exclusion-restriction, to 5.17% when using 
only the presence of grandparents, to 5.16% when using both.18 
 
5 Post-Estimation Analysis: Decomposing the 
Gender Gap 
The previous section presented estimates of the returns to skills and to other individual 
characteristics by gender. Using these estimates, it is possible to decompose the overall gender gap 
 
18 We have also run OLS regressions using the exclusion-restriction variables directly in the wage regressions. We 
found that they are typically not significant, while they always are in the participation-decision equation. Although 
the exclusion-restrictions are not formally testable since we use them for identification, this reduced form results lends 
some credibility to them.
  
19 
 in the portion due to differences in returns and to differences in endowments. The most popular 
procedure to accomplish this is labeled in the literature as Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition.19 It is 
simply an accounting exercise based on mean differences. The regressions we have presented in 
the previous sections and defined in equation (1) are ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions 
guaranteeing that: 
 
  (2) 
 
where the overbar denotes sample mean, the hat denotes estimated value, and the indicator g=m,w 
denotes gender-specific values. The country-fixed effect component is averaged out over all the 
individuals living in the country.20 In other words, equation (2) states that OLS estimation 
guarantees that the mean of the dependent variable is exactly predicted by the estimated 
coefficients applied to the sample mean of the regressors. Based on this result and one step of 
algebra, the gender earnings gap the difference in average earnings between men and women  
can be decomposed in the portion due to differences in the sample mean of the regressors (the 
endowments ) and in the portion due to differences in the estimated coefficients (the returns). 
Focusing on the returns and endowments of relevant skills related to the digital economy  denoted 
with s  we can write: 
 
 (3) 
 
 
19 See Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973). For a more recent assessment of the approach, see Oaxaca and Ransom 
(1994). For a more general decomposition involving the entire distribution, see Machado and Mata (2005). 
20 To formally define it, we need to add an indicator function di(j)=1 if individual i lives in country j, leading to: 
 
  
20 
 where the first term on the right-hand side denotes gender differences in endowments in digital-
economy-relevant skills (weighted by the male return ) and the second term denotes gender 
differences in returns to those skills (weighted by the female endowment ). 
Figure 8 reports the ratio between each of these two terms and the overall gender gap. For example, 
looking at STEM skills, we estimate that both gender differences in endowments and in returns 
have a significant impact in explaining the gender gap. The point estimates indicate that 
endowments could be responsible for up to 30% of the difference and returns for up to 80%.21 We 
see this as the main result to be drawn from the decomposition. Two other significant effects are 
present: Differences in ICT endowments have a marginally significant impact, whereas differences 
in returns in marketing and accounting have a more substantial impact, with the potential to explain 
up to 65% of the gap. We perform an additional exercise by reporting the endowment and returns 
components when including all skills measures at the same time. Results appear in the last panel 
of Figure 8 and show that endowments explain approximately 40% of the gender wage gap, while 
the returns to skills do not have any explanatory power. 
Results by country are reported in Appendix C, Figure C7. They confirm the overall main results 
for Bolivia, Chile, and Colombia: STEM has a significant impact, with differences in returns 
contributing up to 64% of the gap in Bolivia, up to 28% in Chile, and up to 90% in Colombia. El 
Salvador is the only country where STEM does not have either an economically significant or a 
statistically significant impact on the earnings gender gap. In terms of other skills, the country-by-
-country results show that the significant impact of marketing and accounting in the aggregate 
sample was mainly driven by Colombia. 
  
6 Conclusion 
We studied gender differentials in the labor market with a focus on skills relevant to the digital 
economy. Specifically, we estimated the returns to skills using standard wage regressions, but we 
allowed for heterogeneous effects and considered selection in the labor market. We focused on 
 
21 Recall that the estimated returns are based on running separate regressions, each with only one of the digital-
economy-relevant skills at the time. Since there are likely to be correlations between skills, the estimates report the 
maximum impact that the skill may have in explaining the gap.  
21 
 four Latin American countries for which all the relevant data are available: Bolivia, Chile, 
Colombia, and El Salvador.
We found that the group of skills described as ICT and as STEM have significant positive returns 
for both men and women. However, there is a significant gender gap in favor of men on the returns 
to STEM, while the returns to ICT are very similar between the two genders. We also estimated 
the returns in specifications allowing for heterogeneity by education and sector of occupation. We 
found that having upper secondary education or higher implies significantly higher returns for men 
but not for women. Unlike the results obtained on OECD countries (OECD, 2018a; OECD, 
2018b), we did not find any significant impact related to working in a digital-intensive sector. This 
means that either digital intensity is less pronounced in Latin American countries than OECD 
countries or that the skills under consideration are valuable across all sectors of Latin American 
economies. All these results are confirmed when controlling for selection in the labor market for 
women. We also performed a robustness analysis where we studied how results change by varying 
the specification and by employing various exclusion-restrictions in the selection model. 
Finally, we provided a decomposition of how skills relevant to the digital economy may contribute 
to the gender gap in wages. By computing a standard Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition based on our 
estimates, we concluded that both gender differences in endowments and in returns to STEM skills 
have a significant impact in explaining the gender gap in earnings. The point estimates indicate 
that endowments could be responsible for up to 30% of the difference and returns for up to 80%. 
The summary of results provided so far is aggregated over the four countries under consideration. 
Many of our results were confirmed when performing the same analysis for each country 
separately. The most relevant differences between countries concerned returns to STEM. They 
were estimated to be higher than the aggregate in Chile and lower than the aggregate in Bolivia 
and Colombia. El Salvador is the only country not reporting a gender gap in favor of men in returns 
to STEM. As a result, El Salvador is the only country for which gender differences related to 
STEM skills do not explain the overall gender gap in earnings. 
Why returns to STEM exhibit such strong gender asymmetries can only be partially answered by 
our analysis. The list of possible explanations is broad. The first possibility is selection into 
different sectors and occupations; men and women may systematically choose to work in different 
jobs, even when possessing similar skills. Our robustness analysis controlling for sectors and  
22 
 occupations indicated that this is not the case: The within-sector and occupation gaps are higher
than the overall gap. The second possibility is selection in the labor market, i.e.,women participate 
in the labor market at a lower proportion than men. If only the relatively less productive women 
participate, then their lower returns may reflect a genuine productivity differential. Our analysis 
estimating a series of selection models indicated that this mechanism may at most explain a very 
small portion of the differential. The third possibility is different labor market experiences and 
labor market attachments. Some evidence suggests that time investments in household production 
are very different between men and women.22 This is reflected both in the extensive and intensive 
margins of labor supply. The extensive margin differential is reflected in the lower participation 
rate for women, and the selection models we estimated take this into account. The intensive margin 
is reflected in hours worked, which is accounted for by using hourly wages as dependent variables 
in our estimations. However, there is an important dynamic element that our static estimates could 
not properly consider; over time, a lower labor supply implies lower accumulation of human 
capital on the job. Our controls for labor market experience is very crude, and therefore, some of 
the impact of human capital accumulation on the job may be picked up by other returns, such as 
returns to education and returns to skills. The only objection to this explanation is that human 
capital accumulation on the job should involve all skills, not only STEM skills, while we estimate 
the gender gap only on STEM returns. The fourth possibility is discrimination against women in 
STEM professions. There is a growing, even if by no means conclusive, literature suggesting that 
STEM and related professions may be more prone to gender discrimination than other 
professions.23 With the data at our disposal, we neither can exclude nor confirm such an 
explanation. Finally, the fifth possibility is that the quality of the STEM skills acquired by men 
and women may be different, explaining the gap in terms of underlining productivity differentials. 
This may result from human capital acquired before entering the labor market. By controlling for 
numeracy score, our regressions should condition on some of those differences, but the difference 
may result also from human capital acquired on the job after entering the labor market. This is the 
same mechanism we described when discussing the dynamic implication of gender differences in 
 
22 Evidence collected in time-use survey provides convincing evidence in this respect. For cross-country evidence, see 
van der Lippe et al. (2011) and Apps and Rees (2005). For evidence on a Latin American country, see Salazar-Saenz 
(2019) on Colombia. 
23 See, for example, Buffington et al. (2016) and Carrell et al. (2010).  
23 
 labor supply. Given the limited controls for dynamic behavior in our empirical models, this is 
another mechanism that cannot be ruled out. 
In conclusion, we found that if investing in skills relevant to the digital economy, specifically in 
ICT and STEM, may be beneficial for the labor market performance of both men and women, it 
remains a relevant open question in understanding why returns to STEM exhibit such a strong 
gender gap. Our results can rule out some explanations but cannot precisely point to the actual 
mechanism. At least two explanations remain good candidates to explain the gender gap in STEM 
returns: the presence of stronger discrimination against women in STEM-related professions than 
in other professions and the life-cycle impact of a different rate of human capital accumulation on 
the job between men and women. The first suggests policies directly targeting the labor market, 
and the second suggests policies improving work-life balance for both men and women.24
 
 
24 For a recent assessment of these policies in the U.S., see Doran et al. (2018).  
24 
 7. References 
Acemoglu, D., & Autor, D. (2011). Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment 
and earnings. In Handbook of labor economics (Vol. 4, pp. 1043 1171), Elsevier. 
Almeida, R. K., Fernandes, A. M., & Viollaz, M. (in press). Software adoption, employment 
composition, and the skill content of occupations in Chilean firms. The Journal of 
Development Studies . 
Apps, P.,&Rees,R.(2005).Gender, time use, and public policy over the life cycle. Oxford Review 
of Economic Policy , 21(3), 439461. 
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2017). The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations. Journal 
of Economic Literature , 55(3), 789865. 
Blinder, A. S. (1973). Wage discrimination: Reduced form and structural estimates. Journal of 
Human Resources , 8(4), 436455. 
Buffington, C., Cerf, B., Jones, C., & Weinberg, B. (2016). STEM training and early career 
outcomes of female and male graduate students: Evidence from UMETRICS data linked 
to the 2010 census. American Economic Review , 106(5), 333338. 
Busso, M., Cristia, J., Hincapi, D., Messina, J., & Ripani, L. (2017). Learning better: Public 
policy for skills development . Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank. 
Calvino, F., Criscuolo, C., Marcolin, L., & Squicciarini, M. (2018). A taxonomy of digital intensive 
sectors (OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers 2018/14). Paris, 
France: OECD Publishing. 
Carrell, S., Page, M., & West, J. (2010). Sex and science: How professor gender perpetuates the 
gender gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 125(3), 1101 1144. 
Di Carlo, E., Lo Bello, S., Monroy-Taborda, S., Oviedo, A. M., Sanchez-Puerta, M. L., &Santos, 
I. (2016). The skill content of occupations across low and middle income countries: 
Evidence from harmonized data (IZA Discussion Paper 10224). Bonn, Germany: IZA 
Institute of Labor Economics. 
Doran, E. L., Bartel, A. P., & Waldfogel, J. (2018, Month). Gender in the labor market: The role 
of equal opportunity and family-friendly policies  (NBER Working Paper No. 25378). 
Cambridge. USA: National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Grundke, R., Jamet, S., Kalamova, M., Keslair, F., & Squicciarini, M. (2017). Skills and global 
value chains: A characterization  (OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working  
25 
 Papers 2017/05). Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica , 47(1), 153
161. 
Lewandowski, P., Park, A., Hardy, W., & Du, Y. (2019). Technology, skills, and globalization: 
Explaining international differences in routine and nonroutine work using survey data  
(IZA Discussion Paper 12339). Bonn, Germany: IZA Institute of Labor Economics. 
Lo Bello, S., Sanchez-Puerta, M. L., & Winkler, H. (2019). From Ghana to America: The skill 
content of jobs and economic development  (Policy Research Working Paper 8758). 
Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Oaxaca, R. (1973). Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets. International Economic 
Review, 14(3), 693709. 
Oaxaca, R. L., & Ransom, M. R. (1994). On discrimination and the decomposition of wage 
differentials. Journal of Econometrics , 61, 521. 
OECD. (2016). Country note Chile: Skills matter: Further results from the survey of adult skills . 
Paris, France: OECD Publishing. 
OECD. (2018a) Towards the implementation of the G20 roadmap for digitalisation: Skills, 
business dynamics and competition . Paris, France: OECD Publishing. 
OECD. (2018b) Bridging the digital gender divide: Include, upskill, innovate . Paris, France: 
OECD Publishing. 
Roseth, V. V., Valerio, A., & Gutierrez, M. (2016). Skills and labor market outcomes: Results 
from large-scale adult skills surveys in urban areas in 12 countries . Washington, DC: The 
World Bank Publications. 
Ryder, G. (2018). As tech disrupts our jobs, it s not too late to turn pain into gain. Retrieved from 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/10/tech-disrupt-jobs-fourth-industrial-revolution-
ilo/ 
Salazar-Saenz, M. (2019). Household search model of the labor market with home production. 
mimeo, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 
van der Lippe, T., de Ruijter, J., de Ruijter, E., & Raub, W. (2011). Persistent inequalities in time 
use between men and women: A detailed look at the influence of economiccircumstances, 
policies, and culture. European Sociological Review , 27(2), 164179. 
World Bank Group. (2016). World development report 2016: Digital dividends.  Washington, DC:  
26 
 The World Bank Publications.
World Economic Forum. (2018). The future of jobs report . Cologny/Geneva, Switzerland: Centre 
for the New Economy and Society. 
 
 
 27 
 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
 
Notes: Table reports descriptive statistics on the estimation sample extracted from the 2014 PIAAC (Chile) and 2012 
(Bolivia, Colombia) and 2013 (El Salvador) STEP survey. Standard deviation is in parentheses. Low-educated: Lower 
secondary education or lower. High-educated: Upper secondary education or above. ICT: Information and 
communication technologies.   28 
 Figure 1: Distribution of Labor Market States
 
Women 
 
 
Men 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys. 
 
 
 
 
  29 
 Figure 2: Skills in the Digital Economy 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys. 
  30 
 Figure 3: Returns to Skills
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports the coefficient estimate of those individual skill that are relevant to the digital economy in 
the log hourly wage regression defined in equation (1). It represents the percentage change in hourly wages of one 
standard deviation increase in the skill measure. The dot and the diamond are the point estimates, while the vertical 
lines show the 90% confidence interval of the estimate. The complete specification is defined in Section 4, equation 
(1). Complete results are available in Table B1 in Appendix B. 
  
31 
 Figure 4: Returns to Skills in Sectors with Varying Digital Intensity:
Extra Returns for Working in Digital-Intensive Sectors 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports the estimate of the coefficient capturing the interaction between the individual skill relevant 
to the digital economy and a dummy equal to 1 if the sector is a digital-intensive sector. The estimate is obtained in 
the log hourly wage regression defined in equation (1). It represents the percentage change in hourly wages of a one 
standard deviation increase in the skill measure of a digital-intensive sector with respect to a nondigital-intensive 
sector. The dot and the diamond are the point estimates, while the vertical lines show the 90% confidence interval of 
the estimate. The complete specification is defined in Section 4, equation (1). Complete results are available in Table 
B2 in Appendix B. 
  
32 
 Figure 5: Heterogeneous Effects by Education:
Extra Returns to Skills for High-Educated Workers 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports the coefficient estimate for the interaction between the individual skill relevant to the digital 
economy and a dummy equal to 1 if the individual has completed upper secondary education or above. The estimate 
is obtained in the log hourly wage regression defined in equation (1). It represents the percentage change in hourly 
wages of a one standard deviation increase in the skill measure for individuals with at least upper secondary education 
completed with respect to individuals who have not completed that level. The dot and the diamond are the point 
estimates, while the vertical lines show the 90% confidence interval of the estimate. The complete specification is 
defined in Section 4, equation (1). Complete results are available in Table B3 in Appendix B. 
  
33 
 Figure 6: Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market
 
 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports the same estimates as Figure 3 but corrects for selection in the labor market for women. See 
Section 4.3 for additional details. We correct for selection only on women because men have a sufficiently high 
participation rate. Complete results are available in Table B4 in Appendix B.   
34 
 Figure 7: Heterogeneous Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market 
 
Extra Returns for Working in Digital-Intensive Sectors 
 
Extra Returns for High-Educated Workers 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports the same estimates as Figure 4 (top panel) and Figure 5 (bottom panel) but corrects for 
selection in the labor marketfor women. See Section 4.3 for additional details. We correct for selection only on women 
because men have a sufficiently high participation rate. Complete results are available in Tables B5 and B6 in 
Appendix B.   
35 
 Figure 8: Contribution of the Skills  Returns and Endowments to the Gender Wage Gap 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Note: The figure reports results based on the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition defined in equation (3). The Endowments  
correspond to the first term on the right-hand side of equation (3) and represent the contribution to the overall gap due 
to gender differences in endowments (quantities) of each individual skill relevant to the digital economy. The 
Coefficients  correspond to the second term on the right-hand side of equation (3) and represent the contribution to the 
overall gap due to gender differences in returns (prices) to those skills. The dot and the diamond are the point estimates, 
while the vertical lines show the 90% confidence interval of the estimate. Complete results are available in Table B10 
in Appendix B.  
36 
 APPENDIX A: Data Appendix 
 
Table A1. Skill-Related Questions from the PIAAC and STEP Surveys 
  
37 
 Table A1 cont.  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys. 
Notes: Reverse order  means we reversed the order of the categories such that a higher value mean higher frequency 
of the task.38 
  
Table A2. Average Number of Operation Robots Over 2011-2014 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on International Federation of Robotics. 
Note: For Latin America and Western Europe, the table shows the cross-country average from 2011 to 2014. 
 
39 
 APPENDIX B: Complete Estimation Results 
Table B1. Returns to Skills 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Ordinary least squares regressions. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity. 
40 
 Table B2. Returns to Skills in Sectors with Varying Digital Intensity 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Ordinary least squares regressions. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity.  
41 
 Table B3. Returns to Skills: Heterogeneous Effects by Education  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.
Notes: Ordinary least squares regressions. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity.  
42 
 Table B4. Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Heckman selection models. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity. 
 
   
43 
 Table B5. Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market. Sectors with Varying 
Digital Intensity 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Heckman selection models. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity.  
   
44 
 Table B6. Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market. Heterogeneous Effects 
by Education 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Heckman selection models. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity. 
 45 
 Table B7. Returns to Skills: Robustness Analysis. Constraining All the Coefficients to Be the 
Same for Men and Women with the Exception of Their Returns to Skills 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Ordinary least squares regressions. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
PPP: Purchasing power parity.  
46 
 Table B8. Returns to Skills: Robustness Analysis. Conditioning on Sectors and Occupations 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Ordinary least squares regressions. Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
PPP: Purchasing power parity.  
47 
 Table B9. Returns to Skills: Robustness Analysis. Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market 
Using Different Exclusion-Restrictions. STEP Countries Only 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0. 
PPP: Purchasing power parity. 
 
   
48 
 Table B10. Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition of the Gender Wage Gap 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1  
49 
 Appendix C
 
Figure C1. Skills in the Digital Economy 
 
Chile Bolivia 
  
 
Colombia   
El Salvador  
  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
50 
 Figure C2: Returns to Skills 
Chile Bolivia 
  
Colombia El Salvador 
  
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
  
 
51 
 Figure C3: Returns to Skills in Sectors with Varying Digital Intensity: Extra Returns for Working 
in Digital-Intensive Sectors 
Chile Bolivia 
Colombia El Salvador 
  
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
  
 
52 
 Figure C4: Heterogeneous Effects by Education: Extra Returns for High-Educated Workers 
Chile Bolivia 
  
Colombia El Salvador 
  
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
  
 
53 
 Figure C5: Returns to Skills: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market 
Chile Bolivia 
  
Colombia El Salvador 
  
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.  
 
54 
 Figure C6: Correcting for Selection in the Labor Market: Extra Returns for High-Educated 
Workers 
Chile Bolivia 
Colombia El Salvador 
  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.
 
55 
 Figure C7: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition. Contribution of the Skills  Returns and 
Endowments to the Gender Wage Gap 
Chile Bolivia 
Colombia El Salvador 
  
 
 Source: Own elaboration based on PIAAC and STEP surveys.
 
56 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 