/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Shahid, J.; Ahmad, R.;
Kiani, A.K.; Ahmad, T.; Saeed, S.;
Almuhaideb, A.M. Data Protection
and Privacy of the Internet of
Healthcare Things (IoHTs). Appl. Sci.
2022 ,12, 1927. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app12041927
Academic Editors: Hamid Mcheick
and Gianluca Lax
Received: 10 October 2021
Accepted: 27 January 2022
Published: 12 February 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Review
Data Protection and Privacy of the Internet of Healthcare
Things (IoHTs)
Jahanzeb Shahid1
, Rizwan Ahmad1,*
, Adnan K. Kiani2
, Tahir Ahmad3
, Saqib Saeed4
and Abdullah M. Almuhaideb5
1School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National University of Sciences and
Technology (NUST), Islamabad 44000, Pakistan; 13msccsjshahid@seecs.edu.pk
2Essex Pathways Department, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK; a.kiani@essex.ac.uk
3Security and Trust Unit, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 38123 Trento, Italy; ahmad@fbk.eu
4SAUDI ARAMCO Cybersecurity Chair, Department of Computer Information Systems, College of Computer
Science and Information Technology, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, P .O. Box 1982,
Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia; sbsaed@iau.edu.sa
5SAUDI ARAMCO Cybersecurity Chair, Department of Networks and Communications, College of Computer
Science and Information Technology, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, P .O. Box 1982,
Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia; amalmuhaideb@iau.edu.sa
*Correspondence: rizwan.ahmad@seecs.edu.pk
Abstract: The Internet of Things (IoT) is an emerging ﬁeld consisting of Internet-based globally
connected network architecture. A subset of IoT is the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) that
consists of smart healthcare devices having signiﬁcant importance in monitoring, processing, storing,
and transmitting sensitive information. It is experiencing novel challenges regarding data privacy
protection. This article discusses different components of IoHT and categorizes various healthcare
devices based on their functionality and deployment. This article highlights the possible points and
reasons for data leakage, such as conﬂicts in laws, the use of sub-standard devices, lack of awareness,
and the non-availability of dedicated local law enforcement agencies. This article draws attention to
the escalating demand for a suitable regulatory framework and analyzes compliance problems of
IoHT devices concerning healthcare data privacy and protection regulations. Furthermore, the article
provides some recommendations to improve the security and privacy of IoHT implementation.
Keywords: IoHT; data privacy; healthcare systems; security and privacy; healthcare regulations
1. Introduction
The IoT is an emerging technology that facilitates consumers by exchanging informa-
tion with devices connected to the Internet. The International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) [ 1] deﬁnes IoT as the network of sensor devices interacting with the environment.
The spectrum of IoT has been broadened and encloses many applications that are used in
different scenarios like security, remote monitoring, electrical appliances control, military
use, and other electronic equipment. One primary use case of IoT is in the healthcare
sector, i.e., the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT), designed to monitor, store, or transmit
healthcare information. In simple words, IoHT is a sub-class of IoT speciﬁcally dealing
with healthcare that includes devices, services, and software [2].
The IoHT describes uniquely identiﬁable devices connected to the Internet, communi-
cating with each other, used in the medical area. IoHT devices help to monitor individuals’
medical conditions by generating clinical data by forwarding it to a remote server or service
with the help of wireless network infrastructure [ 3]. Like any other Internet-based device,
IoHT devices have a unique identiﬁer such as an IP address which enables them to connect
with the network and to forward/receive data to/from intended devices [ 4]. The central
server manages this collected information and responds accordingly to diagnose patients’
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12041927 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsciAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 2 of 22
diseases. A high-level general working ﬂow diagram of an IoHT implementation is pre-
sented in Figure 1. The idea is to provide reliable, efﬁcient, and cost-effective healthcare
services by facilitating physicians and medical staff by remotely monitoring their patients.
IoHT implementations also enable individuals to manage their health data easily and assist
them in how to use wearable health monitors [5,6].
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927  2 of 23 
 
them to connect with the network and to forward/receive data to/from intended devices 
[4]. The central server manages this collected information and responds accordingly to 
diagnose patients ’ diseases. A high -level general working flow diagram of  an IoHT im-
plementation is presented in Figure 1. The idea is to provide reliable, efficient, and cost -
effective healthcare services by facilitating physicians and medical staff by remotely mon-
itoring their patients. IoHT implementations also enable indivi duals to manage their 
health data easily and assist them in how to use wearable health monitors [5 ,6]. 
 
Figure 1. High -Level Architecture of IoHT Implementation . 
Data privacy is considered to be a fundamental requirement for consumer ac-
ceptance , which can be ensured through the data flow representation, authentication, and 
authorization of the performed activities such as data collection, retention, processing, 
and transmission. Data privacy risks are directly related to unauthorized collection, usage, 
access, storage, and sharing activities. These activities might be the reason for personal 
data leakage and compromis ing the user’s privacy, especially concerning  healthcare data, 
as it has different priorities and is highly valuable and sensitive. In this regard, appropri-
ate protection and security measures are required [7–10]. 
Moreover, accessibility and availability of personal healthcare information on the In-
ternet also cause privacy problems. In June 2015, a censorious privacy violation attack w as 
launched when malware exploited vulnerabilities in blood gas analyzer devices to gain 
access to hospital networks and leaked private data [11]. Despite this, the privacy frame-
work for IoHT systems and services is expected  to be transparent to patients, making 
available updated information to ensure the protection of patients ’ data [6]. The healthcare 
systems collect most of the data from the sensing devices and forward it via intermediate 
devices to the management layer. During this process, several prot ocols and encoding 
schemes are used to communicate data reliably. It is easier to find vulnerabilities in dif-
ferent components of the healthcare system by using search engines like Shodan, which 
assist s attackers in searching the connected vulnerable devic es on the Internet [12]. Simi-
larly, a worksheet containing millions of records with user healthcare information can be 
exchanged in a fraction of a second, seamlessly, and without leaving any consistent trace 
[10].  
Some IoT -related data privacy and protect ion policies are used to protect data and 
user s’ privacy. However, these legal frameworks have not produced the intended results 
and the actual level of healthcare data privacy protection is insufficient for the issues men-
tioned earlier [9]. There are also  some limitations and missing aspects of healthcare data 
privacy laws that do not provide a particular set of instructions to protect IoHT data.  
In this paper, we discuss technological, legal, and structural problems of IoHT sys-
tems with some analysis, and compliance issues of the healthcare data privacy and pro-
tection framework in the developing countries. The paper uses a layered architecture to 
highlight the data protection and privacy issues in the IoHT. It further identifies protec-
tion and privacy issu es at different layers from technical and legal perspectives. Further-
more, the study of different components of the existing healthcare system in terms of se-
curity related to data protection discusses possible points of data leakage, missing aspects 
of hea lthcare policies , and issues in the enforcement of healthcare systems and policies. 
Figure 1. High-Level Architecture of IoHT Implementation.
Data privacy is considered to be a fundamental requirement for consumer accep-
tance, which can be ensured through the data ﬂow representation, authentication, and
authorization of the performed activities such as data collection, retention, processing, and
transmission. Data privacy risks are directly related to unauthorized collection, usage,
access, storage, and sharing activities. These activities might be the reason for personal
data leakage and compromising the user’s privacy, especially concerning healthcare data,
as it has different priorities and is highly valuable and sensitive. In this regard, appropriate
protection and security measures are required [7–10].
Moreover, accessibility and availability of personal healthcare information on the
Internet also cause privacy problems. In June 2015, a censorious privacy violation attack
was launched when malware exploited vulnerabilities in blood gas analyzer devices to
gain access to hospital networks and leaked private data [ 11]. Despite this, the privacy
framework for IoHT systems and services is expected to be transparent to patients, making
available updated information to ensure the protection of patients’ data [ 6]. The healthcare
systems collect most of the data from the sensing devices and forward it via intermediate
devices to the management layer. During this process, several protocols and encoding
schemes are used to communicate data reliably. It is easier to ﬁnd vulnerabilities in different
components of the healthcare system by using search engines like Shodan, which assists
attackers in searching the connected vulnerable devices on the Internet [ 12]. Similarly, a
worksheet containing millions of records with user healthcare information can be exchanged
in a fraction of a second, seamlessly, and without leaving any consistent trace [10].
Some IoT-related data privacy and protection policies are used to protect data and
users’ privacy. However, these legal frameworks have not produced the intended results
and the actual level of healthcare data privacy protection is insufﬁcient for the issues
mentioned earlier [ 9]. There are also some limitations and missing aspects of healthcare
data privacy laws that do not provide a particular set of instructions to protect IoHT data.
In this paper, we discuss technological, legal, and structural problems of IoHT systems
with some analysis, and compliance issues of the healthcare data privacy and protection
framework in the developing countries. The paper uses a layered architecture to highlight
the data protection and privacy issues in the IoHT. It further identiﬁes protection and
privacy issues at different layers from technical and legal perspectives. Furthermore, the
study of different components of the existing healthcare system in terms of security related
to data protection discusses possible points of data leakage, missing aspects of healthcare
policies, and issues in the enforcement of healthcare systems and policies. To highlight
the utility of this work we compare it with recent similar works in the IoHT literature in
Table 1. The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
 We deﬁne a ﬁve-layer reference architecture for IoHT, which is derived from known
architectures used in other IoHT related research articles [13–15];Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 3 of 22
 We present IoHT classiﬁcation, identify the vulnerabilities in IoHT implementation
and map the security problem on the deﬁned ﬁve-layer IoHT architecture;
 We discuss major existing healthcare legislative and regulatory initiatives, compare
various legislative approaches and identify the gaps and governance challenges.
 We conclude with the recommendations on both frontiers (i.e., technical and legislative).
Table 1. Comparison of this work with the recent IoHT literature.
Papers with AuthorsIoHT
ArchitectureLegislative and
RegulatoryCommunication
TechnologiesStandards Security and Privacy
S. Ketu et al., 2021 [16] 4 4Challenges
4Countermeasures
4
M. Mamdouh, 2021 [17] 4 4 4
R. Somasundaram, 2021 [ 18] 4 4
R. Sivan et al., 2021 [19] 4 4 4
This Paper 4 4 4 4 4 4
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the Internet
of Healthcare Things (IoHT) and presents a layered architecture and working of IoHT.
Section 3 highlights the vulnerabilities in the healthcare system and identiﬁes the possible
points from where the data can be leaked. Section 4 presents various global governance
initiatives regarding privacy and data protection in IoHT and also identiﬁes the gaps and
governance challenges that hinder the widespread adoption of IoHT. Section 5 recommends
some measures for effective IoHT implementation, while Section 6 draws some conclusions.
2. Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT)
Health management problems are increasing with the growing population, especially
with the increasingly larger aging population. Sometimes no response from the hospital
for emergencies creates social issues. Similarly, the medical staff in rural areas do not
have sufﬁcient resources for treatment and do not have the expertise to diagnose complex
diseases. Due to these reasons, people in rural areas focus on big hospitals for proper
medical attention, increasing the load on hospitals. The late detection of diseases and
severe health problems of older people also complicate the diagnosis process. Therefore,
there is a need to provide better medical facilities using an optimized healthcare system
that includes body sensors and medical devices to remotely monitor and diagnose medical
problems [20,21].
2.1. IoHT Classiﬁcation Based on Architecture
In this subsection, we present a detailed classiﬁcation of IoHT based on the IoHT
architecture in Figure 2. A generic IoHT architecture consists of IoHT devices [ 22–30],
communication protocols [ 31–36], and networks [ 37–40]. The IoHT devices are further
classiﬁed as wearable devices and implant devices. The data of IoHT devices are then
transmitted by using different communication protocols like IEEE 802.15.6, WBAN, IEEE
802.15.1 Bluetooth, IEEE 802.11 WiFi, and LoRaWAN. The destination of this medical data
is a cloud service, or a remote server designed for intensive processing tasks. Finally, data
can be transmitted to a physician or an Emergency Response Team (ERT) via a mobile
communication service such as 4G or 5G.
Once the information is collected from different IoHT devices where the sensors
exist, it travels toward the near and far edge of the network to be stored, analyzed, and
additionally processing [41].
Using a fog node network can give a health care system more computing power
that smaller and battery-oriented IoHT devices might not be able to achieve. In the IoHT
architecture, data operations, such as classiﬁcation and compression, are completed on the
intermediate devices or often single remote servers that allow for the fast processing of data
that mobile devices cannot do. In cloud-based networks, the majority of the computation isAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 4 of 22
performed on the cloud servers because the cloud has a higher computing capacity than the
fog node networks. Cloud-based networks utilize multiple servers for parallel computing
and data analysis. Moreover, the cloud has data centers that allow for more data storage
that is sometimes needed for patient records.
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927  4 of 23 
 
can be transmitted to a physician or an Emergency Response Team (ERT) via a mobile 
communication service such as 4G or 5G.  
 
 
Figure 2. IoHT Architecture Classification.  
Once the information is collected from different IoHT devices where the sensors exist, 
it travels toward the near and far edge of the network to be stored, analyzed , and addi-
tional ly processing [ 41]. 
Using a fog node network can give a health care system m ore computing power that 
smaller and battery -oriented IoHT devices might not be able to achieve. In the IoHT ar-
chitecture, data operations, such as classification and compression, are completed on the 
intermediate devices or often single remote servers tha t allow for the fast processing of 
data that mobile devices cannot do. In cloud -based networks, the majority of the compu-
tation is performed  on the cloud servers because the cloud has a higher computing capac-
ity than the fog node networks. Cloud -based netw orks utilize multiple servers for parallel 
computing and data analysis. Moreover, the cloud has data centers that allow for more 
data storage that is sometimes needed for patient records.  
2.2. IoHT Components  
An IoHT implementation can simply consist of a single sensor device like a heartbeat 
monitor connected to a mobile device via Bluetooth. The mobile device should have a 
specific application to generate alarms after analyzing data. It could be complex, consist-
ing of multiple sensors, intermediate device s, and centralized servers connected with a 
central management system. The medical Emergency Response Team (ERT) monitors the 
patient’s health conditions and responds in the case of any emergency.  
Figure 3 shows a generic IoHT implementation where differen t devices at different 
layers communicate with each other with the help of various protocols. Intermediate de-
vices like cell phones or PDAs communicate with sensors/actuators using short -range pro-
tocols and with healthcare servers with the help of the Inte rnet. Servers take the 
Figure 2. IoHT Architecture Classiﬁcation.
2.2. IoHT Components
An IoHT implementation can simply consist of a single sensor device like a heartbeat
monitor connected to a mobile device via Bluetooth. The mobile device should have a
speciﬁc application to generate alarms after analyzing data. It could be complex, consisting
of multiple sensors, intermediate devices, and centralized servers connected with a central
management system. The medical Emergency Response Team (ERT) monitors the patient’s
health conditions and responds in the case of any emergency.
Figure 3 shows a generic IoHT implementation where different devices at different
layers communicate with each other with the help of various protocols. Intermediate
devices like cell phones or PDAs communicate with sensors/actuators using short-range
protocols and with healthcare servers with the help of the Internet. Servers take the
appropriate actions by updating the database or contacting the relevant physicians or quick
response teams in case of an emergency. It is a simple architecture used in IoT application
development [ 41]. Each connected device has limitations like limited processing, memory,
and battery resources, etc., and the applications are developed for better utilization of these
limited resources. The reference architecture model shown in Figure 3 highlights a layered
approach for describing IoHT functionalities and their problems. In addition, the layered
architecture is used for identifying IoHT data security and privacy issues in technical and
legal aspects. This ﬁve-layer architecture helps to identify IoHT data security and privacy
issues at different layers, what type of devices and entities (medical team, physician, and
emergency services) are involved at a speciﬁc layer, and what threat vectors are involved at
each layer.Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 5 of 22
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927  5 of 23 
 
appropriate actions by updating the database or contacting the relevant physicians or 
quick response teams in case of an emergency. It is a simple architecture used in IoT ap-
plication development [41]. Each connected device has limit ations like limited processing, 
memory , and battery resources, etc., and the applications are developed for better utiliza-
tion of these limited resources. The reference architecture model shown in Figure 3 high-
lights a layered approach for describing IoHT functionalities and their problems. In addi-
tion, the layered architecture is used for identifying IoHT data security and privacy issues 
in technical and legal aspects. This five -layer architecture helps to identify IoHT data se-
curity and privacy issues at different layers , what type of devices and entities (medical 
team, physician, and emergency services) are involved at a specific layer , and what threat 
vectors are involved at each layer.  
 
Figure 3. Five -Layer Architecture for IoHT . 
Here, we will discuss each layer with its components.  
2.2.1. Device Layer  
Actuators are devices that can perform some actions based on the data generated by 
sensors, e.g., electronic motors, drug pumps, etc. On the other hand, according to their 
installation type, these devices  can be divided into three categories (i.e., implantable, 
wearable, and fixed devices). These categories are briefly discussed here.  
Implantable Medical Devices are implanted into the human body as shown in Figure 
4. The most common devices belonging to th is category are the Pacemaker [42], Neuro -
stimulators [43], Insulin Pumps, Glucose Monitoring Systems [44], Gastric Stimulators 
[45], Foot Drop Implants [46], Cochlear Implants [47] , and Drug Pumps [48], etc.  
Figure 3. Five-Layer Architecture for IoHT.
Here, we will discuss each layer with its components.
2.2.1. Device Layer
Actuators are devices that can perform some actions based on the data generated
by sensors, e.g., electronic motors, drug pumps, etc. On the other hand, according to
their installation type, these devices can be divided into three categories (i.e., implantable,
wearable, and ﬁxed devices). These categories are brieﬂy discussed here.
Implantable Medical Devices are implanted into the human body as shown in Figure 4.
The most common devices belonging to this category are the Pacemaker [ 42], Neuro-
stimulators [ 43], Insulin Pumps, Glucose Monitoring Systems [ 44], Gastric Stimulators [ 45],
Foot Drop Implants [46], Cochlear Implants [47], and Drug Pumps [48], etc.
Fixed Medical Devices are related to the third category of devices that can be used for
different tests in the laboratory, such as X-ray machines. The medical devices in this layer
can be classiﬁed according to their functionalities or installation type. According to their
functionalities, these devices can be divided into two types (i.e., sensors and actuators)
brieﬂy discussed here.
Sensors generate data by sensing physical parameters from their environment, e.g., tem-
perature, pressure, etc. [ 49], ventilators, and ECG machines installed in medical labs and
diagnostics rooms. These machines are not mobile because of their sizeable physical di-
mension. These machines are computerized, controlled, and connected to the networks
for remote monitoring. The data sent from these devices are not secure and prone to
data-stealing threats. It is essential to ensure the security of these devices because these
devices gather and forward the data of multiple patients on an hourly basis compared
to the devices working remotely. Therefore, these devices draw more attention from the
intruders. A summary of data transmission rate, frequency spectrum, range, etc., is given
in Table 2.Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 6 of 22
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927  6 of 23 
 
 
Figure 4. Implantable and Wearable IoHT Devic es. 
Fixed Medical Devices are related to the third category of devices that can be used 
for different tests in the laboratory , such as X -ray machines . The medical devices in this 
layer can be classified according to their functionalities or installation ty pe. According to 
their functionalities, these devices can be divided into two types (i.e., sensors and actua-
tors) briefly discussed here.  
Sensors generate data by sensing physical parameters from their environment, e.g., 
temperature, pressure, etc . [49], v entilators, and ECG machines installed in medical labs 
and diagnostics rooms. These machines are not mobile because of their sizeable physical 
dimension. These machines are computerized, controlled, and connected to the networks 
for remote monitoring. The data sent from these devices are not secure and prone to data -
stealing threats. It is essential to ensure the security of these devices because these devices 
gather and forward the data of multiple patients on an hourly basis compared to the de-
vices workin g remotely. Therefore, these devices draw more attention from  the intruders. 
A summary of data transmission rate, frequency spectrum, range, etc., is given in Table 2.  
Table 2. IoHT Devices Technical Details.  
IoHT Devices  Protocol  Range  Frequency  
Spectrum  Data  
Transmission 
Rate  Security  
Protocols  
Pacemaker  BLE/WiFi/Cel-
lular  400–500 
m 2.4-5 GHz, ISM 
Band, 700 –2100 
MHz  1–3 Mbit/s  Secure SDN, 
NIST Standard  
Hear Rate Mon-
itor ANT +/BLE  400 m  2.5 GHz  60 Kbps–3 Mbit/s  8-Byte Network 
Key, 128 -bit 
AES  
Temperature 
Sensor  IEEE 
802.15.4/Zigbe
e 10 m  2.4-2.48 GHz  250 Kbps  Symmetric 
Cryptography  
Figure 4. Implantable and Wearable IoHT Devices.
Table 2. IoHT Devices Technical Details.
IoHT Devices Protocol RangeFrequency
SpectrumData
Transmission RateSecurity
Protocols
Pacemaker BLE/WiFi/Cellular 400–500 m2.4-5 GHz, ISM Band,
700–2100 MHz1–3 Mbit/sSecure SDN, NIST
Standard
Hear Rate Monitor ANT +/BLE 400 m 2.5 GHz 60 Kbps–3 Mbit/s8-Byte Network Key,
128-bit AES
Temperature Sensor IEEE 802.15.4/Zigbee 10 m 2.4-2.48 GHz 250 KbpsSymmetric
Cryptography
ECG Sensor WiFi 50 m2.4–2.5 GHz, ISM
Band1–3 Mbit/s WPA-2
Blood Pressure
MonitorBluetooth 3.0 + EDR
Technology10 m 2.45 GHz 3 Mbit/sAES-CMAC
Encryption
EMG Sensors BLE 400 m 2.45 GHz 1 Mbit/sLink Layer
Encryption
PPG Sensors BLE 400 m 2.45 GHz 1 Mbit/sLink Layer
Encryption
Position Sensors BLE 400 m 2.45 GHz 1 Mbit/sLink Layer
Encryption
Cufﬂess B.P . Sensors BLE 400 m 2.45 GHz 1 Mbit/sLink Layer
Encryption
Motion Sensors Radio Frequency 150 m 433.92 MHz 10 Kbps SPECK/SIMON
Air Flow Sensors Bluetooth 3.0 100–150 m 2.45 GHz 1–3 Mbit/sSymmetric
Cryptography
2.2.2. Protocol Layer
The protocol layer consists of communication protocols and wireless standards used to
enable communication for wireless devices. The ﬁrst dedicated standard for Wireless Body
Area Networks (WBANs) is the IEEE 802.15.6 released in 2012 [ 31]. IEEE 802.15.6 is de-
signed to support both medical and non-medical applications and can be easily conﬁgured
based on application requirements [ 50]. It ensures communication inside and around the
human body and is speciﬁcally designed keeping in mind sensor devices that consume less
energy and have a low transmission range. Another upcoming standard in this context is
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) SmartBan [27,30] . In additionAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 7 of 22
to IEEE 802.15.6, there are other commonly used standards and technologies such as IEEE
802.15.1 (Bluetooth), IEEE 802.15.4 (ZigBee), IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [ 35], Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE), NFC, LoRaWAN, UWB [ 36], RuBee [ 51], and Z-Wave [ 52]. The choice of the stan-
dard used is based on many factors like data rate, transmission range, number of devices
supported, interference due to the coexistence of different technologies, etc. The technical
details about these protocols, such as frequency, communication range, data transfer rate,
energy consumption, and its security features, are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. IoHT Devices Technical Details.
Protocol Frequency RangeData Transfer
RateEnergy
ConsumptionSecurity
Bluetooth 2.40–2.48 GHz 10–50 m 1–3 Mbps 0.01–50 WSAFER Block
Cipher
BLE 2.40 GHz 400–1000 m 125 Kbps–2 Mbps 50–100 micro W AES-CCM Cipher
ZigBee 860 MHz–2.40 GHz 10–100 m 20–250 Kbps 10–100 micro W AES-CCM/CBC
LoRaWAN 433–923 MHz 2–7 km 27 Kbps 50–80 micro W AEA-CMAC
ANT 2.40 GHz 30 m 60 Kbps 42–72 micro W AES-CBC
UWB 4.3 GHz 10 m 1 Mbps 5.31 micro W CRC
RuBee 131 kHz 15 m 9.6 Kbps 40 nano W AES
2.2.3. Intermediate Layer
Devices in this layer have the responsibility to transmit data to potent computing
resources like cloud servers. These devices act like gateways that enable data ﬂow from
the sensor devices to the cloud or central servers for storage and further analysis. These
devices can run multiple communication protocols such as WiFi, Bluetooth, GSM, etc., [ 53]
and forward the collected data to the server. Some intermediate devices can store data as
well for pre-processing algorithms to evaluate whether the data is clinically relevant or
not [45]. Some of the intermediate devices are discussed here brieﬂy.
Smart Hub is used to make communication easy with smart IoT devices but has many
vulnerabilities that draw the attention of attackers into snifﬁng the trafﬁc of the smart
hub. If they can access networks, they will be able to spot IoT healthcare devices in the
network [54].
Access Points facilitate a wireless connection between different healthcare devices and
connect them with remote servers.
IoT Gateways primarily act as the bridge to connect sensor networks with conventional
communication networks, enabling protocol conversion and device management.
The System on Chip (SoC) is a device that integrates all components of a computer
system, helps to normalize data collected from different sensors, and controls actuators
based on applications. In this way, it reduces the load on a central server and minimizes
the communication [55].
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) are extensively used in the healthcare domain to
support healthcare providers [56]. Such systems receive data from different wearable and
implanted devices and process them through a variety of software applications [57].
2.2.4. Management and Data Link Layer
Management and database servers are the centralized part of the healthcare system
that receives and updates the patient’s data collected by the sensors and can also help the
physicians manage the quantity of medicine or prescribe a new one for the patient. In
emergencies, the servers send alerts to physicians and the emergency response teams for
appropriate actions.Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 8 of 22
2.2.5. Feedback Layer
The physicians and the emergency response teams (ERT) provide feedback in any
emergency and play a signiﬁcant role in the healthcare system. At this layer, doctors and
ERT respond to the system when they receive an alert from it.
Physicians are an integral part of the healthcare system and can observe their patients
anytime, anywhere, and change treatment when required. An IoT device for a physician
gives real-time information about the patient under observation. The IoT gateway device
gathers information from different healthcare devices and forwards it to PDA devices held
by physicians.
Emergency Response Team (ERT): In case of any medical emergency, the responsibility
of the ERT is to provide medical attention to patients on-premises or remotely. In the
context of IoHT, medical devices monitor patients’ conditions and generate alerts in case of
a medical emergency. Emergency care is a critical part of medical services and is inﬂuenced
by the contextual information’s time, availability, and accuracy [58].
2.3. IoHT Working
Figure 4 presents the data workﬂow diagram of a generic IoHT implementation
system. This ﬁgure follows the conventions of a workﬂow diagram where the Start and
End processes are shown with an oval shape. Different systems processes are demonstrated
with rectangle shapes, and conditional methods are shown with the diamond shapes. The
IoHT system consists of a Sensor, Intermediate System, Actuator, Server, and ERT module.
A physician is also a part of the system that receives information from the server about a
patient’s health condition.
Figure 5 presents a three-level generic IoHT implementation framework. Level 1
consists of sensors and actuators reading physiological parameters and at times performing
interventions. The acquired data is then processed in level 2 before it is forwarded to level
3 for decision-making.
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927 9 of 23 
 
 
Figure 5. Workflow Diagram of IoHT Implementation.  
3. IoHT Security Landscape 
IoHT security goes beyond device security, therefore, rather than only physical inter-
faces and firmware on the device, its scope must include web, mobile/cloud interfaces, 
network services, local storage, and 3rd part y APIs as well. Furthermore, diverse needs 
and varied intended usage of healthcare devices  by residential and industrial consumers 
makes it more complex [59]. A list of top ten vulnerabilities related to IoHT devices has 
been published by The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP). This includes 
lack of authorization/insufficient authentication, insecure web interfaces, lack of transport 
encryption, insecure network services, privacy concerns, insecure cloud interfaces, inade-
quate security configuration, insecure software or firmware, poor physical security, and insecure mobile interfaces [60]. Interested readers can refer to [61,62] for detailed security 
issues concerning IoHT. 
3.1. Security Vulnerabiliti es in IoHT Implementations 
There are several known security vulnerabilities in the existing IoHT implementa-
tions [12,63]. It is essential to discuss them to get a better understanding of the resulting security problems. 
3.1.1. IoT Device’s Operating System 
Due to the specialized requirements of IoHT  devices and limitations of existing op-
erating systems, specialized op erating systems such as RIOT , Contiki, FreeRTOS, and Ti-
nyOS have been developed for IoT devices [64, 65]. The constrained computational power, 
memory, and limited power of IoT devices make them vulnerable to the system and net-
work attacks. Furthermore, constrained reso urces do not allow the implementation of 
complex encryption and authentication sche mes on these devices as they may signifi-
cantly consume the computational resources and cause a long delay, resulting in the de-
graded performance of the regular operation of these devices which is critical, especially 
for real-time IoT devices. This scenario facili tates attackers in using memory vulnerabili-
ties and compromises the security of such devices [66]. With inadequate resources on 
lightweight IoT devices, it becomes challenging to implement strong encryption and au-thentication schemes. 
3.1.2. Communication Protocols 
IoHT devices come with fewer safety checks , and it is the firmware of these devices 
that have security vulnerabilities like hardcoded keys. The urgency to roll out IoHT cloud 
platforms and the limited user experience of new IoT applications may result in the de-velopment of protocols by I.T. companies havi ng many potential security loopholes. Due 
Figure 5. Workﬂow Diagram of IoHT Implementation.
3. IoHT Security Landscape
IoHT security goes beyond device security, therefore, rather than only physical inter-
faces and ﬁrmware on the device, its scope must include web, mobile/cloud interfaces,
network services, local storage, and 3rd party APIs as well. Furthermore, diverse needs
and varied intended usage of healthcare devices by residential and industrial consumers
makes it more complex [ 59]. A list of top ten vulnerabilities related to IoHT devices has
been published by The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP). This includes
lack of authorization/insufﬁcient authentication, insecure web interfaces, lack of transport
encryption, insecure network services, privacy concerns, insecure cloud interfaces, inade-
quate security conﬁguration, insecure software or ﬁrmware, poor physical security, andAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 9 of 22
insecure mobile interfaces [ 60]. Interested readers can refer to [ 61,62] for detailed security
issues concerning IoHT.
3.1. Security Vulnerabilities in IoHT Implementations
There are several known security vulnerabilities in the existing IoHT implementa-
tions [ 12,63]. It is essential to discuss them to get a better understanding of the resulting
security problems.
3.1.1. IoT Device’s Operating System
Due to the specialized requirements of IoHT devices and limitations of existing oper-
ating systems, specialized operating systems such as RIOT, Contiki, FreeRTOS, and TinyOS
have been developed for IoT devices [ 64,65]. The constrained computational power, mem-
ory, and limited power of IoT devices make them vulnerable to the system and network
attacks. Furthermore, constrained resources do not allow the implementation of complex
encryption and authentication schemes on these devices as they may signiﬁcantly consume
the computational resources and cause a long delay, resulting in the degraded performance
of the regular operation of these devices which is critical, especially for real-time IoT de-
vices. This scenario facilitates attackers in using memory vulnerabilities and compromises
the security of such devices [ 66]. With inadequate resources on lightweight IoT devices, it
becomes challenging to implement strong encryption and authentication schemes.
3.1.2. Communication Protocols
IoHT devices come with fewer safety checks, and it is the ﬁrmware of these devices
that have security vulnerabilities like hardcoded keys. The urgency to roll out IoHT
cloud platforms and the limited user experience of new IoT applications may result in the
development of protocols by I.T. companies having many potential security loopholes. Due
to the diversity of IoT devices, it is not easy to develop a standard security protocol for
heterogeneous devices and it leads to problems of how to discover and urgently address
the security vulnerabilities among IoT devices.
3.1.3. Insecure Middleware
To make IoT applications development more manageable, various IoT middleware
platforms have been developed. These platforms offer distributed system services with
standard programming interfaces and protocols and minimize problems associated with
heterogeneity, distribution, and scale in IoT applications development. These services are
called ‘middleware’ as they sit ‘in the middle’, in a layer above the operating system and
networking software and below domain-speciﬁc applications [67,68].
3.2. Possible Points for Data Leakage
In the healthcare system, there are two states of data from where it can be stolen.
These states are the persistent data (i.e., data at rest) and transient data (i.e., in motion).
The overall description of data leakage points in a healthcare system is given in Figure 5.
The arrows with dotted lines represent transient data whereas the arrows with solid lines
represent persistent data. The details of each state are as follows.
3.2.1. Persistent Data
Persistent data refers to the data stored on different healthcare system components,
such as sensing and actuating devices, etc., and is prone to theft. Here, the features of the
healthcare system where the data can be stolen are discussed.
Healthcare devices such as sensors and actuators store the events logs (latest reading,
conﬁguration change, connection history, etc.) in the memory. As these devices usually
have weak security conﬁgurations and store data in non-encrypted forms, an attacker can
steal the data by exploiting these weaknesses.Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 10 of 22
IoHT servers are the most attractive components of healthcare systems for attackers to
steal health care data from as they contain the complete history of all the patients with their
biodata.
Physicians/Response Team devices are mostly mobile devices that physicians or
response teams use to monitor and process healthcare data. These devices are susceptible
to memory leakage attacks. Personal computers, mobile phones, tablets, or any speciﬁc
devices to monitor healthcare data fall into this category. Due to direct communication
with IoHT data servers, these devices are highly vulnerable to different security attacks.
Figure 6 is presenting attacks an attacker can execute on devices operating at different
layers. Effect of one compromised device can propagate at different layers because these
devices are communicating with each other.
Appl. Sci.  2022 , 12, 1927  11 of 23 
 
 
Figure 6. Possible Sites for Data Leakage in an IoHT implementation . 
3.2.2. Transient Data  
Transient data refers to the data on the move, as in the IoHT implementations, the 
information is tran sferred from devices to servers using different protocols and network-
ing devices. Here, we discuss such devices and protocols from where the data can be sto-
len during transmission.  
Communication protocols are used to transmit data from an IoT device to a d evice. 
IoT devices are primarily lightweight, low computational, and battery -oriented. Low -
range protocols with weak security features transfer data from IoT devices to a gateway 
device.  
Intermediate devices collect data from end devices using a specific p rotocol  to aggre-
gate and transform this data into another format that can be underst ood by the next de-
vice. A mobile phone or a PDA connected to the wear er acts like an intermediate device. 
These intermediate devices use multiple protocols to communicate with IoT endpoint de-
vices, data servers, and monitoring devices. These protocols have security issues; IoT gate-
ways, smart hubs, mobile phones, and WiFi dev ices enable IoT devices to connect with 
the Internet. These devices are limited in storage and are not used to store data ; therefore , 
they  forward it as it is received by changing its format. These devices communicate with 
IoT devices with different design s like LoRaWAN, ZigBee, Bluetooth, etc., but forward 
this collected data by using TCP/IP or UDP to the Internet.  
Access Points/Smart Hubs/IoT Gateways enable communication between IoT and 
data servers. They are not storage devices; however, they forward re ceived data to the 
intended destination. Due to the contact with different types of IoT devices, these devices 
operate multiple protocols. Security features like encryption, hashing, and password 
checking are used with these protocols. However, there are n o established guidelines to 
comply with any healthcare laws describing the security levels needed for IoT healthcare 
intermediate devices.  
3.3. Essential Security Features of IoHT  
Following are some of the essential security features of IoHT.  
Use of Standa rdized Devices: To ensure data privacy and security in healthcare sys-
tems, it is essential to use standardized devices with reliable security features. These de-
vices should meet healthcare standards and policies. Data storage, transmission, format 
intercha nges, terminologies, and presentation standards should be well -defined. No med-
ical devices, either implantable or wearable, are allowed to be manufacture d if they do 
not meet data standards.  
Figure 6. Possible Sites for Data Leakage in an IoHT implementation.
3.2.2. Transient Data
Transient data refers to the data on the move, as in the IoHT implementations, the
information is transferred from devices to servers using different protocols and networking
devices. Here, we discuss such devices and protocols from where the data can be stolen
during transmission.
Communication protocols are used to transmit data from an IoT device to a device.
IoT devices are primarily lightweight, low computational, and battery-oriented. Low-range
protocols with weak security features transfer data from IoT devices to a gateway device.
Intermediate devices collect data from end devices using a speciﬁc protocol to ag-
gregate and transform this data into another format that can be understood by the next
device. A mobile phone or a PDA connected to the wearer acts like an intermediate device.
These intermediate devices use multiple protocols to communicate with IoT endpoint
devices, data servers, and monitoring devices. These protocols have security issues; IoT
gateways, smart hubs, mobile phones, and WiFi devices enable IoT devices to connect with
the Internet. These devices are limited in storage and are not used to store data; therefore,
they forward it as it is received by changing its format. These devices communicate with
IoT devices with different designs like LoRaWAN, ZigBee, Bluetooth, etc., but forward this
collected data by using TCP/IP or UDP to the Internet.
Access Points/Smart Hubs/IoT Gateways enable communication between IoT and
data servers. They are not storage devices; however, they forward received data to the
intended destination. Due to the contact with different types of IoT devices, these devices
operate multiple protocols. Security features like encryption, hashing, and password
checking are used with these protocols. However, there are no established guidelines toAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 11 of 22
comply with any healthcare laws describing the security levels needed for IoT healthcare
intermediate devices.
3.3. Essential Security Features of IoHT
Following are some of the essential security features of IoHT.
Use of Standardized Devices: To ensure data privacy and security in healthcare sys-
tems, it is essential to use standardized devices with reliable security features. These
devices should meet healthcare standards and policies. Data storage, transmission, format
interchanges, terminologies, and presentation standards should be well-deﬁned. No medi-
cal devices, either implantable or wearable, are allowed to be manufactured if they do not
meet data standards.
Log Management and Compliance: Every management activity performed on these
healthcare devices should be appropriately logged on the healthcare servers. For data
privacy, there is a need to know who is accessing what data from which system. The best
practices are gathering log ﬁles and saving them for future references as long as you need
them. In distributed systems, these reports should be shared with other systems to prove
compliance.
Updating Technologies: Technologies are considered the workforce behind the ad-
vancement in healthcare systems, and recent innovations have proven this. Technologies
have changed the healthcare system to increase the accessibility of treatment that leads
to improved care and efﬁciency. The latest components are more efﬁcient and secure as
compared to the previous ones. Therefore, the new devices with the latest technologies
should be preferred over the old ones.
Patch Management: In addition to upgrading hardware, updating the software of IoT
device’s ﬁrmware is also essential; if it is not updated, it may be vulnerable. The software
vendors release patches from time to time to overcome the ﬂaws and loopholes. Every
device which is connected to the Internet needs to be updated, whether it is a personal
computer, smartphone, or any other device such as IoT [20].
User’s Proﬁling: The users should be identiﬁed and authenticated; the system must
know what resources a user can access. This process is called authorization. This process
ensures that the behavior of the users is constrained according to the user’s permission.
User proﬁling is more critical in healthcare applications. Healthcare organizations must
comply with international standards and procedures regarding user authentication and
authorization. The exchange of patient data must permanently preserve privacy constraints
with professional liabilities.
Generate Alerts: There should be some proper mechanism for IoHT to generate alerts
for any kind of malicious event. Intermediate devices can play an essential role in this
regard with the help of some applications. Warnings should be raised for critical events and
emergencies. These devices can analyze received data; after the detection of any malicious
activity, alerts can be directly transmitted to the monitoring server or system. Availability
of IoHT should be the top priority; if any critical IoHT device goes off for any reason,
intermediate devices communicate with them directly; therefore, generating alerts by these
devices could help the emergency response team to respond more quickly.
Fines and Penalties: A mechanism should be implemented in the healthcare sector
against attackers that attack healthcare systems and devices and try to leak or steal health-
care information. Healthcare data is conﬁdential, and if an attacker tries to breach the
healthcare system for the purpose of data-stealing by any means they should be charged
with penalties or imprisonment.
4. Healthcare Data Protection Legislation and Framework
In developed countries, there are data privacy and protection laws implemented to
securely process citizens’ personal data. In this section, we discuss some of them brieﬂy to
highlight their aims and features. These laws and legislations are compared with each other
to see how they provide security features at different layers of the proposed healthcareAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 12 of 22
architecture. Implementation of IoT data privacy regulations is very important for legal
matters, human rights, and social norms. Generally, IoT data privacy regulations are re-
quired to support core privacy goals like fairness, purpose satisfaction, proportionality, and
accountability. Government and private organizations can work together to achieve these
goals. American, European, and other leading countries’ law enforcement organizations are
working to ﬁnd a common ground for solving healthcare data privacy problems while also
making a more effective existing legal framework. An effective legal framework should
ensure the user’s awareness and their control over the IoT healthcare products with their
services. Compliance with other international data privacy frameworks makes it more
adequate [6,69].
4.1. Major Healthcare Initiative
A brief overview of healthcare initiatives related to data protection, for different
regions, is given below.
4.1.1. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
HIPAA was enacted by the US government to implement the security and privacy
of healthcare data for American citizens. It has separate rule sets for security and privacy.
The privacy rules enable the privacy of the health data to protect the data from disclosure.
The security rules provide security of the individuals’ health information by adopting
advanced technologies to acquire more efﬁcient means of patient care. The HIPAA security
and privacy rules are implemented to healthcare and non-healthcare organizations that
store, transmit, and process healthcare data of US citizens by any means.
The privacy rule protects the following health information processed by concerned entities:
 Common Identiﬁer (e.g., name, address, birth date);
 Past, present, or future physical and mental health or condition;
 Past, present, or future payment provision for healthcare;
 Provision of healthcare to individuals.
The mentioned entities are allowed to be processed or disclosed for research and
public interest and should have the authorization to process or disclose health information
except for treatment purposes, like payment and relevant health care operations.
The Security Rule protects personal health information that has been created, re-
ceived, transmitted, and managed electronically. These security rules have the following
characteristics:
 Making sure of the integrity and availability of personal healthcare information;
 Detects and protects against known threats to conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability;
 Protect against processes not permitted and the disclosure of information.
The security rule requires the administrative protection of management processes
personnel. Proper administrative controls should be maintained for devices and personnel.
This rule also includes audit control, access control, integrity control, and transmission
security.
4.1.2. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)
is an extension of security and privacy guidelines described in HIPAA signed in 2009.
However, it has not been completely enforced in the healthcare industry. It only provides
legal liability for noncompliance. Besides applying the HIPAA rules, it is responsible for the
notiﬁcation of breaches and unauthorized access to healthcare data. It enables individuals
with a right to get their electronic healthcare data and they can grant privileges to others to
receive healthcare information [70].Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 13 of 22
4.1.3. Personal Information Protection and Electronic Document Act (PIPEDA)
The federal government of Canada introduced the Personal Information Protection
and Electronic Document Act (PIPEDA) in 2001. Its main purpose is to provide individuals
control, to some extent, over their personal information by enforcing policies on organiza-
tions that process and disclose the personal information of Canadian citizens. These policies
include informing citizens concerning personal information processed or disclosed and
this information is protected by using adequate security measures. The PIPEDA applies
to all personal data, healthcare data, and other data that holds the private information of
individuals. If any organization collects data, then it is fully accountable for the protection
of the collected data. The PIPEDA is not applicable in all states of Canada. Every province
has the right to enforce rules and policies as long as they are similar to PIPEDA [ 71].
PIPEDA provides basic guidelines to organizations for collecting and processing personal
information for business purposes. The interconnected devices should use the security
standards of data privacy principles according to PIPEDA.
4.1.4. EUROHEALTH
In late 1990, the WHO Regional Committee for Europe established a healthcare pro-
gram called EUROHEALTH. It provides medium-term needs for the Countries of Central
and Eastern Europe (CCEE) for material, managerial, and technical resources for long-term
health strategies. The primary objectives of this program are to make collaborative agree-
ments with CCEE, fundraising, and coordination with international organizations. The
program’s work has generated an information ﬂow for better cooperation and coordination
between all the organizations working in the health sector. This program is realistic, ﬂexible,
and accessible to the CCEE [72].
4.1.5. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
In May 2018, a new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) replaced directive
95/46 [ 73], consolidating and innovating data protection rules. The introduced GDPR is
considerably more comprehensive and establishes requirements for internal compliance
mechanisms that did not exist in the legislation. It applies to all sectors of the economy, all
broadly deﬁned personal data, and every sector that controls or processes data. Moreover,
it applies protective standards throughout the lifespan of the data. GDPR is designed to
enable people to better control their data. Although the EU already established its data
protection directive in 1995, it was not completely reasonable for all the member states of
the EU. To remove all the reservations, the GDPR has been established and is applicable
throughout the EU.
The liability of the GDPR’s impact is likely to be for health organizations, hospitals, and
other healthcare organizations that process healthcare data. GDPR requires accountability
for how healthcare data is processed. Data controllers are not only responsible for the
compliance, but processors are also accountable for any data breach of their work and
direction. Furthermore, health organizations will need to be clearer and attentive in
proﬁling data processing activities and will require their staff to ensure a secure ﬂow of
data [74].
4.1.6. The Privacy Act (Australia)
It entails the set of principles of Australian legislation to protect the personal infor-
mation of Australian citizens. These principles refer to the usage, storage, and disclosure
of personal information. Moreover, individuals have the right to the access and correc-
tion of their personal information. This law also includes data security, data quality, and
cross-border data ﬂow policies [75].
Healthcare data is a subset of personal information and needs extra security policies
and protection. All organizations that provide a health service and hold health information
(other than an employee record) are covered by the Privacy Act, whether or not they are
small businesses. In certain circumstances, the Privacy Act permits the handling of healthAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 14 of 22
information and personal information for health and medical research purposes, where it
is impracticable for researchers to obtain individuals’ consent.
4.1.7. Saudi Health Information Exchange Policies (SHIEP)
The main objective of this policy is to present the permissible usage of the KSA
(Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) health information exchange like patient care, public health, and
quality. This policy applies to all individuals and organizations who have access to the Saudi
Health Information Exchange managed records such as participating healthcare subscribers,
business associates, health information services providers, and subcontractors [76].
Personal Health Information (PHI) will be available for treatment, healthcare op-
erations, and public health, but it may be permitted for research and education. This
policy shall not permit the usage of healthcare information for market studies and legal
investigation or inquiry.
Table 4 presents a comparison of regulations in light of the proposed ﬁve layers
architecture for IoHT. It is interesting to observe that none of the above regulations are
providing security at the intermediate and feedback layer. However, both these layers
are vulnerable to data leakage threats due to human intervention accessibility to physical
devices.
Table 4. Comparison of Healthcare Regulations.
RegulationCountry/
RegionDevice
LayerProtocol
LayerIntermediate
LayerManagement
LayerFeedback
Layer
HIPAA America Yes Yes No Yes No
PIPEDA Canada Yes No No No No
EURO
HEALTHEU Yes No No No No
GDPR EU Yes Yes No No No
The Privacy Act Australia Yes Yes No No No
SHIEP KSA Yes Yes No Yes No
4.2. Data Protection Issues/Aspects Not Covered in Healthcare Laws
There are various issues and aspects of IoHT that are not covered in the already
discussed legislative initiatives.
Big Data Issues Integrating healthcare data notably raises security and privacy issues.
Patient information is processed at different levels of security in data centers. In America,
most organizations have HIPAA certiﬁcation, but this does not guarantee a patient’s record
safety because HIPAA is more inclined towards ensuring security policies rather than
implementation. Moreover, the transmission of large data sets from different locations
poses an extra burden on processing and storage. Conventional security solutions are
inadequate for large and inherently changing data sets. With the emergence of cloud
healthcare solutions, security demands are becoming more complex and there are no
speciﬁed policies written in existing healthcare data protection laws [77].
Data Governance related to the governance of healthcare data should be the initial
step in managing healthcare data. It is due to the need of moving the healthcare industry
towards a value-based business model. It demands common data representation that
encircles different security standards (e.g., ICD, CPT, and LOINC) [ 78]. Currently, data
generated in the healthcare industry is diverse and would demand a proper governance
model. There are no policies for healthcare data standardization and normalization for
proper data governance.
Privacy-preserving analytics in the healthcare industry is grasping IoT devices to
monitor and transmit vitals to healthcare clouds. Therefore, it needs to process and analyze
data in an ad-hoc decentralized manner. However, the execution of resource-exhausting
operations with privacy preservation is becoming a challenge. As new healthcare dataAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 15 of 22
analytics are becoming popular, healthcare data privacy laws need revision, and new laws
should be drafted to illustrate all processes involved in the usage of patients’ private data.
Identiﬁcation of the Relevant Privacy Violation privacy in IoT-based devices can be
violated at many stages. Firstly, it is violated by collecting data by third parties. Secondly,
the usage and distribution of private data, and thirdly, the data is combined with other
data. The third possibility is not known by the users who are using IoT-based medical
devices to process and generate data. By combining newly generated information with
existing data about a patient or health activity, it raises the high commercial value for many
data-hungry organizations and commercial ﬁrms. Most of the data is often generated by
automated medical devices, therefore, a higher trust level should be maintained for this
data than on manually entered human data. This is important because medical insurance
companies are monitoring the health conditions of their customers with the help of medical
devices to ascertain the speciﬁc risks associated with their customer’s health. These devices
are also tracking users’ geo-locations and such data must be protected through adequate
device safety measures as well as legislative limitations on data usage.
Data and context quality are mostly overlooked issues even if these facts play a
signiﬁcant role in the privacy debates in the context of IoT. The quality of data highly
depends on the environment in which it is collected. The quality of context may be
unknown where there is no or incomplete information about the context. It may also be
ambivalent as there is a chance of contradictory information from different context sources.
Context quality generates new problems of conﬁdentiality that have not been addressed by
current research. Context quality is related to the information that is not to be processed by
hardware components that likely provide the information. It is better to protect context
quality as it is sensitive information. Change in context quality is also sensitive information.
IoT devices generate data based on context and do not allow users to shut down the system
or to easily disconnect from it.
To enhance transparency of the healthcare systems, not only healthcare data that
is propagated from different devices need to be controlled, but also the data generated
automatically by the healthcare devices need to be managed. Despite this important issue,
no law has been made in this regard. There is a need to develop a combined approach with
technical standards and existing regulatory frameworks to ensure data transparency.
Privacy violating interactions and presentation in IoT-based healthcare applications
like heartbeat monitors, geo-tracking devices, automated insulin pumps, and other health-
care devices envisage and require strong interaction with the patient. In such devices, the
information will be provided through sensors or other recorded medical device readings.
This information goes through different devices to reach its ultimate destination and be-
comes a threat to privacy when this sensitive information is exchanged through different
systems. In smart cities, for instance, an individual could make a query for the way to a
speciﬁc health clinic. Such a query should not be answered, for instance, by showing the
way to a health clinic nearby, visible to any passerby, another example of such medical
devices that do not encrypt data while transmitting to the remote server. Any adversary
intending to sniff that data could easily use this information for a malicious purpose. Due to
the close interaction and presentation techniques, the threat of privacy-violating interaction
and presentation is a major challenge in healthcare laws.
Life cycle transition privacy is compromised when private information is disclosed
by IoT devices during the life cycle transition. These devices hold information like vital
sign readings, drug dosage, and actuator functions. Healthcare data is highly sensitive, but
also the collection of simple usage data (e.g., location, duration, frequency) could disclose a
lot about the life cycle of people. Despite evident problems with healthcare devices, the
life cycle transition problem has never been addressed. The life cycle of healthcare devices
is still modeled as buy-once-own-forever and solutions have not evolved beyond a total
memory wipe (e.g., before selling a wearable) or physical destruction. There is a need to
identify the requirements for ﬂexible solutions to implement convenient privacy life cycle
management mechanisms.Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 16 of 22
Linkage refers to the linkage of different previously separated systems like combin-
ing forms of revealed data sources. When data is gathered from different sources with
different permissions and contexts it causes loss of context and poor judgment. Threats
of linking different systems and data sources are not novel. Online social networks and
integrated third-party applications are facing the same problems. However, IoT networks
and services rely on the interaction and collaboration of many coequal systems. Managing
the numerous devices in IoHT systems and their connectivity with other systems will
raise more challenges in linkage threats. The threat of linkage will cause problems in the
IoT evolution process. There are mainly two reasons for it. First, the horizontal linkage
of different companies and manufacturers systems to create a heterogeneous distributed
system-of-systems delivering new services that no single system can provide. Successful
linkage will make data exchange more agile and controllable between different parties.
However, horizontal linkage also causes more local data ﬂows than vertical linkage that
could improve privacy. These problems should be properly addressed in IoT healthcare
laws to prevent passive monitoring and intrusive data collection by IoT devices.
4.3. IoHT Governance Challenges
Based on the analysis of the major global healthcare initiatives, we identiﬁed the
following IoHT governance challenges that hinder the widespread adoption of IoHT
systems.
4.3.1. Conﬂicts in Laws
After the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) for the
enforcement of data security and privacy, standards have been widened. For the protection
of European citizens’ data outside of Europe, their data is allowed to be used under strict
conditions: If any data privacy legislation enacted by a non-EU country accepts Standard
Contractual Clauses (SCC) and Binding Corporate Rules (BCR). These terms and conditions
cause challenges for developing countries because BCR’s and SCC are time-consuming and
costly [79].
A country may or may not have a law for user data protection, but the healthcare
system should follow the laws of the country from which the user belongs. The same thing
applies to the social and cultural norms, which should be applied according to the laws of
the state to which the user belongs. In the case of data residing on cloud servers, again, the
privacy laws will be applied according to the region of the patients.
4.3.2. Data Protection Issues in Healthcare Systems
The above discussion leads us to ﬁnd the four major issues in protecting healthcare
data from the national policy level to an organizational level. These issues are (i) the
absence of laws for healthcare data protection, (ii) the use of non-standard healthcare
devices and communication protocols by a healthcare facility, (iii) compliance issues to
implement healthcare policies locally, (iv) and the absence of a dedicated enforcement
agency for inspection and to deal with complaints and violations [80].
4.3.3. Absence of Conﬂict of Laws for Healthcare Data Protection
As we have discussed, the most common reason for violations in healthcare laws
is the absence of law in many developing countries. There is no law for healthcare data
protection, therefore, patients’ data can be used by the government and private agencies.
They use patients’ medical records for research purposes without their consent. No mon-
itoring facility can ensure the integrity of the medical records after being used by these
organizations.
4.3.4. Non-Standard Healthcare Devices and Protocols
The development and production process of various smart devices over a short period
reduces the security considerations. Small businesses have less expertise and resources inAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 17 of 22
terms of security implementations and testing the devices as well as applications for the
healthcare domain. Usage of non-standard healthcare devices and protocols is the major
concern of healthcare data privacy and protection, which, in context, is the usage of locally
manufactured healthcare devices that do not have sufﬁcient security features according
to healthcare standards. Most of these devices are unable to update or patch against new
threats and attacks. There must be some laws and policies included in these healthcare care
laws that declare guidelines for manufacturing healthcare devices and security features
must be included in them [81].
4.3.5. Other Considerations
Apart from the above-mentioned challenges, there are several local issues worth
consideration for the adoption of IoHT governance initiatives.
 Awareness: There is a lack of awareness among the users of healthcare systems about
the importance of the security of healthcare data;
 System Management Staff: Most of the time healthcare data is processed and for-
warded by system management staff in healthcare institutes. They work on inter-
mediate devices like data servers and gateway devices. The staff is not qualiﬁed
enough to understand the complexities of data privacy and legal aspects. They are
unaware of the latest threats because their primary tasks are network conﬁgurations
and the availability of data at the endpoints. Mostly, they do not update healthcare
systems and leave them unpatched until an issue is raised. They have little exposure
to awareness programs and practices for data security and privacy;
 Doctors and Healthcare staff: One of the critical facts is not knowing much about the
security and privacy laws of healthcare data by the healthcare staff and emergency
response teams in hospitals. Speciﬁcally, the doctor uses personal devices such as cell
phones or laptops to view the data, therefore, these personal devices also need to be
secure. Moreover, they are not even familiar with the consequences of healthcare data
leakage. There is no proper framework implemented that enforces healthcare staff to
follow rules and policies to share and process patients’ healthcare data legally and
securely;
 Patients: These are the central entities in the healthcare system. However, they are
less attractive to attackers due to having less information i.e., about themselves only.
They are conscious about their privacy and all these legalities are there to protect their
healthcare privacy. However, they do not have any idea about how their data is shared
with other organizations and what their rights are regarding their healthcare data. If
their data is shared without conferring with them, it begs the question of what the
legal liberties are that can be taken by concerned organizations about data sharing;
 Enforcement Difﬁculties: There is no enforcement authority or body established that
helps to enforce data privacy laws in the healthcare sector. All the healthcare institutes
should be obliged to follow instructions by some authority. The authority should
implement healthcare laws;
 Low Budget: In developing countries, the medical budget is very limited. The trend
of using IoHT devices is emerging in big cities. Mostly, there is no central system
or facility provided to facilitate data privacy in developing countries. A very low
or limited budget is allocated for new and innovative technologies in the healthcare
sector. Therefore, the authorities consider that there is no need to enforce data privacy
policies if the usage of such devices is limited;
 Lack of Qualiﬁed Staff: The IT staff does not conﬁgure/enable security functions in
IoHT due to inadequate qualiﬁcations and expertise. The main reason behind it is
the lack of security training programs for medical staff. They are only interested in
the functional requirements of medical devices but do not take care of non-functional
requirements of a medical device like communication security and data privacy;
 No Internal Auditing: There is no IoHT audit like IT audit, conducted in healthcare
organizations and hospitals. If any organization is processing healthcare data, then itAppl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 18 of 22
is unlikely to make checks and balance the healthcare data. The internal audit ensures
what data is being processed by which organization for what purposes. The auditing
activities reduce the risk of data leakage and unauthorized usage;
 No Special Enforcement Authority: One of the difﬁculties in the enforcement of data
privacy laws and regulations is the absence of special enforcement authorities in the
healthcare sector. Formation and implementation of data privacy laws should be
the primary responsibilities of the authority. It can also ensure the compliance of
state-level or national-level policies with international policies.
5. Recommendations
After careful analysis of data privacy and protection policies and compliance issues
for IoHT-based systems, some recommendations can assist in improving this system. These
recommendations assist in resolving healthcare data security problems due to compliance
issues between different legal frameworks.
 Fines and Penalties: IoT devices gather a huge amount of information and there are
several privacy risks associated with the usage and access of the data. Speciﬁcally,
individual identiﬁcation and behavior monitoring are major concerns. As the usage
of IoT devices is increasing in the healthcare sector, a huge amount of private data
is processed and stored. There is a need to introduce new privacy safeguards. The
health information collected from devices like Fitbit/Jawbone [ 82] can be used to
detect disease correlations with new treatment options with remote monitoring;
 Data Anonymization: IoT devices gather most of the data aggregated from the envi-
ronment and forward it via a router or intermediate device for processing. During
this process, several protocols and compression schemes are used as the storage space
on the devices is limited and cannot handle big headers like that used for Internet
Protocol IPv6. This data is sanitized as closely as possible to the device that created it
since this communication avoids safety risks;
 Healthcare System Design: The healthcare system should be designed in such a way
that it provides the controls in a user-friendly manner. An end-user must have full
control over his/her collected data at any moment i.e., to whom it can be or cannot be
shared. At any moment, the user should be given the possibility to know and control
who has his data, what data have been collected, and for what purposes they will be
used for the legitimate initial purpose;
 Privacy by Design: Privacy embedded into the design is an essential component
integrated into the whole IoHT core system. The privacy safeguard framework must
be implemented from the beginning of the system engineering process. The health-
care devices operate with user interactions or web interfaces. There are no privacy
protection guidelines available while designing device interfaces. There are several
vulnerabilities in web-based interfaces that are prone to data leakage and information
leakage attacks. Most of the devices do not have authentication features or have
default passwords that are difﬁcult to enter due to their small size interfaces;
 Communication Security: There are several communication protocols used in IoT
healthcare devices. There are no speciﬁc guidelines provided in data privacy laws
about protocol security or what type of encryption or anonymity standards should be
adopted for IoT devices, which operate on low memory and computation resources.
These privacy laws should provide transparent policies about the communication
security of these devices, especially for use in hospitals;
 Dispute Resolution: There is a need to resolve regional and international disputes
regarding data protection. There are different versions of healthcare data privacy laws
enforced regionally and internationally. If the healthcare data of a citizen is processed
in a different country or state where different data privacy laws are enforced, then
what are the possible legal issues that should apply to that person’s processed data?
These types of disputes should be resolved in the national healthcare policies;Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 19 of 22
 Awareness Programs: Awareness programs are very signiﬁcant to highlight the im-
portance of data privacy, especially in the healthcare sector. IT staff, management
staff, and other related staff of a healthcare facility should be aware and carry out
the practices of secure processing of healthcare data. They must be aware of the
consequences in the case of data leakage and what penalties they would be charged in
the case of carelessness. Doctor and emergency response teams should be trained for
the secure usage of their devices (i.e., laptops and cellphones, etc.) linked to healthcare
systems, and they should share their experiences and difﬁculties while using these
devices securely with healthcare organizations.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a detailed IoHT classiﬁcation along with the general
architecture of IoHT systems. The architecture aids in highlighting data security and
privacy challenges. Along with discussion about the known security vulnerabilities, we
also discussed the healthcare regulations and afﬁliated issues. We also highlighted major
reasons causing the failure of data protection and possible points of data leakage in IoHT
systems. The study also discussed and compared various data protection regulations and
highlighted their limitations. Lastly, we proposed some recommendations regarding data
privacy and security for IoHT implementations. We believe this research will help the
industrial and governing bodies to design and implement IoT-enabled healthcare systems
while protecting the security and privacy of individuals.
As future work, we plan to explore cybersecurity risk assessment approaches with
respect to IoHT to aid organizations and governments in better protecting themselves
against pertinent risks. The risk with simply extending existing assessment methodologies
will be possibly being blind to new risks arising in the healthcare ecosystem. These risks
could be related to the high sensitivity of healthcare data, the ﬂow of information, and
compliance with regional and global regulatory approaches.
Author Contributions: J.S. and R.A. were involved in the conceptualization of the key idea; A.K.K.
and T.A. helped with the methodology and deﬁning the contents of the paper; J.S., R.A., A.K.K. and
T.A. were involved in the writing—original draft preparation; J.S., R.A., A.K.K., T.A., S.S. and A.M.A.
were involved in reviewing and editing. The improvements in the write-up were contributed to by
all. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors would like to thank SAUDI ARAMCO Cybersecurity Chair, Imam Abdulrah-
man Bin Faisal University for funding this project.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. International Telecommunication Union Yearbook of Statistics, 1991–2000 ; ITU: Geneva, Switzerland, 2001.
2. Ahmad, T.; Ranise, S. Validating Requirements of Access Control for Cloud-Edge IoT Solutions (Short Paper). In International
Symposium on Foundations and Practice of Security ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018.
3. Culler, D.; Chakrabarti, S.; Infusion, I.P . 6LoWPAN: Incorporating IEEE 802.15. 4 into the IP Architecture, IPSO Alliance; White
Paper. 2009. Available online: https://www.omaspecworks.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/6lowpan.pdf (accessed on 1
October 2021).
4. Al Alkeem, E.; Yeun, C.Y.; Zemerly, M.J. Security and privacy framework for ubiquitous healthcare IoT devices. In Proceedings of
the 10th IEEE International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST), London, UK, 8–10 December
2015; pp. 70–75.
5. Miorandi, D.; Sicari, S.; de Pellegrini, F.; Chlamtac, I. Internet of things: Vision, applications and research challenges. Ad. Hoc.
Netw. 2012 ,10, 1497–1516. [CrossRef]
6. Porambage, P .; Ylianttila, M.; Schmitt, C.; Kumar, P .; Gurtov, A.; Vasilakos, A.V . The quest for privacy in the internet of things.
IEEE Cloud Comput. 2016 ,3, 36–45. [CrossRef]Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 20 of 22
7. Solanas, A.; Patsakis, C.; Conti, M.; Vlachos, I.S.; Ramos, V .; Falcone, F.; Postolache, O.; P érez-Mart ínez, P .A.; Di Pietro, R.; Perrea,
D.N.; et al. Smart health: A context-aware health paradigm within smart cities. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2014 ,52, 74–81. [CrossRef]
8. Martinz-Ballest, A.; P érez-Mart ínez, P .A.; Solanas, A. The pursuit of citizens’ privacy: A privacy-aware smart city is possible.
IEEE Commun. Mag. 2013 ,51, 136–141. [CrossRef]
9. Eckhoff, D.; Wagner, I. Privacy in the smart city- applications, technologies, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.
2017 ,20, 489–516. [CrossRef]
10. Alghanim, A.A.; Rahman, S.M.M.; Hossain, M.A. Privacy analysis of smart city healthcare services. In Proceedings of the 2017
IEEE International Symposium on Multimedia (ISM), Taichung, Taiwan, 11–13 December 2017; pp. 394–398.
11. Storm, D. MEDJACK: Hackers Hijacking Medical Devices to Create Backdoors in Hospital Networks Computer World. 2015.
Available online: https://www.computerworld.com/article/2932371/medjack-hackers-hijacking-medical-devices-to-create-
backdoors-in-hospital-networks.html (accessed on 1 October 2021).
12. McMahon, E.; Williams, R.; El, M.; Samtani, S.; Patton, M.; Chen, H. Assessing medical device vulnerabilities on the Internet of
Things. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), Beijing, China, 22–24
July 2017; pp. 176–178.
13. Wang, L.; Ali, Y.; Nazir, S.; Niazi, M. ISA evaluation framework for security of internet of health things system using AHP-TOPSIS
methods. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 152316–152332. [CrossRef]
14. Rahman, M.A.; Hossain, M.S.; Showail, A.J.; Alrajeh, N.A.; Alhamid, M.F. A secure, private, and explainable IoHT framework to
support sustainable health monitoring in a smart city. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021 ,72, 103083. [CrossRef]
15. Rahman, M.A.; Hossain, M.S.; Islam, M.S.; Alrajeh, N.A.; Muhammad, G. Secure and provenance enhanced Internet of health
things framework: A blockchain managed federated learning approach. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 205071–205087. [CrossRef]
16. Ketu, S.; Mishra, P .K. Mishra Internet of Healthcare Things: A contemporary survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2021 ,192, 103179.
[CrossRef]
17. Mamdouh, M.; Awad, A.I.; Khalaf, A.A.; Hamed, H.F. Authentication and Identity Management of IoHT Devices: Achievements,
Challenges, and Future Directions. Comput. Secur. 2021 ,111, 102491. [CrossRef]
18. Somasundaram, R.; Thirugnanam, M. Review of security challenges in healthcare internet of things. Wirel. Netw. 2021 ,27,
5503–5509. [CrossRef]
19. Sivan, R.; Zukarnain, Z.A. Security and Privacy in Cloud-Based E-Health System. Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742. [CrossRef]
20. Parashar, A.; Rishishwar, S. Security challenges in IoT. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Advances in
Electrical, Electronics, Information, Communication and Bio-Informatics (AEEICB), Chennai, India, 27–28 February 2017; pp.
446–449.
21. Morghan, H.; Hashmi, U.S.; Imran, A. Edge computing in smart health care systems: Review, challenges, and research directions.
Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 2019 , e3710. [CrossRef]
22. Cao, Y.; Hou, P .; Brown, D.; Wang, J.; Chen, S. Distributed analytics and edge intelligence: Pervasive health monitoring at the era
of fog computing. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Mobile Big Data (Mobidata), Hangzhou, China, 21 June 2015.
23. Hu, R.; Pham, H.; Buluschek, P .; Gatica-Perez, D. Elderly people living alone: Detecting home visits with ambient and wearable
sensing. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multimedia for Personal Health and Health Care (MMHealth),
Mountain View, CA, USA, 23 October 2017.
24. Baktir, A.C.; Tunca, C.; Ozgovde, A.; Salur, G.; Ersoy, C. SDN-based multi-tier computing and communication architecture for
pervasive healthcare. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 56765–56781. [CrossRef]
25. Brito, C.; Pinto, L.; Marinho, V .; Paiva, S.; Pinto, P . A Review on Recent Advances in Implanted Medical Devices Security. In
Proceedings of the 2021 16th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 2021, Chaves, Portugal, 23–26
June 2021; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
26. Thakar, A.T.; Pandya, S. Survey of IoT enables healthcare devices. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on
Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), Erode, India, 18–19 July 2017.
27. Li, X.; Huang, X.; Li, C.; Yu, R.; Shu, L. EdgeCare: Leveraging edge computing for collaborative data management in mobile
healthcare systems. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 22011–22025. [CrossRef]
28. Perez, A.J.; Zeadally, S. Recent Advances in Wearable Sensing Technologies. Sensors 2021 ,21, 6828. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Qu, Y.; Zheng, G.; Ma, H.; Wang, X.; Ji, B.; Wu, H. A Survey of Routing Protocols in WBAN for Healthcare Applications. Sensors
2019 ,19, 1638. [CrossRef]
30. Baker, S.B.; Xiang, W.; Atkinson, I. Internet of things for smart healthcare: Technologies, challenges, and opportunities. IEEE
Access 2017 ,5, 26521–26544. [CrossRef]
31. Saboor, A.; Mustafa, A.; Ahmad, R.; Khan, M.A.; Haris, M.; Hameed, R. Evolution of Wireless Standards for Health Monitoring.
In Proceedings of the 2019 9th Annual Information Technology, Electromechanical Engineering and Microelectronics Conference
(IEMECON), Jaipur, India, 13–15 March 2019; pp. 268–272. [CrossRef]
32. Saboor, A.; Ahmad, R.; Ahmed, W.; Kiani, A.K.; Moullec, Y.L.; Alam, M.M. On Research Challenges in Hybrid Medium-Access
Control Protocols for IEEE 802.15.6 WBANs. IEEE Sens. J. 2019 ,19, 8543–8555. [CrossRef]
33. Taleb, H.; Nasser, A.; Andrieux, G. Wireless technologies, medical applications and future challenges in WBAN: A survey. Wirel.
Netw. 2021 ,27, 5271–5295. [CrossRef]Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 21 of 22
34. Hämäläinen, M.; Paso, T.; Mucchi, L. ETSI SmartBAN in Medical IoT. In Proceedings of the 2021 XXXIVth General Assembly
and Scientiﬁc Symposium of the International Union of Radio Science (URSI GASS), Rome, Italy, 28 August–4 September 2021.
[CrossRef]
35. Negra, R.; Jemili, I.; Belghith, A. Wireless body area networks: Applications and technologies. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016 ,83,
1274–1281. [CrossRef]
36. Khajenasiri, I.; Zhu, P .; Verhelst, M.; Gielen, G. A low-energy ultra-wideband internet-of-things radio system for multi-standard
smart-home energy management. IEIE Trans. Smart Process. Comput. 2015 ,4, 354–365. [CrossRef]
37. Mukherjee, A.; Ghosh, S.; Behere, A.; Ghosh, S.K.; Buyya, R. Internet of Health Things (IoHT) for personalized health care using
integrated edge-fog-cloud network. J. Ambient. Intell. Hum. Comput. 2021 ,12, 943–959. [CrossRef]
38. Mamdouh, M.; Awad, A.I.; Hamed, H.F.A.; Khalaf, A.A.M. Outlook on Security and Privacy. In IoHT: Key Challenges and Future
Vision, Proceedings of the International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computer Vision (AICV 2020). Advances in Intelligent
Systems and Computing, Cairo, Egypt, 8–10 April, 2020 ; Hassanien, A.E., Azar, A., Gaber, T., Oliva, D., Tolba, F., Eds.; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2020; p. 1153. [CrossRef]
39. Meyer, J.; Kazakova, A.; Büsing, M.; Boll, S. Visualization of complex health data on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
Workshop on Multimedia for Personal Health and Health Care (MMHealth), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 16 October 2016.
40. Rolim, C.O.; Koch, F.L.; Westphall, C.B.; Werner, J.; Fracalossi, A.; Salvador, G.S. A cloud computing solution for patient’s data
collection in health care institutions. In Proceedings of the 2010 Second International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and
Social Medicine, St. Maarten, The Netherlands, 2–16 October 2010.
41. Perera, C.; McCormick, C.; Bandara, A.K.; Price, B.A.; Nuseibeh, B. Privacy-by-design framework for assessing internet of things
applications and platforms. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on the Internet of Things, Stuttgart, Germany, 7–9
November 2016; pp. 83–92.
42. Stork, M.; Vancura, V . Hidden pacemaker pulses detection based on wavelet and Hilbert-Huang transform. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Applied Electronics, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 9–10 September 2014; pp. 285–288.
43. Samani, M.M.; Mahnam, A. Design and implementation of an ultra low power wireless neuro-stimulator system. In Proceedings
of the 17th Iranian Conference of Biomedical Engineering (ICBME), Isfahan, Iran, 3–4 November 2010; pp. 1–4.
44. Lucisano, J.Y.; Routh, T.L.; Lin, J.T.; Gough, D.A. Glucose monitoring in individuals with diabetes using a long-term implanted
sensor/telemetry system and mode. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2016 ,64, 198–1993.
45. Hiremath, S.; Yang, G.; Mankodiya, K. Wearable internet of things: Concept, architectural components and promises for
person-centered healthcare. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare-
Transforming Healthcare Through Innovations in Mobile and Wireless Technologies (MOBIHEALTH), Athens, Greece, 3–5
November 2014; pp. 304–307.
46. Birgit, L.; Andrei, P . ActiGait®: A Partly Implantable Drop-Foot Stimulator System. In Introduction to Neural Engineering for Motor
Rehabilitation ; Farina, D., Jensen, W., Akay, M., Eds.; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013; pp. 421–423.
47. Hansen, J.H.; Ali, H.; Saba, J.N.; Charan, M.R.; Mamun, N.; Ghosh, R.; Brueggeman, A. Cci-mobile: Design and evaluation of a
cochlear implant and hearing aid research platform for speech scientists and engineers. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical & Health Informatics (BHI), Chicago, IL, USA, 19–22 May 2019; pp. 1–4.
48. Caffey, S.; Po-Ying, L.; Jeffrey, B. Remote-Controlled Drug Pump Devices. U.S. Patent 8,285,328, 9 October 2012.
49. Zhao, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, H.; Chen, Z.A.; Lu, Y.; Dai, Y.; Xu, L.; Gao, S. Flexible and Wearable EMG and PSD Sensors
Enabled Locomotion Mode Recognition for IoHT Based In-home Rehabilitation. IEEE Sens. J. 2021 ,21, 26311–26319. [CrossRef]
50. Rao, S.; Dubey, S.; Deb, S.; Hughes, Z.; Seo, Y.S.; Nguyen, M.Q.; Tang, S.J.; Abell, T.; Lahr, C.; Chiao, J.C. Wireless gastric
stimulators. In Proceedings of the Texas Symposium on Wireless and Microwave Circuits and Systems, Waco, TX, USA, 3–4 April
2014; pp. 1–4.
51. Zareei, M.; Zarei, A.; Budiarto, R.; Omar, M.A. A comparative study of short range wireless sensor network on high density
networks. In Proceedings of the 17th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Communications, APCC, Sabah, Malaysia, 2–5 October 2011; pp.
247–252.
52. Fouladi, B.; Ghanoun, S. Security Evaluation of the Z-Wave Wireless Protocol ; Black Hat: Las V egas, NV , USA, 2013; V olume 24, pp. 1–2.
53. Fatima, I.; Ahmad, A.; Ali, S.; Ali, M.; Baig, M. ITriple-Band circular polarized antenna for WLAN/WiFi/Bluetooth/WiMAX
applications. Prog. Electromagn. Res. C 2021 ,109, 65–75. [CrossRef]
54. Varshney, G.; Gupta, H. A security framework for IOT devices against wireless threats. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Telecommunication and Networks (TEL-NET), Noida, India, 10–11 August 2017; pp. 1–6.
55. Xie, L.; Yang, G.; Mantysalo, M.; Xu, L.L.; Jonsson, F.; Zheng, L.R. Heterogeneous integration of bio-sensing system-on-chip and
printed electronics. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Circuits Syst. 2012 ,4, 672–682. [CrossRef]
56. Lindquist, A.; Johansson, P .; Petersson, G.; Saveman, B.I.; Nilsson, G. The use of the personal digital assistant (PDA) among
personnel and students in health care: A review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2008 ,10, e1038. [CrossRef]
57. Jung, J.Y.; Lee, J. Automatic discovery and installation of wearable bio signal devices in ubiquitous healthcare system. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology, Gangwon, Korea, 12–14 February
2007; pp. 412–414.
58. da Costa, C.A.; Pasluosta, C.F.; Eskoﬁer, B.; da Silva, D.B.; Righi, R.d. Internet of health things: Toward intelligent vital signs
monitoring in hospital wards. Artif. Intell. Med. 2018 ,89, 61–69. [CrossRef]Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1927 22 of 22
59. Rajit, N.; Thanachayanont, A. A 1-V CMOS low-power resistor-based temperature sensor for human body temperature monitoring.
In Proceedings of the 34th International Technical Conference on Circuits/Systems, Computers and Communications (ITC-CSCC),
JeJu, Korea, 23–26 June 2019; pp. 1–4.
60. Yousefzadeh, B.; Shalmany, S.H.; Makinwa, K.A. A BJT-based temperature-to-digital converter with inaccuracy from  55C to
+125C in 0.16. IEEE J. Solid State Circuits 2017 ,52, 1044–1052. [CrossRef]
61. Bai, B.; Nazir, S.; Bai, Y.; Anees, A. Security and provenance for Internet of Health Things: A systematic literature review. J. Softw.
Evol. Process. 2021 ,33, e2335. [CrossRef]
62. Esha, N.H.; Tasmim, M.R.; Huq, S.; Mahmud, M.; Kaiser, M.S. Trust IoHT: A Trust Management Model for Internet of Healthcare
Things. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Data Science and Applications, Kolkata, India, 10–11 April 2021; 2021;
pp. 47–57.
63. MacDermott, A.; Kendrick, P .; Idowu, I.; Ashall, M.; Shi, Q. Securing things in the healthcare internet of things. In Proceedings of
the Global IoT Summit (GIoTS), New York, NY, USA, 7–21 June 2019; pp. 1–6.
64. Baccelli, E.; Hahm, O.; Günes, M.; Wählisch, M.; Schmidt, T. OS for the IoT-goals, challenges, and solutions. In Proceedings of the
Interdisciplinaire sur la S écurit éGlobale (WISG2013) Workshop, Troyes, France, 22 January 2013; pp. 1–6.
65. Chung, B.; Kim, J.; Jeon, Y. On-demand security conﬁguration for IoT devices. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, Korea, 19–21 October 2016; pp. 1082–1084.
66. Zhou, W.; Jia, Y.; Peng, A.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, P . The effect of IoT new features on security and privacy: New threats, existing solutions,
and challenges yet to be solved. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018 ,6, 1606–1616. [CrossRef]
67. Foukia, N.; Billard, D.; Solana, E. PISCES: A framework for privacy by design in IoT. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference
on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), Auckland, New Zealand, 12–14 December 2016; pp. 706–713.
68. van Rest, J.; Boonstra, D.; Everts, M.; van Rijn, M.; van Paassen, R. Designing privacy-by-design. In Proceedings of the 1st
Annual Privacy Forum, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Limassol, Cyprus, 10–11 October 2012; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2012; Volume 8319, pp. 55–72.
69. Weber, R.H. Internet of things-new security and privacy challenges. Comput. Law Secur. 2010 ,26, 23–30. [CrossRef]
70. Neuhaus, C.; Polze, A.; Chowdhury, M.M. Survey on Healthcare IT Systems: Standards, Regulations and Security ; University Potsdam:
Potsdam, Germany, 2011.
71. Swartz, N. Canada reviews PIPEDA. Inform. Manag. 2007 ,41(2), 8.
72. Danzon, M.; Litvinov, S.K. EUROHEALTH Programme. World Health Stat. Q. Rapp. Trimest. De Stat. Sanit. Mond. 1993 ,46,
153–157.
73. de Hert, P .; Papakonstantinou, V . The proposed data protection regulation replacing directive 95/46/EC: A sound system for the
protection of individuals. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 2012 ,28, 130–142. [CrossRef]
74. Georgiou, D.; Lambrinoudakis, C. Compatibility of a security policy for a cloud-based healthcare system with the EU general
data protection regulation (GDPR). Information 2020 ,11, 586. [CrossRef]
75. Maeve, M. E-government in Australia: The challenge to privacy of personal information. Int. J. Inf. Technol. 2002 ,10, 327.
76. Balkhair, A. Kingdom of Saudi Arabia The National eHealth Program. 2014. Available online: https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/cyb/events/
2012/e-health/Nat_eH_Dev/Session%204/KSA-MOH-Presentation-SaudiArabia%20FINAL.pdf (accessed on 1 October 2021).
77. Zheng, M. Surveillance and disease control in COVID-19: Big data application in public health. In Proceeding of the Inter-
national Conference on Applications and Techniques in Cyber Security and Intelligence, Fuyang, China, 19–21 June 2021 ; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 565–570.
78. Overhage, J.M.; Ryan, P .B.; Reich, C.G.; Hartzema, A.G.; Stang, P .E. Validation of a common data model for active safety
surveillance research. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2012 ,19, 54–60. [CrossRef]
79. Mattoo, A.; Meltzer, J.P . International data ﬂows and privacy: The conﬂict and its resolution. J. Int. Econ. Law 2018 ,21, 769–789.
[CrossRef]
80. Hemalatha, P . Monitoring and securing the healthcare data harnessing IOT and blockchain technology. Turk. J. Comput. Math.
Educ. 2021 ,12, 2554–2561.
81. Lydahl, D. Standard tools for non-standard care: The values and scripts of a person-centred assessment protocol. Health 2021 ,25,
103–120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Huang, Y.; Xu, J.; Yu, B.; Shull, P .B. Validity of FitBit, Jawbone UP , Nike+ and other wearable devices for level and stair walking.
Gait Posture 2016 ,48, 36–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]