1 
 2  
 
DATA PROTECTION CHALLENGES IN THE INTERNET OF 
THINGS ERA: AN ASSESSMENT OF PROTECTION 
OFFERED BY PDPA 2010  
 
Sidi Mohamed Sidi Ahmed1 
Ahmad Ibrahim Kulliyyah of Laws (AIKOL), International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM) . 
(Email: kaldbkar@yahoo.com)  
Sonny Zulhuda2 
Ahmad Ibrahim Kulliyyah of Laws (AIKOL), International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM) . 
(Email: sonny@iium.edu.my)  
 
Received  date:  04-08-2019  
Revised  date:  01-10-2019  
Accepted date : 04-10-2019    
Published date : 15-12-2019  
  
To cite this document: Ahmed, S. M. S., & Zulhuda, S. (2019).  Data Protection Challenges 
in The Internet of Things Era: An Assessment of Protection Offered by PDPA 2010.  
International Journal of Law, Government and Communication , 4(17), 01-12.  
DOI: 10.35631/ijlgc.417001  
___________________________________________ _______________________________________________  
 
Abstract : The Internet of Things (IoT) is an emerging technology of the 21st century.  It is 
described as the first real evolution of the Internet that could positively or negatively affect 
all aspects of life. The basic idea of the IoT revolves arou nd connecting things and objects 
(persons, animals, cars, trees, etc.) to the Internet and enabling them to communicate and 
then process (generate, receive, send, etc.) data about themselves and the environment 
surrounding them. Without a doubt, the IoT wi ll bring countless benefits and provide timely -
data and information about places and objects. However, the IoT, like other technologies, 
has disadvantages especially in terms of privacy and security of data.  Particularly, the IoT 
might challenge personal data protection law and misgive its ability to effectively stand in the 
rapid successive technology waves.  As the most important law relating to the protection of 
personal data in Malaysia, the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) 2010 could be used as 
a benchmark for assessing the adequacy of data protection law in the country.  Thus, this 
paper attempts to shed light on data protection challenges in the IoT era and then assess the 
adequacy of this Act in dealing with those challenges. The paper employs a legal doctrinal 
method to analyze the legal frameworks relevant to personal data protection. It may also use 
a comparative method to compare the PDPA with its counterparts in other countries. A study 
such as this is arguably useful and timely as Malaysia i s already embarked in the IoT 
caravan with the vision of being “the Premier Regional IoT Development Hub.”  
 
Keywords : IoT Era, Data Protection, Assessment  of PDPA  
 
 
Volume: 4 Issues: 17 [December, 2019] pp.01 -12] 
International Journal of Law, Government and Communication  
eISSN: 0128 -1763  
Journal website: www. ijlgc .com  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135282 
  
Introduction  
The Internet of Things (IoT) is an emerging technology that plays an essential role in the 
modern age. At present time, the IoT technology can be found almost in all things 
surrounding people such as cars, houses, wearable devices  and such like.  The basic  function 
of IoT revolves around connecting things (persons, animals, cars, trees, etc.) to the Internet 
and enabling them to communicate and then process (send, receive, generate, etc.) 
information about themselves and the things they are attached to.  Wi thout any doubt, IoT 
brings countless benefits to humans because data and information generated by IoT 
technology can be used to enhance existing services and create new ones.  However, IoT, like 
other technologies, has disadvantages especially in terms of  privacy and security of data 
streaming through it.  For example, in its Report 2015 about IoT, the Federal Trade 
Commission (2015) mentioned that IoT could enable unauthorized access and misuse of 
personal information, facilitate attacks on other systems and most dangerously create safety 
risks.   Particularly, IoT could challenge personal data protection law and misgive its ability to 
effectively stand in the rapid successive technology waves.  As the most important law 
relating to protection of personal d ata in Malaysia, Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) 
2010 could be used as a benchmark for assessing the adequacy of data protection law in the 
country. This is the objective that this paper attempts to achieve by shedding light on data 
protection challeng es in the IoT era and then assessing the efficiency of the PDPA in terms of 
dealing with those challenges .  In order to achieve this, the second section of this paper 
provides an overview of the IoT including its definition and main features.  Moreover, th e 
discussion will be extended to challenges that IoT could pose on data flow through it. The 
third section will concentrate on PDPA and its relevance to data flow in IoT devices and 
systems.  This includes discussing the applicability of the Act to IoT dat a and examining 
some important terms used in the Act. The fourth section deals with principles of data 
protection established by the Act and how they can be complied with in the IoT environment. 
Lastly, the fifth final and final section provides concluding  points that summarize the 
outcome of the discussion as well as suggestions or recommendations to strengthen and 
improve data protection law in Malaysia.  
 
Methodology   
This research is a doctrinal research depending on both primary and secondary related 
sources.  
 
It uses the doctrinal legal method to analyse  and assess data protection principles provided in 
the PDPA 2010. The aim is to assess the efficiency of the PDPA in the IoT environment. It 
also employs a comparative method to compare the pro tection offered by the PDPA to 
personal data in the IoT era with its counterparts  in other countries especially in the European 
Union (EU) region where such comparison is relevant.  
 
It is argued and believed that a study such this will positively contribu te to the field of legal  
studies as it concerns one of the most penetrated technologies that could affect everyone in 
the digital era. In Malaysian particularly, protecting personal data in the IoT environment is 
an essential matter because the country is already joined the IoT caravan with the aim of 
being “as the Regional Development Hub for IoT ” (Ministry of Science, Technology and 
Innovation (MOATI), 2014) .  
  
IoT and Data Challenges  
IoT is one of the terms used to describe the evolving technology that enables connection of 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135283 
 things to the Internet. Other names include, inter alia, Internet of Anything (IoA), Internet of 
Data (IoD), Internet of People (IoP) and Internet of Everything (Io E) (Edewede Oriwoh, 
2015) . The term IoT was firstly coined in 1999 with the vision that computers would be able 
to collect data and render it into useful information without human intervention  (Jorge E. 
Ibarra -Esquer, 2017) .  At the present time, IoT is a hyped term that is pre occupying time and 
agenda of many stakeholders including some governments around the globe  (Johanna Virkki, 
2013) . Before highlighting challenges pose by IoT on data protection law, it  is important, 
especially in the view of those who are not familiar with the subject, to mention what IoT is. 
IoT encompasses three words: internet, of and things. The Internet can be defined as, “a 
world -wide broadcasting capability, a mechanism for information dissemination, and a 
medium for collaboration and interaction between individuals and their computers without 
regard for geographic location ” (Barry  M. Leiner, 2009, p. 22) . On the other hand, the term 
"thing" in the context of IoT is defined by the Concise Oxford English Dictionary as “an 
object that one need not, cannot, or does not wish to give a specific name to ” (Catherine 
Soanes, 2003) .  It i ncludes both inanimate and animate creations. In the context of IoT, 
‘things ’ can virtually include anything such as computers, electronic devices, clothing, trees, 
houses, fridges, people, animals, trees, house  (Somayya Madakam, 201 5) (Stephan Haller) , 
cars, and so forth.  As for the IoT definition, it can be approached from two aspects, namely 
time and description. In the time phase, IoT is a term used to refer to “the point in time when 
more “things o r objects ” were connected to the Internet than people ” and that point of time 
was “sometimes between 2008 and 2009”  (Evans, 2011, p. 2) .  The other approach defines 
IoT by describing its components and functions. In this re gard, IoT is defined in  the 
Malaysian National IoT Strategic Roadmap as “Intelligent interactivity between human and 
things to exchange information and knowledge for new value creation ” (Ministry of Science, 
Technology and Innov ation (MOATI), 2014, p. 4) .  It seems that the Roadmap ’s definition 
restricts interaction in the IoT environment to humans and things. However, interaction in IoT 
is not restricted to human and things only, but there are also interactions between peop le and 
people and between things and things  (Spyros G. Tzafestas, 2018) .   Moreover, IoT also is 
described as “the general idea of things, especially everyday objects, that are readable, 
recognizable, locatable, addressable through information sensing device and/ or controllable 
via the Internet, irrespective of the communica tion means ” (Patel, 2016, p. 6122) .  Probably, 
the best description of IoT  (Leloglu, 2017)  is the one provided by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) which considers IoT as “a glo bal infrastructure for the 
information society, enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) 
things based on existing and evolving interoperable information and communication 
technologies ” (The Internatio nal Telecommunication Union (ITU), 2013, p. 1) .  The above 
definitions clearly indicate that the idea of IoT revolves around connecting things to the 
Internet in a way that enables such things to generate and process data about themselves and 
their environment . 
 
Simply put IoT aims to connect all things in all places during all times in order to create 
smart environments where cities, transport, energy, etc., become more intelligent  (Patel, 
2016)  and (River Publishers , 2014) .  IoT devices and applications include, inter alia, health 
and fitness devices, smartphone sensors, smart grids, home, banking  (Spyros G. Tzafestas, 
2018)  and (Pepper, 2014)   and other applicable things.  The wide usage of IoT is expected to 
bring a positive impact on aspects of economy and society (education, health care, energy, 
consumers, cities infrastructure and cities), but at the same time there are some challenges 
including privacy, security and technical issues that could act as a hindrance to the IoT 
growth  (Fischer, 2015)  and implications.  As an illustration, the Malaysian Roadmap counted 
some potential adva ntages that IoT could bring to the country in terms of economy, creating 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135284 
 employment opportunities, serving the research community, etc., but at the same time the 
Roadmap acknowledged the existence of some potential challenges most especially in 
security an d privacy  (Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOATI), 2014) . 
 
Regarding challenges pose by IoT on data protection, there is no doubt that billions of 
unsecured objects connecting to the Internet and generating data  including personal data will 
have an impact on the safety of data flowing in IoT devices and systems.  This can be 
supported by the fact that most of IoT applications (63% of IoT applications -5.2 billion units) 
are found to be consumer applications  (Meulen, 2017) .  The European Commission counted 
some features of IoT that could have an effect on data -these features include the followings. 
Firstly, communication between objects to objects and person. Secondly, huge amount of 
personal data coming from various sources and automated communications  (European 
Commission, n.d.) .  These features could generate some challenges ranging from unease 
compliance with data protection principles to deciding the applicable law  (European 
Commission, n.d.) .  Moreover, others asserted that IoT could affect data protection through 
facilitating identification of persons (by linking objects to specific persons), profiling (by 
combining data collected by various objects linked to specific persons) and geolocation (by 
locating  places of persons through smartphone etc.)  (Fabiano, 2017) . These manifestations or 
examples of IoT challenges to the existing data protectio n laws illustrate or support the view 
that IoT “will be a legal tsunami, the intensity and magnitude of which are unknown to date ” 
(BARBRY , 2012) . The next paragraph will discuss these challenges in light of protection 
provided  by the Malaysian PDPA 2010.  
 
An Overview of PDPA 2010  
Data or information is the essence of the digital age because the function and operation of 
every modern activities depends on it. It becomes a valuable object that many people are 
yearning to possess and use for legitimate and illegitimate purposes. The importance of data 
in the information age resulted in the enactment of data protection laws which aim to protect 
interests of data subjects and at the same time encourage and facilitate the free  movement of 
data. The efforts of protecting data in the electronic environment have started in the fourth 
quarter of the 20th century and  placed on the agenda of national and regional organisations 
such as the United Nations (UN)  (United Nations -Economic and Social Council, 1990)   the 
Council of  European  (Council of Europe, 1981)   and the Organisation for Economic Co -
Operation and Development (OECD)  (Organisation for Economic  Co-Operation and 
Development (OECD), 2013) . At this time,  there are more than 100 countries that have data 
protection laws  (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 2016) .  
In Malaysia, personal data is protected by Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) 2010 (Act no 
709) which came after a long wait “to regulate the processing of personal data in commercial 
transactions. ”  This Act consists of 146 sections and 11 parts and rema ins the most relevant 
law in the country that deals with protection of personal data. However, relevance of this law 
to IoT does not guarantee applicability of the Act to all types of data flow in the IoT 
environment. Thus, discussing the scope of PDPA in light of data flow in IoT devices and 
systems is necessary.  
 
According to section two of the Act, PDPA applies to any person who processes or controls 
personal data for the purpose of commercial transactions established in Malaysia or used 
equipment for pu rposes other than transition of the data through the country.  Moreover, PDPA 
has a specific set of material and territorial scopes.  The territorial scope includes two 
scenarios: processing personal data by someone who is inside or outside the country. In the 
first scenario, the Act applies to data users who are established in Malaysia in all 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135285 
 circumstances (processing done by themselves their agents, etc.).  In the case of data 
processed by someone who is not established in Malaysia, the Act will apply to a ll processing 
accept “for the purposes of transit through ” the country  (S 2 (2 -b).  This could arguably have 
the power to extend the territorial scope of the Act to some data processed in the IoT 
environment by data users who are established outside the co untry.  For example, personal 
data collected by some IoT devices (wearable devices, etc.) and share with outside -data users 
such as manufacturers could come into the scope of this section because they are engaging in 
processing data for purposes other than  transiting through the country.  As a comparison, IoT 
device manufacturers “qualify as data controllers ” under the EU law because they do more 
than selling the devices and most of them engage in collecting and processing data generated 
by these devices  (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29), 2014) .  Moreover, the 
EU GDPR applies to the processing of personal data by data controllers or data processors  
who establish outside the Union region in case of  they are offering goods or services to data 
subjects in the Union or monitoring their behaviour thereto (Art. 3 (2, a & b) of the EU 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2016/679). Nevertheless, it is necessary to 
extend the scope of local legislation to inclu de those who operate from other jurisdictions in 
the modern borderless world. In this regard, it would be advised to interpret the term “uses 
equipment in Malaysia for processing the personal data ” in a way that covers those who offer 
goods or services or control behaviour of data subjects in Malaysia, as GDPR does (Art. 3 (2, 
a & b).  This, if done, could arguably enable PDPA to cover a variety of data processed in the 
IoT environment by data users who establish outside the country.  
 
However, the Act on th e material scope applies to personal data processed in “commercial 
transactions. ”  According to this, the terms processing of personal data and commercial 
transactions play a vital role in defining the material scope of the Act.  Processing includes 
most d ealing with personal data such as collecting, recording, storing and so forth (s 4 of 
PDPA 2010).  The broadening definition of processing “is deliberately done to cover all the 
activities of a data user ” (Abu Bakar Munir, 2012)  and this could be useful in the IoT 
environment where data is being processed in new ways.  As for personal data, the Act (s 4) 
defines it as any information “relates directly or indirectly to a data subject, who is identified 
or identifiable from that in formation or from that information and other information in the 
possession of the data user, ” including sensitive data (data related to physical or mental 
health, political, religions, etc.). Moreover, the term “commercial transactions ” covers “any 
transac tion of commercial nature, whether contractual or not, which includes any matter 
relating to supply or exchange of goods or services …” (s 4 of PDPA). Currently, there are 
various classes of data users under PDPA including communications, banking and financial 
institutions, private health and education, insurance, transportation, etc.  (S 2 of the Personal 
Data Protection (class of users) Orders 2013). It is fact that IoT technology penetrates in most 
sectors including commercial sectors and thus there is no doubt that PDPA could apply to 
some IoT data processed in its scope. As an example,  mobile banking applications installed in 
smart phones  (Maybank2u Mobile, 2018)  which are part of IoT like smart home  (Spyros G. 
Tzafestas, 2018)   could be taken as an example of IoT personal data protected by PDPA.  
 
More than anything else, the term “commercial transactions ” is one of the important terms 
that leaves its impression on the Act.  On one hand, the term could cause confusion because 
distinction between commercial and non -commercial activities could be uneasy in some 
circumstances  (Abu Bakar Munir, 2012) . On the other hand, it has the power to exclude 
variety of personal d ata from the scope of the Act. In the context of IoT, “commercial 
transactions ” is arguably the most important term that could affect or lessen the ability of 
PDPA to comprehensively protect personal data flow in the IoT environment.  This is because 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135286 
 some IoT consumer -applications used for personal purposes may not be covered by the 
phrase “commercial transactions ” and such applications constitute a great part of the IoT 
applications  (Meulen, 2017) . Experts have opined that PDPA  should be amended to cover 
personal data in both non -commercial and commercial transactions to effectively protect 
personal data in Malaysia.   
 
Also, non -applicability of the Act to data processed by governmental bodies (s 3 of PDPA) is 
another important  issue that could lessen the efficiency and capability of PDPA to adequately 
coexist with waves of new technology such as IoT. Hence, the wide range exemption and 
extent of application of the data protection law on government agencies is an important issue  
to be addressed here. Regarding applicability of data protection law to the government, the 
approach taken by the EU law could be better to be followed by the Malaysian government.  
For example, GDPR clearly mentions that it “applies to the processing of personal data ” 
including data processed by governmental and non -governmental bodies. However, the 
GDPR exempts personal data processed by competent authorities, data processed for personal 
or household purposes among others. As for the PDPA, section 45 exe mpts some types of 
personal data from provisions of the Act or some of them. Moreover, Section 46 authorizes 
the Minister to make new exemption. As an illustration, the exemption includes data 
processed for personal or family use purposes, taxation and cri minal purposes, statistics or 
research purposes, order or judgments, regulatory functions, journalism, literary or artistic 
purposes and data related to physical or mental health (s 45 of PDPA).  Unlike the various 
exemptions made by PDPA, the non -applicab ility of the Act to the Federal and States 
Governments could have far -reaching on data protection because it will exclude the biggest 
data user (the Governments) from the scope of the Act.  The Act does not define the term 
government but it usually refers to “the whole class or body of office -holders or functionaries 
considered in the aggregate, upon whom devolves the executive, judicial, legislative, and 
administrative business of the state”  (Henry Campbell Black, 1968, p. 824)  This means that 
the term government in the Act could include ministries, public hospital, schools or 
universities, and such like. In fact, the Personal Data Protection (Class of Data Users) Orders 
2013 subject private healthcare, schools and hig her educational institutions to registration (s 2 
(4 &7), but the Orders are silent about their public counterparts. This means that Act 
considers them as governmental bodies.  For the sake of personal data protection, PDPA 
could be extended to include per sonal data processed by the government, but at the same time 
necessary exemption, shall be made as the EU Regulation does (Art. 2 (1 &2) of GDPR).     
 
As the discussion revealed, it can be argued that the Act may not apply to a variety of 
personal data pr ocessed in the IoT environment because such data might be processed out of 
the commercial atmosphere. For example, individuals who buy IoT wearable devices which 
are used to track some aspects of health or fitness data, etc.,  (Pepper, 2014)  from the market 
and voluntary use them to generate and store data about themselves.  When those individuals 
use these IoT devices and upload their data to the Internet or mobile applications, there is 
apparently no commercial transactio ns between those individuals and the manufacturers of 
these devices who can be in other jurisdictions.  In this regard, protection offered by PDPA 
can be considered as insufficient because it could not provide protection to personal data in 
scenarios like the above one.   
 
IoT and Data Protection  Principles  
Data protection laws around the world establish some principles to be followed in the course 
of processing personal data.  These principles mention rights and duties of parties involved in 
the processing. For example, section 5 of PDPA sets out 7 principle s including the general, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135287 
 notice and choice, disclosure, security, retention, data integrity and access principles (s 6 -12). 
These principles are backed by a system of punishments including fine (up to three hundred 
thousand ringgit) or imprisonment (up to 2 years) or both (s 5 (2) of PDPA). In the following 
subsections, these principles will briefly be discussed in order to highlight the difficulty of 
implementing them in an automated environment such as the IoT one.   
 
  General Principle  
As mentioned in s ection 6, this principle obliges the data user to take the consent of the data 
subject before processing personal data related to the latter. This section also restricts the 
processing of personal data to lawful, necessary and non -excessive activities.  Ad ditionally, 
this Principle makes a distinction between processing personal data and sensitive personal 
data which is subjected to more restrictions mentioned in section 40 of the Act. Taking 
consent of the data subject is a central issue in data protection  law.  Apart from mentioning 
that consent can be withdrawn (s 38), PDPA refers to data subject consent in various matters 
including disclosure of personal data, processing of sensitive personal data and transferring 
data outside the country  (Ss 8, 40 (1, a ) and 129 (3, a). The Act does not define the term of  
consent, but the subordinate regulations mention that consent can be obtained “in any form 
that such consent can be recorded and maintained properly by the data user” ( S 3 (1) of the 
Personal Data Prot ection Regulations (PDPR) 2013).   This means that consent can “be oral 
and implied”  (Abu Bakar Munir, 2012)   In the IoT context, using IoT wearable devices such 
as health and fitness devices (Pepper, 2014)   by individuals could be considered as consent in 
the meaning of  PDPA.   
 
The Notice and Choice  
The second principle in the Ac t is the principle of Notice and Choice (s 7).  This Principle 
obliges the data user to inform the data subject, as soon as possible, through written notice 
about the description of the data, the purposes of collection and processing of the data and the 
third party whom the data being or might be shared with, in addition to matters related to 
correction, restriction etc., and the means used therein.  It is important to note that the 
principle of notice and choice is an important principle especially in the online world.  
Linguistically, the term notice and choice mean “a written statement giving information or 
news” and “an act of choosing between two or more…things”  (Oxford Wordpower, 1999, p. 
507 & 123)  respectively.  In data protection atmosphere, while the term notice consists of “a 
presentation of terms,” choice is “an action signifying acceptance of” the terms presented in 
the notice  (Robert H. Sloan, 2013, p. 3) .  Complying with this principle in the IoT 
environment could be a challenging ed task. As an illustration, this principle makes it 
compulsory for the data user to provide written notice to the data subject including 
information about the data and the direction  that it will take in addition to contact of the data 
user( S 7 of PDPA and s 4 of the Data Protection Regulations 2013 ). In the IoT environment, 
however, identifying the data user could be a challenging task as in some cases (wearable 
devices, etc.) the da ta subject is dealing with devices that connected to the virtual world and 
has no connection with the manufacturers or suppliers of these devices.  In such scenarios, 
who shall provide the written notice and who is be contacted: the devices, manufacturers or 
suppliers? These and other challenges imposed by the IoT on data protection laws need a 
suitable solution.  
 
Disclosure Principle  
Section 8 of the Act spells out the context of disclosure Principle which prohibits revealing 
personal data in cases other than the agreed cases without the consent of the data subject 
especially in cases mentioned in section 39 of the Act.   
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135288 
  
 
Security Principle  
The Principle of Security is another crucial principle in the Act. It obliges the data user to 
“take practical steps to protect the personal data from any loss, misuse, modification, 
unauthorized or accidental access or disclosure” (s 9 (1, a) of PDPA).  A dditionally, this 
Principle mentions that the security measures should consider the nature of the personal data, 
its places or locations, storage, persons accessed to it, and the consequences of any security 
breach and such like. Both the PDPR 2013 (s 6) a nd the Personal Data Protection Standard 
(PDPS) 2015 (s 4) establish practical steps to be implemented in securing personal data. 
Without delving deeply into details of these rules, it  is argued that the security measures 
required by the security principle  are not easy to be achieved in the IoT environment because 
of countless flow of data from objects. Technically, IoT devices have a limited physical, low 
powers and computational capacity which in turn make adding security measures to them are 
not easy  (Pepper, 2014) . Another element of security that must be observed by the data user 
is “the place or location where the personal data is stored” (s 9 of PDPA). Practically 
speaking, complying with these could be a challenging matte r because some IoT devices will 
be put in outdoor environments that are subject to physical attacks  (Mohamed Abomhara, 
2015)  such as theft, vandalism and so forth.  Accordingly, the IoT challenges to security of 
personal data i s a major concern because the data users who are obliged to take those 
measures are not easy to be identified. Needless to say, that both physical and technical 
security are important in the IoT context because the consequences of any security breach 
may n ot only result in revealing personal data, but more dangerously IoT could be used to 
shut down transportation systems, alter medical devices, destroy industrial components, etc.,  
(Oltsik, 2014)  which in turn could have an effec t on people lives . 
 
Retention Principle  
This principle deals with the necessity of deleting personal data after the collection and 
usage.  The retention principle is an obligation on the data user to destroyed or permanently 
delated the data. The execution of data retention is done in accordance  with guidelines spelt 
out in the PDPS 2015 (s 6) constituting 7 steps to be taken by the data user in that regard.  In 
the case where PDPA applies to personal data processed in commercial transactions executed 
in the IoT environment, the data user shall c omply with all rules of Retention Principle either 
in the PDPA or its subsidiary regulations.     
 
Data Integrity & Access Principles  
Data Integrity & Access Principles deal  with the accuracy of data and the right of the data 
subject to access his personal data. For example, the Data Integrity obliges the data user “to 
take reasonable steps to ensure” the accuracy of the personal data in fulfilment of its purpose, 
etc. (s 11 of PDPA).  The reasonable steps required by this Principle are explained in  the 
PDPS 2013 (s 7).  In general, the Access Principle establishes the right of the data subject to 
access his personal data held by the data user in accordance with principles and guidelines set 
by PDPA and its subsidiary regulation  (Ss 12, 30 -37 of PDPA  and 9 -11 of PDPR 2013).  
 
Like the other data protection principles, the Access and Integrity principles oblige the data 
user to take specific steps to ensure the integrity and accessibility of the personal data. 
However, the implementation of these princi ples requires identifying data users and 
processors and communicating with them.  In the IoT environment, however, data users and 
processors in some scenarios (wearable devices, etc.) may neither be identified nor 
communicated with. That is, because, unlik e the EU perspective where the IoT device 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35135289 
 manufacturers is considered as data controllers on the ground that they are engaging in 
processing data generated by the devices  (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29), 
2014) , the Malaysian regulatory body does not deal with novel issues such as these.  
 
From the above discussion, it seems that current protection provided by PDPA is insufficient 
in the IoT environment. The inadequacy of the Act to provide enough protection to data flow 
in IoT could arguably be attributed to two reasons. The first one is the narrow scope of the 
Act which only applies to personal data processed in commercial transactions. The second 
reason is inability of the Act in its current version to cope wi th the rapid technology used in 
processing personal data. For example, PDPA applies primarily to data users who collect 
personal data in commercial transactions environment.  However, the concept of data users is 
extended by the IoT to new stakeholders who  collect personal data in various ways. In the EU 
region, device manufacturers, social platforms, application developers, etc., are considering 
data users  (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29), 2014) . By contrast, PDPA is 
not explicitly extended to cover those newcomers.  
 
Conclusion and Policy Recommendations  
This paragraph attempts to summarise the above discussion and then provide some 
recommendations that could improve protection of data or at lea st open the door for further 
discussion and suggestions.  
 
Conclusion  
The IoT brought challenges to data protection law and such challenges should be recognized 
in order to take proactive reforms as steps towards solutions. This paper was dedicated to the 
assessment of protection offered by PDPA to data flow in the IoT envir onment. It started with 
a general introduction highlighting the role that the IoT currently plays in today life and its 
challenges to the legal systems especially those provisions relating to data protection. It then 
defined the main terms such as the Inte rnet of things. As the objective of this paper is to 
assess protection provided by this Act to personal data processed in the IoT environment, the 
applicability of the PDPA to the IoT was discussed. In this regard, it was found that the term 
“commercial tr ansactions ” will affect and lesson the ability of the Act to adequately protect 
all data processed in the IoT environment as some IoT devices used for personal or family 
purposes may not be covered by such term. It is also mentioned that, the Act excluded data 
processed by governmental bodies (Both the Federal Government and the States 
Governments) from its applications and exempted various types of personal data processed 
by non -governmental entities. Apart from discussing the applicability of the Act to d ata flow 
in the IoT environment, the paper also discussed the difficulty of complying with data 
protection principles mention in the Act in the IoT age where data continuously flows. It 
concludes that there is a need for reforming and updating PDPA to enab le it to provide 
suitable protection to personal data in the IoT environment. It is mentioned that the approach 
taken by EU to protect personal data could be flowed by the Malaysian legislators to improve 
data protection in the country.   The next section will provide some suggestions that is 
believed to be useful and necessary for the interests of both data subjects and data users or in 
other words, the whole society.      
 
 Recommendations  
As evidently seen above on the analysis of the Act, some personal data processed in the IoT 
environment may not be covered by the Act which is considered the most important Act 
dealing with personal data protection in the country. This could have an effect  on individuals 
whom personal data are not protected by this supreme Act or probably on the interests of the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=351352810 
 country because protection of personal data is important for its free movement or exchange 
with other countries.  The above discussion revealed tha t the term “commercial transactions ” 
have the power to exclude all personal processed outside the commercial atmosphere.  For 
the sake of data protection, this paper recommends extending protection to personal data 
processed in both commercial and non -comm ercial transactions. Another important thing that 
this paper recommends is the extension of the scope of PDPA to cover personal data 
processed by the Federal and States Governments of the country.   This extension, if done, 
will grant some rights to data s ubjects and help prevent misuse of personal data processed by 
data users (here the Government employers) and also harmonize data protection law in the 
country in both public and private sectors.  The extension of the scope of the Act to data 
processed by th e Governments shall consider the nature of the Governments and their 
functions  and therefore making necessary exemption. Moreover, this paper also recommends 
extending the concept of the data user and data processor to cover new stakeholders in the 
IoT env ironment such as device manufacturers, application developers and such like.  
 
References  
Abu Bakar Munir, S. H. (2012). Personal Data Protection Act: Doing Well by Doing Good. 
Malayan Law Journal, 1 , lxxxvi.  
Article 29 Data Protection Workin g Party (WP29). (2014). Opinion 8/2014 on the Recent 
Development on the Internet of Things. ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 9 7, 2018, from 
Article 29 Data Protection Working Party (WP29), “Opinion 8/2014 on the Recent 
Development http://ec.europa.eu/justice/artic le-29/documentation/opinion -
recommendation/files/2014/wp223_en.pdf  
BARBRY, E. (2012, 3rd Q,). The Internet of Things, Legal Aspects What Will Change 
(Everything)…”. Digiworld Economic Journal, 87 , p. 83.  
Barry M. Leiner, R. E. (2009). A Brief History of t he Internet. ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review, 39 (5), 22.  
Catherine Soanes, a. s. (Ed.). (2003). The Concise Oxford English Dictionary (11 ed.). 
Oxford University Press.  
Council of Europe. (1981). Convention for the Protection of Individual with regard to 
Automated Processing of Personal Data. Strasbourg: European Treaties Series -No. 
108. 
Edewede Oriwoh, M. C. (2015). Things in the Internet of Things: Towards a Definition. 
International Journal of Internet of Things, 4 (1), 1 -5. 
European Commission. (n.d.). IoT Privacy, Data Protection, Information Security . Retrieved 
January 30, 2019, from semanticscholar.org/paper: 
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/IoT -Privacy -%2C -Data -Protection -%2C -
Information/e4f35abaff323159dd66997dbea6d72d 5c0a73cc  
Evans, D. (2011). The Internet of Things – How the Next Evolution of the Internet is 
Changing Everything . (Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group (IBSG)) Retrieved 
January 29, 2019, from 
https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT _IBSG_0411FINAL.p
df 
Fabiano, N. (2017). Internet of Things and the Legal Issues related to the Data Protection 
Law according to the new European General Data Protection Regulation. Athens 
Journal of Law, 3 (3), pp. 203 -204. 
Fischer, E. A. (2015, October 17) . The Internet of Things: Frequently Asked Questions . 
Retrieved 9 7, 2018, from GOVLAB: http://thegovlab.org/the -internet -of-things -
frequently -asked -questions/  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=351352811 
 Henry Campbell Black, M. A. (1968). Black's Law Dictionary  (4 ed.). (1968, Ed.) (West 
Publishing  Co. 
Johanna Virkki, L. C. (2013). Personal Perspectives: Individual Privacy in the IOT. Advances 
in Internet of Things, 3 (2), 21. doi:10.4236/ait.2013.32003  
Jorge E. Ibarra -Esquer, F. F. -N.-R.-V. (2017). Tracking the Evolution of the Internet of 
Things Co ncept Across Different Application Domains. Sensors, 17 , 1379.  
Leloglu, E. (2017). A Review of Security Concerns in Internet of Things. Journal of 
Computer and Communications, 5 (1). doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jcc.2017.51010  
Maybank2u Mobile. (2018, Nove mber 25). Maybank2u.com is now on your mobile phone!  
Retrieved from maybank2u.com: 
https://www.maybank2u.com.my/mbb_info/m2u/public/personalDetail04.do?channelI
d=&cntTypeId=0&cntKey=ACC08.03.06&programId=ACC08.03 -
MobileBanking&chCatId=/mbb/Personal/ACC -Accounts  
Meulen, R. v. (2017, February 7). Gartner Says 8.4 Billion Connected "Things" Will Be in 
Use in 2017, Up 31 Percent From 2016 . Retrieved January 31 , 2019, from 
gartner.com: https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press -releases/2017 -02-07-
gartner -says-8-billion -connected -things -will-be-in-use-in-2017 -up-31-percent -from -
2016  
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MOATI). (2014). National Internet of 
Things (IoT) Strategic Roadmap  (1st publication ed.). Kuala Lumpur: MIMOS 
Berhad.  
Mohamed Abomhara , G. M. (2015). Cyber Security and the Internet of Things: 
Vulnerabilities, Threats, Intruders and Attacks. Journal of Cyber Security, 4 , 65–88. 
Oltsik, J. (2014). White Paper. The Internet of Things: A CISO and Network Security 
Perspective . The Enterprise  Strategy Group, Inc.  
Organisation for Economic Co -Operation and Development (OECD). (2013). Privacy 
Framework”: OECD Guidelines Governing the Protection of Privacy and 
Transborder Flows of Personal Data (2013).  Retrieved 5 3, 2018, from cecd.org: 
https:// www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/2013 -oecd -privacy -guidelines.pdf.  
Oxford Wordpower.  (1999). Oxford University Press.  
Patel, K. K. (2016). , “Internet of Things -IOT: Definition, Characteristics, Architecture, 
Enabling Technologies, Application & Future Challenges. International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Computing (IJESC), 51 (5). 
Pepper, S. R. (2014). Regulating t he Internet of Things: First Steps Toward Managing 
Discrimination, Privacy, Security, and Consent. Texas Law Review, 93 , 95-117. 
River Publishers . (2014). River Publishers Series in Communication Internet of Things - 
From Research and Innovation to Market Deployment.  (O. V. Friess, Ed.) Aalborg, 
Denmark: River Publishers.  
Robert H. Sloan, R. W. (2013). Beyond Notice and Choice: Privacy, Norms, and Consent. 
Journal of High Technology Law . 
Somayya Madakam, R. R. (2015). “Internet of Things (IoT): A Literature  Review. Journal of 
Computer and Communications,, 3 , 164 -173. 
Spyros G. Tzafestas. (2018). “Ethics and Law in the Internet of Things World. Smart Citie, 
1(1), 99. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities1010006  
Stephan Haller. (n.d.). The Things in the Internet of Things (A paper presented as a poster at 
the Internet of Things Conference 2010, Tokyo, Japan).  Retrieved January 29, 2019, 
from Researchgate: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228488111_The_Thin gs_in_the_Internet_of
_Things  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=351352812 
 The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Staff Report. (2015). Internet of Things: Privacy & 
Security in a Connected World.  Retrieved AFebruary 17, 2019, from 
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/federal -trade -commissio n-staff-
report -november -2013 -workshop -entitled -internet -things -privacy/150127iotrpt.pdf  
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU). (2013). Recommendation ITU -T 
Y.2060,Overview of the Internet of things,.  Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union  (ITU) .  
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). (2016). United Nations 
Conference on Trade Data Protection Regulations and International data flows: 
Implications for Trade and Development.  United Nations Publication.  
United Nations -Economic and Social Council. (1990). Revised Version of the Guidelines for 
the Regulation of Computerized Personal Data Files” (E/CN.4/1990/72.). UN Digital 
Library. Retrieved 9 7, 2018, from 
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/85149/files/E_CN.4_1990_72 -EN.pdf 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513528