 
Revista de Derecho. Vol. 10 (I I) (2021), pp.  87-100. ISSN: 1390 -440X — eISSN: 1390 -7794  
Recepción: 24-10-2021. Aceptación: 4-12-2021. Publicación electrónica: 8-12-2021 
https://doi.org/10.31207/ih.v 10i2.288 
 
vol. 10 (I I) (2021 ), p. 87 
 
 
 
EXPERIENCING PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION ON THE 
INTERNET AND ITS POSSIBILITIES OF RECOGNITION 
AND ENFORCEMENT IN UKRAINE  
EXPERIMENTANDO LA PROTECCIÓN DE DATOS PERSONALES EN INTERNET Y SUS 
POSIBILIDADES DE RECONOCIMIENTO Y EJECUCIÓN EN UCRANIA  
 
 
Petro Melnyk* 
Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko** 
Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova*** 
Iryna Igorivna Shynkarenko**** 
 
 
Abstract:  The purpose of this article is to find the most successful ways, 
forms and methods of personal data protection on the Internet among foreign 
countries for domestic political and legal realities. The following methods 
were used in the article: dialectical, logical -semantic, comparative -legal, 
documentary analysis, analytical, information -analytical. Issues related to 
the adaptation of the successful experience of a number of developed 
countries in the field of personal data protection on the Internet are bro ught 
up for discussion. Some options are covered and specified, which include 
effective methods and ways to implement an effective mechanism for 
 
* Candidate of Law. Associate Professor. Deputy Director of the Kyiv Institute of 
Intellectual Property and Law of the National University «Odesa Law Academy » (Kiev, 
Ukraine) . https://orcid.org/0000 -0003-1928 -9660 . melnyk.petro@gmail.com  
** Ph.D . Head of the  Research Laboratory of Theory and Law of Digital Transformations of 
the Research Institute of Informatics and Law of the National Academy of Legal Sciences 
of Ukraine (Kiev, Ukraine).  https://orcid.org/0000 -0002-2131 -0281. antizuk @gmail.com  
*** Doctor of Jurisprudence . Professor of the Department of Administrative Law, Process 
and Administrative Activity of Dnipropetrovsk State University of Internal Affairs (Dnipro, 
Ukraine) . https://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -3320 -585X. blinovahanna @i.ua 
**** Candidat e of Jurisprudence . Associate Professor of the Department of  Operative 
Investigative Activity and Crimes Investigation of the Kharkiv National University of Internal 
Affairs (Kharkiv, Ukraine) . https://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -7136 -3333 . i_shinkarenko @ukr.net Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 88 
personal data protection on the Internet in Ukraine. It is emphasized that the 
protection and proper confidenti ality of personal data of individuals is one 
of the key tasks currently facing modern jurists. It is also added that the 
nature and specifics of the use and protection of personal data of individuals, 
including on the Internet, are extremely closely relate d to the institution of 
intellectual property. Emphasis is placed on the fact that the level of 
protection of personal data of individuals in a country is an indicator of the 
extent to which such a state meets the criteria of freedom, democracy , and 
the ru le of law.  
 
Keywords:  Personal Data, Private Property,  Legal Regulation,  Confidential 
Information, Intellectual Property  
 
 
Resumen : El propósito de este artículo es encontrar las formas  y métodos 
más exitosos de protección de datos personales en Internet entre países 
extranjeros en cuanto a  sus realidades políticas y legales nacionales. En el 
artículo se utilizaron los siguientes métodos: dialéctico, lógico -semántico, 
comparativo -legal, a nálisis documental, analítico  y de análisis informático . 
Se plantean para el debate cuestiones relacionadas con la adaptación de la 
experiencia exitosa de varios países desarrollados en el campo de la 
protección de datos personales en Internet. Algunas opciones están 
cubiertas y especificadas, incluyen do métodos y formas de implementar un 
mecanismo efectivo para la protección de datos personales en Internet en 
Ucrania. Se destaca que la protección y la debida confidencialidad de los 
datos persona les es una de las tareas clave a las que se enfrentan 
actualmente los juristas modernos. También se agrega que la naturaleza y 
los detalles del uso y la protección de los datos personales, incluso en 
Internet, están extremadamente relacionados con la insti tución de la 
propiedad intelectual. Se hace hincapié en el hecho de que el nivel de 
protección de los datos personales en un país es un indicador del grado en 
que dicho Estado cumple los criterios de libertad, democracia y Estado de 
Derecho.  
 
Palabras clav e: Datos personales , propiedad privada , regulación legal, 
información confidencial , propiedad intelectual  
 
 
Sum mary . I. Introduction . II. Methodology . III. Results and Discussion . III.1. The 
Necessity and Essence of Acquiring an Efficient Internet Platform in Ukraine . III.2. 
Legislation of Ukraine on Personal Data Protection, Including on the Internet . IV. 
Conclusions . References . 
 Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 89 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
The application of modern information and communication 
technologies is an indispensable factor in improving public safety. At the 
same time, the development of modern information and communication 
technologies has acted the complexity of security risks po sed by such 
systems. On the other hand, citizens rightly expect an adequate response and 
protection mechanism from modern forms of endangering public safety and 
legally recognized freedoms and rights of citizens. Bearing this in mind, the 
basic task is to engage all the necessary resources starting from the collection 
of data and information, through assessment, processing and analysis. If 
such an answer is not forthcoming, we risk the trust of the citizens and the 
foundations of democracy itself. The chall enge is great, because modern 
forms of endangering public safety are constantly changing, especially due 
to the accelerated development of information technology and means of 
communication (Gligorijević , et al. , 2020).  
In modern realities, which  govern the  entire world community, it is 
impossible not to mention the importance of proper protection and 
confidentiality of the private sphere of people ’s lives. In particular, it 
concerns the personal data protection on the Internet, as it is well known that 
in the XXI century, which is rightly called “information ”, control over 
information, the ways of its collection and dissemination are a powerful 
element of political and economic influence.  
Internet penetration in Ukraine annually increases by an average of 
5%. In 2015, the figure was 49%. As of February 2016, 63% of households 
(excluding Crimea) are connected to the Internet in Ukraine. Regularly, once 
a month or more, 62% of families use the Internet (Chaikovska, 2016). 
According to the results of 2018, the n umber of Internet users in Ukraine is 
70% of Ukrainians (compared to 63% as of December 2017). Factum Group 
research company claims that the number of Internet users in Ukraine 
reached 73% of the total number of Ukrainians in 2019, and the number of 
regula r Internet users at the beginning of the 4th quarter 2019 was 22.96 
million ( Dubinskiy , 2019 ; Shymon , et al. , 2020).  
The issues outlined in this article are quite deep and not fully explored. 
It is recognized that the study and substantive analysis of the nature and 
characteristic features of the processes associated with the proper respect for 
the safety and confidentiality of personal data of individuals on the Internet, 
should remain relevant for domestic and foreign scientific community.  The 
issue o f personal data protection on the Internet is available around the 
world. Thus, for example, an estimated 26 million American citizens per Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 90 
year have been victims of an identity -based crime (Piquero , et al., 2021). At 
the same time, it should be noted that in the developed countries of the West, 
the above processes of personal data protection are developing and 
improving much more dynamically than in Ukraine. That is why this article 
will focus on what specific methods and ways to develop the field of 
compli ance and protection of personal data of individuals on the Internet can 
be adopted and further used in the domestic political and legal sphere.  
 
 
II. METHODOLOGY  
At present, any research should be based on the use of appropriate 
scientific methods, the app lication of which makes it possible to achieve the 
goal, scientifically substantiate the conclusions and propose appropriate 
solutions to the problem under study. The methodological basis is an 
interdisciplinary approach, in which the theoretical and metho dological 
component is based on the fundamental provisions of the theory of law. The 
methodological base includes a set of general and specific methods of scientific 
knowledge.  An objective analysis of the subject became possible due to the use 
of a complex of methods of general and special scientific knowledge.  
In the study with the help of the dialectical method of cognition, as 
well as the logical -semantic method it was possible to define and reveal such 
theoretical concepts as “personal data”, “pe rsonal data protection” and “the 
use of personal data”.  The experience of developed countries of the Western 
democratic world, in particular, such as the United States of America, 
Canada, Great Britain and the countries of the European Union, is studied 
using the comparative legal method.  
When scientifically substantiating the theoretical conclusions of the 
author, the method of documentary analysis and the analytical method were 
used, in particular, it was concluded that the dynamic development of 
computer  and digital technology requires constant supervision by the state 
in the field of personal data protection on the Internet. The most effective 
way to do this is to develop programs that make it possible to block pirated 
sites; identify persons who, using computer programs, interfere with the 
personal data of other persons, enterprises, organizations, etc.  
The information and analytical basis of the scientific research was the 
legal framework governing relations in the field of personal data protection 
on the Internet, as well as the scientific achievements of Ukrainian and 
foreign scientists.  
All of these methods are applied in interdependence and interrelationship.  
It’s great and efficient that there exist methods of ensuring effective Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 91 
protection of user’s  personal data from the internet, but this method  
continues to be questionable as they continue to be violations on personal 
data and services provided by the internet. Most people data are not secured 
and protected from the ills or criminal invasion of in ternet criminal. Our 
main concern here is to guarantee to personal users of the internet that their 
information and other activities are secured and protected. There is no use 
of putting in place methods and strategies were user rights and data will 
contin ue to be infringed and violated. It is there the responsibility of the State 
of Ukraine in ensuring the effective protection of personal data of its internet 
user, since they have the right to their individual privacy. Ensuring and 
following up the measure  used become of prime importance.  
 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The democratic countries strictly adhere to the doctrine of privacy and 
private property, to the most radical approach in China. The settlement of 
any of the aspects does not mean the solution of the problem in the whole. 
The matter of its fundamental solu tion lies in the legal plane, and since 
organized crime in the context of global digitalization of the world 
community is becoming increasingly transnational in nature, it is primarily 
a field of international law. The complete solution of the problem has a 
complex character and should contain a number of normative and legal acts 
at the level of international and national law, as well as certain technical 
measures that ensure the legality of personal data collection procedures used 
by police in the most mod ern high -tech, toolmaking , analytical systems 
(Hnusov, Strukov & Mozhayev, 2021) . 
The expansion of the Internet and technologies based on it has enabled 
the development of the digital economy and the emergence of new and 
innovative business models. The Int ernet has transformed how goods and 
services have been produced, delivered and consumed. Using Internet 
platforms (such as eBay, Alibaba and Google Search) allows consumers to 
globally search, locate and buy goods from anywhere in the world. 
Simultaneously  with the rapid development of technology, there was a need 
for regulatory intervention in various area of law, including the Intellectual 
Property Law. Increasingly diverse ways of using Intellectual Property 
works on the Internet have contributed to the frequency and extent of their 
abuse (Maltzer, 2016; Perišić, 2020).  
The treatment of personal data of individuals solely in the spirit of the 
rule of law and on the basis of clear legal regulation is an important step 
towards the normalization of the funct ioning of intellectual property. Even Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 92 
though with all these strategies and measures put in place in ensuring the 
effective use of personal data on the Internet, it ’s accessibility and protection 
has become problematic. Most users of the internet experience  violations on 
their personal data, and this has affected the confidence bestow in the usage 
of the internet. The question one should be asking here is in verifying how 
secured the personal data of users of the internet are  protecting their personal 
data. This has been a serious debate and deficiencies affecting users in 
aspects related to the internet.  
It is very important today to understand that the parameter of data 
openness and accessibility is a fundamental vector for the existence of a 
modern informa tion society. Open data, in this vein, should be studied from 
the standpoint of exclusively public information  to which government 
authorities have provided online access to anyone who wishes. That is, the 
basic aspect is free access. Alternatively, such d ata can be found on the 
websites of ministries, various departments, state bodies of the region, cities, 
state registers, and platforms that have been created by activists and 
journalists (Shevchenko , et al. , 2020).  
The Internet, the World Wide Web, and their successors are evolving 
rapidly into a global digital network, a “cybersphere ” interrelating people 
and their activities through robust, albeit ubiquitous, computers, networks, 
and intelligent hardware and software. The internet has become an integral 
part of everyday life across diverse parts of society (Atkins, Duderstadt & 
Houwel ing, 2002 ; Pew Research Center , 2005 ). The Internet builds a 
parallel world from conversion of analog practices to new experimental 
spaces. Dissensus is an intrinsic  feature of the cybersphere ; difference not 
identity is its connecting work. Communicative activism potentially renders 
all practices, rules, and norms of practice controversial. Online  activism 
feeds network change that serves the economic driven interests of the 
industry. Media oligopolies build out networks to reach audiences through 
filterin g preferences that serve the ends of mass media (Thomas , 2016 ). 
The present unbridled advancement in the field of information and 
communication technology has resulted in individuals being thrust at a 
crossroad, where refusing to sacrifice one’s privacy wo uld mean the denial 
of technological benefits. Concern for privacy begins once a child is born 
into this world where the right to privacy could now be argued needs to be 
considered as one of the basic human rights similar to other inalienable 
rights such a s the right to life and liberties (Dhali, Zulhuda & Fadhilah, 
2021).  
Ukraine should definitely take lessons from Western Europe and 
North America in the development of systems related to the protection and 
secure storage of personal data. In particular, th is can be explained by the fact Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 93 
that in these countries, such as the United States, the first real steps in world 
history were taken to create systems and methods of personal data protection.  
The United States is considered a “pioneer ” in the introduction of 
confidential processing and storage of personal data on the Internet. Experts 
argue that the especially serious attitude of American society to the problems 
and issues, one way or another related to personal data protection, began 
somewhere in the middl e of the XX century.  
The prevention of identity theft requires the responsibility, 
cooperation, and actions of three major groups: individuals, businesses, and 
government. Individuals have the information that must be protected and 
need to take care to gua rd their personally identifiable information (PII). To 
help them do so, agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission 
recommend a plethora of preventive measures, such as shredding sensitive 
documents and regularly reviewing credit reports and credit card statements, 
which individuals are encouraged to undertake for their own protection 
(Piquero , et al. , 2021).  
As we can see, without the effective and stable influence of public 
authorities and representatives of society (public organizations) on the 
quality  of compliance in the country with all the necessary rules for the 
treatment of personal data will be considered impossible. In turn, the 
development of various data confidentiality programs, introduced and 
successfully operated under the administration of  private entities and 
companies, is a good basis for the emergence of effective and consistent 
public policy in this area. Therefore, it is extremely important that there is a 
clear and long -term mutual cooperation (relationship) in society between 
governm ent agencies, institutions and private commercial and non -
commercial firms, as well as civil society organizations.  
Experts in the field of cyber protection from the United Kingdom 
confidently state in their official reports that hacker cyberattacks are 
currently the most widespread and dangerous threat to the daily operation of 
servers that work with personal data. British experts emphasize that almost 
every piece of software of any institution or organization can become a 
potential target of a cyberattack . For example, according to a British report, 
in 2017 the computer servers of the U nited Kingdom  National Health 
Service  (NHS)  were attacked. In particular, a criminal organization of 
hackers attacked more than two hundred thousand personal computers of 
representatives of the health service, which were located directly in the UK 
and other member countries of the British community . 
Security officials, along with British police, found that the criminal 
computer attack was due to the using of the infamous hacking program 
«WannaCrypt» by cybercriminals . The criminal result of this attack on NHS Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 94 
servers was the taking by cybercriminals  of passwords and encryption keys 
of employees, including those in senior positions. As a result, criminals 
returned their access codes to UK health workers only after receiving 
significant amounts of money from them. It should be noted that this 
example i s just one of many similar cyber -attacks  that take place dozens of 
times a year.  
Given these circumstances, British researchers, in our opinion, have 
come to the logical conclusion that even in the developed world, which 
includes the United Kingdom, it is essential to continue reforms and other 
significant changes. This is somehow related to ensuring the proper and 
secure day -to-day operation of systems that use personal data of individuals 
(Appleby Global Group , 2017, pp. 1 -5). Such a negative example shou ld 
serve as a “lesson ” for the Ukrainian Government, since recently in our 
country electronic document management is being introduced more and 
more often, records in the form of an “electronic queue ” and others are being 
introduced in public and private in stitutions. Of course, such virtual 
computer programs require a person to provide their personal data, and 
therefore must be effectively protected from outside interference. That is 
why private companies should be more careful about issues and processes 
related to the transfer (even temporary) of personal data or other information 
to third parties or organizations. Offshore companies and institutions that 
offer their services to other legal entities in the field of temporary or long -
term storage of certain amounts of information, including personal data of 
employees of these legal entities, may act as such “third ” organizations. 
Given that, offshore companies are a “tasty ” target for illegal attacks by 
cybercriminals from around the world.  
In order to signif icantly minimize the processes of transferring 
personal data to offshore companies, British experts suggest that legal 
entities increase their own scientific and technical potential, raise the general 
level of high technology in production and try to creat e a product or provide 
certain services based on their own capabilities and resources. Regarding the 
use of high -tech tools and implements, scientists recommend that all 
institutions, enterprises and organizations, regardless of their form of 
ownership or field of activity, gradually move to the use of blockchain 
technology in their daily work. This technology, according to experts, is a 
powerful tool in countering financial and computer crimes and fraud. It is 
clear that along with the introduction within the country of a number of the 
latest technological advances, steps should also be taken to ensure a proper 
law enforcement system, which should act to prevent hackers, 
cybercriminals, etc.  Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 95 
Nowadays, it is no less important to establish a proper regime of legal 
regulation in the country, which will ensure the effective storage of 
confidential information and personal data. To do that, it is necessary that 
the legislative body of state power (in Ukraine it is the Verkhovna Rada), 
adopt a number of legal acts  that would adequately ensure effective and 
efficient legal regulation in the field of protection and promotion of personal 
data, including the Internet. In this context, both domestic and foreign legal 
experts point out that without a reliable system (mec hanism) in a particular 
state of clear and unambiguous legal regulation of compliance with 
international standards and requirements to ensure the protection of personal 
data, it will be impossible.  
A number of statements made by jurists and experts in cybe rnetics and 
computer technology from many developed countries should be identified 
as a separate point of view on this issue. This refers to the fact that the legal 
(legislative) regulation of such a specific and dynamic sphere of public 
relations as cyber netics, should be carried out exclusively at the national 
level, that is, at the State level. Instead, all other types of legal regulation, 
such as local or regional, are considered ineffective or even harmful. If such 
legal regulation is carried out by ea ch region or each municipality separately, 
it will of course significantly slow down the quality and efficiency of public 
relations in the field of personal data protection on the Internet. It will also 
significantly harm both the development of computer t echnology and the 
development of the economy of a particular city, region or country as a 
whole. It is based on these logical statements;  we note that regulation should 
take place at the State level.  
 
III.1. The Necessity and Essence of Acquiring an Efficient Internet 
Platform in Ukraine  
Developed and democratic states with true rule of law continue to be 
leaders and role models for other countries in further improving and 
developing the norms and principles of international law in the field of 
proper  confidential treatment and protection of personal data on the Internet. 
To ensure the effectiveness of these processes, it is recommended that 
economically, culturally and politically developed countries help less 
developed countries to improve the effici ency of their state mechanism, as 
well as to create clearer, transparent and unambiguous legislation. In 
addition, it is appropriate for states to act together in an effort to improve the 
effectiveness of international legal norms and institutions, as it i s known that 
the development of the Internet and computer technology is dynamic.  Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 96 
Considering the above opinion more broadly, we can argue that today 
the Internet is such that it is developing extremely rapidly (faster than other 
spheres of public life). Moreover, the peculiarity of the phenomenon of the 
Internet is that it is not only quite rapid, dynamic and rapidly evolving, but also 
significantly helps to progress and develop all other spheres  of public life. In 
particular, the Internet and high technolo gy have become an advanced part of 
societal progress. Therefore, through the rapid nature of the above  phenomena, 
it can be noted that they should be subject to clear legal regulation.  
State control over the relevance of national legislation in the field o f 
personal data protection on the Internet should not be carried out through the 
creation of any new bodies or state commissions, while “inflating ” the 
bureaucracy and creating an additional burden on the domestic state budget 
and government mechanisms. A much more useful solution may be the 
introduction of simplified procedures for changing or correcting the existing 
regulatory legal acts governing public relations in the field of personal data 
protection, as well as simplified and rapid procedures for the  development 
and adoption of new legal acts.  
We completely agree with this way of thinking, because it is clear that 
in the context of considering this issue there are two sides to a common 
problem. On the one hand, such a powerful and influential branch o f public 
life as the Internet and the high -tech sector cannot be left unregulated by law 
(Kittichaisaree & Kuner , 2015, pp. 2 -4). On the other hand, it can be argued 
that excessive legal regulation in this area or its slow introduction and 
implementation c an significantly harm the whole mechanism of proper 
protection of private personal data, for example, artificially slowing down 
the natural dynamics of their development and functioning.  
Economically developed countries should be considered as priority 
countries for cooperation and mutually effective exchange of experience and 
practical successful examples of work. This is explained by the fact that they 
have a high level of political and social culture, as well as have in their 
territory stable state insti tutions of power, which demonstrate their own 
stable efficiency for many years or even centuries ( United Nations,  2013 , 
Resolution  No. 68/167). To date, several Western countries are subject to 
the characteristic requirements outlined above. In particular,  among them 
the United States as the leading “superpower ” of the modern world, which 
has the world ’s greatest influence and weight in politics, economics, culture, 
education and scientific and technological progress. Also, among the 
countries with which Ukraine can carry out fruitful cooperation, it is 
necessary to add the Member States of the European Union, which are 
extremely close to Ukraine in terms of common family, political and cultural 
values.  Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 97 
As is known, these countries follow the same principles and 
approaches in terms of protecting the privacy of every person as a subject of 
public relations . It is on the basis of these beliefs and convictions of 
Americans and representatives of Western European countries in the 
inviolability of property rights of each person, in respect for the 
confidentiality of their private life in general, as well as for  certain, separate 
parts of confidential information about these persons or their lives, the 
appropriate legal regulation is formed.  
 
III.2. Legislation of Ukraine on Personal Data Protection, Including on 
the Internet  
It will be important to emphasize tha t the general content of legal 
regulation of personal data protection is based on such well -known 
international documents as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 
1948 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of 1966. 
The current  legislation of Ukraine has been developed taking into account 
the requirements of these international documents, as they have been ratified 
by the Ukrainian Government (Verkhovna Rada) and are therefore binding. 
At present, the legislation on personal dat a protection consists of the 
Constitution of Ukraine, the Law of Ukraine “On Personal Data Protection ”, 
other laws and by -laws, international treaties of Ukraine which were 
approved as binding by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine . 
The Member States of the European Economic Area, as well as the 
states that have signed the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection 
of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data, are 
recognized as ensuring an adequate level of protection of personal d ata. 
Current regulations in the field of personal data protection regulate 
legal relations related to the protection and processing of personal data and  
are aimed at protecting fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms, in 
particular the right to pri vacy, in connection with the processing of personal 
data. The current legislation applies to the processing of personal data, which 
is carried out in whole or in part using automated means, as well as to the 
processing of personal data contained in the fil e or are subject to entering 
into the file, using non -automated means. If an international treaty of 
Ukraine, approved by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, establishes rules 
other than those provided by the legislation of Ukraine, the rules of the 
internation al treaty of Ukraine shall be applied.  
According to Art. 2 of the Law of Ukraine “On Personal Data 
Protection ”, personal data is defined as “information or aggregate 
information about a natural person who is identified or may be identified ”. Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 98 
Meanwhile, in accordance with Part 1 of Art. 5 of this Law , personal data 
relating to the exercise by a person authorized to perform the functions of state 
or local government, official or service powers is not confidential information . 
In our opinion, such a legislative interpretation of this concept is 
somewhat narrowed, as it includes only an indication of an individual, while 
neglecting the legal entity. At the same time, the owner of personal data may 
be both an individual and a legal entity, which determi nes the purpose of 
personal data processing, establishes the composition of these data and the 
procedures for their processing, unless otherwise provided by law. In 
addition, the legislator unjustifiably narrowed the concept of a subject of 
personal data, understanding it only as an individual whose personal data is 
processed.  However, personal data of an individual can also be processed, 
as evidenced by the fact that nowadays all tax reports are submitted in 
electronic form, and for the current year of the ir activity, business entities 
submit appropriate declarations, which can be found in the public domain 
on the Internet.  
The procedure for access of third parties to personal data possessed by 
the public information manager is determined by the Law of Ukra ine “On 
Access to Public Information ”, except for data received from other bodies 
by the central executive body that ensures the formation and implementation 
of state financial and budgetary policy during the verification and 
monitoring of state payments.  
It should be pointed out that the nature and content of legal norms 
protecting the confidentiality of personal data of individuals and their proper 
treatment are closely related to the institution of private property. In our 
opinion, this state of affairs can be explained by the fact that the personal 
data of individuals, as well as specific information about them, is their 
exclusive personal value, and therefore must be properly protected. The 
obtaining of personal data of individuals should be understood as a direct 
unlawful encroachment on personal freedoms, rights and interests of a 
person. It ’s a beautiful scenario that the country has put in place and enacted 
credible laws and legislation in ensuring the security and accessibility of its 
internet usage in depriving the violations of personal data rights. This is 
beautiful and laudable in all its initiation. The problem will be posing here 
is as to what use will this legislation be if effective methods and measures 
are not used to ensure i ts enforcement and application. It is one thing in 
enacting laws, and the other in ensuring it ’s application. The State of 
Ukraine can be credited in all its efforts in guaranteeing personal user’s  data, 
but more efforts still need to be done as this issue  of internet crackers and 
hackers continues to be a serious threat affecting not only particular persons, 
but the entire Ukrainian system . Experiencing Personal Data Protection of the Internet and Its Possibilities of…  
 
| v. 10 (I I) (2021), p. 99 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS  
1. The study showed that the nature and content of the processes of 
protection and proper provision of personal data on the Internet are closely 
linked with the institution of private property, as well as in general with the 
private part of life of individuals. However, there are some exceptions in this 
context, for example, some of the personal data is information that is socially 
important.  
2. Given the many unique features of the Internet, as well as related 
computer and high -tech areas, the legal regulation of this area of public life 
is a difficult and responsible matter. In particular, the legal protection of 
personal data on the Internet sh ould be carried out with the help of special 
“simplified ” procedures for amending and adopting new legal acts. Instead, 
the creation of additional bodies or agencies to oversee the use of personal 
data of individuals is considered unnecessary and creates a n excessive 
burden on the state system and budget.  
3. The United States and the E uropean Union  Member States are the 
best role models for Ukraine in the field of proper protection and ensuring 
the confidentiality of personal data on the Internet, as these countries have 
common values regarding the priority of human rights, freedoms and 
interests of the individual over the State, as well as developed means of 
successful protection of these values.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
Appleby Global Group (2017). Protecting Personal  Data from Cyber -Attacks . Appleby 
Global Group Services Limited.  
Atkins, D. E.,  Duderstadt, J. J., & Houweling, D. V. (2002). Higher Education in the 
Digital Age: Technology, Issues and Strategies for American Colleges and 
Universities . Greenwood Press.  
Chaikovska, V.  P. (2016). E -Commerce in Ukraine: Current State and Trends. Intelligence  
XXI, 3, 38-48. 
Dhali, M ., Zulhuda, S ., & Fadhilah, S . (2021). The Digital Economy and the Quest for 
Privacy Protection in Bangladesh: A Comparative Legal Analysi s. IIUM Law 
Journal , 28 (2), 567 -596. Doi: https://doi.org/10.31436/iiumlj.v28i2.451  
Dubinskiy, I.  (11-X-2019).  Internet Penetration in Ukraine: Research Methodology. 
Factum Group . https://bit.ly/3rznGjf  
Gligorijevi ć, M., Pećanac, M., Vulevi ć, O., & Maksimovi ć, A. (2020 ). Analysis of 
Aspects of Personal Data Protection Risk Assessment Using Modern 
Technologies in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. International Scientific Petro Melnyk, Oleksii Volodymirovich Kostenko, Hanna Oleksandrivna Blinova & Iryna...  
  | v. 10 (II) (2021 ), p. 100 
Conference “Archibald Reiss Days”: Thematic Conference Proceedings of 
International Significance , 10 (1), 593 -603. 
Goodnight , G. T. (2016 ). Argumentation and the Cybersphere. In Ron von Burg (Ed.), 
Windsor Studies in Argumentation  [Vol. III]. University of Windsor.  
Hnusov, Y. V., Strukov, V. M., & Mozhayev, O. O. (2021). Problem of Harmonization of 
Legal Norms with the Needs of Police Investigations by Using High -Tech 
Instruments for Searching Information.  Law and Safety , 80 (1), 78 -85. Doi: 
https://doi.org/10.32631/pb.2021.1.11  
Kittichaisaree, K., & Kuner, C. (14 -X-2015). The Growing Importance of Data Protection 
in Public International Law. Blog of the European Journal of International 
Law. https://www.ejiltalk.org/the -growing -importance -of-data-protection -in-
public -international -law/ 
Meltzer, J. P. (2016). Maximizing the Opportunities of the Internet for International 
Trade. E15 Expert Group on the Digital Economy - Policy Options Paper. E15  
Initiative . International Centre for Trade and Sus tainable Development 
(ICTSD) & World Economic Forum.  
Perišić, J. Ć. (2020). The Sale of Counterfeit  Goods Via the Internet as a Contemporary 
Security Challenge – Legal Aspects. International Scientific Conference 
“Archibald Reiss Days”: Thematic Conference Proceedings of International 
Significance , 10 (1), 195 -203. 
Pew Research Center  (2005).  Internet: The Mainstreaming of Online Life . 
http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/Internet_Status_2005.pdf  
Piquero, N. L., Piquero, A. R., Gies, S., Green, B., Bobnis, A. , & Velasquez, E. (2021). 
Preventing Identity Theft: Perspectives on Technological Solutions from 
Industry Insiders. Victims & Offenders , 16 (3), 444 -463. Doi: 
10.1080/15564886.2020.1826023.  
Shevchenko, V., Dosenko, A., Iuksel, G., Synowiec, A., & Valentyna, D. (2020). Use of 
Open Data in Ukraine: Some Important Aspects. Revista San Gregorio , 42, 
319-329. Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.36097/rsan.v1i42.1564  
Shymon, S. , Baliuk, I., Kykot, P., Shatalova, L., & Harust, Y. (2020). Administrative and 
Legal Bases of Consumer Rights Protection on the Internet.  Gênero e Direito , 9 
(5), 72 -92. 
United Nations (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights . United Nations  General 
Assembly Resolution 217A (III).  
United Nations (1966). International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . United 
Nations General Assembly Resolution 2200A (XXI).  
United Nations (2013). The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age . United Nations Hig h 
Commissioner for Human Rights.  