The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 269   
The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on  
1 ountriesC eveloping D ducation in E 
 
Zuheir N Khlaif and Soheil Salha 
Faculty of Educational Sciences and Teachers ’ Training, An Najah National University,  
Nablus, Palestine 
 
Shahid Fareed 
Department of Computer Science, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan 
 
Hadi Rashed 
Business Communication Department, Kabul University, Kabul, Afghanistan 
 
Abstract 
The aim of this paper is to investigate the challenges associated with emergency remote teaching 
in the developing countries of Palestine, Libya, and Afghanistan, as reported by middle-school 
students, their parents, and teachers. These countries have been struggling with an unstable and 
violent situation for decades. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 60 participants from 
the three countries and 60 online classes were observed. Findings revealed that COVID-19 
widened the digital gap among students and families , which created challenges in terms of online 
class attendance. In addition, violation of students’ and parents’ digital privacy emerged as another 
key challenge to emergency remote teaching. However, teacher presence and timely feedback in 
synchronous online sessions strengthened students’ engagement within the emergency remote 
teaching environment. Overall, emergency remote teaching during the COVID-19 crisis deepened 
inequities across students and infringed upon the digital ethics of students, teachers, and parents.   Keywords: COVID-19, Coronavirus, digital inequity, digital privacy  
 Khlaif, Z.N., Salha, S., Fareed, S., & Rashed, H. (2021). The hidden shadow of the coronavirus 
on education in developing countries. Online Learning, 25(1), 269-285. https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v25i1.2287 
  
 
 
1 The motivation for the current study was the findings of Khalif and Salha’s (2020) brief report  regarding the  
unanticipated challenges of education during the COVID -19 pandemic. For this paper, the  researchers used the same 
data from the same participants , but developed different research questions on digital  privacy, gender inequity, and 
the specific impact of t he digital  divide.  The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 270  The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Emergency Remote Teaching (ERT) is an unplanned and sudden shift from traditional in-
person education to remote teaching, using technology to deliver teaching and learning materials 
and activities, due to natural disasters, economic crises, violence, and p andemics. In the past, 
individual countries have used technology to teach online for a limited time in response to crises 
and school shutdowns (Czerniewicz et al., 2019; Holzweiss et al., 2020; Khlaif & Salha, 2020; 
Shraim & Khlaif, 2010; Traxler et al., 2019). This year, ERT was implemented in countries across 
the world to fight the outbreak of Coronavirus (Johnson et al. , 2020; Khlaif et al., 2020). ERT is 
unlike normal online learning: while typical online courses take 3–6 months to design, develop, 
and deliver to students, ERT materials or lectures were originally designed for face-to-face 
delivery, and their quality in the remote context can be low (Khlaif & Salha, 2020). In developing 
countries in particular, students may also struggle with the digital equity and accessibility of 
educational resources delivered in the context of a crisis (Czerniewicz et al., 2019; Jones & 
Bridges, 2016; Khlaif et al., 2020).  
In this study, we investigate the challenges associated with emergency remote teaching in 
the developing countries of Palestine, Libya and Afghanistan, as reported by middle-school 
students, their parents, and teachers. In the introductory sections below, we first describe our 
conceptual framework, which is centered in digital inequity and digital privacy. Next, we describe 
the context of the three countries under study and lay out our key research questions.  
 Conceptual Framework 
The dimensions and determinants of the impact of COVID-19 on educational systems 
within developing countries are wide and varied. In the context of digital learning, however, two 
issues may represent key challenges to students and their families in developing c ountries: digital 
inequity and digital privacy.  Below, we review these two issues in more detail, with particular 
reference to the three developing countries  under study. 
Digital Inequity 
Digital equity is conceptualized in the framework of resource distribution, technical 
knowledge and skills, and the impact of  Information and Communication Technology  (ICT) use 
(Yuen et al., 2018). Willems  et al.  (2019) defined digital equity as access to hardware and software 
and connectivity to the internet to create, share, and exchange high-quality content in a suitable 
language. Resta et al. (2018) suggested that there are five dimensions of digital equity: hardware , 
software and connectivity to the internet, high-quality digital content in local languages, creation 
and sharing of digital content, educators who know technology, and high-quality research and 
application. 
In recent years, with the increasing use of ICT in education, digital inequity has begun to 
receive more attention from researchers  (Kurea, 2015; Yuen et al., 2016). With the shift to remote 
learning during the COVID-19 crisis, digital inequity has become an even more critical topic (Hall 
et al., 2020; Khlaif et al., 2020). For example, a recent U.S. study reported that school closures due 
to the spread of COVID-19 prevented children with disabilities from continuing their learning. 
These children were from the poorest families who did not have access to technology  (Collis & 
Vegas, 2020).  
In developing counties, the digital divide may be even more stark. Shraim and Khlaif 
(2010) highlighted that a key challenge of implementing e-learning in the Palestinian educational The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 271  system was students’ differential access to devices and high-speed internet. A significant aspect of 
the digital divide in developing countries is the difference between men ’s and women’s access to 
and use of technology (Mariscal et al., 2019; Singh, 2017). For example, Elaiess (2017) found a 
gender divide in Libya, with women and girls having less access to technology, such as the internet, 
compared with men because of cultural and social issues. Internet cafes for only men are not 
accepted.. The digital gap in gender is more evident for countries in the global south (such as the 
three countries under study) than for countries in the global north (such as the U.S.). 
Digital Privacy 
Digital privacy refers to the protection of an individual ’s information and communication 
that is used or created while using the internet on a computer or personal device (Robertson  et al., 
2019). It is worth noting that the protection of digital privacy requires the knowledge, the technical 
practices of online security, institutional privacy procedures , and the skill to conduct several 
processes for protecting online data (Li, 2018). Digital privacy is often understood as  an individual 
right that must be respected and secured even when people have different objectives and desires 
(Ahmed & Booth, 2016). With advancements in technology, individuals can communicate and 
leverage data more easily , but are also at increased risk of hackers violating their privacy and data      
confidentiality (Lustgarten et al., 2020). 
Despite the importance of digital privacy, students are often unaware of its meaning or 
value. For example, Lorenz et al. (2012) conducted a survey of sixty-one participants from Estonia, 
which examined the relationship  between students’ awareness of privacy and their level of 
participation in the online learning environment. The findings of the study revealed that students 
in the online learning environment did not distinguish between educational social interaction and 
their privacy. The researchers considered student lack of awareness to be a threat to the student ’s 
privacy (Lorenz et al., 2012). Similarly, Siemens et al. (2013) conducted research on Canadian 
students in a master’s degree program to explore their perceptions of privacy and its impact on 
their engagement within an e-learning environment. The findings of the study revealed that 
students are not aware of their privacy in the online forums.  
Students may be unaware of digital privacy issues because they have not been formally 
taught about them. Kumar et al. (2019) conducted nine focus group sessions with 25 teachers in 
elementary school settings across three regions in the north of the U .S. to ascertain the meaning of 
digital privacy and security. The findings of their study revealed that teachers rarely teach their 
students about digital privacy and security while using technology . However, teachers and parents 
themselves may have little understanding about digital privacy. Citizens’ concerns and behaviors 
in terms of digital privacy may also be influenced by political and cultural factors. For example, 
Fahey and Hino (2020) point out that during the COVID-19 pandemic, some countries (such as 
France, South Korea, Iran, and Qatar) have taken a “data first” approach to contact tracing and 
other public health measures, while other countries (such as Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.S.) 
have taken a “privacy first” approach.  
Studies of digital privacy have not focused on developing countries. However, a unique set 
of political and cultural factors impact education in developing countries. For example, in 
Afghanistan, the education system has long struggled with issues revolving around  culture, lack 
of security, and distance; these challenges continue today (Arooje & Burridge, 2020; Rasmussen 
& Kelly , 2016). Many of these challenges are further affected by transparency and quality The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 272  assurance. Thus, levels of awareness and concern about digital privacy in education could be quite 
different from those found in prior studies. 
Context of the Three Countries Under Study 
The three developing counties under study are Palestine, Libya, and Afghanistan. All three 
countries have been struggling with unstable situations and continuous violence for decades, and 
thus have implemented ERT many times before the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the three 
countries are quite distinct, all three share a similar security situation, have experience in education 
under crisis, used online learning before the COVID-19 pandemic, transformed education into 
ERT during the COVID-19 pandemic, and have the technological initiatives to integrate 
technology into teaching and learning. Below, we provide context regarding the educational 
system of each country. 
Libya 
Education policy in Libya is managed from the top down and is influenced by the overall 
political system of the country. The education system has changed frequently since the Arab Spring 
in 2011 (Aloreibi & Carey, 2017). The World Bank (2013) reported significant success in 
enhancing the literacy rate in Libya by increasing the budget for education and making it free and 
accessible for all Libyans and implementing new programs to improve education. Conversely, 
Gadour (2011) argued that the Libyan educational system is still not capable of producing 
graduates with the necessary skills to compete in a world where knowledge and technology are 
essential for development in different aspects of the society. Hbaci et al. (2020) found that Libyan 
educators believe that using technology is still a difficult task, and that schools need computers, 
internet access, training, and financial support to improve the teachers ’ technological competencies 
in teaching and learning. Libyan students may also be underrepresented in terms of their 
participation in global learning platforms: a recent study of Arab users of  the MITx online learning 
platform found that only 111 per million Libyans used the platform, compared to 1,552 per million 
in the United Arab Emirates and 383 per million in Egypt ( Ruipérez-Valiente et al., 2020). 
Palestine 
As an occupied territory, Palestine is subject to a variety of ongoing restrictions (such as 
checkpoints and other travel restrictions), as well as periodic “security spikes” characterized by 
unrest, violence, and travel lockdowns, which negatively impact its educational system. For 
example, students and teachers may be unable to pass through checkpoints in order to reach school 
in time, or school trips may be canceled due to travel restrictions (Traxler et al., 2019). A recent 
study conducted by Bruck et al. (2019) confirmed the continued conflict in Palestine decreased the 
probability to pass the final exam, and the opportunities to get an admission from the university to 
pursue higher education. To mitigate the negative impact of restriction of mobility o n their 
students’ education, many Palestinian teachers have turned to digital technologies (Traxler et al., 
2019). Furthermore, the Ministry of Education (hereafter MoE), which is responsible for the 
administration and development of the Palestinian education system at the levels of preschool, 
basic education, and secondary education  has taken different procedures on the ground to reduce 
the negative impact of conflict on educati on such as locating teachers close to their living place 
and opening new schools in rural areas  (Shraim, 2018; Shraim & Khlaif, 2010). Moreover, the 
MoE has pursued a variety of initiatives to integrate technology in public schools, such as the 
Professional Development program (supported by the U.S. through USAID), the Belgium e-
Learning project (supported by the Kingdom of Belgium), and Smart Learning (supported by the The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 273  local community in Palestine) (Khlaif & Farid, 2018). As a consequence, Palestinian education is 
highly digitized at both the managerial and instructional levels  (Khlaif et al., 2019). In general, the 
Palestinian education system is thought to be strong, with an adult literacy rate at more than 90% 
(Itmazi. 2020). 
Afghanistan  
The education system in Afghanistan is influenced by the Taliban, and therefore there were 
several changes in the Afghani education system from the Taliban period to the post-Taliban 
period (Dandawate & Dhanamjaya, 2019). The decades of conflict almost destroyed the education 
system in Afghanistan. During the Taliban era, most girls’ schools were closed; girls represented 
only about 6% of school enrollment, and women were barred from the few Teacher Training 
Colleges that remained open (Shayan, 2015). For students who did attend school, the curriculum 
included a religious subject that took up to 50% of the teaching time (Guistozzi, 2010). Starting in 
2002, girls’ enrollment began to rebuild; by 2013, girls represented 38% of school enrollment, and 
32% of teachers were women (Shayan, 2015). However, enrollment is inequitably distributed 
across the country; in 2008, 80% of girls attended school in the Hazara region, while only 10% did 
so in several southern provinces (Larson, 2008). 
Noorajan (2020) described Afghani online learning as very poor, stating that access to  the 
internet and digital learning resources are still not available in most educational institutions. The 
digital divide is greater than expected because  of the digital inequity to access to technology and 
the social gap among the Afghani society  (Khan et al., 2012). Saay and Norta (2018) claimed that 
higher education institutions have moved forward in terms of creating a shared, reliable, high -
speed, interoperable e-learning structure, a similar system for K -12 is not yet a reality. 
Contribution of this Study 
Although much research has been conducted on distance education, there is a lack of 
research on ERT in developing countries, particularly since the COVID-19 emergency forced 
schools to close and transfer their education to online classes. This study examines a “hidden 
shadow” on education across these three countries: the unrevealed impact of ERT during the 
COVID-19 pandemic on education, including on students, parents, teachers, and quality of content. 
The study aims to answer the following questions: 
• How was Emergency Remote Teaching implemented in middle school settings  by 
instructors in these three countries? 
• To what extent did digital inequity create challenges for students and their families?  
• To what extent did digital privacy concerns create chall enges for students and their 
families?  
 
Methods 
A qualitative approach was adopted for the current study. The qualitative approach is 
generally used to describe an intervention or phenomenon in the real -life context in which it 
occurred (Yin, 2003). The qualitative approach used in the current study w as individual semi-
structured interviews and observations of online learning sessions.  
 The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 274  Participants 
The participants in the study were parents, students, and teachers in middle school settings 
in Libya, Palestine, and Afghanistan. Sixty participants (20 participants from each country , 
including 15 teachers, 15 parents, and 30 students) were interviewed to discuss their lived 
experience with ERT in middle school settings during the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, 60 
online classes (4 for each participating teacher) were observed.  
Purposeful sampling was used to recruit participants. The criteria for recruiting the 
participants in the study were having experience in online teaching during the COVID-19 
pandemic; living in Libya, Palestine, and Afghanistan; and allowing the online classes to be 
observed. The participants were recruited through the professional network of the first author, who 
was working with nonprofit organizations to train teachers on the use of ICT tools in education in 
these countries. Table 1 presents demographic information about t he participants. 
 
Table 1 
Participants’ Demographic Characteristics 
Participants Palestine Libya Afghanistan 
 Male Female Male Female Male Female 
Teachers 3 2 2 3 2 3 
Parents 2 3 2 3 3 2 
Middle school 
students 4 6 3 7 4 6 
Total 9 11 7 13 9 11 
 
Data Collection  
Semi -structured interviews with 60 participants on Zoom were the main data source of this 
research. Individual interviews were 20–30 minutes in length and were audio-recorded after 
obtaining permission from each participant. The interviews with participants from Libya and 
Palestine were in the Arabic language. The interviews with participants from Afghanistan were in 
the Dari and Arabic languages.  
The secondary data collection approach was observations of online classes. Researchers 
observed four online classes for each teacher. The main criterion for teachers to participate in the 
study was allowing their different online classes  to be observed. The researchers observed 60 
online classes from the three countries , which took around 50 hours. Forty online classes were in 
the Arabic language and 20 were in the Dari language (the Afghani official language). The classes 
comprised students from different backgrounds and cultures. All the students, parents, and teachers 
participated in the study on a voluntary basis.   
Data Analysis 
The data analysis process started with the manual transcription of the interview audio files. 
The transcribed files in the Dari language were translated into the Arabic language to facilitate the The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 275  data analysis process. The researchers individually coded the data into themes and subthemes from 
all the data sources by using thematic analysis  (Creswell & Creswell, 2017). Through thematic 
analysis, researchers analyze, categorize , and report patterns in the data. After constructing the 
themes that emerged in the analysis of the interview data, the researchers used these themes to 
analyze the observations of online classes.  
In terms of the analysis of the observations of online classes , the researchers wrote notes 
on the structure of the classes  and audio-recordings of the sessions to answer the first research 
question. Furthermore, the data from the observations of online classes were used to support 
themes and subthemes that emerged in the individual interviews.  
Trustworthiness 
After transcribing the interviews, the researchers sent all the written transcripts to 
participants for checking, asking them to  verify the content for accuracy. Moreover, participants 
were asked to write notes, rewrite content, and add new information on the transcripts. 
Participants’ transcripts were not altered by the researchers. When the final themes had been 
constructed, a professor in educational technology was asked to select  a small portion of the 
transcription and analyze it based on the constructed themes to check the accuracy of the themes. 
In the Results section below, transcript excerpts are labeled according to the participant ’s role 
(Parent, Teacher, or Student), country (A = Afghanistan, L = Libya, or P = Palestine) and a 
personal identification number. 
 
Results 
Research question #1: How was Emergency Remote Teaching implemented in middle school 
settings by instructors in these three countries? 
Based on the analysis of the observations of online classes, the researchers categorized the 
implementation of ERT by schools and teachers in the three countries in to three themes: type of 
online learning classes, students ’ engagement, and the design and delivery of online instruction.  
Type of Online Learning Classes 
Most of the teachers in the three countries used both synchronous and asynchronous tools 
to deliver instruction to the learners in the middle school settings. Typically, teachers created their 
asynchronous class using Edmodo or Google Classroom, and posted links to synchronous Zoom 
sessions on the class wall. Most of these teachers also recorded the synchronous sessions and 
posted the recordings for students who may have missed class. Students needed to log into the 
virtual classes to access the recorded sessions. All the teachers used free versions of the Zoom 
application, Google Classroom, and Edmodo. 
However, some teachers used other asynchronous platforms to deliver instruction and to 
communicate with their students, and they rarely used synchronous sessions. A follow-up question 
was sent to these teachers about the reasons for not using synchronous session s. Typically, teachers 
responded that most of their students did not have access to the internet because of the electricity 
in Gaza in Palestine and in Afghanistan being cut off.  
Despite differences in the type of online instruction among the teachers from the three 
countries, all teachers’ instruction shared the following common features: it was free, it was easy The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 276  to use, students had to enroll in the platform to access content, and technology tools were 
integrated.  
Types of Content Delivered  
Various types of content were used by teachers to instruct students, including interactive 
activities designed in open-source platforms, educational videos from YouTube, PowerPoint slides 
designed by teachers and students, pictures, infographic s, and whiteboard animation. Teachers 
from Palestine and Afghanistan focus ed on using simple technological tools to design and deliver 
the instruction, most of which were from open-source platforms. They integrated simple tools to 
design and deliver interactive content to the students. However, the Libyan teachers depended only 
on one tool to design and develop instruction, which was the Edmodo platform.  
Few teachers assigned online tasks or activities to their students in the synchronous 
sessions, as they reported they did not want to distract students in the online sessions . Instead, they 
assigned activities asynchronously using Edmodo or Google Classroom.  
In synchronous online sessions, teachers shared their screens, used different features of the 
online platform such as the whiteboard and polls, and used breakout rooms to allow students to 
work on assignments in small groups. Depending on the type of instruction, teachers allowed 
students to share their screen.  
Students’ Interaction 
Teachers tried to support students’ engagement and interaction with each other in the 
synchronous and asynchronous sessions by designing and delivering activities. A few teachers 
gave students the opportunity to interact with the instructor or with their peers. These teachers 
delivered online individual and group activities. Teachers asked students to work on these 
activities online by forming groups and giving them the option to share their screens to present 
their work to their peers. Other students were able to interact with their peers by providing text 
and verbal comments by using chat and audio features.  
Many of the students engaged and interacted with their teachers thr ough text questions 
written on the chat tab. In addition, some students engaged in answering their peers ’ questions on 
the chat tab.  
Some female students from the three countries were reluctant to participate verbally in the 
online discussion. However, we noticed that these students were active in the asynchronous 
discussion on the platform.  The researchers asked the female students a follow-up question about 
their engagement with the platform and discussions. Feedback from participants indicated that 
students had various reasons for choosing to participate in asynchronous rather than synchronous 
interaction, including personal reasons and cultural and religious reasons. (We discuss these 
reasons in more detail under Research Question 3.)   
Moreover, the researchers noticed that the presence of teachers on the platform and timely 
feedback encouraged students to complete their assignments and interact with their peers. Students 
from Afghanistan were more engaged in asynchronous activities than Palestinian st udents. 
Observations suggested that the reason for this was that unlike the Afghani teachers, Palestinian 
teachers did not interact with their students in asynchronous platform s. Libyan students engaged 
and interacted in both synchronous and asynchronous platforms less than the Afghani and 
Palestinian students.  The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 277  Challenges of ERT  
All the participants from the three countries reported that ERT was a big challenge for them 
since it was unplanned, and students, teachers and parents were unprepared to shift to online 
learning. Most of the teachers in the three countries agreed that “this was not the first time we 
moved to online teaching during a crisis” (Teacher P2) and that previous transformation had been 
for “specific schools in specific districts due to violence” (Teacher A4). Implementing ERT on a 
large scale in the three countries caused pressure and anxiety for families in these countries. A 
parent from Afghanistan said: “Using online learning during the COVID-19 crisis put me and my 
wife under pressure. We have three kids in school… We do not have enough devices and enough 
knowledge about online teaching” (Parent A1). 
Research question #2: To what extent did digital inequity create challenges for students and 
their families? 
All the participants from the three countries reported that m oving to ERT suddenly 
increased the digital gap in the learning process. In addition, they all reported that digital inequity 
put them under high pressure and caused anxiety—particularly since they did not know when this 
state of emergency would end and allow them to return to face-to-face learning. Overall, the 
researchers identified three main themes: inequity in internet and hardware, quality of digital 
content, and inequity based on gender.  
Inequity in Internet  and Hardware 
Internet Broadband Connectivity 
Teachers from Libya, Afghanistan, and Palestine noted the weakness of internet bandwidth 
as an element that hindered their ability to provide timely instruction to students , ultimately 
affecting student engagement.  Although teachers in all three countries mentioned the issue, it was 
reported less in the Palestinian context than in the      Afghani and Libyan contexts. Teachers and 
students who referred to the inequity in internet reported that access to internet broadband was one 
of the major barriers to implementing ERT during the COVID -19 pandemic.  
For example, a teacher from Afghanistan reported that “[the] internet nowadays is weak 
because a lot of people were trying to attend online classes … It cannot help me prepare instruction 
and deliver it to my students” (Teacher A3). Researchers observed that students from rural areas 
in all three countries were at more of a disadvantage in terms of the availability and reliability of 
the internet than their peers from large cities. 
I live in a small village north of Gaza, Palestine. I did not attend online classes… I missed 
most of them because the electricity is cut off all the time… Even if we have electricity, 
the internet is weak. I asked my relative who lives in Gaza city to send me the recorded 
files to view them when electricity is available (Student P3).  
A female student from a rural area in Afghanistan stated: “I usually go to my uncle’s house 
to attend online classes because we do not have the internet at home” (Student A3).  
The participants from Libya reported that families’ financial situations influenced their 
connectivity to the internet.  
I am a teacher in Tripoli. I have not received my salary for the last year, so how can I pay 
for the internet? My priority is to pay for food and living expenses… Moving to emergency 
remote teaching was sudden, and it is difficult to adopt it in a short time (Parent L3).  The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 278  Inequit y in Hardware 
Families from all three countries reported that some households have too few technological 
devices based on the number of children enrolled in schools and universities , especially in families 
in which the father or mother or both are enrolled in a graduate program at a univ ersity. A female 
student from Libya reported, “I cannot attend synchronous classes because my sister is using the 
device [laptop] when it is time for the class” (Student L2). A female student from Palestine stated 
that “before this crisis [COVID-19], I used to use my mom’s iPhone to finish my assignments, but 
now I cannot do this because she uses it to teach her students ” (Student P4). 
A parent from Libya reported:  
Because of the stay at home rule, I lost my job, and it is difficult to buy a new device for 
my kids to attend online learning. I asked their teacher to provide me the recorded teaching 
materials to use them by my children (Parent L3).  
A male student from Afghanistan stated: “I have two sisters, one in high school and the 
older one at the university. All of us are using the same desktop… My dad cannot buy an additional 
computer for us” (Student A9). A parent from Palestine said, “I cannot buy more devices because 
I have not received my salary in the last six months because of Coronavirus” (Parent P3).  
Quality of Digital Content 
Parents, teachers, and students agreed that the quality of digital content delivered by 
teachers in both synchronous and asynchronous sessions was low. For example, Libyan parents 
and students mentioned the low quality of course content for math and English, while Palestinian 
and Afghani students and parents reported the low quality of learning materials and content in 
science. Teachers believed the low quality of course content was a result of the sudden transition 
to remote learning contexts.  
We moved to online teaching within 24 hours . I do not have time to plan and design suitable 
content for my students… The teaching online is completely different from teaching face  
to face… It needs specific teaching strategies, specific content , which takes a lot of time to 
prepare (Teacher A3). 
Other teachers from Libya and Palestine reported that they were “unprepared” to design interactive 
content, stating that they “do not have a team to design” and “do not know the tools to use in the 
design process” (Teacher L1, Teacher L3, Teacher L4; Teacher P4, Teacher P5).  
Students from Afghanistan complained about the quality of the assignments and the 
grading system.  
The content is related to the lesson in the book, but when I went to do the assignment, it 
was unclear. I do not feel there was a connection between the assignment and the material. 
In addition, I do not know how my teacher will grade me (Student A4).  
Some parents from Palestine and Afghanistan were struggling to teach and assist their 
children because they do not have experience with the design of digital content. A Palestinian 
parent said, “I usually teach my children and help them finish their tasks and activities but now I 
do not know how to start with them… I asked my brother, who is a teac her, to help them” (Parent 
P2). A parent from Afghanistan stated: “I am not educated in using technology . It is difficult for 
me to teach my kids this type of content” (Parent A5). The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 279  Inequity Based on Gender 
Most students and parents, and some teachers, believed that online course design and 
delivery was biased based on gender. For example, female students reported that course materials 
and activities tended to focus on males by showing photos of boys or using boys’ names.  
Our observational data supported female students ’ perceptions that teachers from all three 
countries privileged male students by using gendered language, referring mostly to boy s’ names, 
allowing male students to speak more frequently, and often interrupting female students . 
My teachers are biased toward males in online classes. Since the beginning of teaching 
online two months ago, I have only been allowed to use the mic twice for two or three 
minutes, but some males talk more than all the females (Student P4) . 
A female student from Libya said: “In the presentation of our project, my teacher did not 
give us an opportunity to present in the same way as males and in mixed teams . He asked if I prefer 
males to present the project… I like to discuss my ideas, but I am not allowed to” (Student L3).  
The inequity based on gender was not only due to teachers, as some families did not allow 
their female children to use the microphone. A female student from Libya stated: “My dad put 
restrictions on using the microphone and camera while using his laptop for online learning” 
(Student L5). A Palestinian female student mentioned that her mo ther allowed her to use the 
internet for learning without opening the mic and the camera (Student P2).  
Research question #3: To what extent did digital privacy concerns create challenges for 
students and their families?  
According to the data analysis, a new theme related to the ERT during the COVID-19 crisis 
was mentioned by the participants , which was digital privacy. Most of the participants in the 
current study stated that teaching and learning in the ERT environment should be managed 
professionally and ethically by teachers and students.  
All participants expressed concerns about digital privacy , and most of the students reported that 
their digital privacy was violated by on e of their family members or by their teachers. Furthermore, 
families stated that sharing devices such as smartphones, laptops, or desktops is considered as 
violating individual privacy. In general, perspectives on privacy seemed re lated to two key themes: 
gender differences in privacy and sharing devices or internet access.  
Gender Differences in Privacy  
As mentioned earlier, many female students mentioned that their families did not allow 
them to use their camera or microphone during class. A follow-up question was sent to the students 
asking why their families were concerned about the camera and microphone. Below, we draw from 
these responses as well as students’ original interviews.  
Due to security concerns, cultural traditions, or rel igious strictures, many female students  
and their families  felt their personal images should remain private. For example, one parent said, 
“We are living in a bad situation because of violence and security. I am concerned about her 
[daughter] privacy in online learning. I do not know how to protect her” (Parent A3). In some 
districts in Afghanistan, Libya, and Palestine, it is considered inappropriate for families to allow 
their children to share photos , videos, or even to appear talking in a video clip . Other families from 
these countries consider themselves open-minded and allow their children to share videos and The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 280  photos and use a webcam on the internet; however, these families were a minority. Overall, many 
female students felt their privacy was threatened by teachers as well as other students.  
First, some teachers asked female students to engage in practices that the students or 
families felt were inappropriate. For example , the researchers noticed that some male teachers 
asked students to open their camera at the beginning of the session. Some of the girls refused to 
open it, with one girl saying, “I do not like to open my camera for personal reasons ” (Student P1), 
and the teacher respected their privacy. During the online sessions, some teachers asked students 
to share their desktop; some students agreed to share it while others refused to share it, with one 
saying, “I have personal pictures in the background on my computer ” (Student A2). In interviews, 
a few other female students reported that their teachers asked them to open the webcam, which 
they considered a violation of their digital privacy  and reported to their families . One student 
asked, “Personal information on social media and in the online classes  is private information. I do 
not like to use the camera, so why did my teacher asked me to open the camera? ” (Student L4). 
Other families did not allow their girls to attend online classes if they were asked to share their 
information on social media or share their laptop screen. 
Second, female students felt that many of their male peers did not know the “boundaries” 
or work “professionally” (Student A5) in the new online learning environment. A female student 
from Afghanistan expressed anger about some of her male friends who looked for her social media 
profile and sent her a friend request.      Some female teachers from Libya and Afghanistan also 
reported that many girls complained about the bad conduct of their peers, which included taking 
screen shots of the online sessions and posting them on social media pages, trying to add them as 
friends on social media, and sharing their emails on the chat tab in the online sessions to contact 
them.  
In contrast, most of the male students did not care about their privacy. They were willing 
to open their camera and to share their desktop and shared no concerns about these practices in 
their interviews.  
Sharing Devices or Internet  
Parents from all three countries reported they were forced to share their own smartphones, 
laptops, or desktops with their children for schooling purposes, which they felt was a violation of 
individual privacy. A parent from Palestine sta ted:  
Because we do not have extra devices, somet imes I share my smartphone with my son and 
allow him to use it… My accounts on social media are open,  and I share my thoughts with 
my close friends… Allowing a family member to share my device puts my digital privacy 
at risk (Parent P3).  
A Libyan parent reported that she does not like to share her laptop with her children. She 
said, “I am lawyer, and all of my clients’ files are stored on my computer… Honestly, when I let 
my kids use my laptop, I observed them” (Parent L4). We asked her a follow-up question about 
restricting access to her files by using a password. The answer was: “I do not have high skills in 
computers to protect myself… I would appreciate it if you could help me” (Parent L4). A woman 
from Afghanistan reported that her husband asked her if he could share her smartphone in his 
online session. “My husband is a science teacher and he asked if he could use my phone… At the 
beginning, I hesitated because I have my sister ’s wedding pictures on it” (Parent A3).  The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 281  In addition to sharing devices, many families shared their internet access points with 
neighbors. This practice was common in Palestine and Afghanistan but was less common in Libya 
since buying an internet package is cheaper than in Palestine and Afghanistan. “No, I do not like 
to share internet with others. It is cheap… I have high internet speed for less than $10” (Parent 
L1). 
When families shared internet with neighbors, parents worried that their children could be 
stalk ed by others on their network. A parent from Afghanistan reported: “We share internet with 
one of our neighbors because it is expensive to buy an internet package alone… My daughter told 
me that our neighbors’ son knows everything about her online account and sen t her a friend 
request” (Parent A1). Students from Libya and Palestine reported that they do not feel safe and 
secure in the online environment when they share internet with their neighbors. For example, a 
female student from Palestine said : “When I post anything on social media, our neighbors ’ son 
was the first to like or comment. I feel he is waiting for me to write a post” (Student P8).  
 
Discussion 
The aim of the study was to explore the challenges of ERT during the COVID-19 crisis in 
three developing countries , Libya, Palestine, and Afghanistan. A qualitative approach was adopted 
to achieve this aim. Moving suddenly from face-to-face teaching to ERT complicated and 
disrupted the educational system in these countries , which had already been affected by violence 
and unstable policy, as well as the weaknesses of the infrastructure and the bad economic situation. 
Although teachers tried their best to foster students ’ engagement in online learning sessions , they 
sometimes failed because of the digital inequity among students and families.  
Teachers and students in the developing countries used synchronous and asynchronous free 
tools to continue teaching and learning in the ERT, and teachers on both asynchronous and 
synchronous platforms provided support and encouraged students to engag e in online activities . 
Teachers relied on their own technology solutions because there was no well-designed and secure 
online system or platform for teaching and learning . As a result, learners’ digital privacy was 
threatened, and consistent with previous studies, the quality of content in the emergency context 
was low compared with content delivered in a well -planned online learning context (Hodges et al., 
2020; Khlaif et al., 2020; Mohmmed et al., 2020;Whittle et al. (2020).  
Our results found a number of inequities between students. Some parents could not provide 
their children with technological devices and families in rural and remote places encountered 
difficulties in getting connected to internet broadband, which reduced students’ engagement in 
online synchronous sessions compared with online asynchronous sessions.  Girls were also less 
active in synchronous online sessions than boys, due in large part to their hesitancy to share their 
personal images, but they were more active and productive in the asynchronous platforms. These 
results align with previous studies suggesting that digital inequity negatively influences the online 
learning process (Khidhir et al., 2020; Khlaif & Salha, 2020; Khlaif et al., 2020). 
We also found that digital privacy was a major concern for both parents and students. Most 
families were concerned about daughters opening their webcams or sharing their screens . Parents 
were reluctant to share their own devices for their children’s schooling, and worried that their 
children’s activities could be monitored by neighbors via shared internet access points. In general, The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 282  violation of students’ and parents’ digital privacy increased during the coronavirus ERT, which 
reduced students’ engagement in online classes. 
The concepts of digital inequity and digital ethics are still very limited, underrated , and 
unclear in developing countries such as Palestine, Afghanistan, and Libya. Both were eroded in 
the coronavirus ERT setting, which had a negative influence on students’ engagement in online 
classes. The absence of these concepts and related processes of instructional design among 
teachers in ERT settings  was obvious, which deepened digital inequity and damaged digital 
privacy. To address these issues, the Ministries of Education in these countries  may wish to 
consider three key actions. First, they could provide students and teachers with devices and reduce 
internet fees to make the internet available to a wide range of citizens . Second, they could develop 
a clear vision about digital privacy . Finally, develop a shared technology platform across the K -12 
system that will benefit learners and train teachers on it.   
 
 
 
 The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 283  References 
Affouneh, S., Salha, S., & Khlaif, Z. N. (2020). Designing quality e-learning environments for 
emergency remote teaching in Coronavirus crisis. Interdisciplinary Journal of Virtual 
Learning in Medical Sciences , 11(2), 1–3. 
Ahmed, A. & Booth, D. (2016). The digital privacy laws and practices in the Jersey island. 
Procedia Computer Science, 98, 163–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.026 
 Aloreibi, A., & Carey, M. D. (2017). English language teaching in Libya after Gaddafi. 
In English language education policy in the Middle East and North Africa (pp. 93–114). 
Cham, Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46778-8_7 
Arooje , R., & Burridge N. (2020) . School education in Afghanistan. In P. Sarangapani  & R. 
Pappu (Eds .), Handbook of education systems in South Asia . Springer . 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -981- 13-3309- 5_10- 1  
Brück, T., Di Maio, M., & Miaari, S. H. (2019). Learning the hard way: The effect of violent 
conflict on student academic achievement.  Journal of the European Economic 
Association, 17(5), 1502–1537. 
Creswell, J. W., & Creswell, J. D. (2017). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed 
methods approaches. Sage. 
 Dandawate, V. S., & Dhanamjaya, M. (2019). A review of the open-access scenario in 
Afghanistan. Library Hi Tech, 37(4), 660–668. https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-01-2019-
0020  
Elaiess, R. (2017). Digital divide in Libya: A general assessment. International Research: 
Journal of Library and Information Science, 7(3), 1–9. 
Fahey, R. A., & Hino, A. (2020). COVID-19, digital privacy, and the social limits on data-
focused public health responses. International Journal of Information Management, 55, 
102181.Gadour , A. (2011) . Power and struggle for education in Libya. In R. G. 
Sultana ( Ed.), Educators of the Mediterranean… … up close and personal. 
Comparative and international education ( a diversity of voices)  (vol. 9, pp. 121– 131) . 
Sense  Publishers. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94-6091- 681- 6_11  
Guistozzi, A. (2010). Nation-building is not for all: The politics of education in Afghanistan . 
Retrieved from https://www.afghanistan-analysts.org/en/special-reports/nation-building-
is-not-for-all-the-politics-of-education/ 
 Hbaci, I., Ku, H. Y., & Abdunabi, R. (2020). Evaluating higher education educators ’ computer 
technology competencies in Libya.  Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12528-020-09261-z 
Hodges, C., Moore, S., Lockee, B., Trust, T., & Bond, A. (2020). The difference between 
emergency remote teaching and online learning. Educause Review, 27(1), 1–12. 
Holzweiss, P. C., Walker, D. W., Chisum, R., & Sosebee, T. (2020). Crisis planning for online 
students: Lessons learned from a major disruption. Online Learning, 24(2), 22–37. 
 The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 284  Itmazi, J. (2020). Open educational resources in Palestine. In R. Huang, D. Liu, A. Tlili, Y. Gao 
& R. Koper (Eds.), Current state of open educational resources in the “belt and road” 
countries. Lecture notes in educational technology. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-3040-1_8 
Johnson, N., Veletsianos, G., & Seaman, J. (2020). US faculty and administrators’ experiences 
and approaches in the early weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic. Online Learning, 24(2), 
6–21. 
Jones, M., & Bridges, R. (2016). Equity, access, and the digital divide in learning 
technologies. Wiley Handbook of Learning Technology, 327–347. 
Khan, G. F., Moon, J., Swar, B., Zo, H., & Rho, J. J. (2012). E-government service use intentions 
in Afghanistan: Technology adoption and the digital divide in a war -torn 
country. Information Development, 28(4), 281–299. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0266666912438879  
Khlaif, Z. N., & Farid, S. (2018). Transforming learning for the smart learning paradigm: 
Lessons learned from the Palestinian initiative.  Smart Learning Environments, 5(1), 12. 
Khlaif, Z. N., & Salha, S. (2020). The unanticipated educational challenges of developing 
countries in Covid-19 crisis: A brief report. Interdisciplinary Journal of Virtual Learning 
in Medical Sciences , 11(2), 130–134. 
Khlaif, Z. N., Salha, S., Affouneh, S., Rashed, H., & ElKimishy, L. A. (2020). The Covid-19 
epidemic: teachers’ responses to school closure in developing countries.  Technology, 
Pedagogy and Education, 1-15. 
Kurea, G. M. (2015). The implementation of the two third gender rule in the devolved 
government as stipulated in the Kenyan Constitution: The case study of Meru 
County (Doctoral dissertation, University of Nairobi). Retrieved from: 
http://erepository.uonbi.ac.ke/bitstream/handle/11295/94524/Kurea_The%20Impl ementat
ion%20of%20the%20Two%20Third%20Gender%20Rule%20in%20the%20Devolved%2
0Government%20as%20Stipulated%20in%20the%20Kenyan%20Constitution.pdf?seque
nce=3&isAllowed=y  
Li, X. (2018). Understanding eHealth literacy from a privacy perspective: eHealth literac y and 
digital privacy skills in American disadvantaged communities.  American Behavioral 
Scientist, 62(10), 1431–1449. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764218787019  
Lorenz, B., Sousa, S., & Tomberg, V. (2013). Privacy awareness of students and its impact on 
online learning participation —A case study. In T. Ley, M. Ruohonen, M. Laanpere, & A. 
Tatnall (Eds.), OST 2012. IFIP AICT (vol. 395, pp. 189–192). Springer.  
Mariscal, J., Mayne, G., Aneja, U., & Sorgner, A. (2019). Bridging the gender digital 
gap. Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 13(9), 1–12.  
Mohmmed, A. O., Khidhir, B. A., Nazeer, A., & Vijayan, V. J. (2020). Emergency remote 
teaching during Coronavirus pandemic: The current trend and future directive at Middle 
East College Oman. Innovative Infrastructure Solutions, 5(3), 1–11. The Hidden Shadow of Coronavirus on Education in Developing Countries 
Online Learning Journal – Volume 25 Issue 1 – March 2021                    5 285  Noorajan A. (2020). A critical reflection of teacher education policies and programs in 
Afghanistan. In K. Pushpanadham (Ed.), Teacher education in the global era. Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-4008-0_14  
Rasmussen, P. E., & Kelly, A. (2016). Education sector analysis Afghanistan . Pouras Consult. 
https://www.globalpartnership.org/sites/default/files/education -sector -analysis -
afghanistan.pdf . 
Resta, P., Laferrière, T., McLaughlin, R., & Kouraogo, A. (2018). Issues and challenges related 
to digital equity: An overview. Second handbook of information technology in primary 
and secondary education (pp. 1–18). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-73315-9_44  
Ruipérez-Valiente, J. A., Halawa, S., Slama, R., & Reich, J. (2020). Using multiplatform 
learning analytics to compare regional and global MOOC learning in the Arab world. 
Computers & Education, 146, 103776. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compedu.2019.103776  
Shraim, K., & Khlaif, Z. (2010). An e-learning approach to secondary education in Palestine: 
Opportunities and challenges. Information Technology for Development, 16(3), 159–173. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2010.501782  
Traxler, J., Khaif, Z., Nevill, A., Affouneh, S., Salha, S., Zuhd, A., & Trayek, F. (2019). Living 
under occupation: Palestinian teachers ’ experiences and their digital responses.  Research 
in Learning Technology, 27, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.25304/rlt.v27.2263  
United Nations. (2015). Sustainable development goals . Retrieved January 18, 2021, from 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org 
UNESCO. (2020). COVID-19 education response. Retrieved January 18, 2021, from 
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/globalcoalition  
Whittle, C., Tiwari, S., Yan, S., & Williams, J. (2020). Emergency remote teaching environment: 
A conceptual framework for responsive online teaching in crises.  Information and 
Learning Sciences, 121(5/6), 311–319. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-04-2020-0099  
Willems, J., Farley, H., & Campbell, C. (2019). The increasing significance of digital      equity 
in higher education. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 35(6), 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.5996  
World Bank. (2013). Libya: World development indicators . Retrieved January 18, 2021, from 
http://data.worldbank.org/country/libya#cp_wdi  
Yuen, A., Park, J., Chen, L., & Cheng, M. (2018). The significance of cultural capital and 
parental mediation for digital inequity. New Media & Society, 20(2), 599–617. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816667084  
 