  
 西 南 交 通 大 学 学 报   
第 56 卷 第 1 期 
2021 年 2 月 JOURNAL OF SOUTHWEST JIAOTONG UNIVERSITY  Vol. 56 No. 1 
Feb. 2021  
 
 ISSN: 0258 -2724                                                             DOI：10.35741/issn.0258 -2724.5 6.1.23 
 
Research article  
 
Computer and Information Science  
 
 
THE PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION OF INTERNET USERS IN 
INDONESIA  
 
印度尼西 亚互联网用户的个人数据保 护 
 
Dewa  Gede  Sudika  Mangku  *, Ni Putu  Rai Yuliartini, I . Nengah  Suastika, I. Gusti Made Arya Suta 
Wirawan  
Faculty  of Law and  Social  Sciences, Universitas Pendidikan Ganesha  
Jalan Udayana No. 11 Singaraja Bali Indonesia , sudika.mangku@undiksha.ac.id  
 
Received: November 4, 2020 ▪ Review: December 7, 2020 ▪ Accepted: January 3, 2021  
 
This article is an open -access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons  
Attribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0 ) 
 
Abstract  
The emergence and rapid development of information and communication technolo gy has brought 
about  various opportunities and challenges. One of them is the active interaction between individuals and 
the digital -based information service providers. In modern economic development, related information 
including personal data  or also known as digital dossier —the collection of large amounts of an 
individual’s information using digital technology —are valuable asset s due to their high economic value 
since they are  widely utilized by businesses . In this regard  and due to the increasing number of cellphone 
and internet users , there is a need to study the issue s on the importance of protecti ng one’s  personal data. 
In Indonesia, there is no specific regulation regarding the protection of personal data. Therefore, it is 
essential to  come up with specific and comprehensive legislation related to personal data protection  as 
legal basis for better implementation of personal data protection in Indonesia in the future. The purpose  of 
this research  is to find out and analyze  the current policies on  protection  of personal data of internet users 
in Indonesia. This study uses a normative  juridical  method  with a statutory  approach  and utilizes literature 
study. The result  shows that the concept  of personal data protection  implies  that individuals  have  the right  
to determine  whether  one will join an online community , share  or exchange personal data with  another, 
and the conditions  that must  be met in order to  do so. The study likewise found that t he threat  of personal 
data leakage  is increasingly  occurring because of the development  of the e -commerce  sector in Indonesia.  
 
Keywords : Protection, Personal Data, Information, Communication, Technology  
 
 
 
摘要  信息和通信技 术的出现和迅速发展带来了各种机遇和挑 战。其中之一是个人与基于数字的信
息服务提供商之 间的积极互动。在现代经济发展中，相关信息包括个人数据或也称 为数字档案（
使用数字技 术收集大量个人信息）是有价 值的资产，因为它们具有很高的 经济价值，因为它们已203             Mangku et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University / Vol.56 No.1 Feb. 2021  
 被企业广泛使用。在 这方面，由于手机和互 联网用户的增加，有必要研究有关保 护个人数据重要
性的问题。在印度尼西 亚，没有关于保 护个人数据的具体 规定。因此，有必要提出与个人数据保
护有关的具体而全面的立法，作 为将来在印度尼西 亚更好地实施个人数据保 护的法律基 础。这项
研究的目的是 找出并分析印尼 现行的互联网用户个人数据保 护政策。本研究采用 规范性的法律方
法和法定方法，并利用文献研究方法。 结果表明，个人数据保 护的概念意味着个人有 权确定一个
人是否将加入在 线社区，与另一个人共享或交 换个人数据，以及必 须满足的条件。 该研究同样发
现，由于印度尼西 亚电子商务部门的发展，个人数据泄露的威 胁越来越多。  
关键词 : 保护，个人数据，信息，通信，技 术 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
The emergence and rapid development of 
information and communication technology has 
brought about various opportunities and 
challenges. One of them is the active interaction 
between individuals and digital -based 
information service providers. Currently, various 
sectors and industries use information systems, 
such as trade and business (e -commerce), 
transportation, tourism, government (e -
government), the financial industry (e -payment 
for electronic commerce), educatio n (e -
education), health (e -health), search engines, 
social networks, smartphones and mobile internet, 
and the development of the cloud computing 
industry.  
In modern economic development, related 
information including personal data or also 
known as digital dossier —the collection of large 
amounts of an individual’s information using 
digital technology —are valuable assets due to 
their high economic value since they are widely 
utilized by businesses [1]. Accordingly, as well 
as due to the increasing number of c ellphone and 
internet users, there is a need to study the issues 
on the importance of protecting one’s personal 
data. In the virtual world, actions of a user are 
almost limitless. However, in accessing the 
virtual world via the internet, even if it is free , a 
user must have an “identity card,” which is called 
an internet protocol (IP). An IP differentiates one  
internet user from one another . 
Registering one’s data  is dangerous because if 
a user’s personal data is made public, other 
people can access and kno w an individual’s 
personal identity. Accordingly, this may result in 
cybercrimes such as when a person may access 
without authorization another user’s Instagram 
account or even his ATM card, fraud, or 
pornographic crimes. Thus, it is of utmost 
importance t hat legislation be issued in protecting 
one’s personal data.  
The collection and dissemination of personal 
data is a violation of privacy [2]. Personal data is an asset or commodity with high economic value. 
There is also a correlative relationship between 
the level of trust and the protection of certain data 
from personal life. In Indonesia, the protection of 
personal data is currently not regulated by any 
specific statutory regulation but is scattered in 
various laws and regulations. Legal provisions 
related to personal data protection remain partial 
and sectoral. To date, these laws and regulations 
have not been able to provide optimal and 
effective protection of personal data as part of 
privacy as well as a form of protection of human 
rights (HAM) [3].  
Article 28G of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Indonesia 1945 stipulates that, 
“every person has the right to protection of 
himself, family, honor, dignity and property 
under his control, and has the right to sense safe 
and protection from the threat of fear to do or not 
do something is a human right.” Thus, this article 
mandates to establish laws and regulations that 
protect personal data.  
Regulations regarding personal data 
protection will minimize threats in violations of 
personal data privacy in diffe rent fields including 
the banking industry, online friendship sites such 
as Facebook, WhatsApp, Twitter, and Instagram, 
and electronic ID card programs. If the privacy 
policy is violated by one of the parties, especially 
social media service providers, it will cause a 
condition known as misuse of personal data.  
By avoiding the threats, personal data 
protection arrangements are intended to protect 
personal interests and provide economic benefits 
for Indonesia. It will further encourage and 
strengthen the pos ition of Indonesia as a trusted 
business center, which is a key strategy for 
Indonesia's national economy. Therefore, the 
regulation regarding the protection of personal 
data is an important matter that will ensure that 
personal data of the Indonesian peop le remain 
private and protected . 
Dealing with this matter, the importance of 
protecting personal data starts to strengthen along 204 
 with the increasing number of cellphone and 
internet users. This is dangerous because when 
the personal data is open to the pub lic, other 
people can access and know someone's personal 
identity. Therefore, several cases have emerged, 
especially related to the leakage of personal data 
of a person and lead to fraud or pornographic 
crimes. Thus, this is important in relation to a 
legal umbrella in protecting internet users' 
personal data in Indonesia by applying principles 
that uphold user privacy protection at the 
regulatory and technical level.  
 
II. LITERATUR E REVIEW  
 
A. The Concept of Personal Data Protection  
The development of technology has had a 
very significant impact on social life, especially 
on the speed of internet connectivity. This also 
has implications for accessibility related to the 
technological advances that raise questions about 
the right of individuals to maintain the 
confi dentiality of some information. Easy and 
fast dissemination of information through 
technology creates a threat to privacy by 
providing big opportunities for those who access 
personal information.  
The concept of personal data protection 
implies that individ uals have the right to 
determine whether that person will join the 
community and then share or exchange personal 
data between them and the right to determine 
what conditions must be met to conduct it [4]. 
Personal data protection laws, in general, involve 
safeguarding measures to protect the security of 
personal data and allow their users by other 
people as long as they comply with 
predetermined conditions.  
Several international instruments have 
regulated data protection principles, and many 
have been ratif ied as part of national law. The 
Council of Europe Convention for the Protection 
of Individuals with regard to Automatic 
Processing of Personal Data (No. 108), 1981; the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development Guidelines on the Protection of 
Privacy and Transborder Data Flows of Personal 
Data (1980); and the Guidelines for the 
regulation of computerized personal data files 
(General Assembly resolution 45/95 and E / 
CN.4 / 1990/72) are some examples of 
international instruments that regulate th e data 
protection [5].  
Data protection is fundamental to human 
rights. Several countries have recognized data 
protection as a constitutional right or in the form 
of data habeas, namely the right of a person to obtain security for the data they have and jus tify 
when the errors are found in the data [6]. 
Portugal is an example of a country that has 
recognized data protection as a constitutional 
right. Besides, Armenia, the Philippines, Timor -
Leste, Colombia, and Argentina are countries 
with historical and cul tural differences that have 
also recognized the role of data protection in 
facilitating democratic processes and have 
guaranteed data protection privacy [ 6]. 
Meanwhile, the ASEAN region countries also 
clearly recognize the right to privacy data as 
stipulat ed in Article 21 of the ASEAN Human 
Rights Declaration [ 6]. 
The concept of data protection is often treated 
as part of privacy protection. For example, the 
rules protect personal data. Data protection can 
relate specifically to privacy, and the idea can be  
applied to a broader category of privacy. 
Regarding data protection as part of privacy, it is 
consistent with the understanding that privacy is 
a form of confidentiality or the right to disclose 
or withhold information [ 7]. 
 
B. The Thre at of Leakage Related to Personal 
Data  
Threats related to leakage of personal data 
have increasingly been proposed along with the 
development of Indonesia's e -commerce sector. 
When President Joko Widodo has launched the 
1000 Start -Up movement, one of them is an 
effort to develop the digital economy [ 8]. What is 
expected to encourage the growth of 4 (four) 
start-ups of unicorn originating from Indonesia, 
including Go -Jek, Tokopedia, Traveloka, and 
Bukalapak?  
This digital startup's growth has also triggered 
a massive collect ion of personal consumer data, 
personal data, and consumer behavior 
(shopping/activity) data. Referring to the terms of 
services of e -commerce in Indonesia, they collect 
personal consumer data. Suppose a potential user 
wants to run almost all applications.  In that case, 
it will force the user to provide access to other 
data, such as access to personal identity, contact 
list, location, SMS, photos/media/files [ 9]. 
Thus, if the user wants to run the application, 
they do not have a choice except it has to agree to 
access the data. Unfortunately, the absence of a 
Law on Personal Data Protection results in the 
absence of standardization of data protection 
principles, which results in minimal recognition 
of the data subject's right [1 0]. 
As an example of Indon esia's case regarding 
the leakage of personal data, namely in early 
September 2019, consumer data from Lion Air 
subsidiaries, namely Malindo Air and Thai Lion 205           Mangku et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University / Vol.56 No.1 Feb. 2021  
 Air, experienced a leak. This was disclosed by 
cybersecurity company Kaspersky Lab, and at 
least 21 million passenger data was leaked and 
uploaded to online forums [1 1]. 
In addition to the above cases, there are other 
cases, namely a case that did not exist long ago, 
in May 2020, which happened to one of the 
Tokopedia e -commerce sites hacked by an 
unknown person. A total of 91 million user data 
and more than seven million Tokopedia merchant 
data were reportedly sold on dark sites, for 5,000 
US dollars or around Rp 75 million. Data that has 
been compromised, such as user names, e -mail 
addresses, and pho ne numbers with the rest of the 
data, such as payment data for Tokopedia users, 
such as credit cards, or digital finance such as 
OVO, remains safe [1 2]. 
Responding to these cases, we need a 
regulation that regulates Personal Data Protection 
to safeguard or  at least provide a clear wall for 
the security of individual’s personal data. 
Because currently, violations of personal data 
were only regulated in a Ministerial Regulation, 
it is not at the level of a Law.  
As a result of this legal vacuum, the parties 
(digital service providers) as data controllers 
avoid the obligations that should be attached as 
personal data controllers. In general, data 
controllers should maintain the personal data 
security infrastructure of their service users, 
which includes the impl ementation of 
pseudonymization and encryption of personal 
data and providing guarantees of the continuous 
confidentiality, integrity, availability, and 
resilience of processing systems and services  
[13]. 
 
III. METHODS /MATERIAL  
Research is the main means of dev eloping 
science, including technology. The research aims 
to reveal the truth systematically, 
methodologically, and consistently. Thus, the 
research was conducted through analysis and 
construction of existing data. Research is an 
effort to explore an unclea r, obscure object or 
even without explanation for it. The logical and 
systematic study of the principles that guide 
scientific research (methodology) is intended as 
basic principles and not methods (methods or 
designs for conducting research).  
The author' s legal research regarding The 
Personal Data Protection of Internet Users in 
Indonesia is normative and prospective legal 
research. This research can qualify as normative 
legal research because it examines the rules or 
norms in the law regarding personal d ata in using 
the Internet in Indonesia, including related laws and regulations and those relevant to it. This 
research can also qualify as prospective legal 
research because it is expected to provide 
conceptual input on Indonesian government 
policies in pr otecting personal data on the 
Internet.  
 
IV. RESULT AND  DISCUSSION  
 
A. Legal Basis Concerning Current Protection 
of Personal Data in Indonesia  
There is no regulation in Indonesia that 
specifically regulates the protection of personal 
data. However, the laws and regulations do 
include some aspects of protection, including:  
1) Law No. 23 of 2006 Conce rning Population 
Administration  
Law No. 23 of 2006 concerning Population 
Administration states that the state is obliged to 
store and provide protection for the personal data 
of residents. Thus, administration officers and 
agencies that collect personal data on residents 
with access rights are obliged to maintain the 
confidentiality of such data, where the detailed 
arrangements of this are described in Presidential 
Regulat ion No. 67 of 2011, namely concerning 
National Identity Card Based on Identity Number. 
However, this regulation still does not 
accommodate the protection of residents' 
personal data (storage and use) related to post -
scanning and recording of data related t o 
fingerprints and retinal scans of residents.  
According to Article 1 point 22 of Law No. 24 
of 2013, concerning Amendments to Law 
Number 23 of 2006 concerning Population 
Administration, it is stated that personal data as 
individual data must be stored and  maintained for 
the truth and protected in its confidentiality. It is 
also stated in Article 85 that the state has an 
obligation to keep and provide protection for the 
personal data of these residents. This is as stated 
in Article 79, which obliges the sta te to provide 
protection and appoint a minister as the person in 
charge of access to citizens' personal data.  
2) Law No. 49 of 2009 Concernin g Archiving  
In the context of archiving, in Article 3 of 
Law no. 49 of 2009 concerning Archives, it is 
determined that  one of the objectives of archiving 
is to ensure the safety and security of archives as 
evidence of accountability in the life of society, 
nation and state. This law also regulates the 
retention period of data, ranging from 10 to 25 
years. A data/informati on archive that has passed 
the retention period of 25 years can be extended, 
destroyed, or shared to the public, provided that it 
does not disclose any confidential or personal 
data.  206 
 3) Law No. 8 of 199 9 Conc erning Company 
Documents  
This is the law that regulates company data, 
where Article 1 paragraph (2) determines that 
company documents include data, records, and/or 
information created and/or received by the 
company in the context of carrying out its 
activities. This documentation is written or 
recorde d in any form that can be seen, read, or 
heard.  
4) Law No. 10 of 1998 Concerni ng Banking  
Article 1 point 28 of this Act states that bank 
secrecy includes everything related to 
information regarding bank deposit customers 
and their deposits. Provisions relatin g to personal 
data protection in the Banking Act relate to bank 
confidentiality matters . Banks are required to 
keep information confidential regarding 
depositors and their deposits based on Article 40 
of Law Number 10 Year 1998, except in the 
cases referre d to in Articles 41, 41A, 42, 43, 44, 
and 44A. These exclusions are for cases where 
the implementation is used for tax purposes, 
settlement of bank receivables, judicial interests 
in criminal cases, as well as at the request, 
approval, or power of attorney  of the depositing 
customer. In these instances, the bank may 
violate the provisions concerning bank secrecy 
by following certain procedures.  
5) Law No. 21 of 2011 Conc erning the Financial 
Services Authority (OJK)  
According to this law, the OJK has 
supervisor y authority over all financial service 
providers, including banks that were previously 
supervised by the central bank. This law is one of 
the few controls covering the confidentiality of a 
customer’s personal data. This provision was 
later reinforced by OJ K Regulation (POJK) No. 1 
/ POJK.07 / 2013 concerning consumer 
protection in the financial services sector. In this, 
Article 2D states that the basic principles of 
consumer protection that the OJK must embrace 
are based on the principles of confidentiality  and 
the security of consumer data. This POJK also 
contains a special chapter that regulates the 
supervision of consumer protection in the areas 
of the financial services sector that are fully 
under the authority of the OJK [1 4]. 
6) Law No. 36 of 199 9 Conc erning 
Telecommunications  
This law regarding telecommunications 
regulates several matters relating to the 
confidentiality of information. These regulations, 
among others, are stated in Article 22, which 
stipulates that every person is prohibited from 
committing acts without rights,  illegality, or 
manipulation of: (a) access to telecommunications networks; and/or (b) access 
to telecommunications services; and/or (c) access 
to special telecommunications networks.  
7) Law No. 11 of 2008 Concernin g Information 
and Electronic Transactions  
Article 9 states that business actors who offer 
products through electronic systems must make 
available full and true information about 
contractual conditions, producers, and offered 
products. Article 26 paragraph (1) states that, 
unless provided otherwise b y the rules, the use of 
any information through electronic media that 
involves personal data must be made with the 
consent of the person concerned. Paragraph (2) 
then states that any person whose rights are 
infringed as indicated in paragraph (1) may lodge  
a claim for damages incurred under this law. 
Elucidation of Article 26 paragraph (1) states that 
in the use of information technology, the 
protection of personal data is one part of  privacy 
rights.  
 
B. Urgency on Internet User Personal Data 
Protection in Indonesia  
The internet has indirectly changed the way 
that people communicate. Information 
technology has changed the lifestyles of people 
globally, which has resulted in significant 
changes in social, cultural, economic, and legal 
frameworks. Indonesia is a  developing country 
that has a very large number of people using 
technology and modern communication systems; 
however, it does not yet have a comprehensive 
legal framework for regulating the protection of 
internet users and their data.  The impact is that 
there is an urgency to address legal issues related 
to personal data protection, which increases along 
with the increasing use of technology. This is 
because often existing laws cannot work 
optimally and effectively in keeping up with 
technological developm ents. This causes the law 
to run often slower than the development of 
society, including technological developments 
related to protecting personal data for internet 
users in Indonesia.  
On the other hand, the reality is that people 
have not placed their per sonal data as part of the 
property that must be protected. This is 
evidenced by the number of posts containing 
personal data content, both on several social 
media platforms and in various social networking 
groups. Besides, users, in general, do not fully 
understand the privacy policy, terms, and 
conditions of service of each of these applications, 
especially those related to the use of personal 
data when they access several  electronic 207           Mangku et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University / Vol.56 No.1 Feb. 2021  
 platforms (e -commerce, online transportation, 
and many more) [1 0]. 
One of  the efforts that can be made to 
overcome this problem is to strengthen the legal 
framework for protecting personal data, namely, 
by creating a protection system applying 
principles that uphold the protection of user 
privacy at the regulatory or technical level [1 5]. 
The principles that uphold the protection of user 
privacy are as follows [1 5]: 
1. Proactive, instead of reactive: This 
principle focuses on anticipation and prevention.  
2. Prioritizing user privacy: This principle 
maps the efforts to provide maximum privacy 
protection by ensuring that personal data is 
automatically protected in IT systems.  
3. Integration of privacy protection into the 
design: This principle requires that the protection 
of personal data should be embedded in 
technology designs.  
4. Optimizing  the function: It emphasizes 
the provision of risk mitigation standards for 
electronic systems whose obligations are not only 
for the security of the company but also for the 
privacy of the owners of personal data.  
5. Provision of a total security system: Thi s 
principle strengthens the security system from the 
beginning to the end.  
6. Transparency: This ensures that 
practically any existing business or technology 
can operate following the agreed rules and be 
disclosed to the public . Digital -based service 
provider s must comply with a verification 
process that has been carried out by an 
independent party.  
7. Respecting user privacy: This principle is 
the most vital and is realized by giving the 
owners of personal data an active role to manage 
their data . 
In general, th ese seven principles are 
contained and spread at the technical, regulatory 
level in Indonesia. Take, for example, the 
proactive, instead of reactive principle that has 
been stipulated in Article 15 and Article 16 of 
Law No. 11 of 2008 concerning Electronic  
Information and Transactions, which regulates 
that electronic system providers must provide a 
reliable and secure electronic system, and are 
responsible for system operation, and establish 
minimum requirements for the implementation of 
the system. The pri nciple of providing total 
security is also contained in Article 26 letter a of 
the Financial Authority Authority (OJK) 
Regulation Number 77 / POJK.01 / 2016 
concerning Information Technology -Based 
Borrowing and Lending Services, which 
stipulates that it re quires the maintenance of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
personal data from the beginning to destroyed 
[16]. 
However, specific and comprehensive 
arrangements related to the seven principles are 
not determined by the Law's level and are 
scattered in different implementing regulations. 
This contrasts with the increasing development of 
technology and the increasing number of digital -
based service users who demand personal data 
protection efforts that require a stronger legal 
basis, namely in p roviding guarantees for 
people's rights to the security of their personal 
data.  
Therefore, specific and comprehensive laws 
and regulations related to protecting personal 
data in Indonesia are very important. This is 
intended so that Indonesia will have a legal basis 
to implement better personal data protection in 
Indonesia in the future.  
 
V. CONCLUSION  
The concept of personal data protection 
implies that individuals have the right to 
determine whether that person will join the 
community and be able to  share o r exchange 
personal data with one another or not, as well as 
the right to determine what conditions must be 
met in order to do this. The threat of personal 
data leakage is increasingly occurring in line with 
the development of the e -commerce sector in 
Indonesia. The growth of this digital startup has 
also triggered a massive collection of consumer 
data, which is not only limited to personal data, 
but also behavioral (shopping/activity) data from 
consumers.  
Until now, no one has specifically regulated 
the pr otection of personal data in Indonesia. 
However, the aspect of protection has been 
reflected in other laws and regulations, including 
Law No. 23 of 2006 concerning Population 
Administration; Law No. 49 of 2009 concerning 
Archives; Law No. 8 of 1999 concern ing 
Company Documents; Law No. 10 of 1998 
Banking; Law No. 21 of 2011 concerning the 
Financial Services Authority (OJK); Law No. 36 
of 199 9 concerning Telecommunications; Law 
No. 11 of 2008 concerning Electronic 
Information and Transactions.  
Referring to the issues of the existing problem, 
the importance of protecting personal data is 
starting to strengthen along with the increasing 
number of cellphone and internet users. 
Therefore, it is necessary to have specific and 
comprehensive legislatio n related to personal 
data protection in Indonesia. It is intended that 
Indonesia should have  a legal basis in 208 
 implementing better personal data protection in 
Indonesia in the future . 
 
REFERENCE S 
 
[1] IBRAHIM , R. (2021 ) Jurisdiksi 
Dunia Maya (Cyberspace) dalam  Sistem 
Hukum Nasional Abad XXI.  Ius Quia  Iustum 
Law Journal , 10 (24), pp. 119-127. 
[2] NUGRAHA, R.A. (2012 ) Analisis 
Yuridis Mengenai Perlindungan Data 
Pribadi dalam Cloud  Computing System 
Ditinjau dari UU Informasi dan Transaksi 
Elektronik . Jakarta : Universitas Indonesia . 
[3] RIZAL, M.S. (2021 ) Perbandingan 
Perlindungan Data Pribadi Indonesia dan 
Malaysia . Jurnal Cakrawala Hukum,  10 (2), 
pp. 218-227. 
[4] MUTIARA , U. and MAULANA, R. 
(2020 ) Perlindungan Data Pribadi Sebagai 
Bagian Dari Hak Asasi Manusia Atas 
Perlindungan Diri Pribadi . Indonesian 
Journal  of Law and  Policy  Studies , 1 (1), pp. 
43-55. 
[5] DEWI , S. (2015 ) Privasi atas Data 
Pribadi: Perlindungan Hukum dan Bentuk 
Pengaturan  di Indonesia . Jurnal De Jure , 15 
(2), 23. 
[6] BANISAR,  D. ( 2000 ) Privacy  & 
Human Rights : An International Survey  of 
Privacy  Laws  and Developments . 
Washington , District of Columbia : Electronic  
Privacy  Information Centre . 
[7] CNN INDONESIA  (2018)  Risiko 
Ketika Data Pribadi Dicuri . [Online] 
Available from: 
https://www.cnnindonesia.com/teknolo gi/201
81226210103 -185-356593/risiko -ketika -
data-pribadi -dicuri  [Accessed 0 4/01/21].  
[8] SAAD, A.R. (2005 ) Personal Data &  
Privacy  Protection . Hunters Hill : 
Puddingburn  Publishing.  
[9] PURWANTO . (2007 ) Penelitian 
Tentang Perlindungan Hukum Data Digital . 
Jakarta : Badan Pembin aan Hukum Nasional . 
[10] DJAFAR, W. (n.d.)  Hukum 
Perlindungan Data Pribadi di Indonesia: 
Lanskap, Urgensi dan Kebutuhan 
Pembaruan . [Online] Available from: 
https://law.ugm.ac.id/wpcontent/uploads/sites
/1043/2019/08/Hukum -Perlindungan -Data -Pribadi -di-Indonesia -Wahyudi -Djafar.pdf  
[Accessed 0 4/01/21]. 
[11] HERIANI, F.N. (2019) Data 
Pengguna Lion Air Bocor, UU Perlindungan 
Data Pribadi Dibutuhkan . [Online] Available 
from:  
https://www.hukumonline.com/berita/baca/lt
5d8947d 7aa783/data -penumpang -lion-air-
bocor --uu-perlindungan -data-pribadi -
dibutuhkan/  [Accessed 0 4/01/21]. 
[12] PERTIWI, W.K. (2020) Kasus 
Kebocoran Data di Indonesia dan Nasib UU 
Perlindungan Data Pribadi . [Online] 
Available from:  
https://tekno.kompas.com/read/2020/05/05/1
9080067/kasus -kebocoran -data-di-indonesia -
dan-nasib -uu-perlindungan -data-
pribadi?page=all  [Accessed 0 4/01/21]. 
[13] SITOMPUL,  A. (2001 ) Hukum 
Internet, Pengenalan Mengenai Masalah 
Hukum Di Cyberspace . Bandung : PT Citra 
Aditya Bakti.  
[14] MAKARIM, E. (2010 ) Tanggung 
Jawab Hukum Penyelenggara Sistem 
Elektronik . Jakarta : Raja Grafindo Persada . 
[15] SAUTUNNIDA, L. (2018 ) Urgensi 
Undang -Undang Perlindungan Data Pribadi 
di Indonesia: Studi Perbandingan Hukum 
Inggris dan Malaysia . Kanun Jurnal Ilmu 
Hukum , 20 (2), pp. 369-384. 
[16] HAMZAH, A. (1987 ) Aspek -aspek 
Pidana di Bidang Komputer, Cet. I . Jakar ta: 
Sinar Grafika.  
 
 
参考文 : 
[1] IBRAHIM ，R.（2021）网络管辖权
（网络空间） 达拉姆 ·西斯泰姆 ·胡库姆 ·阿
巴德。因为那是正确的法律期刊 ，法律杂
志，10（24），第 119-127页。  
[2] NUGRAHA ，R.A。（ 2012）我国个人
数据保护的法律分析 云计算系统 电子信息
大学和电子学系 。雅加达：印度尼西 亚大
学。  
[3] RIZAL ，硕士（ 2021）印尼个人 资料
和马来西亚。 贾卡纳尔地平线法 ，10
（2），第 218-227页。  
[4] MUTIARA ，U。和 MAULANA ，R。
（2020）作为保护个人人权的一部分保护209           Mangku et al. / Journal of Southwest Jiaotong University / Vol.56 No.1 Feb. 2021  
 个人数据 。印尼法律和政策研究 杂志， 1
（1），第 43-55页。  
[5] DEWI ，S.（2015）私人数据：印度尼
西亚的法律保护和表格安排 。朱尔纳·德·
朱尔，15（2）， 23。 
[6] BANISAR ，D。（ 2000）隐私与人
权：隐私权法律和发展的国际调查 。哥伦
比亚特区华盛顿：电子隐私信息中心。  
[7] 有线电视新闻网 印度尼西 亚（ 2018）
个人数据被盗的 风险。[在线]可从以下网
站 获得：
https://www.cnnindonesia.com/teknologi/201
81226210103 -185-356593/risiko -ketika -
data-pribadi -dicuri [访问时间 04/01/21] 。 
[8] SAAD ，A.R。（ 2005）个人数据和 隐
私保护。猎人山：布丁本出版社。  
[9] PURWANTO 。（ 2007）数字数据保 护
法研究。雅加达： 国家法律 发展局。 
[10] DJAFAR ，W.（n.d.）印度尼西 亚的
胡库姆 ·佩林登甘 资料库：兰斯卡普，乌
尔根西 ·丹·基布图汉 ·彭巴鲁。 [在线]可从
以 下 网 站 获得：
https://law.ugm.ac.id/wpcontent/uploads/sites
/1043/2019/08/Hukum -Perlindungan -Data -
Pribadi -di-Indonesia -Wahyudi -Djafar.pdf [ 已
访问 04 / 01/21] 。 
[11] HERIANI ，F.N。（ 2019）狮航用户
数据泄漏，需要 个人数据保 护法。[在线]
可 从 以 下 网 站 获得：
https://www.hukumonline.com/berita/baca/lt
5d8947d7aa783/data -penumpang -lion-air-
bocor --uu-perlindungan -data-pribadi -
dibutuhkan/ [ 访问时间： 04/01/21 ] 。 
[12] PERTIWI ，W.K.（2020）印度尼西 亚
的数据泄漏案件 和个人数据保 护法的命运 。
[在线]可 从 以 下 网 站 获 取 ：
https://tekno.kompas.com/read/2020/05/05/1
9080067/ kasus -kebocoran -data-di-indonesia -
dan-nasib -uu-perlindungan -data-
pribadi?page= 全部 [Accessed 04/01/21] 。 
[13] SITOMPUL ，A。（ 2001）互联网法，
法律问题概论 网络空间。万隆： PT柠檬
阿迪亚。 
[14] MAKARIM ，E。（ 2010）电子系统
操作员的法律责任 。雅加达： 拉贾·格拉
芬多 ·佩尔萨达。 [15] SAUTUNNIDA ，L.（2018）印度尼
西亚保护法的紧迫性 数据：马来西亚，马
来西亚。 法学杂志法典 ，20（2），第
369-384页。  
[16] HAMZAH ，A.（1987）计算机领域的
犯罪方面 ，著作。 一世 .雅加达： 西纳尔 ·
格拉菲卡 。 