1
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTCGD Note
DECEMBER 2021
Why Data Protection Matters 
for Developmen t: The Case 
for Strengthening Inclusion 
and Regulatory Capacity 
Michael Pisa , Pam Dixon, and Ugonma Nwankwo
As data and digital tools assume an ever-larger role in all aspects of our lives, it is increasingly import -
ant to have clear and effective rules that govern how different actors can use personal data through its 
life cycle and across different data ecosystems. A key challenge for governments is establishing rules 
that protect citizens from harm while supporting useful innovation from both the public and private 
sectors.
Over the course of the Governing Data for Development project, we asked more than 100 experts from 
government, civil society, the private sector, development organizations, and the data governance 
and privacy communities for their views on the most significant challenges governments face in 
using and regulating the use of data to meet their development aims. Almost every expert we spoke 
with cited at least one of the three following obstacles: 
1.A lack of funding and political impetus needed to strengthen systems to manage data;
2.A shortage of people with the technical expertise needed to create and work within those systems; 
3.Uncertainty about how to comply with (often new) national laws governing the use of data.
This note summarizes two years of research under the CGD project, “Governing Data for Devel -
opment,” led by Michael Pisa and Ugonma Nwankwo, along with project co-chairs Pam Dixon 
and Benno Ndulu (in memoriam).* The project was funded by the Hewlett Foundation and 
guided by a working group of 15 experts. For more information, please visit cgdev.org/governing-
data
* We continue to mourn the loss of Benno Ndulu, who passed away in February 2021. You can read CGD President Masood 
Ahmed’s post remembering his life and contributions here.2
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTUntil recently, the development community has paid substantially more attention to the first two chal -
lenges than the third.1 This has changed over the last several years, however, as the sector has begun to 
grapple with how to promote responsible data use, in line with a broader shift in societal views about 
the risks of data misuse and mounting concerns about digital surveillance and the growing role of AI.2 
The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the importance of using data responsibly by forcing a con -
versation on the limits that should be placed on governments seeking to use personal data to support 
public health efforts.
Although data protection policies are just one element of a broader nexus of laws, regulations, and 
norms that determine how countries govern the use of data, they play an outsized role. For many gov -
ernments, establishing a data protection regime is a foundational step in developing a broader ap -
proach to modern digital governance. The choices that policymakers make when creating and imple -
menting data protection laws set a trajectory for how a government and its citizens will engage with 
digital ecosystems and data. These choices, therefore, have direct and long-lasting consequences for 
economic development. 
While the experts we spoke to for this project welcomed the growing number of countries that have 
enacted data protection regimes in recent years, they also raised concerns about the effectiveness of 
these regimes in practice, the challenges resource-constrained governments face in implementing 
them, and the potential negative consequences of poor implementation. 
In this note, we review lessons learned through our research over the last two years and offer sug -
gestions for policymakers seeking to regulate data use while keeping up with rapidly evolving digital 
practices and recommendations for how the international development community and high-income 
countries can promote a more inclusive and level playing field. 
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Effective data protection laws and regulations help build trust in digital tools and systems by estab -
lishing rights  that protect citizens against the misuse of their personal data and obligations  that require 
organizations to use data in a fair, transparent, and accountable manner. In theory, this greater trust 
should translate to greater acceptance of services that rely on data sharing and data use, leading to 
more investment in the resources and expertise needed to fuel a country’s digital transformation and 
support evidence-informed policymaking (World Bank, 2021; Bhaskar and Chaturvedi, 2017; World 
Economic Forum, 2019). 
To meet these aims, however, data laws and regulations must be well-designed, tailored to local real -
ities, and effectively and consistently enforced. Unfortunately, early evidence suggests that in many 
countries that have enacted data protection laws, enforcement is weak, regulatory authorities lack 
independence, and policies are not designed in line with existing resource constraints. 
1  For more on efforts to strengthen funding and technical expertise see the work of the Global Partnership on Sustainable Devel -
opment Data, Open Data Watch, PARIS21 and the World Bank’s Global Data Facility.
2  The development community’s growing interest in how data is governed is perhaps best exemplified by the World Bank’s 2021 
World Development Report “Data for Better Lives,” which calls for a new social contract in which the use and re-use of personal 
data is governed primarily by a rights-based framework.3
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTData protection rules that are poorly designed or inadequately enforced can hinder economic devel -
opment through different channels that can be roughly categorized as under-regulation, over-regula -
tion, and regulating the wrong things in the wrong way. 
 •Under-regulation:  Even when data protection laws exist “on the books,” they often fail to translate 
into “law on the ground” (Pisa, Dixon, Ndulu and Nwankwo, 2020). This weakens the level of 
protection provided and undermines the trust in data use and sharing that data protection laws 
are meant to instill. It also contributes to regulatory uncertainty, which can hinder useful data 
innovation by both the public and private sectors (Mungan, 2019).
 •Over-regulation: As in other sectors, over-regulation in the form of high compliance costs that bear 
little relation to improvements in desired policy outcomes have the potential to slow innovation 
by creating an unnecessary disincentive to investment. These costs are especially damaging to 
small- and medium-sized enterprises, which typically lack the well-resourced legal teams need -
ed to navigate complex compliance requirements. (UK Digital Competition Expert Panel, 2019; 
Voss, 2021). 
 •Regulating the wrong things in the wrong way: Several theorists have argued that current approaches to 
data protection place too much emphasis on protecting against individual harms and not enough 
on collective harms, putting it at odds with the growing reliance on machine learning algorithms 
that extract insights from collective data. (Tisné and Schaake, 2020; Moerel and Prins, 2016). 
Overemphasis on protecting against individual harms is mirrored by overreliance on informed 
consent as the primary basis for data processing, which often places an unreasonable burden on 
individuals and is meaningless in situations where they lack a basic understanding of how their 
data will be used (Medine, 2020; Selinger and Hartzog, 2020). 
By undermining people’s trust in how their data is used and raising hurdles to responsible innova -
tion, each of these conditions seems likely to lead to less investment in digital tools and data-driven 
services. But empirical evidence is lacking. Developing a better understanding of the causal pathways 
through which data regulations can affect a country’s digital and economic development is crucial to 
designing effective policies. 
THE GLOBAL DATA PROTECTION LANDSCAPE IS MARKED BY DISPARATE 
RESOURCES AND AN UNEVEN PLAYING FIELD 
Modern approaches to data protection can be traced back to the establishment of the Fair Information 
Practices  in the United States in the 1970s and the subsequent codification of and expansion on those 
principles by the OECD in the Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data  
published in 1980. The years that followed were characterized by a slow and steady diffusion of na -
tional data protection frameworks, mostly in wealthier countries, based and building on these prin -
ciples (Gellman, 2021). 
Over the last two decades, however, the number of countries that have adopted data protection legis -
lation has significantly increased. Just since 2010, 64 countries—most of which are in Africa, Asia and 
Latin America and over 70 percent of which are categorized as LMICs—have enacted new data protec -
tion laws, bringing the total with such laws in place up to 146 (Figure 1).4
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTSeveral factors are driving the recent rapid adoption of national data protection frameworks, among 
them growing awareness of the risks of data misuse; the desire to create an enabling framework for 
responsible data use and sharing; the need to meet requirements of international development part -
ners; and the catalytic effect of the European Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), 
which was enacted in 2016 and came into effect in 2018. Of the more than 60 countries that have en -
acted new data protections laws over the last decade, almost all modelled their approach in full or in 
part on the GDPR and its predecessor, the 1995 EU Data Protection Directive (DPD).
The GDPR altered the global data protection landscape by providing a more rigorous model for pro -
tecting the privacy of individual data than had previously existed and established the EU as the global 
leader in regulating data. The regulations provided mechanisms that strengthened individual con -
trol over how data is used, increased the accountability of data controllers, and raised the stakes for 
non-compliance through greater fines and penalties. In contrast, the United States, home to the 
world’s largest tech firms, has taken a sectoral and relatively hands-off approach to regulating the 
use of personal data at the national level, with exceptions around certain categories of data, including 
health data and data pertaining to children. 
The influence of the GDPR and DPD also reflects the extraterritorial scope of EU adequacy frameworks, 
which call on the European Commission to determine whether non-EU countries “offer guarantees 
ensuring an adequate level of protection essentially equivalent to that ensured within the Union, in 
particular where personal data are processed in one or several specific sectors” as a basis for transfer -
ring data (EU General Data Protection Regulation—Recital 104, 2016). Note: Data from Greenleaf’s Global Tables of Data Privacy Laws and Bills (6th Ed January 2019) ; Greenleaf and Cottier’s 2020 Ends a Decade 
of 62 New Data Privacy Laws ; and UNCTAD’s Data Protection and Privacy Legislation  mapping. Additional research conducted by World 
Privacy Forum and Center for Global Development.Figure 1. Data protection and privacy legislation around the world
Data protection legislation introduced and passed between 2010-Present Data protection legislation introduced and passed before 20105
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTBecause companies based in countries that receive a favorable adequacy determination face lower 
barriers to doing business with EU citizens, achieving adequacy confers a significant competitive ad -
vantage in the global digital economy. For example, a report issued before the UK achieved GDPR ade -
quacy estimated that not receiving it would cost UK firms between £1 billion and £1.6 billion due to the 
additional compliance obligations (McCann, Patel and Ruiz, 2020). The risk is that failure to achieve 
adequacy will set countries that are already behind on their digital transformation even further back. 
Although a growing number of countries have incorporated elements of the GDPR into law, early and 
anecdotal evidence suggests that most of them struggle to implement it effectively due to its breadth 
and complexity (Davis, 2021; Dixon 2019). Even EU member states, which had roughly 25 years of 
practice implementing a similar framework under the DPD, have struggled to implement the updated 
law (European Commission, 2020; Voss, 2021). The challenge is much greater for countries that face 
severe resource constraints, have a smaller pool of experts to draw from, and have less experience 
implementing a comprehensive data protection framework.
The scale of the challenge is illustrated by wide regional disparities in the level of human and finan -
cial resources available to data protection authorities (DPAs), which are the institutions responsible 
for interpreting and enforcing data protection laws in most countries that have comprehensive data 
protection frameworks (Table 1). Not only do DPAs in lower income countries face severe resource con -
straints, they also are more likely to lack functional independence from the executive branch or other 
ministries, which makes it difficult for them to resist political influence or to hold other government 
actors accountable (Davis, 2021).
Acknowledging the difficulties of implementing the GDPR framework is not an endorsement of wa -
tering down existing rules or taking an entirely different approach. In fact, the experts we spoke to 
were nearly unanimous in their support of the principles that underlie the GDPR and in their belief 
that countries should take a comprehensive and rights-based approach to personal data protection (as 
opposed to a sectoral approach or one that seeks to achieve an economic balance of interests) (Pisa and 
Nwankwo, 2021).
Median per-country  
DPA budgetMedian per-country  
DPA staff
Region
North America $58 million 647
Asia/Oceania $6.9 million 77
Europe $2.2 million 34
Africa/Middle East $500,000 14
Central And South America $400,000 13
OECD
Member $6 million 50
Non-member $500,000 17Table 1. Regional differences in staffing and budget among data protection authorities
Source: Fazlioglu, 20186
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTMany of the same experts expressed frustration, however, with how current arrangements for gov -
erning cross-border data flows have, in their view, unduly restricted domestic policy choices. This 
includes the GDPR adequacy process, which they regarded as excessively opaque and often driven by 
political and economic considerations, rather than the fitness of a country’s data protection regime. 
(Pisa and Nwankwo, 2021). For example, although the European Commission granted Japan adequacy 
in 2019 despite key differences between the GDPR and Japan’s model of cooperative data privacy, it 
has not granted adequacy to any country in Africa, despite several countries having data protection 
frameworks that are closely modelled on the GPDR. 
Lack of coordination on data regulations at the global and regional levels further disadvantages low- 
and middle-income countries who, on their own, lack the economic leverage needed to influence both 
the practices of big tech companies that dominate global data flows and the terms on which cross-bor -
der data flows are governed in bilateral agreements with wealthier countries (for an example of the 
latter, see Rutenberg and Omino: Why the US-Kenya Free Trade Agreement Negotiations Set a Bad 
Precedent for Data Policy ).
FUTURE-PROOFING DATA REGULATION 
Although lower income countries face unique challenges in getting data regulation “right” due to their 
greater resource constraints and more limited economic leverage, the problems they face are uni -
versal. Our research suggests the following lessons for policymakers trying to regulate data use while 
keeping up with fast evolving digital practices: 
 •Think Local… While the GDPR’s global influence has resulted in similarities across national data 
protection frameworks, beliefs about data policy remain highly contextual, reflecting differenc -
es in local norms about data use, resharing, and privacy. One way for regulators to mitigate this 
tension is by working with different sectors to co-create guidance and codes of practice that can 
simultaneously help companies better understand their compliance duties and help regulators 
better tailor regulation to local conditions (for an example, see Data Protection Code of Practice 
for Digital Identity Schemes in Africa ).
 •…But Don’t “Localize” Data Without Good Reason.  It is increasingly common for data protection re -
gimes to include localization measures that require firms that collect data about a country’s cit -
izens to store or process that data within the same jurisdiction. While national security and law 
enforcement concerns may provide valid reasons to limit cross-border data sharing in certain 
limited instances, these measures can harm local companies by preventing them from using 
foreign cloud service providers that often deliver cheaper, higher quality, and more secure data 
storage options than domestic providers (UNCTAD, 2013; Levite and Kalwani, 2020).
 •Invest in improving knowledge and capacity.  Low levels of digital literacy in the general population 
and among policymakers present a major hurdle to effectively implementing data governance 
and protection laws. Additionally, citizens must know their data rights and be equipped with the 
skills needed to question why their data is being collected and how it will be used. Experts noted 
that while DPAs have an important role to play in educating the public about their digital rights, 
they are often too resource-constrained to do so in practice.7
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENT •Foster approaches that move beyond consent as the primary basis for protecting personal data. Relying on 
individual consent places an unreasonable and unworkable burden on individuals. Addition -
ally, in complex data ecosystems, obtaining consent is not always possible. Policymakers should 
therefore consider ways to support testing and measuring the effectiveness of different models 
of personal data protection and enforcement, including, for example, legitimate purposes tests, 
data fiduciaries and trusts, and participatory data stewardship approaches (Medine and Murthy, 
2020; Ada Lovelace Institute, 2021; Hardinges, Wells, Blandford, Tennison, & Scott, 2019; Wylie 
and McDonald, 2018; Moerel and Prins, 2016).
WHAT CAN THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY DO TO SUPPORT  
A MORE INCLUSIVE AND LEVEL PLAYING FIELD? 
Our research suggests several ways the international development community and high-income 
countries can promote a more level playing field for data protection policies and help LMICs advance 
on their path of digital transformation:
1. Devote more resources to strengthening domestic data governance and protection regimes, in line with the coun -
tries’ needs and capacities.  Development organizations should work with client countries to make 
sure their data governance and protection frameworks can support digital transformation. Im -
proving how these frameworks are implemented and enforced should be a key focus of funding 
vehicles to support more and better data use such as the World Bank’s recently announced Global 
Data Facility (Hammer, Kaushik, Song and Rickets, 2021). Funding vehicles aimed at support -
ing data and statistics priorities like the World Bank’s recently announced Global Data Facility 
should make strengthening and measuring the effectiveness of data governance a key focus of 
their lending (Hammer et al., 2021). 
2. Promote a common, transparent, and flexible approach to establishing the legality of cross-border data flows.  
The GDPR adequacy process is opaque and easily politicized. As more countries establish their 
own mechanisms for determining the legality of cross-border data flows, there is a danger that 
a proliferation of national data protection adequacy regimes could further fragment the global 
digital economy, unless they are anchored to a similar set of standards and adequacy assess -
ments are conducted transparently. 
As a first step, jurisdictions should be transparent about how they reach adequacy decisions, in -
cluding publicly stating why decisions are denied or delayed for certain countries. Beyond this, 
countries should agree to a set of standards to govern cross-border data flows that are strong 
enough to ensure high-quality data protection but flexible enough to allow governments to design 
frameworks that meet their own needs, priorities, and capacities. The Council of Europe’s Con -
vention 108+, which is the only legally binding multilateral instrument on the protection of pri -
vacy and personal data, provides a model of such an outcomes-based yet flexible arrangement, but 
governments may be more likely to ratify a framework whose design they have provided input on. 
3. Foster global and regional initiatives to harmonize national data policies that give LMICs a seat at the table.  To 
date, LMICs have had little input into global debates on data policy standards, leaving them in 
the role of “standards-takers.” Giving LMICs a meaningful voice in shaping the standards they 
are expected to meet makes effective implementation more likely. This will likely require the 
creation of new institutions as “existing institutional frameworks at the international level are 
not fit for purpose to address the specific characteristics and needs of global data governance” 
(UNCTAD Digital Economy Report 2021).8
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENT4. Identify and develop better data policy metrics. Currently, most cross-country measures related to data 
protection focus solely on legislation (Greenleaf, 2019; Chen, 2020; UNCTAD, 2020). New metrics 
are needed to better understand the relationship between data protection policies and economic 
outcomes, including on how well or poorly data protection measures are implemented, the effect 
of these measures on protection and investment outcomes, and the value created by key data 
ecosystems, cross-border data flows and data-driven innovation more broadly. The lack of such 
metrics is an obstacle to understanding which policies are working and which need reform. 
REFERENCES 
Ada Lovelace Institute. (2021).  Participatory Data Stewardship: A Framework for Involving People in the Use of Data . Retrieved 11 
03, 2021, from https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/participatory-data-stewardship/
Chakravorti, B., & Chaturvedi, R. (2017).  Digital Planet 2017: How Competitiveness and Trust in Digital Economies Vary Across 
the World . The Fletcher School, Tufts University, Medford, MA. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://sites.tufts.edu/
digitalplanet/files/2020/03/Digital_Planet_2017_FINAL.pdf
Chen, R. (2020). Mapping data governance legal frameworks around the world: Findings from the Global Data Regu -
lation Diagnostic. In  Policy Research Working Paper.  World Bank, Washington, DC. Retrieved 09 13, 2021, from https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35410
Davis, T. (2021).  Data Protection in Africa: A Look at OGP Member Progress.  Open Government Partnership , Washington, DC. 
Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://www.opengovpartnership.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/OGP-Data-Protec -
tion-Report.pdf  
Digital Competition Expert Panel. (2019).  Unlocking Digital Competition .  Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785547/unlocking_digital_
competition_furman_review_web.pdf
Dixon, P. (2019). Roundtable of African Data Protection Authorities. Retrieved 11 15, 2021, from https://www.id4africa.
com/2019/files/RADPA2019_Report_Blog_En.pdf  
European Commission. (2020).  Data protection as a pillar of citizens’ empowerment and the EU’s approach to the digital transi -
tion—two years of application of the General Data Protection Regulation . Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELE
Fazlioglu, M. (2018).  How DPA Budget and Staffing Levels Mirror National Differences in GDP and Population . International As -
sociation of Privacy Professionals, Portsmouth, NH. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://iapp.org/media/pdf/re -
source_center/DPA-Budget-Staffing-Whitepaper-FINAL.pdf
Gellman, B. (2021). Fair Information Practices: A Basic History. Retrieved 11 18, 2021, from https://bobgellman.com/
rg-docs/rg-FIPShistory.pdf  
Greenleaf, G. (2019). Global tables of data privacy laws and bills (6th Ed January 2019). SSRN. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, 
from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3380794
Greenleaf, G., & Cottier, B. (2020). 2020 ends a decade of 62 new data privacy laws.  Privacy Laws & Business International , 
163, 24–26. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3572611
Hammer, C., Kaushik, S., Hwa Song, S., & Ricketts, L. (2021). Putting data and innovation to work for the SDGs: The 
Data Innovation Fund.  World Bank Data Blog . Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/put -
ting-data-and-innovation-work-sdgs-data-innovation-fund
Hardinges, J., Wells, P., Blandford, A., Tennison, J., & Scott, A. (2019).  Data Trusts: Lessons from Three Pilots . Open Data 
Institute, London. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://theodi.org/article/odi-data-trusts-report/  
Levite, A., & Kalwani, G. (2020). Cloud Governance Challenges: A Survey of Policy and Regulatory Issues . Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, Washington, DC. Retrieved 11 22, 2021, from https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/11/09/
cloud-governance-challenges- survey-of-policy-and-regulatory-issues-pub-83124 
McCann, D., Patel, O., & Ruiz, J. (2020). The Cost of Data Inadequacy. New Economics Foundation/UCL Europe Insti -
tute, London. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://neweconomics.org/2020/11/the-cost-of-data-inadequacy  9
WHY DATA PROTECTION MATTERS FOR DEVELOPMENTMedine, D., & Murthy, G. (2020).  Making Data Work for the Poor: New Approaches to Data Protection and Privacy.  Consultative 
Group to Assist the Poor , Washington, DC. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/
publications/2020_01_Focus_Note_Making_Data_Work_for_Poor_0.pdf
Moerel, L., & Prins, C. (2016). Privacy for the homo digitalis: Proposal for a new regulatory framework for data pro -
tection in the light of big data and the Internet of Things.  Cybersecurity . Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2784123
Mungan, M. (2019).  Seven Costs of Data Regulation Uncertainty . Data Catalyst, Washington, DC. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from 
https://datacatalyst.org/reports/seven-costs-of-data- regulation-uncertainty/
Pisa, M., & Nwankwo, U. (2021).  Are Current Models of Data Protection Fit for Purpose? Understanding the Consequences for Eco -
nomic Development . Center for Global Development, Washington, DC. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://www.cg -
dev.org/publication/are-current-models-data-protection-fit-purpose-understanding-consequences-economic
Pisa, M., Dixon, P., Ndulu, B., & Nwankwo, U. (2020). Governing data for development: Trends, challenges, and 
Opportunities. In  CDG Policy Paper . Center for Global Development, Washington, DC. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from 
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/governing-data-development-trends-challenges-and-opportunities.
pdf
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of natural persons with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC 
(General Data Protection Regulation), Official Journal of the European Union L 119/1, p. 19–20
Selinger, E., & Hartzog, W. (2020). The inconsentability of facial surveillance.  Loyola Law Review , 66. Retrieved 11 03, 
2021, from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3557508
Tisné, M., & Schaake, M. (2020).  The Data Delusion: Protecting Individual Data is Not Enough When the Harm is Collective .  
Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://fsi-live.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/the_data_delusion_format -
ted-v3.pdf  
UNCTAD. (2013). Information Economy Report 2013—The Cloud Economy and Developing Countries. United Nations Confer -
ence on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Geneva. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://unctad.org/system/files/
official- document/ier2013_en.pdf 
UNCTAD. (2020).  Data Protection and Privacy Legislation Worldwide (webpage) . United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD), Geneva. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://unctad.org/page/data-protection-and-pri -
vacy-legislation-worldwide
UNCTAD. (2021).  Digital Economy Report 2021—Cross-border Data Flows and Development: For Whom the Data Flow.  United Na -
tions Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Geneva. Retrieved 10 19, 2021, from https://unctad.org/
system/files/official-document/der2021_overview_en_0.pdf
Voss , A. (2021). Fixing the GDPR: Towards Version 2.0. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://www.axel-voss-europa.de/
wp-content/uploads/2021/05/GDPR-2.0-ENG.pdf
World Bank. (2021).  World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives.  World Bank, Washington, DC. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1600-0  
World Economic Forum. (2019).  Data Collaboration for the Common Good: Enabling Trust and Innovation Through Public-Private 
Partnerships.  Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Data_Collaboration_for_the_Com -
mon_Good.pdf
Wylie, B., & McDonald, S. (2018). What Is a data trust?  Centre for International Governance. Retrieved 11 03, 2021, from 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/what-data-trust/  WWW.CGDEV.ORG
This work is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons  
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license.Ideas to Action: Independent 
research for global prosperity
MICHAEL PISA is a policy fellow at the 
Center for Global Development. 
PAM DIXON is the founder and executive 
director of the World Privacy Forum.
UGONMA NWANKWO is a research 
assistant at the Center for Global 
Development.APPENDIX 
Working Group Co-Chairs 
Pam Dixon , World Privacy Forum
Benno Ndulu (in memoriam), Oxford University (Former Central Bank Governor of Tanzania)
Working Group Members 
Adedeji Adeniran , Center for the Study of Economies of Africa (CSEA)
Teki Akuetteh Falconer , Africa Digital Rights Hub
Shaida Badiee , Open Data Watch
Donatien Beguy , United Nations Human Settlements Program (UN-Habitat)
Stephen Chacha , Tanzania Data Lab
Somsak Chunharas , National Health Foundation (Thailand)
Vyjayanti Desai , Identification for Development (ID4D), World Bank
Drudeisha Madhub , Data Protection Office of Mauritius
David Medine , Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)
Santosh K Misra , Government of Tamil Nadu
Tom Orrell , DataReady
Olasupo Oyedepo , African Alliance of Digital Health Networks
Isaac Rutenberg , Center for Intellectual Property and Information Technology Law
Omar Seidu , Ghanaian Statistical Service
Rachel Sibande , Data for Development at Digital Impact Alliance (DIAL)