3D CITY MODELLING TOWARD CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT. THE 
DIGITAL DOCU
MENTATION OF MUSEU DO IPIRANGA - USP, SAN PAULO, BRAZIL 
M. Balzani 1, L. Rossato 1, F. Raco 1*, B. Mugayar Kühl 2 
1 University of Ferrara, Department of Architecture, DIAPReM/TekneHub, Ferrara, Italy - (bzm , rsslcu, rcafbn) @unife.it 
2 FAU-USP Faculdade de Arquitetura e Urbanismo dell'Universidade de São Paulo - bmk@usp.br 
Commission IV, WG IV/1 
KEY WORDS: 3D City Modeling, 3D Integrated Survey, Point cloud processing and analysis, Smart Cultural Heritage, Museu do 
Ipiranga – USP, Brazil 
ABSTRACT: 
The present paper illustrates the survey and documentation activities for the 3D city modelling and visualisation carried out since 2016 
on complex monumental buildings of the city of São Paulo in Brazil by the DIAPReM research centre and the TekneHub Laboratory 
of the University of Ferrara in collaboration with FAU-USP Faculdade de Arquitetura e Urbanismo of  Universidade de São San Paolo 
and funded by the Fundação de Apoio à Universidade de São Paulo- FUSP for the definition of interdisciplinary collaboration protocols 
and the development of integrated digital databases of Brazilian cultural heritage. Starting from a wider joint international research 
collaboration dated more than five years ago, the project aims to define interdisciplinary protocols for the digital documentation of 
built heritage in order to support the knowledge, restoration, maintenance, management and enhancement of Museu do Ipiranga - USP 
involving both academic and research competencies, as well as professional and technical skills. The definition of the first integrated 
digital database of the Museu do Ipiranga took into account the documentation needs of complex architecture for restoration and the 
project for new accessibility and the extension of the Museum itself and a wider digitisation project for urban planning as well as new 
Smart Cultural Heritage accessibility. 
1.INTRODUCTION
The recent world pandemic emergency has further highlighted 
the fragility of the world's tangible and intangible cultural 
heritage, increasing the need to implement knowledge sharing 
and awareness and understanding of the importance of the 
protection and enhancement of built heritage (ICCROM, 2013). 
The intervention process is marked by discontinuity and lack of 
information relating to the current state of built heritage, the 
duplication of data, poor accessibility (Parrinello, 2019) and 
usability (Ramos, 2015) of information, characteristics which, 
despite improved digitization processes, offer an interesting field 
for the application of exceptional ICT and Key Enabling 
Technologies (KETs) in order to support knowledge accessibility 
and semantic modelling from a Smart City management 
viewpoint. 
On one hand the uniqueness and variety of cultural heritage 
hinders the definition of a single method for knowledge and 
documentation, but at the same time it is becoming increasingly 
urgent to have real time sharing of an integrated information 
system that allows the specific features of an individual context 
to be overcome and the complex knowledge, management and 
promotion of the world’s cultural heritage to be made effective 
(Jokilehto, 1998). 
Consequently, the paper aims to illustrate the impact of Smart 
City and Smart Object approaches also on decision-making 
processes and urban planning (Angelidoua, 2017) with reference 
to a prime example of Brazilian cultural heritage, which is the 
result of an ongoing international cooperation between the 
University of Ferrara and the University of San Paolo USP which 
began over five years ago. From this perspective, the issue of 
“Smart City” and Smart Cultural Heritage refers to the social 
impact and inclusiveness of the intervention on built heritage as 
* C orresponding author well as a means of enhancing the application of ICT, IoT and 
KETs integrated technologies (EU, 2018). 
The optimization of digitisation processes on Cultural Heritage 
preservation, management (ICOMOS, 2017) and enhancement 
aims to define, from the data acquisition phase, the accuracy and 
level of detail of the data in order to develop the digital model, 
digital twin, in accordance with the needs of the end-users 
involved. Therefore, from the perspective of ICT and integrated 
Key Enabling Technologies it helps to develop the accessibility 
of information, system automation and cost-effective solutions. 
On the other hand the specific cognitive skills required 
(Brusaporci, 2018), in terms of perception and understanding of 
the digital model, from the real to the virtual, are still preventing 
the dissemination and wider adoption of Smart Objects and 
contents (Gaiani, 2017). The development of smart contents in 
relation to Cultural Heritage may connect the diachronic and 
synchronic levels of meanings of the Cultural Heritage itself. The 
aim of the research project is to make the complexity of 
information and meanings related to built heritage 
understandable to a variety of experienced and inexperienced 
users. Consequently, the technology transfer activities within the 
project deal with the transfer of the skills and competences 
required in order to understand, use and implement digital models 
and make project innovation effective for more interactive and 
responsive involvement of citizens and an interoperable Smart 
City ecosystem (EU, 2018). 
1.1 Museu do Ipiranga - USP 
The building was begun in 1885 as a memorial to the 
independence of Brazil and as of its inauguration in 1895 it was 
designed to function as a museum, initially housing the natural 
history collection. Conceived as a monument that symbolizes 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
99Fig
ure 1. Museu do Ipiranga – USP main façade. View of the 
central projecting pronaos from the monumental gardens 
overlooking the main building 
Independence, the history of Brazil and Sao Paulo, the Museu do 
Ipiranga in Sao Paulo, commonly known as "Museu do Ipiranga", 
stands on the river site where it is said that the Emperor Pedro I 
proclaimed Brazil's independence in 1822, near the banks of the 
Ipiranga River. 
The museum, which currently houses a collection of over 
125,000 exhibits of Brazilian history dating from the 16th to the 
mid-20th century, was designed by Eng. Tommaso Gaudenzio 
Bezzi and it represents, as stated in the preliminary report and 
recommendations for the Museu Paulista, a conservation project 
dated 2013, a unique testimony to the irreplaceable values of 
Brazil's history, architecture and engineering (Emerich, 2016) . 
The Museum is certainly the repository of the national memory 
linked to São Paulo, which was built through the epic expeditions 
of the various local explorers and the pioneering vocation of São 
Paulo, since the colonial era, as testified by the objects, 
documents, iconography and specimens from the collection 
(Fonseca Brefe, 2005). 
Even though the construction of the building was interrupted 
several times and underwent variations, the Museu do Ipiranga – 
USP was intended to testify the memory of Brazilian 
independence. Moreover, although increasing urbanisation is still 
taking place in the area of the Museu do Ipiranga – USP, Parque 
da Independência, Monumento à Independência do Brasil and 
Casa do Grito and the history of the place is still unknown, every 
year crowds of tourists and locals attend the Independence 
Anniversary celebrations. Consequently, the international 
research group started developing the 3D city modelling as 
described below in order to support conscious conservative and 
management intervention processes as well as future IoT and 
KETs technology applications across industries and society. 
Currently, the building is bound under Brazilian law through the 
Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional - IPHAN 
and has been closed to the public since 2013 for total restoration, 
one of the aims of which is to preserve the important functions 
performed by this significant example of architecture. 
Based on a series of studies on the behaviour of the building and 
on the state of conservation of the roofs and facades and a 
structural analysis, a competition was held in 2017 in order to 
explore ideas for the restoration of the museum and the extension 
of the building. The renovation project consists of 3,345 square 
metres in order to accommodate the new accessibility to the 
building, in compliance with safety and accessibility standards, 
under the Esplanada . The main aim of the new project is to 
emphasise inclusive public fruition and engagement.  Figure 2. View of the perspective axis in the direction of the 
Monumento à Independência from the roof of the Museu do 
Ipiranga 
Consequently, all the administrative areas have been moved, in 
order to allow the full enjoyment of the building's architecture, in 
a way that is fully integrated with the urban complex. 
In fact, in addition to the dissemination and interpretation of its 
permanent collections, focusing on material culture, the Museu 
Paulista institute conducts advanced research for the presentation 
and interpretation of new collections of Brazilian history, culture 
and society. At the same time, it carries out intense advanced 
training in museology conservation techniques and promotes 
many of the museology initiatives in the State of São Paulo. 
2.RELATED WORKS
First of all, the project involving the survey and implementation 
of the first integrated digital database of the Museu do Ipiranga 
took into consideration the needs of the conservation and 
restoration project as well as the requirement to document the 
state of deterioration and maintenance of the building elements. 
Subsequently, the completed 3D database allowed H+F 
Arquitetos studio, the winner of the public competition launched 
by the University of São Paulo for the restoration and 
modernization of the building, to verify the design hypotheses 
relating to the new access to the building. 
The project by the architects Pablo Herenu and Eduardo Ferroni 
(selected from the 13 proposals received by invitation) was also 
supported by the collaboration with the DIAPReM centre which 
took the form of a period of face-to -face training, at the 
University of Ferrara, of some of the architects from the firm .  
The technology transfer training activity focused on the real time 
management of the database in order to allow the representation 
of the project in the 3D point cloud model, for the purpose of 
verifying the feasibility of the interventions from a 
morphological and structural point of view.  
The mentioned training activity is part of a wider field of research 
and experimentation coordinated by the DIAPReM centre and the 
TekneHub Laboratory within the activities, developed in a 
public-private partnership with over ten large companies and 
SMEs of the Emilia-Romagna High Technology Network 
(Balzani, 20 20), and aimed at assessing the impact of enabling 
technologies on the value chain of the intervention on built 
heritage. In fact, it is interesting to note that even in the presence 
of complex projects in international contexts that are advanced 
from the point of view of the spread of survey and digital 
modelling technologies, the behaviour of the operators is mainly  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
100Fig
ure 3. Integrated digital database and three-dimensional point 
cloud model hierarchy and structure  
implemented through traditional procedures and the use of 2D 
and analogue representation tools. 
The requirement of the public client first and of the designers for 
2D representation drawings with a high level of detail, and the 
skills of the team in terms of management of 3D point cloud 
databases, have led to the definition of data processing extraction 
protocols. As a result, the expected level of accuracy and the 
digital detailed survey performed were addressed towards the 
definition of the database structure and 2D representation 
processes in order to support the analysis of the geometric characteristics and the aims of the intervention project such as the 
understanding of: 
- morphologies of vertical elevation and construction elements
for the understanding of the static and structural safety of the
building;
- development, consistency, and material characterisation of the
monumental façades to allow for further investigation of the
conservation status of the surfaces and integration of data from
diagnostic investigations.
Nevertheless, the survey and documentation project took into
account the complex relationship between the Museu do
Ipiranga, the park and the Monument to the Independence, which
is the most important and complex urban system that bears
witness to this phase of Brazilian history. Moreover, the
Monument to the Independence was the subject of an integrated
3D survey by the DIAPReM/TekneHub research centre of the
University of Ferrara in 2018 and the system of the park and the
emerging architecture housed therein is close to completion.
The survey campaign planned for spring 2020 has been
interrupted and postponed due to the current world pandemic.
3.DEVELOPED METHODOLOGY
The digital documentation of tangible and intangible cultural 
heritage, aimed at its accessibility (UCLG, 2018), as well as 
dissemination and more effective management (Kioussi, 2012) in 
terms of networks and services ( UN, 2020), in support of the 
strengthening of the identity of the territories, raises challenges 
and opportunities which refer to both the horizontal and vertical 
direction of the technological development of the value chain. 
The survey of the Museu do Ipiranga in São Paulo wa s 
developed, starting in 2017, as part of the collaboration between 
the Universidade de São Paulo, Faculdade de Arquitetura e 
Urbanismo, University of São Paulo; CPC (Centro de 
Preservação Cultural) University of São Paulo (USP); "Fundaçao 
de Apoio a Universidade de São Paulo" São Paulo, Brazil, the 
Future Consortium in Research, CFR and the DIAPReM 
Research Centre (Development of automatic integrated 
procedures for the restoration of monuments), University of 
Ferrara, which has over twenty years' experience in the definition 
of optimised protocols of integrated 3D survey for built heritage 
(Balzani et altri, 2019); from the urban scale to the architectural 
scale. 
Over time, the evolution of laser scanner technologies has 
allowed operators to use tools in order to optimise the 3D point 
cloud acquisition phases in relation to the amount of information 
recorded, reducing the time required (Young, 2019) . 
Nevertheless, the subsequent data processing phases remain 
dependent on the action and experience of the operator or can at 
most be considered semi-automatic, for example: 
- noise reduction, which depends both on the instrumental
characteristics and on the methods of execution of the survey
project;
- the segmentation (Grilli, 2017) of the point cloud in order to
clean up the disturbing elements and manage them both in
assisted drawing and 3D modelling programs, BIM for example.
The experience gained over years of applied research on
numerous case studies has highlighted the close correlation
between the project and the way the survey is carried out and the
optimisation of the post-processing phases of noise reduction and
segmentation with the same accuracy.
In fact, the integration of surveying technologies, such as 3D
laser scanner survey with time-of -flight technology (Leica P40
Laser Scanner), and topographic survey, Leica Total Station
TCR, for the creation of a first and second level polygonal
system, aims to:
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
101- re
duce the number and overlapping of scans typical of a
morphological approach to 3D surveying which, in current
practice, tends to eliminate support target networks;
- guarantee in the post-processing phase the usability of the
model through the reduction of the quantity of data, but not of the
accuracy necessary to guarantee that the operators of the value
chain of the built heritage intervention have information models
consistent with conservation needs on the one hand or
enhancement with a wider public on the other.
3.1 Digital documentation 
The integrated digital survey campaign involved the entire 
complex of more than fifty-five rooms on the five main levels 
(basement, ground floor, first floor, attic and roof) which includes 
the Museu do Ipiranga, for a total area of over 12,500 square 
metres divided into about 2,500 square meters per floor. The 
development of the building was also taken into account, varying 
from 15 m to 25 m, corresponding to a development of the 
external fronts of about 123 m. 
Concerning the data processing phase (Weinmann, 2016), the 
management of the large amount of data deriving from the 
morphological characteristics of the building determined the 
choice of the hierarchy of the model breakdown structure 
(Georgopoulos, 2017). For the purposes of the survey project and 
the choice of the integrated time- of-flight technologies adopted, 
the survey campaign took place over 21 working days for a total 
of 208 hours of instrument activity, corresponding to 160 hours 
for each operator involved in the survey activities; 1800 stations 
were built and 375 targets were employed for a total of 
240,260,487,654 acquired coordinates. The overall database is 
accessible and searchable both through the Leica Cyclone 7.0 
software source and through open source software compatible  Figure 4. Cross-section and façade with specification of the 
cutplanes for the identification of the planimetric DEM and 
analysis of the elevation profile in the relationship between 
museum and the gardens 
with the format. imp (CloudCompare). The subsequent 
registration phase took into account, on the one hand, the 
accessibility of the data in the whole point cloud model in order 
to allow the analytical interrogation of the data, and on the other 
hand, the identification and management of the most 
representative section plans, in order to understand the 
morphological relationships, for the extraction of the Digital 
Elevation Model (DEM) and subsequent 2D processing through 
assisted drawing software (CAD).  
The reference systems related to the identified cutplanes and the 
reference planes were documented in a report, together with the 
rototranslation matrix with the average square deviations of the  
Figure 5. Digital reconstruction of the Digital Elevation Models, DEM, of the mezzanine plane for the study of the relationship between 
the spatial and functional composition of the building and the consistency of the vertical elevation structures. The representation 
highlights the central system of the building jutting out at the pronaos on the main front and the monumental staircase in the atrium . 
Floor plan projection of the ceiling 3D survey.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
102Fig
ure 6. Digital Elevation Model, DEM, of the roofing system 
for the analysis of the wooden truss elements of the primary 
structural system. 
registration, in order to ensure, at any time, the accessibility 
and verification of the choices and actions implemented, 
allowing in this sense any possible subsequent integration and 
implementation of the model also through new campaigns.   
3.2 Data processing and analysis 
Subsequently, the acquisition, data processing and analysis 
phase of the point cloud model was guided by the aim of 
documenting the geometrical and morphological 
characteristics of the building's factual state while at the same 
time enabling multiscale and interdisciplinary investigations 
of a restoration project on the one hand and functional 
adaptation on the other (Ki oussi, 2011). There was a particular 
focus on the slopes and section elevation profiles in the 
relationship between ground level, the podium and the ground, 
near the relevant areas in front of the main part, now used as a 
park, once designed to house the extension of the Museum. As 
previously mentioned, for the purpose of the completion of the 
urban survey (2020) of the entire area that houses the Museu 
do Ipiranga (2016), the Parque da Independência (postponed 
due to the world pandemic) and the Monumento à 
Independência do Brasil (2019), the choice of the cross-section 
planes was conducted with the further geometric 
morphological characteristics of the site in relation to the 
original project, its variants and the construction choices 
adopted. The orographic and planoaltimetric characteristics of 
this area, which was at the time sparsely urbanised, of the city 
of São Paulo were well suited to the idea of a man-made  Figure 7. Digital Elevation Model, DEM, Monumento à 
Independência do Brasil; longitudinal section; axonometric 
cutaway; planimetry of the imperial crypt. 
landscape, the park, within which the main architectural 
features of the Museu do Ipiranga, Parque da Independência, 
Monumento à Independência do Brasil would enter into a 
direct visual relationship, together with secondary architecture 
such as the Casa do Grito (House of Scream), through the 
construction of precise perspective cones. 
General info  
Mission start 10th August 2017 
Mission end 31st August 2017 
Days of work 21 working days 
Hours of work 208 hours 
Technicians 2 
Survey Data 
Equipment 2 Leica P40 + LEICA TCR 
12
03 
Time of data capturing 160 hours/person 
Number of scan stations 1800 
Number of targets 375 
Number of points 
(co
ordinates) 240.260.487.654 
Table 
1. Survey data and technical equipment: 3D integrated 
survey of Museu do Ipiranga – USP 
The 3D survey level of detail allows experts to develop both 
conventional and non-conventional representation for a variety 
of end users involved.     
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
103Fig
ure 8. Museu do Ipiranga main façade: central perspective 
view from Monumento à Independência do Brasil and the 
relationship with the Parque da Independência. 
3.
3 Medium and long-term fallout 
The digitisation process, through digital survey and 
documentation of the complex urban area of Museu do 
Ipiranga – USP, Parque da Independência and Monumento à 
Independência, is the first challenge of the international 
cooperation activity toward the digitisation of the Brazilian 
Cultural Heritage in order to support more effective decision 
making processes and awareness of the use of resources, with 
reference to the identity of the place.  
Moreover, the level of accuracy pursued in the data acquisition 
and processing phases took into account the following need to 
develop digital contents, model segmentations and 
interoperable and detailed representations that even allow an 
inexperienced audience to access cultural heritage, to engage 
new users and to develop creative and accessible content for 
education and the enhancement of cultural heritage 
enhancement.  
As a result, the digital model is suitable for implementing 
specialist uses such as data integration related to: sensors and 
remote sensing in order to monitor the state of conservation 
and maintenance of buildings, public spaces and so on; 
integrated Key Enabling Technologies, thermal imaging, GIS, 
satellite maps, for the management of security in public 
spaces; VR and AR content for the enhancement of tangible 
and intangible cultural heritage, which helps with intercultural 
dialogue, encourages mutual respect and provides innovative 
solutions for accessing cultural contents. The research is 
certainly part of a broader challenge for the development of 
cross sector digital platforms (EIP SCC, 2020) of built  
Fig
ure 10. Museu do Ipiranga, Parque da Independência, 
Monumento à Independência do Brasil: 3D survey campaigns. Fig
ure 9. Monumento à Independência do Brasil: central 
perspective view from Museu do Ipiranga and the relationship 
with the Parque da Independência. 
heritage, in order to support data-based decision-making 
processes as well as the production of knowledge through 
participatory action research and knowledge accessibility 
enhancement (Gaiani, 2017). 
4.CONCLUSIONS
The research activities carried out since 2017 have made it 
possible to consolidate integrated survey protocols and the 
digital documentation of complex architectures subject to 
interventions, restoration and in part adaptation, which require 
multidisciplinary contributions (Ioannides, 2018). At the same 
time, the experience gained with the Museu do Ipiranga in the 
relationship between the urban system of the park and the 
Monument to the Independence of Brazil is contributing to the 
optimisation of the protocols for the acquisition and 
management of integrated digital information systems from 
the scale of architectural survey to urban survey, toward the 
development of a digital platform for the digitisation of 
cultural heritage as well as an open information system. 
The activity carried out concerned the strategy of integration 
of digital terrestrial survey methods aimed at the development 
of databases and 3D models that are reliable and 
implementable over time (cit.). In particular, the use of 
topographic survey together with the Terrestrial Laser Scanner 
(TLS) survey instrumentation pursues multiple purposes: 
firstly, the verification and control of geometric and 
morphological characteristics, from the architectural scale to 
the detail scale, with a view to the accessibility and usability 
of the database created and subsequent implementations, also 
conducted with different tools and survey techniques. 
Subsequently, the normalisation of the information models 
generated is pursued, also with a view to subsequent semantic 
modelling through the use of Building Information Modelling 
tools, taking into account both the cognitive needs and 
methods of data representation and visualisation during the 
project phase and subsequent needs for knowledge, 
management, use and enhancement by multidisciplinary teams 
(Parrinello, 2019). 
In addition to the huge amount of data from an integrated 3D 
survey, one of the main results of the project was aimed at 
consolidating the methods of technology transfer to allow 
teachers and researchers of the FAU USP of São Paulo to  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
104Fig
ure 11. 3D points cloud processing and analysis. Variety of 
uses of Digital Elevation Models, DEM: from state of the art 
documentation and analysis for the restauration project toward 
3D point cloud comparison with the photographic survey of 
Monumento à Independência do Brasil in order to develo p 
non-conventional representation for both experienced and 
inexperienced end users.   
manage and implement digital models and complex databases 
of existing built heritage (Balzani et. al., 2017). 
The research staff of the DIAPReM centre and of the 
TekneHub laboratory have in fact been engaged, for over five 
years, in training activities involving professors, researchers, 
PhD students and students both at the University of São Paulo  
and at the Department of Architecture of the University of 
Ferrara. The result of this continuous exchange is the sharing 
of an integrated multidisciplinary and multiscale approach that 
allows the results of the research activity conducted on 
Brazilian cultural heritage to be implemented, explored and 
enhanced in a continuous way and not exclusively related to 
international mission activities (Balzani, 2020).  
Overall, a team of over fifteen scholars, both with academic and professional backgrounds, was involved in the project of 
historical, digital integrated documentation for the survey of 
the state of affairs and structural analysis allowing the team in 
charge of the restoration project to verify, in real time, the 
hypotheses and spatial design configurations in relation to the 
actual geometry and morphology of the built architecture. 
5.CREDITS
Museu do Ipiranga 
International cooperation: DIAPReM center, University of 
Ferrara, UNIFE, TekneHub Technopole of Ferrara; 
Consorzio Futuro in Ricerca, Ferrara, Italy;  Universidade de 
Sao Paulo, Faculdade de Arquitetura e Urbanismo della 
Universidade de São Paulo; CPC (Centro de Preservação 
Cultural) dell’Universidade de São Paulo (USP); Museu 
Paulista dell'Universidade di São Paulo; “Fundaçao de Apoio 
a Universidade de Sao Paulo” Sao Paulo, Brasil.  
UNIFE: 
DIAPReM/TekneHub 
Scientific coordinator:   Marcello Balzani  
Project coordinators:  Luca Rossato 
3D survey coordinators:  Guido Galvani 
3D survey technician:  Daniele Felice Sasso 
Diagnostic survey:  Federica Maietti 
USP: FAUUSP-CPC USP 
Scientific coordinator: Beatriz Mugayar Kuhl (FAU USP) 
Responsible for the Cooperation Agreement : Mônica 
Junqueira de Camargo (CPC USP; FAU USP); 
Research group: Renata Cima Campiotto (PhD Student; 
FAUUSP) 
Monumento à Independência do Brasil  
International cooperation: DIAPReM center, University of 
Ferrara, UNIFE, TekneHub Technopole of Ferrara; 
Consorzio Futuro in Ricerca, Ferrara, Italy; Mackenzi e 
University; Department of Historical Heritage (DPH) – SP 
Scientific coordinator:   Marcello Balzani  
Project coordinators:  Luca Rossato 
3D survey coordinators:  Guido Galvani 
Survey Support Team: Maria Fernanda Torgal Fonseca, 
Henrique Shoiti (Mackenzie University) 
Survey Support Team Coordinator: Guilherme Antonio 
Michelin (Mackenzie University) 
Elaboration of 3D data: Guido Galvani  
Leader for support logistics: Valter Caldana (Mackenzie 
University) 
Logistics support coordinator: Guilherme Antonio Micheli n 
(Mackenzie University) 
REFERENCES 
Angelidoua, M.; Karachalioua, E.; Angelidoua, T.; 
Stylianidisa, E., 2017. Cultural heritage in smart city 
environments in The International Archives of the 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017 26th International CIPA 
Symposium 2017, 28 August –01 September 2017, Ottawa, 
Canada, pp. 27- 32 
Balzani, M.; Maietti, F.; Rossato, L., 2019. 3d data processing 
toward maintenance and conservation. The integrated digital 
documentation of casa de vidro  in The international archives 
of the photogrammetry, remote sensing and spatial 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
105info
rmation sciences , XLII-2/W9, Proceedings, 8th 
International Workshop 3D-ARCH 3D Virtual Reconstruction 
and Visualization of Complex Architectures", Copenicus, 
Göttingen, Germany, pp. 65-72. 
Balzani, M., Maietti, F., Mugayar Kühl, B., 2017. Point cloud 
analysis for conservation and enhancement of modernist 
architecture. In: Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial 
Inf. Sci., XLII-2/W3, pp. 71-77. 
Balzani, M.; Raco, F., 2020. Integrated Digital Models for the 
Representation and Diagnosis in Existing Buildings: The 
Clust-ER BUILD Project for the Value Chain Innovation in 
Bolognesi, C. M.; Santagati, C. (2020) Impact of Industry 4.0 
on Architecture and Cultural Heritage , Business Science 
Reference, Advances in Civil and Industrial Engineering, pp. 
181-201.
Brusaporci, S.; Maiezza, P.; Tata, A. 2018. For a Cultural-
based Smart City. In: Rappresentazione materiale/immateriale 
- Drawing as (in) tangible , 40° Convegno internazionale dei
Docenti delle discipline della Rappresentazione, 2018,
Gangemi, pp. 73- 80.
Emerich, D., 2016. Museu Paulista : 120 Anos de História , 
Editora Brasileira, ISBN; 9788563186362, São Paulo, Brazil, 
pp. 200. 
European Commision, 2018. Innovation in Cultural Heritage 
Research. Retrieved: https://op.europa.eu/it/publication-
detail/-/publication/1dd62bd1-2216-11e8-ac73-
01aa75ed71a1 
Fonseca Brefe A. C., 2005. O Museu Paulista, Editora UNESP , 
ISBN: 85713958 88, São Paulo, Brazil, pp. 336. 
Gaiani, M., 2017. A framework for Smart Cultural Heritage. 
In: New activities For Cultural Heritage . Springer. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67026-3_24 
Georgopoulos, A., 2017. Data Acquisition for the Geometric 
Documentation of Cultural Heritage. In: Mixed Reality and 
Gamification for Cultural Heritage . Springer, Cham, pp. 29-
74. 
Grilli, E.; Menna, F.; Remondino, F. (2017). A review of point 
clouds segmentation and classification algorithms in The 
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences , Volume XLII-
2/W3, 2017 3D Virtual Reconstruction and Visualization of 
Complex Architectures, 1 –3 March 2017, Nafplio, Greece, pp. 
339-344
ICCROM, 2013. Management guidelines for World Cultural 
Heritage sites. Rerieved: 
www.iccrom.org/it/publication/managing-cultural-world-
heritage. 
ICOMOS, 2017. Smart Heritage Policy. Retrieved: 
http://openarchive.icomos.org/1834/ 
Ioannides, M., Fink, E., Brumana, R., Patias, P., Doulamis, A., 
Martins, J., & Wallace, M., 2018. Digital Heritage. Progress 
in Cultural Heritage: Documentation, Preservation and 
Protection  7th International Conference, EuroMed 2018, 
Nicosia, Cyprus, October 29 –November 3, 2018, Proceedings, 
Part I. Berlin, D: Springer.  Jokilehto, J., 1998. International trends in historic 
preservation: from ancient monuments to living cultures. APT 
Bulletin, 29 (3-4), pp. 17-19. 
Kioussi, A., Labropoulos, K., Karoglou, M., Moropoulou, A., 
Zarnic, 
R., 2011. Recommendations and strategies for the 
establishment of a guideline for monument documentation 
harmonized with existing European standards and codes. 
Journal Geoinformatics FCE CTU, 6 (2011), pp. 178-184. 
Kioussi, A., Karoglou, M., Bakolas, A., Moropoulou, A., 
2012. Integrated Documentation Protocols Enabling Decision 
Making in Cultural Heritage Protection. In: Ioannides M., 
Fritsch D., Leissner J., Davies R., Remondino F., Caffo R. 
(eds). Progress in Cultural Heritage Preservation. EuroMed 
2012. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 7616. Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 211-220. 
Parrinello, S., Dell’Amico, A., 2019. Experience of 
Documentation for the Accessibility of Widespread Cultural 
Heritage, 2-2019, doi.org/10.3390/heritage2010067, pp. 
1032-1044. 
Parrinello, S.; Picchio, F.; De Marco, R. A. Dell’Amico, A., 
2019. Documenting the cultural heritage routes. The creation 
of informative models of historical Russian churches on upper 
kama region in The international archives of the 
photogrammetry, remote sensing and spatial information 
sciences Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 27th CIPA International 
“Documenting the past for a better future”, 1– 5 September 
2019, Ávila, Spain, pp. 887-894 
Ramos, M.M. and Remondino, F., 2015. Data fusion in 
cultural heritage a review. ISPRS – Int. Archives of the 
Photogrammetry,  Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, 5, W7, pp. 359-363. 
Weinmann, M., 2016. Preliminaries of 3D Point Cloud 
Pro
cessing. In: Reconstruction and Analysis of 3D Scenes . 
Springer, Cham, pp. 17- 38. 
Young, H.J.; Seonghyuk, H. 2019. Three-Dimensional Digital 
Documentation of Cultural Heritage Site Based on the 
Convergence of Terrestrial Laser Scanning and Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle Photogrammetry. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2019, 
8, 53. DOI: 10.3390/ijgi8020053 
UCLG, 2018. Cultural Heritage and Sustainable Cities Key 
Themes and Examples in European Cities , retrieved from 
http://www.agenda21culture.net/sites/default/files/report_7_-
_cultural_heritage_sustainable_development_-_eng.pdf 
UNESCO, 2013.  Managing cultural world heritage. Retrieved 
from https://www.iccrom.org/sites/default/files/2018-
07/managing_cultural_world_heritage_en.pdf 
United Nations 2020. The SDG partnership guidebook. A 
practical guide to building high impact multi-stakeholder 
partnerships for the Sustainable Development Goals,  retrieved 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/PartnershipAccelerator 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIV-4/W3-2020, 2020 
5th International Conference on Smart City Applications, 7–8 October 2020, Virtual Safranbolu, Turkey (online)
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIV-4-W3-2020-99-2020 | © Authors 2020. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
106