Original Paper
Development of a Mobile Game to Influence Beha vior
Deter minants of HIV Service Uptak e Among Key Populations in
the Philippines: User-Centered Design Process
Charlotte Hemingw ay1, BA; Emmanuel S Baja2, SCD, BS, MSc; Godafreda V Dalmacion2, BSc, MSc, MD; Paul
Mark B Medina2, BS, MSc, PhD; Ernest Genesis Guevara2, BS; Tyrone Reden Sy2, MPH, MA; Russell Dacombe1,
MSc; Claire Dormann3, MSc, PhD; Miriam Taegtme yer1,4, BM, MA, ChB, FRCP , PhD
1Department of International Public Health, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom
2Institute of Clinical Epidemiology , National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines, Manila, Philippines
3Department of Vector Biology , Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom
4Tropical Infectious Diseases Unit, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom
Corr esponding Author:
Charlotte Hemingw ay, BA
Department of International Public Health
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine
Pembrok e Place
Liverpool, L35QA
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 7942118311
Email: charlotte.hemingw ay@lstmed.ac.uk
Abstr act
Backgr ound: Opportunities in digital distrib ution place mobile games as a promising platform for games for health. However,
designing a game that can compete in the saturated mobile games mark et and deliver persuasi ve health messages can feel like an
insurmountable challenge. Although user-centered design is widely advocated, factors such as the user’ s subject domain expertise,
budget constraints, and poor data collection methods can restrict the benef its of user involvement.
Objecti ve: This study aimed to develop a playable and acceptable game for health, targeted at young key populations in the
Philippines.
Methods: Authors identif ied a range of user-centered design methods to be used in tandem from published literature. The
resulting design process involved a phased approach, with 40 primary and secondary users engaged during the initial ideation
and prototype testing stages. Selected methods included participatory design workshops, playtests, playability heuristics, and
focus group discussions. Subject domain experts were allocated roles in the development team. Data were analyzed using a
frame work approach. Conceptual frame works in health interv ention acceptability and game design guided the analysis. In-game
events were captured through the Unity Analytics service to monitor uptak e and game use over a 12-month period.
Results: Early user involvement revealed a strong desire for online multiplayer gameplay , yet most reported that access to this
type of game was restricted because of technical and economic constraints. A role-playing game (RPG) with combat elements
was identif ied as a very appealing gameplay style. Findings guided us to a game that could be played offline and that blended
RPG elements, such as narrati ve and turn-based combat, with match-3 puzzles. Although the game recei ved a positi ve response
during playtests, gameplay was at times percei ved as repetiti ve and predicted to only appeal to casual gamers. Knowledge transfer
was predominantly achie ved through interpretation of the game’ s narrati ve, highlighting this as an important design element.
Uptak e of the game was positi ve; between December 1, 2017, and December 1, 2018, 3325 unique device installs were reported
globally . Game metrics provided evidence of adoption by young key populations in the Philippines. Game uptak e and use were
substantially higher in regions where direct engagement with target users took place.
Conclusions: User-centered design activities supported the identif ication of important conte xtual requirements. Multiple data
collection methods enabled triangulation of findings to mediate the inherent biases of the different techniques. Game acceptance
is dependent on the ability of the development team to implement design solutions that address the needs and desires of target
users. If target users are expected to develop design solutions, they must have adequate expertise and a signif icant role within
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 1 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXthe development team. Facilitating meaningful partnerships between health professionals, the games industry , and end users will
support the games for health industry as it matures.
(JMIR Serious Games 2019;7(4):e13695) doi: 10.2196/13695
KEYW ORDS
HIV; video games; health communication; persuasi ve communication; games; experimental; user-centered design
Introduction
The Philippines’ HIV Epidemic
The Philippines has the fastest growing HIV epidemic in the
Southeast Asia region. The dominant mode of transmission
reported in the Philippines is sexual contact among males who
have sex with males (MSM) and transgender women (TGW).
As of 2017, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and
AIDS reported the HIV prevalence rate at 0.1% for general adult
population (aged 15-49 years), 0.3% among young men (aged
10-24 years), 4.9% among MSM, and 1.7% among TGW [1].
Specif ic data for TGW are limited [2]; however, a
cross-sectional study in Cebu City in 2015 showed an 11.8%
HIV prevalence rate in this group [3]. Cases are forecast to triple
in the next 10 years, with the majority of new infections among
young MSM (aged 15-24 years) [4]. Since the first reported
case in 1984, the National HIV/AIDS and Antiretro viral Therap y
Registry of the Philippines has confirmed 59,135 cases as of
September 2018, of which 28% were aged between 15 and 24
years and 51% were aged between 25 and 34 years at the time
of diagnosis. The proportion of HIV-positi ve cases in the 15-
to 24-years age group has almost tripled in the last 10 years [5].
Young key populations worldwide pose a comple x public health
challenge; transmission rates are high, diagnosis is often
delayed, and linkage to care and treatment is poor among those
found to be infected [6]. Barriers to HIV services vary across
conte xts. In the Philippines, intrapersonal and social barriers
exist alongside health system and economic barriers. Recurring
themes associated with barriers to HIV services in the literature
include low percei ved risk of HIV infection; fear of losing
access or status in important social spheres as a repercussion of
accessing HIV services; lack of awareness or negative
perceptions of treatment; belief that clinics do not provide
confidential or private services; and restricted access to testing
services because of time constraints, economic constraints, and
legal constraints for those aged under 18 years [7-11].
Why Play Mobile Games?
As the HIV epidemic worsens, social changes are occurring for
young people in the Philippines. Increased online connecti vity,
a growing economy , and prevalent mobile device use has
changed the way people spend their time and socialize. This
change has generated new possibilities for the public health
sector to deliver targeted health messages [12]. Utilizing
technology already popular among adolescents and young adults
may provide access to individuals who do not otherwise engage
with traditional forms of HIV education and advocacy [13].
Mobile games, in particular , offer a promising platform to
address the knowledge gaps, perceptions, social pressure, and
self-stigma that deter young key populations from accessinghealth services [14]. A recent meta-analysis of 54 digital games
for health y lifestyle promotion found small but signif icant
effects on behavior, determinants, and clinical outcomes,
demonstrating the potential benef its [15].
Mobile games contain structural elements that effectively engage
users [16], and it is through these elements that mobile games
could influence behavior determinants. Players can model
health-related behavior and witness positi ve and negative
outcomes within a safe environment. Well-designed narrati ves,
integrated with the gameplay , can foster identif ication with the
characters, thereby increasing a player’ s sense of personal risk
or self-ef ficacy in overcoming barriers to HIV services [17].
Positi ve portrayals of characters living with HIV may help form
beliefs that players can also remain or become their desired self
after a positi ve diagnosis. Influence may also be found from
the comple x interplay between digital gaming and social
behavior [18]. Even a single-player mobile game can trigger
meaningful social interactions, from recommending a new game
to offering advice on how to complete a challenge. For example,
a player may recommend the game to a peer or family member
who they belie ve could benef it from the health-related content.
Narrati ves and characters within the game could also trigger
meaningful conversations within social groups. Such use of the
game could generate social pressure about health-related
behavior.
A Need for User -Center ed Design in Games for Health
Rittel and Webber [19] defined the term wicked problem as a
design problem that cannot be solved in a stepwise
problem-solving manner . Game development is riddled with
wick ed problems. They are inherently interacti ve, and any
interacti ve component must be tested with users. Even a simple
game has an interconnected system as its backbone; any change
to 1 component of the game will have ramif ications to all
connected components. Furthermore, game development is
bound by countless budget, technical, user, and mark et
constraints. As a solution to wick ed problems, some game
developers turned to user-centered design [20]. User-centered
design is an iterati ve process; using a range of research
techniques, feedback is obtained from users at different stages
of product development to ensure their needs and preferences
are considered in the design [21]. This design approach was
established in the softw are industry to identify and rectify
usability issues and expanded for use in game design to evaluate
experiential aspects, supporting the development of games that
are both functional and fun. User involvement in game design
may have benef its with regard to the effectiveness of the game,
although the evidence is mixed when reviewed in the conte xt
of games for health y lifestyle promotion [22]. The core principle
behind this theory is that, for a game to be effective, it must be
acceptable and appropriate. This can only be achie ved through
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 2 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXconsultation with target users, especially if the developers do
not share the same characteristics as them. User involvement
is also predicted to impro ve user adoption and enable developers
to critically reflect on the value and consequences of a game
when vulnerable groups are involved [23]. Thus, user-centered
design methods must encompass interpretation and emotional
response to health-related content in the game as well as
evaluating usability .
As the purpose of our game expanded beyond entertainment,
we developed a theory of behavior change (Figure 1) to guide
the design process [24]. Conte xt-specif ic learning objecti ves
were generated through a review of the literature and formati veresearch with target users and HIV service providers in the
regions of Davao and Manila. Data were collected through focus
group discussions (FGDs) with HIV services providers, in-depth
intervie ws with MSM and TGW , and an online survey on
enablers and barriers to HIV services. Findings from the
formati ve research are not included in detail in this paper . The
frame work references modifying factors relevant to the
Philippines’ HIV testing conte xt such as health system and legal
and economic constraints. Given that the target audience for
the game will be young MSM and TGW , we do not expect the
game to impact modifying factors but note that these are
important considerations in the evaluation of the game’ s
percei ved effectiveness.
Figur e 1. Integrative model of predicti ve behaviour and predicted game influence.
In this paper , we describe the user-centered design process for
a mobile game titled Battle in the Blood and explore the effect
of user-centered design techniques on the game’ s acceptability
as a health interv ention and uptak e among target users.
Methods
Overview
Battle in the Blood was developed from 2016 to 2018 through
a collaborati ve effort with experts from the United Kingdomand the Philippines. Final design choices were made by the
game’ s coproducers: a British behavioral scientist specializing
in game design for health system benef it (CH); the director of
an independent game development compan y, with over 10 years
industry experience, based in Scotland; and a Filipino clinical
epidemiologist (EB). The process was divided into 3 phases
and aligned with development milestones for the game (Figure
2). Internal playtests were frequently conducted by members
of the project team and their immediate netw orks. Change
requests and bugs were recorded and shared with the
development team using Google Docs.
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 3 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 2. Development process.
Selection of User Center ed Design Methods
A literature review was conducted to identify a range of
user-centered design methods to be used in a combined
approach. Methods were selected based on their fit to the
question the development team wanted to answer and the
available resources. The resulting design process involved a
phased approach, with primary and secondary users engaged
during the initial ideation and prototype testing stages. Resources
were prioritized to capture important conte xtual requirements
and evaluate educational and experiential aspects of the game.
Selected methods included participatory design workshops [25],
extended playtests [20], playability heuristics [26], FGDs, and
game analytics.
As the methods for each phase were distinct, recruitment, data
collection, and analysis have been described for each. Data were
collected in the cities of Manila and Davao. The study was part
of a much larger project, which included assessment of a rapid
diagnostic algorithm for HIV, that was being piloted in these
cities.
Phase 1: Game Design
To determine important conte xtual requirements and user
preferences, design workshops with Filipino gamers were
conducted during the initial specif ication and ideation stage.
Subject experts in clinical practices for HIV and the Philippines
HIV epidemic were allocated informant roles in the game
development team.
Recruitment
Filipino individuals older than 18 years who regularly played
digital games or were involved in game development or
electronic sports, regardless of sexual identity , were invited to
participatory design workshops via social netw orking sites,
including Facebook and Steam forums. It was theorized that
the game would need to be appealing and accessible to a range
of gamer types and that gamer type would not be dictated by
sexual identity . A total of 18 participants were divided into 2
groups (11 and 7). Participants were aged between 21 and 30
years and were a mixed group of MSM and non-MSM.
Data Collection
Group sessions were facilitated by UK and Filipino researchers
(CH, EB, EG, and JD), in which (1) participants responded to
questions by creating a human scatter graph indicating their
level of agreement to different statements by their physical
proximity to the statement placed on the floor, creating an instant
visual of the group’ s perception and experience of mobile games
and games for health; (2) group discussions were held on design
and technical enablers and barriers to digital gaming; and (3)participants were divided into teams (maximum 6 participants
in a team) to develop pitches for games to promote HIV services,
which they then presented and discussed. HIV clinic counselors
were present at both workshops to answer any questions the
participants had regarding HIV and provided information on
HIV service provision in the Philippines. The session was audio
recorded and transcribed, and photos were taken to record the
human scatter graphs and visuals from the game pitches.
Analysis
Transcripts and session outputs were analyzed using a
frame work approach [27] to identify a set of recommended
game features. A 4-day workshop was conducted with the full
development team to translate the list of recommended game
features into a game design document. Game features were also
connected to the conte xt-specif ic learning objecti ves outlined
in Figure 1.
Phase 2: Prototype Testing
Playtesting sessions and FGDs were conducted to assess the
acceptability and playability of the beta game build.
Recruitment
Participants were older than 18 years and self-identif ied as
MSM. This study aimed to ensure that the narrati ves and art
style were appealing, relatable, and inoffensi ve to the target
users. Participants were recruited using social netw orking sites,
including Facebook, Grindr , Growlr, and PlanetRomeo, known
as popular netw orking sites for the MSM and TGW community .
Peer counselors from HIV testing services were also recruited
as they were predicted to be an important user group for the
game.
Overall, 5 FGDs and playtesting sessions involving a total of
22 participants were conducted between August 20, 2017, and
November 18, 2017; 4 sessions were conducted in Manila (17
participants, all MSM) and 1 in Davao (5 participants, all peer
counselors and MSM). Game changes and bug fixes were
implemented between each testing session.
Data Collection
Sessions were facilitated by UK and Filipino researchers (CH,
EB, EG, and JD). User testing was divided into 3 activities: (1)
participants’ screens and faces were video recorded as they
played the game for 30 to 45 min, (2) all animations in the game
were played on a big screen and a short discussion was held by
participants for each one, and (3) a group discussion was
conducted on the percei ved acceptability of the game.
Analysis
Analysis of data from the game testing sessions was divided
into 2 parts. The first part utilized playability heuristics to
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 4 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXidentify and fix design flaws. Playability heuristics are a set of
qualities by which a game’ s engagement and usability can be
assessed. They are typically used by game developers and
professional game testers. We adapted an existing list of
playability heuristics for mobile games [26] to use as a coding
frame work to analyze the video recordings and transcripts
(Figure 3). Screen recordings were primarily used to identify
technical and usability issues, whereas transcripts were more
conduci ve to recognizing different experiential aspects. For
example, expressions of confusion by the player when they lost
a level, especially when followed by repeated failed attempts,could be mark ed as a violation of gameplay heuristic GP1, “the
game provides clear goals” (Figure 3). This is an example of
what is termed a playability violation. Playability reports were
developed independently by 2 researchers (CH and EG). The
reports described each playability violation and gave
recommendations for game impro vements. The reports were
compared and discussed by the game development team before
agreeing on a final list of game changes. Where feasible,
changes were implemented before the next game testing session.
Softw are bugs and technical issues were also recorded, and fixes
were implemented.
Figur e 3. Playability heuristics for mobile game for health. UI: user interf ace.
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 5 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXThe second part of the data analysis utilized the transcription
of the group discussions to assess the acceptability of the game
as a health interv ention. Data analysis was informed by a general
inducti ve approach, aligning emer ging themes identif ied in the
transcripts with the following predetermined constructs of health
interv ention acceptability: affective attitude, burden, ethicality ,
interv ention coherence, opportunity costs, percei ved
effectiveness, and self-ef ficacy [28].
Quality Assurance: Phases 1 and 2
All qualitati ve data collected were translated into English for
analysis (EG), and the translation was check ed for accurac y by
members of the research team. Analysis was led by a UK
researcher (CH) with regular consultation and input from the
full project team to impro ve quality and depth. All design
choices resulting from the data were reviewed by the
development team before implementation.
Phase 3: Game Analytics
Recruitment
Game use data were obtained from users who installed the game
and gave permission for the app to access device storage.
Geolocation data were obtained from users who granted access
to their devices’ location data and played the game with GPS
switched on. Information about why data were being gathered
and reassurances that all data would be kept anon ymous werepresented on the app store page, and in the game when access
was requested.
The game was made available on the Apple App Store and
Google Play on November 27, 2017, and was officially launched
during World AIDS Day celebrations in the Davao Region on
December 1, 2017. Mark eting events for the game included
local television appearances by project staff, printed and online
news articles, exhibitions at health- and game-related
conferences in the National Capital Region and Davao Region,
social media advertisements on Facebook and Twitter , and
posters displayed in 4 HIV testing and counseling clinics (3 in
Manila and 1 in Davao). The game analytics span a 12-month
period from December 1, 2017, to December 1, 2018.
Data Collection
Data were automatically gathered from devices with the game
installed through the Unity Analytics service, version 2017.1
by Unity Technologies. For data to be sent from the device, the
user must have opened the game at least once while the device
was connected to the internet. Events are stored locally on the
device when the game is played offline and sent the next time
the game is opened and the device is connected. All data points
were stored in the Unity Data Store. The game metrics (Table
1) were exported and converted into a readable format for use
in statistical analysis softw are.
Table 1. Game metrics.
Metrics Segment
Daily active users; monthly active users; and new users (unique device installs) Active player metrics
Sessions per day; sessions per user; total daily playing time; and total playing time per active user Session metrics
Day 1, 7, and 30 retention Retention metrics
Total Android and iOS users Platform segment
Level events—reports each time a level is completed or failed, and the players end score; link event—reports the click-
through rate of all in-game links to external information; question events—reports the response to all in-game questions,
including a set of demographic questions; geolocation per session—reports the device’ s current location at the start of
a session to 2 decimal places; and app versionCustom segments
Analysis
Descripti ve statistical analysis was conducted in Microsoft
Excel, version 1812. Spatial analysis was conducted in QGIS,
version 3.2.3.
Ethical Assurance: All Phases
Legal advice was sought to ensure that management of game
analytics complied with the 2018 European Union General Data
Protection Regulation.
Ethical appro val for the project was obtained from the ethics
committees at the University of the Philippines Colle ge of
Medicine and Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (research
protocol 16-017).Results
Phase 1: Game Design
Direction on game elements to support health-related behavior
change first emer ged through the human scatter graph activity.
Figure 4demonstrates that the 2 groups had varied perceptions
on the effectiveness of games for health-related behavior change.
Participants were questioned as to why they had chosen their
place on the graph. Percei ved limitations of the game’ s
effectiveness were centered around beliefs that changes in
knowledge would not be sufficient to change behavior and that
the use of technical language would make the game’ s content
inaccessible, as illustrated by the following quote:
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 6 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 4. Human scatter graph on perceptions of the effectiveness of games for health behavior change.
I’m still not convinced with the knowledg e part
because , as with some health conditions, even with
some health benef its and stuff, there will be some
things that a player will not under stand, especially if
it’s scientif ic jargon...b ut I do belie ve that behavior
can chang e especially if it’s immer sive and it is an
experience that will chang e your perspective on very
different matter s.[Group 2: Respondent B]
Facilitators to behavior change centered around the use of
immersi ve experiences that could change perspecti ves and
generate social interactions between users, as illustrated by the
following quote:
Because whene ver I’m playing games, they would
often ask me “Hi [name]! What’ s that game? Is that
available in iOS? Is it available in the Andr oid Play
Store?” Right after I told them about it, they would
go check out the game and download it. So, it’s not
just me but also them that learns from the game .
[Group 1: Respondent J]
During group discussion, the game’ s narrati ve was identif ied
as an important feature. If done well, it fostered an identif ication
with the game characters and motivated the players to overcome
challenges in the gameplay to witness the story unfold. The
narrati ve was identif ied as the logical place to communicate
why it was important to know one’s HIV status. Participants
felt that the game should not provide technical information on
HIV or HIV services but should focus on telling an emotionally
driven story and provide the player choice over the narrati ve
direction.
When the groups were divided into teams (2 teams in each
group) to pitch their HIV advocacy games, 3 out of the 4 teams
presented a similar concept of a hero sent on a quest to fight or
evade the HIV virus, where story and role-playing game (RPG)elements intertwined and where reality and fantasy existed in
the same space.
Multiplayer gameplay was reported to be a strong motivator for
repeated gameplay and was percei ved to play a role in the
effectiveness of the game, as illustrated by the following quote:
...the y say that no man is an island. So, I think it
would affect the behaviour of the person if there is a
community that pushes you. Someone playing alone
will say “I’m just alone , nobody will care if I do this
or do that.” But if you know somebody else is pushing
you, it will affect your behaviour , it drives you as a
person. [Group 1: Respondent I]
However, participants also reported that access to these types
of games was restricted because of the requirement of a stable
internet connection:
I have external and internal factor s why I leave the
game . The external factor is whene ver the game
requir es internet connection because the internet, the
wireless data in the Philippines is not that good.
[Group 1: Respondent E]
This presented a dilemma for the game design. On the one hand,
multiplayer gameplay was a very desirable game style among
the participants as they could participate in discussions about
HIV, behavior, and personal values and coconstruct their own
narrati ves about a desired future. This was further evidenced
by the mark et success of multiplayer mobile games in the
Philippines. On the other hand, we did not have the resources
to develop and maintain an online multiplayer platform, and
known issues around internet connecti vity would restrict access
to the game.
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 7 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXCombining Feasibility With Desire
Findings from the phase 1 game design workshops directed the
game’ s overarching narrati ve and the integration of gameplay
and storytelling. Players take on the role of the protagonist,
entering the blood stream in an antiretro viral (ARV) pill capsule
and battling anthropomorphic viruses, bacteria, and cancer cells
using a weaponized mechanical suit. The gameplay combines
match-3 puzzles with turn-based combat; players connect icons
on a puzzle board that represent condoms, ARVs, health y living,
health care, and time. Connecting the icons builds up the
player’ s defense and attack status during the rounds of combat.
The match-3 game style was selected because of the availability
of prebuilt game assets and source code, which substantially
reduced the development time and enabled the team to allocate
time to the custom animations.
The gameplay is segmented with a series of 8 animated stories
about people living with HIV that the player helps by
progressing through the game. The difficulty of the levels and
the types of enemy units are connected with the story line. For
example, if the character in the story line is diagnosed with
gonorrhea, an enemy unit representing gonococcus appears
during the gameplay . In the game’ s final mission, the player is
introduced to a character with AIDS in critical condition; it is
revealed that he has never been tested for HIV, treatment fails,
and the character dies. Throughout the game, the player is
awarded with fragments that combine to form an anting-anting,a traditional Filipino amulet belie ved to have magical powers.
This amulet allows the player to travel back in time and change
how the story ends for this character by encouraging him to
under go a HIV test.
The game can be played and completed offline. Online features
include a global leader board, ranking players by their total
score, and hyperlinks to websites containing information on
HIV and HIV services in the Philippines. The file size of the
game was also restricted to 53.4 MB on Android and 70 MB
on iOS to reduce the risk of failed download attempts from the
app stores. This in turn had ramif ications for animations and
sounds in the game, both of which can substantially increase
the file size. To maintain a small file size, the number of sound
effects and music tracks in the game was limited and animated
stories were presented in a dynamic 2-dimensional comic book
style, where static images moved across the screen to give the
scenes depth and movement.
Integration of Context-Specific Learning Objectiv es
Table 2details the design choices made in relation to the
conte xt-specif ic learning objecti ves outlined in Figure 1.
Figure 5uses screenshots from the game to illustrate some of
the design choices made. A table summarizing the phase 1
design process (Multimedia Appendix 1) and the game design
document, version 0.15, (Multimedia Appendix 2) are included
as Multimedia Appendices.
Table 2. Theory of behavior change design choices.
Game design element Conte xt-specif ic learning objecti ve
The animated stories depict people living with HIV pursuing their ambi-
tions, being socially active, or spending time with their family . For exam-
ple, a transgender character enters a beauty pageant and, as she takes her
medication in the dressing room, the text reads, “I fought to be my true
gender , I can win this fight too.” This particular story line was selected
because of the cultural relevance pageantry has in the Philippines and the
great esteem in which Filipinos hold the contestants.To belie ve that you can live a fulfilling life after a positi ve diagnosis
Antiretro viral tablets feature in every animated story except the one where
the character dies. Treatment is also shown to impro ve the physical appear -
ance of the characters in the later missions. Players can earn an extra life
during gameplay by answering a multiple-choice question. Some questions
address knowledge on treatment effects, and feedback containing the right
answer is given. Hyperlinks to websites containing information on HIV
treatment are included throughout the game, and the click-through rate is
measured.To know that HIV treatment makes your immune system stronger and
more able to fight off illness; reduces the risk of transmitting the virus to
someone else; reduces the effect of the illness on quality of life; and, if
started early , leads to a signif icant reduction in the risk of death
In the animated stories, the words “Free HIV tests” appear in the back-
ground of all the clinic waiting room scenes. The rapid testing procedure
is depicted in the first 3 animations. Multiple-choice questions address
the availability of free testing and the time taken for the client to recei ve
their results in the Philippines. Hyperlinks to websites containing informa-
tion on HIV services in the Philippines are included throughout the game,
and the click-through rate is measured.To know that HIV testing and treatment services are available for free in
the Philippines and that results are given on the same day
Enemy units in the game include representations of gonorrhea, tuberculosis,
hepatitis B, herpes, and cancer . Common signs of HIV infection are de-
picted in the animated stories, and some characters show no symptoms.To recognize common coinfections and signs of HIV infection and to
know that symptoms may not appear until long after infection
The first animated story depicts a heterose xual couple. In several other
animated stories, the character’ s sexuality is ambiguous.To know that there is a risk of HIV transmission among heterose xuals
A hyperlink to a website containing the contact information and location
of all testing sites in the Philippines is featured throughout the game.To know the location of HIV services
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 8 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 5. Screenshots Battle in the Blood v1.4.
Phase 2: Prototype Testing
Table 3summarizes the final agreed list of playability violations
and the game changes made as a result.
Learning Achieved Predominantly Through
Interpretation of the Animated Narrativ es
Participants repeatedly drew inferences between the presence
of ARVs and the positi ve outcome in the short-animated stories,recognizing the unique benef its of treatment for each character ,
as illustrated by the following quote:
Ever since the guy was given the ARVs, his fear of
him having STDs or socializing with people is now
gone , and he was able to not be afraid to connect with
other people .[GameT ester_MSM]
Table 3. Playability violations and game changes.
Game change Evidence of violation Playability heuristic
On the second playthrough, a title screen appears
with the text “Previously on Battle in the
Blood …Skip?”Participants felt bored and diseng aged with the animation
when the first half of the story line was repeated. Video
footage demonstrated that players did not realize they could
skip the recap by tapping anywhere on the screen.GP5: There are no repetiti ve or bor-
ing tasks
The design of the icons was adjusted to correspond
visually with the attack and defense bars.Players reported the icons as unintuiti ve because the color
of the icons did not correspond with the combat status bars
that they effected. Video footage showed players taking
decisions based solely on the length of the chain, not the
color of the icons, and becoming frustrated when they re-
peatedly lost a level.GU1: Audio-visual representations
support the game
When a new game mechanic is triggered, a dialog
box appears that explains the new mechanic using
a small amount of text and images. This information
can also be accessed via the game’ s menu and via
the level-pause screen.Participants did not feel that the onboarding was compre-
hensi ve enough, and new mechanics in the game were not
explained.GU11: The game contains help
Avatar appears animated in the level-complete or
-fail screen.Participants stated that they did not like the mechanical
suit as they had spent time customizing the avatar but rarely
saw it in the game as most of it was covered.GP6: The players can express
themselv es
Implementing an in-game currenc y system and
custom character upgrades would have required
additional resources and delayed the planned launch
of the game. The change request was logged but
not implemented for the pilot.Participants stated that they wanted to be able to earn in-
game currenc y by completing the levels, which could be
spent on upgrading or customizing their character . They
also felt this would make the gameplay feel less repetiti ve.GP2: The player is rewarded, and
the rewards are meaningful; GP5:
There are no repetiti ve or boring
tasks
In addition to the inferred benef its of HIV treatment, participants
also identif ied messages about the consequences of delayed
access to HIV services. One participant reported that the gamehad changed his personal understanding of when to under go a
HIV test, as shown by the following conversation:
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 9 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXFor me it’s better to test at the earliest, so you can
know if you’re positive and prevent it earlier .
[PhaseT wo_GameT ester_MSM]
So, befor e you played the game , you just know that
you need to get tested when? [Intervie wer]
Only if you’re already having symptoms.
[PhaseT wo_GameT ester_MSM]
Participants interpreted the stories based on their current
knowledge and personal values. In 1 case, this led to the message
of the story being repeatedly challenged:
...he was told that he has Gonorrhoea and he was
then given pills to cure it and the HIV treatment. With
that, he told himself that this could save his life and
then could continue living his life normally . And then
he was seen to be at the bar again. But it was
somehow an off for me because it gave me the
impression that just because there’s treatment, you
can go on with your promiscuous activity all your
life.[PhaseT wo_GameT ester_MSM]
Some counterar guments were expressed because of preexisting
knowledge, namely , a lack of awareness that ARVs can reduce
the viral load to the point where the individual is no longer
infectious and social norms in which sexual promiscuity is
percei ved as an undesirable trait. Most participants concluded
that the character in this particular animation was sexually
promiscuous because the story centered around a nightclub, and
he was diagnosed with HIV and gonorrhea. In this case, the
narrati ve appeared to challenge stigmatizing perceptions around
sexual promiscuity and its association with HIV.
Although participants felt that the health-related messages were
reinforced in the turn-based combat levels, most of the learning
outcomes were achie ved through interpretation of the animated
narrati ves and the discussions they triggered. A potential concern
is that the animations were percei ved to be disconnected from,
and less engaging than, the gameplay . During the prototype
testing session, all in-game animations were played in sequence
through a projector , and participants intently watched and
discussed each animation. Interpretation of the narrati ve may
be signif icantly different by a user casually playing the game
alone, with no direct incenti ve to focus on and analyze the
content.
Identification With Game Characters
Animated narrati ves where the players shared a set of
commonalities with the character diagnosed with HIV elicited
a stronger emotional reaction than those where the characters
did not share similar demographics or behaviors. The story of
a young MSM who resorts to solicitation to afford to play games
at an internet café was reported to be the most impactful story
line by almost all game testers. This was likely because of the
recruitment strate gy, as most game testers were part of the young
MSM community and had a strong interest in gaming:
Well it seems relatable for me because I’m a gamer .
And I have a friend who does that thing sometimes.
And thankfully he hasn’ t got any HIV. It’s relatable
to me because well, I know those who did, Iexperienced one but thankfully I haven’ t got HIV.
[GameT ester_MSM]
The game follows the stories of 8 different characters diagnosed
with HIV. Each character is unique in its sexuality , gender ,
appearance, and behavior. Therefore, a user is likely to
empathize with or relate to some but not all characters in the
game. As game characters are presented in a predetermined
sequence, some users may never witness a character that they
share commonalities with, reducing the potential impact of the
in-game narrati ve for certain users based on their progress in
the game. The representation of different sexualities and genders
was well recei ved by participants as they ackno wledged that it
could help to address misconceptions that HIV only effects
MSM, indicating that the design flaw was the delivery of the
narrati ves rather than the inclusion of multiple character types.
Gameplay Perceiv ed as Enjo yable but Potentially Limited
in Appeal
Despite a positi ve response from the participants, in which
gameplay was described as “enjo yable, addicti ve, and
challenging, ” there were indications that the game would have
a limited appeal. In the first instance, participants had very low
expectations for the game and expressed surprise at playing a
game comparable with commercial games on the app stores. In
1 FGD, participants identif ied 2 categories of gamers, casual
and hardcore, and discussed which category the game would
appeal to and why. A casual gamer was percei ved to be someone
who occasionally engaged with digital games as a form of
distraction, whereas a hardcore gamer’ s life would revolve
around digital games. Most agreed that the game would have
little to no appeal for hardcore gamers. For casual gamers, the
consensus was that the game would be appealing but required
an effective mark eting and deplo yment strate gy to overcome
competition from similar games. Offline gameplay was
percei ved to be a strong motivator, regardless of gamer type,
as it would enable players to alleviate boredom when they were
unable to access features on their devices that required an
internet connection. Mark eting Battle in the Blood as a game
about HIV was percei ved to have 2 effects on the appeal; in
most cases, it would arouse curiosity or tap into a desire to learn,
whereas in some cases, it could be off-putting. Participants felt
that the game’ s mark eting should also be targeted toward parents
and should offer information on the age appropriateness of the
content.
Phase 3: Game Analytics
Game analytics reported 3325 unique device installs globally
during a 12-month period. The game recei ved an average of 10
installs per day. Installs peak ed during active and incenti vized
mark eting events; the maximum number of installs in 1 day was
367 at the time of the World AIDS Day launch event in Davao.
Unity Analytics provided a more accurate report of game uptak e
and reach than the app store services because of the common
practice of using third-party apps, such as SHAREit, to access
the game via Bluetooth and avoid data costs. Installs via this
method would not have been captured by the analytics services
provided by the Apple App Store or Google Play at the time of
the study .
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 10 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXRegional Game Uptak e
Geolocation data were collected for at least one play session
from 50.77% (1688/3325) of users. Of the users from whom
geolocation data were collected, 85.36% (1441/1688) were
located in the Philippines (Figure 6). Game use was concentrated
in urbanized areas. Uptak e of the game was highest in theNational Capital Region and Davao Region. Furthermore,
54.01% (1796/3325) of the users reported their age, gender , and
gender of sexual partners; of these users, 28.06% (504/1796)
reported as being sexually active MSM. Within the sexually
active MSM category, 47.8% (241/504) reported their age as
between 25 and 34 years, 26.1% (132/504) as between 20 and
24 years, and 7.1% (36/504) as between 10 and 19 years.
Figur e 6. Cluster point map of the location of Battle in the Blood installations in the Philippines. Points clustered at 4mm. Number in circle represents
total number of users which installed Battle in the Blood in that location. Total number of user records from the game analytics that contain geolocation
data and have played the game in the Philippines=1441. Region level shape file from Humanitarian Data Exchange.
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 11 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXOverall, 2 factors are belie ved to have contrib uted to the
substantially higher uptak e among target users in the regions
of Davao and Manila. First, several promotional exhibitions for
the game were held by project staff in these regions. The
exhibitions often included prize giveaways for those who
downloaded the game, indicating a dependenc y on these types
of active and incenti vized mark eting events. Self-reported data
indicated that mark eting events targeting adolescent users were
potentially lacking. Second, user-centered design activities were
conducted in these regions with influencers in both the gaming
and HIV community , and it is likely that they also played a role
in promoting the game.
Low Rates of Game Completion
As of December 1, 2018, 14.98% (498/3325) of users were
reported to have completed level 45 and 4.00% (133/3325) were
reported to have completed level 90, the last level in the game.
Factors belie ved to have contrib uted to the reported low rates
of game completion are the gameplay being percei ved as
repetiti ve and having limited appeal and missing data because
of the provision of offline gameplay .
Additional factors impacting uptak e and progression will be
explored further through intervie ws with end users and
follow-up intervie ws with participants involved in the design
process.
Identification of Access Issue on Android Devices
Game analytics and app store reviews were monitored
throughout the 12-month period. Monitoring activities supported
the identif ication of an access issue on Android devices, which
was related to app permissions managed by the Google Play
store. A fix was launched on November 5, 2018. Between
October 5, 2018, and November 4, 2018, the average number
of daily active users was 16, and this increased to 40 in the
month following the fix.
Discussion
Establishing Design Solutions Through User -Center ed
Design
User-centered design methods supported the identif ication of
conte xtual requirements for the game [22]. Qualitati ve methods
provided a deep understanding of the important factors that both
motivated and enabled gameplay , which are likely to have
contrib uted to the reported uptak e and use of the game. The
human scatter graph method and game pitches enabled
participants to reflect on their views and the views of others,
which, in turn, ignited valuable discussion on the qualities the
game required to both be appealing and deliver persuasi ve health
messages. Although findings from phase 1 influenced the
creati ve direction of the game, each design choice made by the
development team was prefixed with a discussion on what was
feasible within the predetermined budget and development time
frame. For example, during phase 1, an action RPG in which
the player could control their character’ s strength and traits was
found to be highly desirable, but adequate resources were not
available to implement a stable and balanced underlying
mathematical model for this feature. In this case, the design
workshops supported the identif ication of a wick ed problem,the solution for which was informed by the experience and best
judgment of the game’ s coproducers [19]. The reported low
rates of game completion indicated that optimal design solutions
were not achie ved by the game’ s producers.
User -Center ed Design and Community Adoption
Results from the game analytics indicated that users’
involvement in the game development process had a positi ve
impact on uptak e among target users. However, the extent of
that impact cannot be determined from the available data. For
example, although unique device installs were substantially
higher in regions where user-centered design activities took
place, the proportion of installs credited to such activities cannot
be determined, especially with the presence of targeted and
incenti vized promotional events in those regions. Further studies
are recommended to explore the correlation between user
involvement and community adoption of games for health. The
way in which target users involved in the design are credited
may also be an important factor to consider .
Narrati ves in Games for Health
Storytelling has long been established as an effective means of
attitude and behavior change [17], and this was reflected in the
findings during the user-centered design process. This also
highlights the importance of having an experienced narrati ve
designer as part of the development team to work in partnership
with the subject domain and behavioral experts. Assessment of
the game’ s acceptability found that mobile game design that
accommodates typical user behavior is not always conduci ve
to effective storytelling. To be suitable for use in a public space,
the animated stories had to be highly capti vating to retain focus
while also allowing the player to diseng age without missing
vital information. Although Battle in the Blood made some
headw ay in delivering a narrati ve that was accessible and
accommodated typical user behavior, a lack of interaction, an
obscure link to the gameplay , delivery through linear episodes,
and limited character identif ication may have rendered the
animated stories ineffective in generating new knowledge and
perceptions when the game is played outside a facilitated
gameplay session. These design flaws could be addressed
through the inclusion of additional branching narrati ves driven
by player choice, forming a stronger link between the gameplay
and cause and effect sequences in the narrati ve, inclusion of
stories based on true events, allowing players to select narrati ves
they are interested in, and facilitating group gameplay sessions
where players are encouraged to discuss their interpretation of
the narrati ves as part of the game’ s distrib ution strate gy.
Multiple Data Collection Methods to Mediate Biases
Telemetry and geolocation data are widely used in the mobile
games industry to impro ve app revenue. There are countless
articles ranking key performance indicators by their value to
app developers. In response to demand, a range of services are
now available that process large volumes of data into actionable
information with very low setup costs. In the case of the Unity
Analytics service (version 2017.1), standard metrics can be
obtained by toggling a switch in the Unity game engine.
Although generating income may not be a primary goal, it could
be argued that analytical services that capture data during
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 12 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXgameplay are currently underutilized in games for health
development and evaluation [29]. In contrast to FGDs, telemetry
and geolocation data collected through the game are not biased
by the presence of a researcher; however, emoti ve responses to
gameplay cannot be captured this way. Thus, it is important not
to focus solely on 1 data collection technique but rather to
triangulate results from a range of different data sources to
mitig ate bias while providing a more complete picture of game
performance.
This study explored the effect of user involvement on health
interv ention acceptability and community adoption and
described in detail the methods used. Further evaluation of the
game has been conducted to explore the game’ s effect on
knowledge, attitudes, and HIV service use among target users,
the results of which will be published in a separate paper .
Limitations
As with all qualitati ve research, findings cannot be applied to
the wider population with certainty . Perceptions from aged
under 18 years and subjects outside Manila and Davao were not
captured. Although the project team failed to recruit TGW
during phases 1 and 2 of the game development process, they
were included during the formati ve research stage, which
informed the conceptual frame work for the game (Figure 1).
Feedback on how the transgender character in the game was
portrayed was provided by TGW known to the research team
in the Philippines in an informal capacity .
The authors note that the recruitment strate gy and use of FGDs
is likely to have resulted in a bias toward participants less
encumbered by stigma toward their sexuality or HIV status.
Given that recruitment advertisements stated that participants
would be inputting into the design of an HIV advocacy game,this may have also created a bias toward individuals with a
vested interest in health advocacy and game design.
The timing for phase 2 protype testing was not ideal, which is
belie ved to have impacted the changes implemented in the game
design.
Certain terms used by the participants did not have a direct
English translation, which, at times, led to ambiguity in the data
during the translation process.
Conclusions
By involving users from the outset, the development team was
guided toward narrati ves that were shown to be relatable and
understandable and to gameplay that provided enjoyment. The
resulting product is a game that is accessible, simple, and
entertaining because of universally recognized game mechanics,
small file size, and offline gameplay . At a minimum, games for
health should involve target users in early stages of the design
process as a relati vely cost-ef fective method of cataloging
important conte xtual requirements and user preferences. If target
users are to be tasked with developing design solutions, then
interaction with the development team must go beyond FGDs.
For the target user to be a valued member of the game
development team, they must have adequate expertise in design,
a shared goal, and be properly credited and compensated for
their contrib utions [22]. Increased reporting of design
approaches and stronger collaboration among health
professionals, the entertainment games industry , and end users
will support the games for health industry as it matures.
Restructuring projects to involve users before determining the
development budget will enable design choices to be driven
more by user requirements and less by what is feasible.
Ackno wledgments
The authors wish to ackno wledge the game development team at EM Studios and Bobby Farmer (coproducer), Craig Gardiner
(lead artist), Aitor Prado (lead coder), and Stuart Henderson (coder), whose hard work and passion were integral to the project.
The authors would like to thank all the participants who devoted their time to partak e in the study , and the authors would also
like to ackno wledge the contrib utions made by the Philippines Department of Health’ s National HIV and Sexually Transmitted
Infection Prevention Program, LoveYourself Philippines, Klinika Bernardo-Quezon City Health Office, Davao Social Hygiene
Clinic-Da vao City Health Office, Dr Rhoda Myra Garces-Bacsal, Dr Jose Gerard Belimac, Dr Stefanie Gregorius, and Dr Marlize
Coleman. This project was funded by the Newton Agham Grant through the UK Medical Research Council and Philippines
Council of Health Research and Development, Department of Science and Technology .
Authors' Contrib utions
CH analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. CH and EB produced the game. All authors inputted into the study design, game
design, data analysis, and manuscript. EG and TS coordinated the recruitment and data collection activities and transcribed and
translated the data.
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
Summary of phase 1 design process.
[DOCX File , 18 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 13 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderXMultimedia Appendix 2
Battle in the Blood game design document v0.15.
[DOCX File , 3318 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
Refer ences
1. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. UNAIDS Philippines Country Factsheet. URL: https://www .unaids.or g/
en/re gionscountries/countries/philippines [accessed 2017-12-01]
2. Bumanglag KC. Enhancing HIV/AIDS surveillance in the Philippines to ensure the transgender population's visibility . Am
J Public Health 2018 Jan;108(1):58-60. [doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2017.304158 ] [Medline: 29211538 ]
3. Department of Health website. 2015. Integrated HIV behavioral and serologic surveillance: 2015 fact sheet. URL: https:/
/www .doh.go v.ph/sites/def ault/f iles/publications/Philippines_2015_IHBSS_F act_Sheets_No v2017_22JUN2016.pdf
[accessed 2017-12-01]
4. Department of Health website. 2016. The State of the Philippine HIV Epidemic 2016 Facing Challenges, Forging Solutions.
URL: https://www .doh.go v.ph/sites/def ault/f iles/publications/
publication__nonSerials_State%20of%20HIV%20Epidemic%20in%20the%20Philippines.pdf [accessed 2017-12-01]
5. AIDS Data Hub. 2018. HIV / AIDS and ART Registry of the Philippines. URL: http://www .aidsdatahub .org/
hivaids-and-art-re gistry-philippines-march-2018-epidemiology-b ureau-department-health-2018 [accessed 2017-12-01]
6. Wong VJ, Murray KR, Phelps BR, Vermund SH, McCarraher DR. Adolescents, young people, and the 90-90-90 goals: a
call to impro ve HIV testing and linkage to treatment. AIDS 2017 Jul 1;31(Suppl 3):S191-S194 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1097/QAD.0000000000001539 ] [Medline: 28665876 ]
7. Adia A, Bermudez A, Callahan M, Hernandez L, Imperial R, Operario D. 'An Evil Lurking Behind You': drivers, experiences,
and consequences of HIV-related stigma among men who have sex with men with HIV in Manila, Philippines. AIDS Educ
Prev 2018 Aug;30(4):322-334. [doi: 10.1521/aeap.2018.30.4.322 ] [Medline: 30148671 ]
8. van Wijngaarden JW, Ching AD, Settle E, van Griensv en F, Cruz RC, Newman PA. 'I am not promiscuous enough!':
exploring the low uptak e of HIV testing by gay men and other men who have sex with men in Metro Manila, Philippines.
PLoS One 2018;13(7):e0200256 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200256 ] [Medline: 29979766 ]
9. Cano y NA, Ofreneo MA. Struggling to care: a discursi ve-material analysis of negotiating agenc y among HIV-positi ve
MSM. Health (London) 2017 Nov;21(6):575-594. [doi: 10.1177/1363459315628040 ] [Medline: 26851265 ]
10. Burki T. HIV in the Philippines. Lancet Infect Dis 2017 Jun;17(6):589-590. [doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30256-6 ]
[Medline: 28555587 ]
11. Koirala S, Deuba K, Nampaisan O, Marrone G, Ekström AM, CAT-S group. Facilitators and barriers for retention in HIV
care between testing and treatment in Asia-A study in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Lao, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines and Vietnam.
PLoS One 2017;12(5):e0176914 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176914 ] [Medline: 28459881 ]
12. KPMG Global. 2018. IT Report: Philippines Investment Guide. URL: https://home.kpmg/ph/en/home/insights/2017/12/
it-report-philippines.html [accessed 2017-12-01]
13. Newzoo. 2017. The Filipino Gamer . URL: https://ne wzoo.com/insights/infographics/the-f ilipino-g amer/ [accessed 2017-08-20]
14. Highto w-W eidman LB, Muessig KE, Bauermeister J, Zhang C, LeGrand S. Youth, technology , and HIV: recent advances
and future directions. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep 2015 Dec;12(4):500-515 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1007/s11904-015-0280-x ]
[Medline: 26385582 ]
15. DeSmet A, van Ryck eghem D, Compernolle S, Barano wski T, Thompson D, Crombez G, et al. A meta-analysis of serious
digital games for health y lifestyle promotion. Prev Med 2014 Dec;69:95-107 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.08.026 ] [Medline: 25172024 ]
16. Prensk y M. Fun, play and games: what makes games engaging. In: Digital Game-Based Learning. United States: Paragon
House; 2001:1-31.
17. Shen F, Han J. Effectiveness of entertainment education in communicating health information: a systematic review. Asian
J Commun 2014;24(6):605-616. [doi: 10.1080/01292986.2014.927895 ]
18. Kort YA, IJsselsteijn WA, Poels K. Digital games as social presence technology : development of the Social Presence in
Gaming Questionnaire (SPGQ). In: Presence 2007 : the 10th Annual International Workshop on Presence. Barcelona:
Starlab; 2007:1-9.
19. Rittel HW, Webber MM. Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Polic y Sci 1973;4(2):155-169. [doi:
10.1007/BF01405730 ]
20. Pagulayan R, Keeker K, Fuller T, Wixon D, Romero R, Gunn DV. User-centered design in games. In: Sears A, Jacko JA,
editors. Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies and Emer ging Applications. Boca
Raton: CRC Press; 2007:883-906.
21. Giacomin J. What is human centred design? Des J 2014;17(4):606-623. [doi: 10.2752/175630614X14056185480186 ]
22. DeSmet A, Thompson D, Barano wski T, Palmeira A, Verloigne M, de Bourdeaudhuij I. Is participatory design associated
with the effectiveness of serious digital games for health y lifestyle promotion? A meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2016
Apr 29;18(4):e94 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir .4444 ] [Medline: 27129447 ]
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 14 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderX23. Mayer I, Bekebrede G, Harte veld C, Warmelink H, Zhou Q, van Ruijv en T, et al. The research and evaluation of serious
games: toward a comprehensi ve methodology . Br J Educ Technol 2014;45(3):502-527. [doi: 10.1111/bjet.12067 ]
24. Conner M. Cogniti ve determinants of health behavior. In: Steptoe A, editor . Handbook Of Beha vioral Medicine: Methods
And Applications. New York, NY: Springer; 2010:19-30.
25. Jessen S, Mirk ovic J, Ruland CM. Creating gameful design in mHealth: a participatory co-design approach. JMIR Mhealth
Uhealth 2018 Dec 14;6(12):e11579 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/11579 ] [Medline: 30552080 ]
26. Korhonen H, Koivisto EM. Playability Heuristics for Mobile Multi-player Games. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on Digital interacti ve media in entertainment and arts. 2007 Presented at: DIMEA'07; September 19-21, 2007;
Perth, Australia p. 28-35.
27. Smith J, Firth J. Qualitati ve data analysis: the frame work approach. Nurse Res 2011;18(2):52-62. [doi:
10.7748/nr2011.01.18.2.52.c8284 ] [Medline: 21319484 ]
28. Sekhon M, Cartwright M, Francis JJ. Acceptability of healthcare interv entions: an overvie w of reviews and development
of a theoretical frame work. BMC Health Serv Res 2017 Jan 26;17(1):88 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-017-2031-8 ]
[Medline: 28126032 ]
29. Smith SP, Blackmore K, Nesbitt K. A meta-analysis of data collection in serious games research. In: Loh CS, Sheng Y,
Ifenthaler D, editors. Serious Games Analytics: Methodologies for Performance Measurement, Assessment, and Impro vement.
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing; 2015:31-55.
Abbreviations
ARV: antiretro viral
FGD: focus group discussion
MSM: males who have sex with males
RPG: role-playing game
TGW : transgender women
Edited by G Eysenbac h; submitted 25.02.19; peer-reviewed by P Newman, T Kuhn, F Mckay, J Salisb ury; comments to author 27.04.19;
revised version received 18.06.19; accepted 19.08.19; published 20.12.19
Please cite as:
Hemingway C, Baja ES, Dalmacion GV, Medina PMB, Guevara EG, Sy TR, Dacombe R, Dormann C, Taegtme yer M
Development of a Mobile Game to Influence Behavior Determinants of HIV Service Uptak e Among Key Populations in the Philippines:
User -Center ed Design Process
JMIR Serious Games 2019;7(4):e13695
URL: http://games.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
doi: 10.2196/13695
PMID: 31859673
©Charlotte Devon Hemingw ay, Emmanuel S Baja, Godafreda V Dalmacion, Paul Mark B Medina, Ernest Genesis Guevara,
Tyrone Reden Sy, Russell Dacombe, Claire Dormann, Miriam Taegtme yer. Originally published in JMIR Serious Games
(http://g ames.jmir .org), 20.12.2019. This is an open-access article distrib uted under the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution
License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Serious Games, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic
information, a link to the original publication on http://g ames.jmir .org, as well as this copyright and license information must be
included.
JMIR Serious Games 2019 | vol. 7 | iss. 4 | e13695 | p. 15 http://g ames.jmir .org/2019/4/e13695/
(page number not for citation purposes)Hemingw ay et al JMIR SERIOUS GAMES
XSL•FO
RenderX