  informatics
Article
Digital Educational Support Groups Administered
through WhatsApp Messenger Improve
Health-Related Knowledge and Health Behaviors of
New Adolescent Mothers in the Dominican Republic:
A Multi-Method Study
Samantha Stonbraker1,2,*
, Elizabeth Haight3, Alana Lopez3, Linda Guijosa3, Eliza Davison3,
Diane Bushley3, Kari Aquino Peguero2, Vivian Araujo2, Luz Messina2and Mina Halpern2
1College of Nursing, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
2Clínica de Familia La Romana, La Romana 22000, Dominican Republic;
DraKarinaAquino@gmail.com (K.A.P .); vivianaraujocf@gmail.com (V .A.); LuzMessinacf@gmail.com (L.M.);
Mina@ClinicadeFamilia.org.do (M.H.)
3Planned Parenthood of the Great Northwest and the Hawaiian Islands, Seattle, WA 98122, USA;
Liz.Haight@ppgnhi.org (E.H.); Alana.Lopez@ppgnhi.org (A.L.); Linda.Guijosa@ppgnhi.org (L.G.);
Eliza.Davison@ppgnhi.org (E.D.); Diane.Bushley@ppgnhi.org (D.B.)
*Correspondence: Samantha.Stonbraker@CUAnschutz.edu
Received: 3 October 2020; Accepted: 2 November 2020; Published: 5 November 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: (1)Background : In limited-resource settings such as the Dominican Republic, many factors
contribute to poor health outcomes experienced by adolescent mothers, including insu cient support
and/or health knowledge. In response, we designed a digital educational support group, administered
through WhatsApp Messenger, for new adolescent mothers. The purpose of this study was to assess
if participation in this digital support group could improve health outcomes and health behaviors.
(2)Methods : Participants completed questionnaires with a health literacy screener, demographic items,
knowledge questions, the Index of Autonomous Functioning, and ﬁve Patient Reported Outcomes
Measurement Information System scales before and after the moderator-led intervention. Di erences
between pre- and post-intervention scores were calculated and perceptions of the intervention were
explored through in-depth interviews analyzed with content analysis. Participants’ well-baby visit
attendance and contraceptive use were compared to that of controls and a national sample. (3) Results :
Participants’ ( N=58) knowledge scores increased ( p<0.05). Participants were 6.58 times more likely
to attend well-baby visits than controls (95% CI: 2.23–19.4) and their contraceptive use was higher
than that of the national sample ( p<0.05). Participants indicated the intervention was enjoyable and
beneﬁcial. (4) Conclusion : This adolescent-centered digital intervention is a promising method to
improve health outcomes and health behaviors of young mothers in limited-resource settings.
Keywords: digital health; mHealth; adolescent mother; digital support group; nursing informatics;
WhatsApp Messenger
1. Introduction
The Dominican Republic (DR) has one of the highest rates of adolescent pregnancy in the world,
as over 20% of girls aged 15–19 years are, or have been, pregnant [ 1,2]. This is concerning, as adolescent
pregnancy may lead to negative health outcomes for the mother and baby [ 3–7]. Additionally, adolescent
pregnancy can alter girls’ life courses, by limiting their educational attainment and decreasing their
lifetime earning potential, which has implications for broader society as well [ 8–10]. The postpartum
Informatics 2020 ,7, 51; doi:10.3390 /informatics7040051 www.mdpi.com /journal /informaticsInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 2 of 16
period and transition into motherhood is a stressful time for any mother, and may be particularly
dicult for adolescents to manage, but how to e ectively support girls living in limited-resource
settings during this time is insu ciently researched and few tools are available to provide e ective
guidance [11,12].
The successful management of any mother’s and baby’s health in the postpartum period requires
new mothers to acquire much information regarding how to take care of themselves and their
newborn [ 13,14]. Topics such as when and how to feed their baby and how to manage their own
emotional and physical needs are just a few of the many information needs of new mothers [ 14].
Obtaining this information may be especially di cult for adolescents in limited-resource settings,
as they undergo the same physical and psychological changes during pregnancy and childbirth but
may lack the resources and life experience their older counterparts have to help manage them [ 12,15].
In addition to information needs, adolescents in the postpartum period require support, both from
professional and social sources [ 16–19]. While professional support can o er pertinent health care
services, social support is necessary for e ective self- and infant care and has been shown to reduce
postpartum depression and improve other maternal health outcomes [18,19].
Because mobile health (mHealth) technologies are rapidly advancing and are ubiquitous even in
limited-resource settings, there is much potential for digital solutions to extend high quality health
services to hard-to-reach populations [ 20–24]. Therefore, to help simultaneously meet the health
information and various support needs of new adolescent mothers living in a limited-resource setting,
La Romana in the DR, during the postpartum period, our group developed a digital educational support
group called Fortaleciendo la Autodeterminaci ón de Madres Adolescentes (FAMA) or “Strengthening
the Self-determination of Adolescent Mothers” [ 25]. This group was designed for WhatsApp Messenger
(hereafter referred to as WhatsApp), one of the most widespread social media applications (app) in
the world, which is increasingly being used to promote health [ 26–29]. Of note, WhatsApp contains
end-to-end encryption, which increases the level of privacy for end-users [26].
A known beneﬁt of digital health platforms is that patients can use them to connect to their
providers, as well as to their peers [ 30,31]. There is also evidence that professional and social support
can be obtained, at least partially, through electronic communication [ 17,32,33]. The FAMA intervention
takes advantages of these beneﬁts and is particularly relevant to adolescents, as cellular phones are one
of the most common ways this age group communicates [34,35]. Additionally, previous studies have
shown that adolescents are willing to report and discuss health through text messaging, especially
when their privacy is guaranteed [ 36]. Previous studies on support groups run through WhatsApp,
including one for new mothers, demonstrate that these groups are safe and feasible [ 27,37]. Notably,
many studies have looked at interventions and ways to improve health education on a variety of topics
with adolescents, but few have reported on outcomes [23,38,39].
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to assess if participation in our digital educational support
group, administered through WhatsApp Messenger through a local health clinic, could improve the
following health outcomes among new adolescent mothers: postpartum-related health knowledge,
use of modern contraception, attendance at scheduled well-baby appointments, levels of perceived
support, and autonomous functioning.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Design
To enable a comprehensive evaluation of the FAMA intervention, this multi-method study had
three data collection components.
1. Baseline and follow-up surveys. Intervention participants completed surveys that assessed the
outcome measures of interest before and after participation in the intervention.
2. Medical record review. Clinical data (attendance at well-baby visits, modern contraceptive use,
and completion of scheduled vaccinations) were extracted from FAMA participants’ medicalInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 3 of 16
records and compared to similar data extracted from the medical records of a control group.
Where control group data were insu cient, participants’ medical record data were compared to
data from a publicly available national demographic and health survey.
3. In-depth interviews. Participants who completed the FAMA intervention and attended the
closing group session were invited to complete an in-depth interview to assess their perspectives
of the FAMA intervention and identify areas for future improvement.
2.2. Ethical Approval
This study was approved by two institutional review boards in the DR—the Instituto
Dermatol ógico y Cirug ía de Piel “Dr. Huberto Bogaert D íaz” and the Consejo Nacional de Bio ética
en Salud.
2.3. Research Setting
The digital educational support groups were designed and led through the M ódulo de Adolescentes
Materno Infantil (MAMI), a clinic that o ers health care services and education to approximately 3000
adolescents in La Romana, DR. At MAMI, family planning counseling and methods are o ered, as is
sexual and reproductive health education, pre- and post-natal care, pediatric care, and testing for
sexually transmitted infections.
2.4. Study Team
MAMI has closely collaborated with Planned Parenthood of the Great Northwest and the Hawaiian
Islands (PPGNHI) for nearly a decade. As part of this long-standing partnership, sta from PPGNHI’s
Global Programs and Education departments regularly travel to the DR to provide support for MAMI’s
health education programs. Our study team, therefore, consisted of bilingual PPGNHI sta , MAMI
educators and administrators, as well as the research department and administrators at Cl ínica de
Familia La Romana, the parent organization that supports MAMI.
2.5. Participants and Recruitment
The target sample size agreed upon was 60 adolescents, as determined by funding and logistical
considerations. Some participants ( n=16) had participated in initial user-centered design sessions
and had agreed to participate in this study phase. Therefore, the study team recruited 44 additional
adolescent mothers in the waiting room at MAMI. Inclusion criteria were that FAMA participants be 14
to 19 years of age, have at least one child, have given birth in the previous six months, speak Spanish,
live in La Romana, and attend pediatric appointments at MAMI. The babies of participants who
had participated in the ﬁrst phase were older (up to 11 months) at the time the intervention began.
Exclusion criteria were not having the capacity to understand the study or provide informed consent.
As Dominican law 136-03 classiﬁes adolescents who are pregnant and /or have had children as
emancipated minors who can consent to participate in research and /or health care services, those who
agreed to participate provided written informed consent after study team members thoroughly
explained the study and answered any questions.
2.6. FAMA Intervention
2.6.1. Development
The methods used to establish the content for the FAMA intervention are fully described
elsewhere [ 25]. However, to provide a general description, a group of target participants ( n=24)
completed participatory user-centered design sessions that explored the health information needs
of new adolescent mothers in the DR as well as their experiences as new mothers. Participants
ﬁrst identiﬁed information and support needs, then worked with each other to prioritize the health
information and support topics that were the most meaningful and potentially important to includeInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 4 of 16
in the intervention. Growth and development stages of infants, understanding your baby, common
infant illnesses, breastfeeding, nutrition during a child’s ﬁrst year, and family planning were the topics
that participants agreed were the most important to address. We then identiﬁed pertinent content
associated with each identiﬁed topic through a brief literature review and established the guide for the
FAMA intervention with the corresponding ﬁndings.
2.6.2. Pre-Intervention
We divided FAMA participants into three separate intervention groups ( n=16,n=20,n=22),
to enable meaningful participation for each participant in each group. All groups began with an in-person
meeting where participants met the intervention moderators (a health educator and physician /study
coordinator at MAMI), received a cellular phone, instructions for how to access cellular data packages
(replenished weekly), met other participants in the group, discussed intervention procedures, established
group norms and guidelines, an d completed baseline surveys. If a participant from the ﬁrst group
missed the in-person meeting for their group, they were able to move to the later groups, which accounts
for the larger group size in the second and third groups. Two participants did not attend any in-person
group sessions and were removed from the study for a ﬁnal N=58.
2.6.3. Intervention
Each group participated in the intervention for 12 weeks to allow su cient time for participants
to adapt to the intervention format, learn about and ask questions pertaining to each topic, and to
enable observable changes in outcome measures. During the intervention, informational messages and
associated images from the previously developed manual [ 25] were sent to the WhatsApp groups on
weekdays. Intervention moderators interacted with participants by providing support and answering
questions in the group chat. Moderators encouraged participants to respond to the informational
messages with questions, comments, and their own experiences. To conﬁrm message receipt and
ongoing participation, participants were asked to at least respond with a thematic “emoji of the day”,
which was included in each message. There were also biweekly optional quizzes and a biweekly forum
with a question posed to the group to reﬂect upon.
2.6.4. Post-Intervention
A second in-person group was held after the intervention was complete, in which participants
completed follow-up surveys and a ﬁnal reﬂection activity, and a convenience sample of participants
completed in-depth interviews to gather participants’ perspectives on the intervention, including
suggestions for improvement.
2.7. Measures and Data Analysis: Baseline and Follow-Up Surveys
2.7.1. Demographics and Postpartum /Neonatal Health Knowledge
At enrollment, a demographic survey was administered that included questions regarding
participants’ age, marital status, level of education, employment status, and number of children.
Health literacy was measured at baseline with a single self-reported health literacy screening
question that has been previously validated in Spanish [ 40,41]. Participants answered the question,
“how conﬁdent are you ﬁlling out medical forms by yourself?” with one of the responses: (a) not at all
conﬁdent, (b) a little conﬁdent, (c) somewhat conﬁdent, (d) very conﬁdent, or (e) completely conﬁdent.
Those who responded “a” or “b” were classiﬁed as likely to have inadequate health literacy and the
rest were considered likely to have adequate health literacy [ 40,41]. Health knowledge was assessed
with multiple-choice questions designed by the study team based on the health education topics to
be provided in the intervention. There were 11 points possible, with scores calculated based on the
number of correct responses.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 5 of 16
2.7.2. Index of Autonomous Functioning
As autonomous functioning is associated with more engagement in learning, greater energy and
vitality, lower stress, increased wellbeing, and more rewarding socialization [ 42–44], we included
a validated assessment of autonomous functioning, the Index of Autonomous Functioning (IAF),
to assess changes in this important outcome [ 42]. The IAF scale provides a measure of trait autonomy
and is scored on three subscales [ 42]. We calculated a total composite score for participants who
completed both a baseline and follow up survey using the average score of all 15 questions in the scale.
Each ﬁve-question Likert subscale was scored; total possible scores ranged from 5 to 25 according to
a Likert of 1 point (not true at all) to 5 points (completely true). Five questions were reverse scored.
High scores on the authorship /self-congruence (when “a person is wholeheartedly willing to act on,
or stand behind, what they do” [ 42,45]) subscale and the interest subscale indicate more autonomy and
low averages of the susceptibility to control (when individuals behave in response to pressure from
others [42]) subscale indicate more autonomy.
2.7.3. PROMIS Measures
To assess perceived levels of social support, ﬁve of the Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS)®measures were administered: (1) emotional support, (2) informational
support, (3) social isolation, (4) instrumental support, and (5) companionship. Beneﬁts of using the
PROMIS scores are that they have been extensively validated in diverse populations, including among
Spanish speakers, they are freely available, and can be administered in a relatively short amount
of time [ 46,47]. There were six questions in each of the PROMIS scales we administered. Response
options for each question are scored on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “never” (1 point) to “always”
(5 points). Total possible points for each scale range from 6 to 30. Total scores from each scale were
calculated for participants who completed both baseline and follow up assessments and then, as with
all PROMIS measures, ﬁnal scores were converted into a standardized T-score with a standard deviation
of 10. Thus, a person with a T-score of 40 is one standard deviation below the arithmetic mean.
2.7.4. Data Analysis
Paired t-tests were used to assess di erences in mean scores on all survey measures before and
after the intervention.
2.8. Measures and Data Analysis: Medical Record Review
Data were extracted from FAMA participants’ medical records as well as from the medical records
of additional MAMI patients ( N=22), “controls” who had similar characteristics to those of the FAMA
participants (age of 14–19 years with a baby 6 months of age) and were enrolled in pediatric services
during the intervention period. Data were collected from controls to enable comparisons between
FAMA participants’ and non-participants’ attendance at well-baby visits and modern contraceptive use.
2.8.1. Attendance at Well-Baby Visits
The dates participants and controls attended their scheduled well-baby pediatric appointments
during the 12-week intervention period and up to one month after were collected from medical
records. At MAMI, the recommended well-baby visits are 15 days after birth and then monthly until
one year of age. We categorized attendance at well-baby visits as good attendance (attended two or
more recommended /scheduled visits) or poor attendance (attended one or fewer visits) during the
four-month reporting period. We calculated an odds ratio to compare the well-baby visit attendance of
participants and controls.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 6 of 16
2.8.2. Modern Contraceptive Use
Participants’ and controls’ use of modern contraceptive prevalence (having any intrauterine
device, oral contraceptive prescription, receiving the Depo Provera injection, or having an Implanon
implant) was extracted from medical records. Whether or not a participant was using a modern
method during the intervention period and up to one month after was dichotomized to yes or no.
During data collection, we realized there were insu cient data on controls’ family planning methods
to enable meaningful comparisons. Therefore, we compared the modern contraceptive use of our
study participants to that of a recent national sample of adolescents across the DR (24% of girls aged
15–19) using a Chi-square test [48].
2.8.3. Babies’ Vaccination Status
Data regarding participants’ and controls’ babies’ vaccination status were collected from copies
of their World Health Organization and Ministry of Health endorsed vaccination cards kept in
their medical records. However, due to a large percentage of missing vaccination data among both
participants and controls, neither descriptive statistics nor case /control analyses could be performed
for vaccination coverage.
2.9. Measures and Data Analysis: In-Depth Interviews
Post-intervention in-depth interviews were conducted by study team members using a
semi-structured interview guide, developed by the study team, and were audio recorded. The guide
included eight questions supported by several prompts that aimed to explore participants’ perceptions
of the FAMA intervention and recommendations for improvement. Interviewers all completed a
training to ensure interviews were administered in the same format. Recordings were transcribed
verbatim and veriﬁed by the study team. Transcripts were then analyzed through qualitative descriptive
content analysis using Dedoose software [ 49–51]. Members of the study team generated a codebook
through open coding of a selection of transcripts. Two study team members then independently coded
transcripts with the initial codebook. Coder agreement was established by independently coding
a selection of transcripts and double coding every ninth transcript. Discrepancies in coding and
additional suggested codes were discussed until consensus was reached.
3. Results
3.1. Demographics
The median age of the 58 adolescent mothers who participated in the intervention was 18 (range
15–20) years at the time of enrollment (either for initial design sessions or for the intervention) (Table 1).
Participants’ babies had a median age of 3.6 months (IQR =4 months) at the start of the intervention.
Most participants (93%) were ﬁrst time mothers. Forty percent of participants were enrolled in school,
97% were unemployed, 79% were married or had a domestic partner, and 67% were economically
dependent on their partner.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 7 of 16
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of participants ( N=58).
Characteristic n(%)
Health literate *
Yes 39 (69.6)
No 17 (30.4)
Attends school
Yes 23 (40)
No 35 (60)
Current grade in school or highest-grade level
completed
6th Primaria (Middle School) 2 (3.4)
7th Primaria (Middle School) 5 (8.6)
8th Primaria (Middle School) 9 (15.5)
1st Bachiller (High School) 16 (27.6)
2nd Bachiller (High School) 8 (13.8)
3rd Bachiller (High School) 13 (22.4)
4th Bachiller (High School) 5 (8.6)
Has a job
Yes 2 (3.4)
No 56 (96.6)
On whom does the participant depend economically?
Partner 39 (67.2)
Parents 7 (12.1)
Both Partner and Parents 10 (17.2)
Other 1 (1.7)
Missing 1 (1.7)
Has a partner
Yes 46 (79.3)
No 12 (20.7)
Number of children
1 54 (93.1)
2 3 (5.2)
3 1 (1.7)
Median, IQR
Participant’s age (years) 18, 1
Range of time with partner (months) 24, 24
Age of youngest child (months) * 3.6, 4
Note: * 2 missing values for this question.
3.2. Intervention
Of participants, 44 (76%) completed the intervention (actively participated in groups through the
ﬁnal session, attended the last in-person meeting, and completed follow up surveys); 11 /16 group 1
participants completed, 15 /20 group 2 participants completed, and 18 /22 group 3 participants completed.
FAMA participants were very active with a total of 19,536 messages, 1,582 pictures, and 10,369 emojis
sent in the three groups. The content of messages included asking questions about the daily and
weekly health topics, sharing personal experiences, and telling stories about how their situation related
to the current topic. Sent pictures were mainly of participants’ newborns to provide context for
questions about what was happening (i.e., a skin rash) or to share “cute” and /or meaningful moments.
Moderators found themselves correcting several misconceptions about how to appropriately manage
self- and infant care.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 8 of 16
3.3. Baseline and Follow-Up Surveys
3.3.1. Health Knowledge
There was a statistically signiﬁcant increase in health knowledge post-intervention as the mean
percent of correct health knowledge questions increased from 74.3% to 86.4% between baseline and
study end ( p<0.05) among the 44 participants who completed both baseline and post-intervention
health knowledge questions.
3.3.2. Index of Autonomous Functioning
There was a slight decrease in the mean composite score on the IAF between the pre (46.1 SD 5.6)
and the post (45.9 SD 5.6) questions among the 39 participants who completed both baseline and
post-intervention IAF questions, though this change was not statistically signiﬁcant.
3.3.3. PROMIS Measures
Participants who completed pre- and post-intervention PROMIS questions ( n=39) all had
scores within one standard deviation of the population mean. The PROMIS scales Social Isolation,
Instrumental Support, and Companionship increased in scores post-intervention, with an average
increase of 1.3 points. The Emotional Support and Informational Support scales decreased between the
pre- and post-intervention assessments, with an average decrease of 0.6 points. None of the changes in
the PROMIS measures were statistically signiﬁcant.
3.4. Medical Record Review
3.4.1. Attendance at Well-Baby Visits
Study participants with available medical records ( n=57) were 6.58 times more likely to attend at
least two of their indicated well-baby visits than controls ( n=22) (95% CI: 2.23–19.4). This result is
statistically signiﬁcant at the 95% conﬁdence interval.
3.4.2. Prevalence of Modern Contraceptive Use
Of the 56 participants with medical records with family planning data, 34 (61%) had used a modern
contraceptive method between the birth of their youngest child and the start of the intervention and 41
(72%) either continued to use, or had started, a method during the intervention. Most participants
used Depo Provera (58%) followed by an Implanon (9%), oral contraceptives (9%), and one participant
had an intrauterine device (IUD). Modern contraceptive use among the study sample was statistically
signiﬁcantly higher ( p<0.05) than that of a national sample of 15- to 19-year-old adolescents (21.4%),
as reported by the 2013 national demographic and health survey in the DR [48].
3.5. In-Depth Interviews
Results from qualitative analysis of interview transcripts ( n=27) indicated participants felt they
learned a lot during the intervention and, related to our quantitative measures of social support and
autonomous functioning, participants indicated they had received social support in various dimensions
and were more capable of autonomous functioning after participation. Overall, participants indicated
they were highly satisﬁed with the intervention and all participants interviewed indicated they would
recommend participation in FAMA to others.
3.5.1. What Participants Learned
Twenty-four participants (88.9%) discussed having learned new information from their
participation in FAMA. When participants were asked to provide speciﬁc examples, 78% mentioned
learning the family planning topic and emphasized that they learned as much about what does notInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 9 of 16
work to prevent pregnancy as what does. For example, one participant said, “about family planning,
I loved that. There are some methods that I did not know about and through the group I learned...and that there
are some myths that they [people in general] say, supposedly to not get pregnant, but in truth they are not true,
like urinating, that does not prevent a pregnancy.” Similarly, another commented, “bathing after you have
sex with your husband, to prevent a pregnancy, knowing that this is false, and I learned, yes, a lot from that,
from [family planning] and that this is false.” Yet another said she learned “to understand things, let’s suppose,
the myths that people say that after people have had sexual intercourse, that afterwards washing yourself and
urinating that that prevents pregnancy and all those are myths because none of that is real.” One participant
said of the family planning topic, “: : :they [the moderators] taught me many things for our babies and
for ourselves too, of family planning for ourselves, to not get pregnant at an early age so that we can continue
our studies”.
Of the participants, 63% expressed they had learned from and /or valued the topic “understanding
your baby” and 55.6% indicated the same for the topic “feeding your baby”. One participant
comprehensively expressed the importance of both topics: “I have learned a lot. First, I learned how to
care for my baby, I know now when she cries it’s not because she is misbehaving, but because something is wrong,
or something hurts. I have learned to appreciate her smile, how she grabs me or cuddles. And, in the morning
when I wake her up the ﬁrst thing she looks for the breast, like someone who says: ‘Give me breast, give me breast
I’m hungry’, but she doesn’t cry in the morning. The ﬁrst days it was very di cult to get used to it because she
was crying and I did not know why, because I am a ﬁrst time mother : : :but thank you to FAMA, I have learned
a lot about breastfeeding. My mom used to say to me: ‘From the moment the child is born, you stick a bottle of
milk to them’, it is not like that, the child is given the breast for the ﬁrst 6 months”.
3.5.2. Social Support
There was evidence of increased social connectedness, companionship, informational support,
and emotional support demonstrated in the interviews. Nearly all participants (96.3%) expressed
feelings or perceptions of increased social connectedness and /or the availability of someone with whom
to share enjoyable social activities as a result of the FAMA intervention. As one participant commented,
“: : :it [the group] was practically a family, they guided us and showed us a lot of care and appreciation. You’ve
seen how [the moderators] are with us, they are very playful, and I thank you and them because I have learned a lot
and I have helped my baby a lot...I had to change environments and look for a job and all that so I don’t participate
as much in the group now, but still I felt like I was in a family, I felt the warmth of being in a home with other
girls.” Another commented, “: : :some of the girls, we got along well, not a simple friendship ‘Ah we talk on
WhatsApp and that’, no we can already say, ‘maybe one day we can go to her house, we are going to hang out,
we are going to cook with the children’, you know? And we built trust.” Emotional support was mentioned
by 37.0% of the participants. As one participant said, “I felt really good and supported. It even lifted my
self-esteem; that was something really nice.” Another participant reported a similar self-esteem boost
sharing, “ Yes, I even feel that my self-esteem has risen a little because I am a little antisocial and I have opened
up a little, speaking in the conversations : : :I have met many people .” One participant shared that one of the
facilitators provided emotional support during a di cult time, “ My experience was very comfortable,
I felt very trusting, I could communicate, not only in private but also with the girls, many times...I mean I’ve
had a lot of relationship problems with the baby’s father, they [the moderators] have helped me a lot, they advise
me, I felt comfortable, we shared a lot, I learned a lot... ” Receipt of informational support was expressed
by 55.6% of the participants. Many participants shared the sentiment that, “[the moderators] are really
good, they helped me signiﬁcantly, always attentive to whatever question, really good treatment.” Several
participants provided examples of the informational support provided to them including about family
planning, what to do when their baby is crying or constipated, among other information received.
3.5.3. Autonomous Functioning
There was evidence of increased autonomous functioning in the exit interviews as participants
expressed heightened interest and ability to take care of themselves and their babies. As one motherInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 10 of 16
said, “I learned to be more awake, like more agile, and to interact more with other people.” Another said,
“before [the intervention] there were things that I didn’t feel that kind of trust [to talk about], not even to talk
with my mom. Now I do it, I have opened a little, I’ve left my comfort zone.” Another said, “Oh, with my
husband an example, I feel more... I mean, I tell him things he can do with the child and I explain to him that if he
can, he can give him his little meal : : :before he gave him anise and oregano tea, and I said: ’No, you can’t give
that,’ and he said to me, ’okay,’ and I explained why.” Similarly, participants indicated decreased levels
of susceptibility. As one mother said, “I learned that I can have my own opinion and decide for myself.”
Another demonstrated high authorship saying, “I would say in ﬁve years I will be working. I would also
like to dedicate myself to my family and sometimes hang out with my girlfriends. I would like to be like that in
the future.”
3.5.4. Overall Satisfaction
Overall, participants expressed general satisfaction with the FAMA intervention. As one participant
shared, “It is a very excellent group, very excellent, it should be extended more in the country because it provides
signiﬁcant help to ﬁrst time moms.” Another said, “: : :I learned a lot, it was really useful to me the information
they gave us, the help with the babies, because I was totally inexperienced.” Every participant expressed they
would recommend the FAMA program to others. As one participant summarized, “this group was really,
really special, truly it was. I am really very happy, very happy, I am. The only thing that bothers me is that now
we aren’t going to be able to participate because this is the end. I was really, really happy in this group, I would
pass the day really happy reviewing messages. I wasn’t angry, no, because I would grab the phone and when I
grabbed the phone it was for me to smile.” One participant said they would recommend the group because,
“: : :sometimes [girls] get pregnant at an early age and they don’t know how to take care of their child, but [in
the group] they deal with all topics, there are some girls who know more than others, they can help each other.”
3.5.5. Recommendations for Future Improvements
When asked what we could do to improve the intervention, one participant gave content-related
feedback, suggesting expanding the baby illnesses topic to include more childhood illnesses.
Others voiced other concerns related to the function of the group including the di culty involved
in juggling the group with other responsibilities, determining how to meaningfully contribute to the
group, annoyance over long waits for responses to questions, and complaints that some participants
did not follow group norms. For example, one participant said, “Sometimes they talked a lot, I practically
didn’t talk, I only entered [into the chat] to see what interested me, and I didn’t like it, that they talked so
much, many voice memos, talked about things that they shouldn’t be talking about and that’s why I didn’t
talk much in the group.” Some were frustrated by the lack of participation by some of the participants.
One participant said, “in reality, I didn’t like it when other participants didn’t talk much in the group : : :that
bored me a little. But, I liked it [FAMA] a lot, it was very interesting.”
4. Discussion
As we move toward an increasingly digital and global world, it is important to e ectively design
and evaluate technologies that can provide information and improve health among those living in
hard-to-reach areas. In this study, we aimed to determine if participation in a digital educational
support group administered through WhatsApp Messenger centered on the speciﬁc needs of new
adolescent mothers was a feasible and e cacious method to improve their health knowledge and
behaviors. Overall, participants demonstrated statistically signiﬁcant improvements in postpartum
and neonatal knowledge, better attendance at well-baby visits, and as a group, had a markedly higher
modern contraceptive use than other adolescents in the Dominican Republic after participating in the
intervention. Additionally, participants indicated feeling increased social connectedness as well as
higher levels of informational and emotional support following participation.
A particular strength of our study is the evaluation component, as many studies detailing
the development of digital technologies for limited-resource settings focus on the feasibility,Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 11 of 16
acceptability, and design of new technologies, while few evaluate the outcomes observed following
their interventions [ 52]. Furthermore, our use of a mixed-methods study provides sound evidence and
a rich description regarding adolescents’ perspectives of the intervention as well as the improvements
in outcomes experienced from their participation in it. Our ﬁndings, therefore, provide a valuable
contribution to the literature, as evidence-based methods to help adolescent mothers living in
limited-resource settings manage the postpartum period are acutely needed and hard to come by.
Additionally, evidence-based methods for the e ective evaluation of these interventions are needed [ 38].
Our ﬁndings are unique as much of the research on WhatsApp interventions and adolescent pregnancy
focuses on sexual and reproductive health, including sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy
prevention [ 53,54]. Our ﬁndings were, however, similar to one recent study conducted in Kenya,
which found a mobile support group o ered through WhatsApp is safe, feasible, and enhanced rates
of postpartum contraceptive uptake among participants [ 27]. That these types of interventions are
demonstrating e cacy among similar populations in as diverse of settings as the DR and Kenya
further emphasizes that well-designed digital interventions are a promising method to improve health
outcomes among adolescents in limited-resource settings globally.
Beyond our ﬁndings, our experience implementing our intervention provided many important
lessons that are applicable to future digital interventions. First, it took extensive planning and
coordination to determine how to provide cell phones to each participant as well as ensure participants
had su cient internet connectivity or cellular data to be able to participate in the intervention.
Despite numerous global statistics indicating there is widespread smartphone use in limited-resource
settings [ 55,56], other studies have identiﬁed disparities in who has access to phones or that cell phone
connectivity is very limited [ 25,54,57]. Before implementing mHealth or other digital technologies
in limited-resource settings, exploring target participants’ access to cellular phones and internet
connectivity is an important ﬁrst step. Then, once we provided participants cellular phones, they quickly
exhausted their data packages by sending photos of their babies and voice memos in the WhatsApp
groups. In response, we purchased weekly data plans that enabled more internet and cellular data use
and implemented “group rules” that limited the number of pictures /videos and length of voice notes
that could be sent. These are important lessons when considering implementing digital interventions,
as a thorough understanding of target participants’ potential data use, and how to obtain su cient
connectivity to maintain it, is critical. Additionally, we had the funding to provide phones and data
packages to intervention participants from a successful grant application. As this may not be the case
for many organizations looking to implement this type of intervention, some possible ways to reduce
costs are to include less participants, only include participants who have access to a cellular phone and
WhatsApp, as has been done in other studies [ 27], or place limits on the amount of data they are able
to use.
Encouragingly, the WhatsApp groups were very active. However, this meant the group moderators
had to dedicate more time than anticipated to answer questions, maintain group norms, and correct
misinformation. To help manage participants’ expectations (i.e., that moderators would not respond in
the middle of the night), a group norm was developed to clarify that although participants could send
messages at any time, the moderators would only respond Monday–Friday during working hours.
Beyond monitoring the group chats, responding to individual messages received from participants
was a time-consuming task for moderators. The large group size may have exacerbated this problem.
For future interventions, it will be important to recognize the time and resources required to manage
a support group such as this and establish the norms around, expectations for, and availability
of moderators. The size of the digital groups should also be carefully considered, as of course
larger groups will maximize impact and a su cient number of participants is needed to generate
meaningful conversation as well as social and peer support. However, groups should not be too big
that vocal participants drown out their more timid counterparts and moderators cannot reasonably
manage questions received from all group members. Another consideration of the time investment
by moderators is the associated cost, which may reduce the cost e ectiveness of the intervention.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 12 of 16
To mitigate this concern, the amount of time moderators are able to spend on the intervention could
be more clearly regulated at the outset of the study, participants could be limited on the number
of questions they can pose to moderators outside of the group chat, or automated options, such as
eectively designed chatbots, could be used to answer frequently asked questions [ 58]. It is, however,
notable that other studies in limited-resource settings have also been able to have moderators involved
in WhatsApp groups in a cost-e ective way [ 27], but since WhatsApp groups are still emerging as a
health-related intervention method, further analyses on what makes them cost e ective are warranted.
Two additional considerations important for future studies are informed consent and privacy
concerns with the digital groups. As previously mentioned, in the DR, pregnant adolescents are
considered emancipated minors who can legally provide informed consent to participate in research
studies. As this is not always the case, future intervention designers must consider how to obtain
consent for younger adolescents’ participation. Privacy concerns are another large issue that may
aect similar interventions in di erent contexts. Unlike many messaging platforms, WhatsApp
Messenger has end-to-end encryption [ 26], which makes it a more secure platform. However, it may
not meet all privacy standards established to protect the sharing of personally identiﬁable health
information, as might be a concern in similar support groups. In this case, knowledge of local privacy
laws and regulations is paramount, as is careful attention to the informed consent process so that
potential participants understand what they are committing to when they join the group. Furthermore,
creating group norms that limit the sharing of private medical information in the group may minimize
this concern.
This study had limitations. First, 16 participants had previously participated in the user-centered
design sessions conducted during the intervention design stage. Those participants could, therefore,
have been more comfortable with the study team and MAMI clinic, more engaged in their health and /or
health care, and more willing to participate in groups. Notably, initial design sessions only explored
participants’ experiences as new mothers and their corresponding information needs; participants
in those sessions did not receive any type of patient education or health coaching. Therefore, it is
unlikely participation in these sessions led to increased knowledge of postnatal concepts or an increase
in contraceptive use. A second limitation was that in-depth interview participants were a convenience
sample of mothers who attended the ﬁnal in-person group sessions, which could lead to bias as those
in attendance were likely the more engaged participants. Additionally, despite implementing methods
such as indirect questioning [ 59,60] to avoid it, social desirability bias may have caused participants
to overestimate or overstate positive feelings toward the intervention during in-depth interviews.
Additionally, retrospective data collection of medical record data of participants and controls led to a
large amount of missing vaccination data and therefore, the vaccination data analysis was omitted
from the study. Lastly, the contraceptive methods used by paired controls was frequently missing in
MAMI medical records. This made it so that we could not compare contraceptive use of participants
and controls, which we remedied by substituting a national sample for comparison. This highlights an
important concern in the record keeping at this clinic and is an important reminder to those working
in similar settings globally; thoroughly documented medical records are critical to enable e ective
analysis of retrospective patient data. Regardless of limitations, we were able to successfully conduct
the intervention with three separate groups and most participants demonstrated increased knowledge
and improved health behaviors post-intervention as compared to controls and a national sample of
adolescent females.
5. Conclusions
Moderated WhatsApp support groups centered on the needs of new adolescent mothers are
feasible for health centers to conduct, acceptable by the target population, and can have a positive
impact on health knowledge, perceptions of social support, and health seeking behavior for family
planning and well-baby visits. Further study and improved documentation are necessary to determineInformatics 2020 ,7, 51 13 of 16
impacts on childhood vaccination coverage. Our results emphasize that digital technologies are a useful
and important technology that can lead to better health outcomes in limited-resource settings globally.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.S., M.H., D.B., and L.M.; methodology, S.S., M.H., L.M., E.H., L.G.,
and E.D.; software, E.H., A.L., S.S., and K.A.P .; formal analysis, E.H., S.S., and A.L.; investigation, V .A., L.M., K.A.P .,
E.D., and L.G.; validation, S.S., E.H., A.L., L.G., E.D., D.B., K.A.P ., V .A., L.M., and M.H.; resources, S.S., and E.H.;
data curation, E.H., V .A., and K.A.P .; writing—original draft preparation, S.S.; writing—review and editing, E.H.,
A.L., L.G., E.D., D.B., and M.H.; supervision, L.M., M.H., and S.S.; project administration, V .A., and K.A.P .; funding
acquisition, D.B., M.H., and L.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This project was supported by Grand Challenges Canada award number ST-POC-1808-17557.
Grand Challenges Canada is funded by the Government of Canada and is dedicated to supporting Bold
Ideas with Big Impact®. The author SS was funded through National Institute of Nursing Research of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number K99NR017829. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the o cial views of the National Institutes of Health. Also, the ﬁndings
and conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of Planned
Parenthood Federation of America, Inc.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to send a special thank you to our participants who were generous
with their time and involvement in this study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Centro de Estudios Sociales y Demogr áﬁcos—Rep ública Dominicana. Encuesta Demogr áﬁca y de Salud 2013 ;
CESDEM /República Dominicana and ICF International: Santo Domingo, Rep ública Dominicana, 2014; p. 620.
2. Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo. El Embarazo en Adolescentes: Un Desaf ío Multidimensional
para Generar Oportunidades en el Ciclo de vida ; Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo (PNUD):
Santo Domingo, Rep ública Dominicana, 2017.
3. Vogel, J.P .; Pileggi-Castro, C.; Chandra-Mouli, V .; Pileggi, V .N.; Souza, J.P .; Chou, D.; Say, L. Millennium
Development Goal 5 and adolescents: Looking back, moving forward. Arch. Dis. Child. 2015 ,100, S43–S47.
4. Santhya, K.; Jejeebhoy, S.J. Sexual and reproductive health and rights of adolescent girls: Evidence from
low-and middle-income countries. Glob. Public Health 2015 ,10, 189–221.
5. Kawakita, T.; Wilson, K.; Grantz, K.L.; Landy, H.J.; Huang, C.-C.; Gomez-Lobo, V . Adverse maternal and
neonatal outcomes in adolescent pregnancy. J. Pediatr. Adolesc. Gynecol. 2016 ,29, 130–136. [PubMed]
6. Althabe, F.; Moore, J.L.; Gibbons, L.; Berrueta, M.; Goudar, S.S.; Chomba, E.; Derman, R.J.; Patel, A.; Saleem, S.;
Pasha, O. Adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in adolescent pregnancies: The Global Network’s
Maternal Newborn Health Registry study. Reprod. Health 2015 ,12, S8.
7. Kiani, M.A.; Ghazanfarpour, M.; Saeidi, M. Adolescent Pregnancy: A Health Challenge. Int. J. Pediatr. 2019 ,
7, 9749–9752.
8. Cae, S.; Plesons, M.; Camacho, A.V .; Brumana, L.; Abdool, S.N.; Huaynoca, S.; Mayall, K.;
Menard-Freeman, L.; de Francisco Serpa, L.A.; de Leon, R.G.P . Looking back and moving forward: Can we
accelerate progress on adolescent pregnancy in the Americas? Reprod. Health 2017 ,14, 83.
9. Verguet, S.; Nandi, A.; Filippi, V .; Bundy, D.A. Postponing Adolescent Parity in Developing Countries
through Education: An. Extended Cost-E ectiveness Analysis ; The International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development /The World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2017; p. 303.
10. Chandra-Mouli, V .; Camacho, A.V .; Michaud, P .-A. WHO guidelines on preventing early pregnancy and
poor reproductive outcomes among adolescents in developing countries. J. Adolesc. Health 2013 ,52, 517–522.
11. Verbiest, S.; Bonzon, E.; Handler, A. Postpartum health and wellness: A call for quality woman-centered
care. Matern Child. Health J. 2016 ,20, 1–7.
12. Erﬁna, E.; Widyawati, W.; McKenna, L.; Reisenhofer, S.; Ismail, D. Exploring Indonesian adolescent women’s
healthcare needs as they transition to motherhood: A qualitative study. Women Birth 2019 ,32, e544–e551.
[CrossRef]
13. Kamali, S.; Ahmadian, L.; Khajouei, R.; Bahaadinbeigy, K. Health information needs of pregnant women:
Information sources, motives and barriers. Health Inform. Libr. J. 2018 ,35, 24–37.Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 14 of 16
14. Guerra-Reyes, L.; Christie, V .M.; Prabhakar, A.; Siek, K.A. Mind the gap: Assessing the disconnect between
postpartum health information desired and health information received. Womens Health Issues 2017 ,
27, 167–173.
15. Mangeli, M.; Rayyani, M.; Cheraghi, M.A.; Tirgari, B. Exploring the challenges of adolescent mothers from
their life experiences in the transition to motherhood: A qualitative study. J. Fam. Reprod Health 2017 ,11, 165.
16. Leahy-Warren, P .; McCarthy, G.; Corcoran, P . First-time mothers: Social support, maternal parental self-e cacy
and postnatal depression. J. Clin. Nurs. 2012 ,21, 388–397.
17. Evans, M.; Donelle, L.; Hume-Loveland, L. Social support and online postpartum depression discussion
groups: A content analysis. Patient Educ. Couns. 2012 ,87, 405–410.
18. Grassley, J.S. Adolescent mothers’ breastfeeding social support needs. J. Obs. Gynecol. Neonatal Nurs. 2010 ,
39, 713–722.
19. Milgrom, J.; Hirshler, Y.; Reece, J.; Holt, C.; Gemmill, A.W. Social Support—A Protective Factor for Depressed
Perinatal Women? Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019 ,16, 1426.
20. Chang, B.; Bakken, S.; Brown, S.; Houston, T.; Kreps, G.; Kukafka, R.; Safran, C.; Stavri, P . Bridging the digital
divide: Reaching vulnerable populations. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 2004 ,11, 448–457.
21. IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. The Growing Value of Digital Health: Evidence and Impact on
Human Health and the Healthcare System. 2017. Available online: https: //www.iqvia.com /insights /the-
iqvia-institute /reports /the-growing-value-of-digital-health (accessed on 3 October 2020).
22. López, L.; Green, A.R.; Tan-McGrory, A.; King, R.S.; Betancourt, J.R. Bridging the digital divide in health
care: The role of health information technology in addressing racial and ethnic disparities. Jt. Comm. J. Qual.
Patient Saf. 2011 ,37, 437–445.
23. Hindin, M.J.; Fatusi, A.O. Adolescent sexual and reproductive health in developing countries: An overview
of trends and interventions. Int. Perspect Sex. Reprod. Health 2009 ,35, 58–62.
24. Guerra-Reyes, L.; Christie, V .M.; Prabhakar, A.; Harris, A.L.; Siek, K.A. Postpartum Health Information
Seeking Using Mobile Phones: Experiences of Low-Income Mothers. Matern Child. Health J. 2016 ,20, 13–21.
25. Stonbraker, S.; Haight, E.; Soriano, L.; Guijosa, L.; Davison, E.; Bushley, D.; Messina, L.; Halpern, M.
Establishing content for a digital educational support group for new adolescent mothers in the Dominican
Republic: A user-centered design approach. Int. J. Adolesc. Med. Health 2020 ,1. [CrossRef]
26. Kamel Boulos, M.; Giustini, D.; Wheeler, S. Instagram and WhatsApp in health and healthcare: An overview.
Future Internet 2016 ,8, 37. [CrossRef]
27. Patel, S.J.; Subbiah, S.; Jones, R.; Muigai, F.; Rothschild, C.W.; Omwodo, L.; Ogolla, T.; Kimenju, G.; Pearson, N.;
Meadows, A. Providing support to pregnant women and new mothers through moderated WhatsApp
groups: A feasibility study. Mhealth 2018 ,4, 1–8. [CrossRef]
28. Henry, J.V .; Winters, N.; Lakati, A.; Oliver, M.; Geniets, A.; Mbae, S.M.; Wanjiru, H. Enhancing the supervision
of community health workers with WhatsApp mobile messaging: Qualitative ﬁndings from 2 low-resource
settings in Kenya. Glob. Health Sci. Pract. 2016 ,4, 311–325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Giordano, V .; Koch, H.; Godoy-Santos, A.; Belangero, W.D.; Pires, R.E.S.; Labronici, P . WhatsApp messenger
as an adjunctive tool for telemedicine: An overview. Interact. J. Med. Res. 2017 ,6, e11. [CrossRef]
30. Odendaal, W.A.; Watkins, J.A.; Leon, N.; Goudge, J.; Gri ths, F.; Tomlinson, M.; Daniels, K. Health
workers’ perceptions and experiences of using mHealth technologies to deliver primary healthcare services:
A qualitative evidence synthesis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2020 ,3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Lim, M.H.; Rodebaugh, T.L.; Eres, R.; Long, K.; Penn, D.L.; Gleeson, J.F. A pilot digital intervention targeting
loneliness in youth mental health. Front. Psychiatry 2019 ,10, 604. [CrossRef]
32. Baker, B.; Yang, I. Social media as social support in pregnancy and the postpartum. Sex. Reprod. Healthc.
2018 ,17, 31–34. [CrossRef]
33. Arcia, A.; Stonbraker, S.; Warner, E.R.A. Information Needs and Information-Seeking Processes of Low-Income
Pregnant Women in Relation to Digital Maternity Education Resources. J. Perinat. Educ. 2019 ,28, 151–162.
[CrossRef]
34. Yan, Z. Child and adolescent use of mobile phones: An unparalleled complex developmental phenomenon.
Child. Dev. 2018 ,89, 5–16. [CrossRef]
35. Sockolow, P .; Schug, S.; Zhu, J.; Smith, T.; Senathirajah, Y.; Bloom, S. At-risk adolescents as experts in a new
requirements elicitation procedure for the development of a smart phone psychoeducational trauma-informed
care application. Inform. Health Soc. Care 2017 ,42, 77–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 15 of 16
36. Schnall, R.; Okoniewski, A.; Tiase, V .; Low, A.; Rodriguez, M.; Kaplan, S. Using text messaging to assess
adolescents’ health information needs: An ecological momentary assessment. J. Med. Internet Res. 2013 ,
15, e54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Cole, L.; Kharwa, Y.; Khumalo, N.; Reinke, J.S.; Karrim, S.B. Caregivers of school-aged children with autism:
Social media as a source of support. J. Child. Fam. Stud. 2017 ,26, 3464–3475. [CrossRef]
38. Denno, D.M.; Hoopes, A.J.; Chandra-Mouli, V . E ective strategies to provide adolescent sexual and
reproductive health services and to increase demand and community support. J. Adolesc. Health 2015 ,
56, S22–S41. [CrossRef]
39. Haberland, N.; Rogow, D. Sexuality education: Emerging trends in evidence and practice. J. Adolesc. Health
2015 ,56, S15–S21. [CrossRef]
40. Stonbraker, S.; Schnall, R.; Larson, E. Tools to measure health literacy among Spanish speakers: An integrative
review of the literature. Patient Educ. Couns. 2015 ,98, 1513–1523. [CrossRef]
41. Sarkar, U.; Schillinger, D.; Lopez, A.; Sudore, R. Validation of self-reported health literacy questions among
diverse English and Spanish-speaking populations. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 2011 ,26, 265–271. [CrossRef]
42. Weinstein, N.; Przybylski, A.K.; Ryan, R.M. The index of autonomous functioning: Development of a scale of
human autonomy. J. Res. Personal. 2012 ,46, 397–413. [CrossRef]
43. Roth, G.; Assor, A.; Kanat-Maymon, Y.; Kaplan, H. Autonomous motivation for teaching:
How self-determined teaching may lead to self-determined learning. J. Educ. Psychol. 2007 ,99, 761.
[CrossRef]
44. Knee, C.R.; Lonsbary, C.; Canevello, A.; Patrick, H. Self-determination and conﬂict in romantic relationships.
J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 2005 ,89, 997. [CrossRef]
45. Deci, E.L.; Ryan, R.M. The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of
behavior. Psychol. Inq. 2000 ,11, 227–268. [CrossRef]
46. Cella, D.; Riley, W.; Stone, A.; Rothrock, N.; Reeve, B.; Yount, S.; Amtmann, D.; Bode, R.; Buysse, D.; Choi, S.
The Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) developed and tested its ﬁrst
wave of adult self-reported health outcome item banks: 2005–2008. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 2010 ,63, 1179–1194.
[CrossRef]
47. Cella, D.; Yount, S.; Rothrock, N.; Gershon, R.; Cook, K.; Reeve, B.; Ader, D.; Fries, J.F.; Bruce, B.; Rose, M.
The Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS): Progress of an NIH Roadmap
cooperative group during its ﬁrst two years. Med. Care 2007 ,45, S3. [CrossRef]
48. DHS Program. Dominican Republic: Standard DHS. 2013. Available online: http: //dhsprogram.com /what-
we-do /survey /survey-display-439.cfm (accessed on 3 October 2020).
49. Elo, S.; Kyngäs, H. The qualitative content analysis process. J. Adv. Nurs. 2008 ,62, 107–115. [CrossRef]
50. Hsieh, H.-F.; Shannon, S.E. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual. Health Res. 2005 ,
15, 1277–1288. [CrossRef]
51. White, M.D.; Marsh, E.E. Content analysis: A ﬂexible methodology. Libr. Trends 2006 ,55, 22–45. [CrossRef]
52. Chib, A.; van Velthoven, M.H.; Car, J. mHealth adoption in low-resource environments: A review of the use
of mobile healthcare in developing countries. J. Health Commun. 2015 ,20, 4–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Ahinkorah, B.O.; Hagan, J.E., Jr.; Seidu, A.-A.; Budu, E.; Hormenu, T.; Mintah, J.K.; Sambah, F.; Schack, T.
Access to Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention Information and Services in Ghana: A Community-Based
Case-Control Study. Front. Public Health 2019 ,7. [CrossRef]
54. McCarthy, O.L.; Wazwaz, O.; Calderon, V .O.; Jado, I.; Saibov, S.; Stavridis, A.; Gallardo, J.L.; Tokhirov, R.;
Adada, S.; Huaynoca, S. Development of an intervention delivered by mobile phone aimed at decreasing
unintended pregnancy among young people in three lower middle income countries. BMC Public Health
2018 ,18, 576. [CrossRef]
55. Sondaal, S.F.V .; Browne, J.L.; Amoakoh-Coleman, M.; Borgstein, A.; Miltenburg, A.S.; Verwijs, M.;
Klipstein-Grobusch, K. Assessing the e ect of mHealth interventions in improving maternal and neonatal
care in low-and middle-income countries: A systematic review. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0154664. [CrossRef]
56. Qiang, C.; Yamamichi, M.; Hausman, V .; Miller, R.; Altman, D. Mobile Applications for the Health Sector ;
World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2012.
57. Lee, S.; Begley, C.E.; Morgan, R.; Chan, W.; Kim, S.-Y. Addition of mHealth (mobile health) for family
planning support in Kenya: Disparities in access to mobile phones and associations with contraceptive
knowledge and use. Int. Health 2019 ,11, 463–471. [CrossRef]Informatics 2020 ,7, 51 16 of 16
58. Denecke, K.; May, R.; Popel, A.; Hochreutener, S.L. Can a Chatbot Increase the Motivation to Provide Personal
Health Information? Studies Health Technol. Inform. 2020 ,273, 85–90.
59. Dodou, D.; de Winter, J.C. Social desirability is the same in o ine, online, and paper surveys: A meta-analysis.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 2014 ,36, 487–495. [CrossRef]
60. Fisher, R. Social desirability bias and the validity of indirect questioning. J. Consum. Res. 1993 ,20, 303–315.
[CrossRef]
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aliations.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).