__________________________  
* Corresponding authorDIGITAL HERITAGE:  
ACADEMIC RESEARCH IN BRAZIL IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS 
Ana Paula R. Araujo1*, Claudio Antônio S. L. Carlos 1, Julio Cesar R. Sampaio 1, Ricardo Ferreira Vieira2 
1 UFRRJ, Dep. de Arquitetura e Urbanismo, Programa de Pós-graduação Patrimônio, Cultura e Sociedade, BR 465 km 7, Seropédica, 
Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brasil - (ana.r.araujo, claudio.limacarlos, julio.sampaio.ufrrj) @gmail.com 
2 UFRRJ, Curso de Graduação em Arquitetura e Urbanismo, BR 465 km 7, Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brasil – 
(rikrdim_pr@hotmail.com) 
Commission II, WG II/8 
KEY WORDS: Digital Heritage, Cultural Heritage Technologies, Education, Research, Keywords. 
ABSTRACT: 
In order to update and deepen the theoretical discussions about Digital Heritage, the authors initiated a survey of the most recent 
technologies that improves the documentation of architectural buildings and sites. We intend to implement a digital workflow on the 
studies of buildings and sites that have a potential of protection in the Fluminense lowland of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. This is part of the 
activities of the conservation education at bachelor level in Architecture and Urbanism, and the course of the Postgraduate Program on 
heritage conservation of Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ). The main objective of the current scientific research 
is the identification of Brazilian researchers and the subjects that have been studied in the last five years in order to make a theoretical 
review through the systematization of topics, thematic axis, terms, concepts regarding the application of information and 
communication technologies (ICT) in the heritage documentation. We carried out a qualitative-quantitative mapping of the scientific 
production of twelve scientific events having occurred in Brazil and Latin America between 2013 and 2018. We detected 156 Brazilian 
researchers from all regions of the country that had researched about Digital heritage. The mapping of themes was compared to 
keywords index of CIPA-ICOMOS Symposium 2017 in order to identify points of contact and lack of studies in Brazil for planning 
the future research. The research group seek ways for better integration between national researchers, ways to get theoretical content 
up-to-date and to adopt more accurate documentation practices at undergraduate and postgraduate disciplines. 
1. INTRODUCTION
Digital heritage comprises a wide variety of approaches and 
topics that involve researchers from multiple disciplines and are 
widely discussed by researchers of different countries. Digital 
technologies are increasingly important in research in the arts and 
humanities since they enhance digital workflow for documenting 
cultural heritage. We present the first part of the research - "The 
state of the art of the application of digital technologies in the 
documentation of material heritage in Brazil and abroad" that 
intends to systematize practices to build a workflow to be used in 
academic-scientific inventories considering ICTs in order to give 
greater efficiency to documentation heritage. 
In order to identify ICTs applied to inventories of architectural 
heritage, we started with a theoretical review through the 
systematization of topics, thematic axis, terms, concepts 
regarding the application of information and communication 
technologies (ICT) in the heritage documentation. We aim to 
support the conservation teaching of the Undergraduate Course 
in Architecture and Urbanism and Postgraduate Program in 
Cultural Heritage of the Federal Rural University of Rio de 
Janeiro - UFRRJ. 
2. METHODOLOGICAL PROCEDURES
At first, we searched for scientific articles that discuss digital 
heritage published in symposia, congresses, colloquiums, 
meetings to identify by keywords which topics are being studied. 
We systematized the main topics to: organizing the readings by 
thematic axes, monitoring the evolution of research in Brazil; constitute a definition of the terms in order to provide greater 
theoretical precision to the group of researchers; to seek a deeper 
theoretical understanding for Brazilian research and to establish 
new research themes. Secondly, the identification of Brazilian 
and foreign researchers has the following objectives: to monitor 
Brazilian and foreign scientific production according to key 
themes; identify potential partners for interinstitutional research; 
assist ICOMOS Brazil in structuring national scientific 
committees, in line with existing international standards. 
We selected eleven scientific events in which there was a great 
participation of Brazilian educators and researchers in the 
cultural heritage discussion: Information and Communication 
Technology Meeting-TIC, 2015; Ibero-American Seminar of 
Architecture and Documentation-ArqDoc 2013 and 2015 and 
2017; Scientific Symposium of the Ibero-American Society of 
Digital Graphics-SIGRADI, 2013 to 2018; ICOMOS Brazil 
Scientific Symposium, 2018. Then we organized by topics: 
DISCOVERY; SCIENTIFIC PROCESS and DISSEMINATION 
(Owen et al, 2004). For the comparison of Brazilian and foreign 
production, we have selected the scientific articles of the annals 
and archives of the International Symposium of the International 
Committee of Architectural Photogrammetry - CIPA-ICOMOS 
2017 to identify if Brazilian research is up-to-date and if covers 
all international research topics. 
TIC is a national event of the National Association of Built 
Environment Technology (ANTAC), dedicated to the application 
of Information and Communication Technology for the 
improvement of the design, production and management 
processes of buildings and cities. The VII Meeting of Information 
and Communication Technology, occurred in 2015, addressed 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
109 
the theme of Infrastructure and City Buildings: From BIM to 
CIM, and aimed at expanding the BIM concept to urban 
development scale, allowing us to glimpse a series of discussions 
about how Information and Communication Technologies can 
contribute to improve the quality of buildings and cities. 
 
The 3rd (2013), 4th (2015) and 5th (2017) Ibero-American Seminar 
of Architecture and Documentation – ArqDoc - held in Belo 
Horizonte (MG) have made a great contribution to the research 
of architecture documentation presenting the Latin American 
Network of Architecture and Urbanism Collections - RELARQ. 
These seminars had the following themes about architecture and 
documentation: the challenges of new technologies; the research 
in the area of the history of Architecture and Urbanism; 
Constructive techniques and documentation. 
 
XVII Congress of SIGraDi 2013, with the topic “Knowledge-
based Design”, proposed a reflection on ways of thinking and 
developing design in relation to information and digital 
resources. XVIII Congress of SIGraDi 2014 focused on "Design 
in Freedom" and sought to discuss the impact these two 
dimensions have on design and habitat disciplines - in their 
different scales and environments - in their technical, creative, 
cognitive, social, ethic? and educational aspects. XIX Congress 
of SIGraDi 2015 with the theme "Project information for 
interaction" promoted debates on the applications and 
possibilities of using digital graphics technologies. XX Congress 
of SIGraDi 2016, on the other hand, addressed the theme 
"Crowdthinking" that reveals how transdisciplinary thinking 
builds multiplicity and diversity in complex problems through 
collaborative work, distributed intelligences and collective 
research. XXI Congress of SIGraDi 2018 sought to discuss 
"Technopolitics" to broaden the debate on access and sharing of 
information, ways of executing, modes of participation, 
management, decision-making processes and production of 
cities, as well as the improvement of creative practices. 
 
The II Scientific Symposium ICOMOS 2018 centred on the 
discussion about “The challenges of modern preservation” 
reserving a thematic axis for discussions on documentation, 
conservation and restoration heritage. Preserve architectural 
heritage is too important in our country, because we have 
numerous sites and historic buildings, that represents our culture. 
 
The CIPA Scientific Symposium 2017, as a leader in the area of 
research on the use and innovations of digital technologies in the 
documentation for heritage conservation, had the theme "Digital 
Workflows for Heritage Conservation". The articles covered all 
stages of documentation (collecting, analysing, and 
dissemination of information) as well as the appropriate and 
innovative use of digital media in multidisciplinary research. 
 
The keywords and the locality of the authors of 140 scientific 
articles about heritage documentation produced by 156 Brazilian 
researchers represent, on average, almost 8% of the scientific 
production of the selected scientific events: 
 04 articles (6%) of 70 articles published in the Information 
and Communication Technology in Construction – TIC 2015; 
 73 articles (12%) of 580 articles published in the Ibero-
American Architecture and Documentation Seminars- ArqDoc 
2013, 2015 and 2017; 
 44 articles (5%) of 795 articles published in the Ibero-
American Digital Graphic Congresses – SIGraDi 2013, 2014, 
2015, 2016, 2017, 2018; 
 19 articles (5%) of 354 articles presented at the II ICOMOS 
2018 Scientific Symposium 
 At the CIPA Scientific Symposium held in Ottawa in 2017, all 
164 scientific articles (annals and archives) produced by 436 
researchers from 36 countries were selected for this study. 
 
 
3. EDUCATION AT ARCHITECTURE AND 
URBANISM UNDERGRADUATE AND HERITAGE, 
CULTURE AND SOCIETY POSTGRADUATE COURSE 
AT UFRRJ 
 
3.1 The topics and practices in the conservation discipline 
 
The aim of the undergraduate course in architecture and urbanism 
is to train the student, through a review of the world evolution of 
conservation by theory readings of cultural heritage. Considering 
the development of the Heritage and Restoration of Constructed 
Heritage, the discipline (IT 819) proposes to the students designs 
of conservation interventions, considering updates in their 
architectural physical structures, and plans to consolidate urban 
areas. In order to do so, the students are taught to study the 
evolution of the main theoretical assumptions underlying the 
formation and development of conservation theory, with 
particular emphasis in the Brazilian context and its particularities 
manifested in the current legislation for the protection and 
conservation of architectural monuments and historical urban 
areas considering the technical bodies. 
 
The theoretical module addresses the basic concepts of cultural 
heritage, the instruments of protection, history and conservation 
theory, the methodology of conservation projects and basic 
conservation techniques. In the practical module, the students 
elaborate projects of conservation of buildings and of urban 
areas. It generates documentation that identifies architectonic and 
urbanistic characteristics that make up their cultural identity in 
the Fluminense lowland. The municipality of Nova Iguaçu / RJ / 
Brazil has been studied since 2012. About 50 buildings were 
identified representing their urban and architectural memory. The 
vast majority without any kind of legal protection. The studies 
were developed by the students with proper guidance of the 
teachers responsible for the discipline. 
 
In order to achieve these objectives, the course (60 hours per 
semester) is divided into two modules of two credits: one is 
dedicated to the conservation of urban areas and the other to the 
conservation of buildings. This programme is based on the 
experience of the similar discipline teaching plan of the 
Graduation Course of Architecture and Urbanism of the Federal 
University of Juiz de Fora from 2004 to 2010. 
 
Regarding the module related to conservation buildings, the 
discipline develops ten themes related to the study and 
proposition of conservation interventions in previously selected 
cases. They are: introduction to conservation (instruments of 
protection and conceptual frame); historical research; analysis of 
the current conditions I (planimetry and altimetry); analysis of 
the current conditions II (remaining architectural features, 
ambience, current legislation, damage mapping, levels of 
deterioration and alterations); basic conservation techniques; and 
conservation proposals (preliminary and draft studies). 
 
With respect to the module dedicated to urban conservation, a 
theoretical module is developed first, which addresses the main 
aspects that support the conservation of urban areas. Then, the 
students study a selected area of the universe of municipalities of 
Baixada Fluminense, currently in the municipality of Nova 
Iguaçu, as already mentioned. 
 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
110 
The analysis of the urban areas and buildings has the purpose of 
establishing protection areas of the built environment that are 
worked in the other module of the discipline. This study is 
concerned with the protection of the respective ambiences and 
the necessary improvements of their conditions of use. It may 
include proposals for protection of other built elements that may 
come to be identified as relevant to the local landscape 
composition. To this objective, the uses, the occupation, the 
height of the buildings and recurrent stylistic tendencies are 
mapped and evaluated. The result helps to identify 
incompatibilities, as well as to establish the limits of an 
environment area. It is proposed to the students to elaborate 
profiles and 3D models with the existing silhouettes according to 
the researched data. 
 
3.2 The topics of the postgraduate digital technology 
discipline 
 
The discipline "Digital technologies applied to the conservation 
of mobile and immovable assets" (IT 4011) of the "Heritage, 
Culture and Society Postgraduate Program" covers the inventory 
methodologies in Brazil, the technologies for data acquisition, 
documentation, visualization and interaction. 
 
Concerning to inventories, we start with a historical perspective 
of inventories  based on reference texts, patrimonial letters 
(Athens - 1931, Venice - 1964, UNESCO - 1972, Lausanne - 
1990, 1996, Letter of Burra - 1999, Ename – 2007, ICOMOS-
2008, London-2009, Seville-2010), and the Brazilian practices 
(Work Plan of Lucio Costa-1949, Historical Cities Program-
1970, National Inventory of Real Estate in Sites INBI-SU-1987-
1979, Monumenta Program-2000-2010, PAC Historical Cities-
2007-2011). We focus on the means, techniques, technologies, 
principles and criteria for documentation of monuments, 
buildings and sites. It is important to identify what information 
and knowledge must be produced of different kinds of cultural 
heritage and whether there are guidelines for digital workflow. 
 
On the subject of technologies for data acquisition , we use the 
systematization of technologies proposed by Owen et al (2004): 
DISCOVERY/INPUT stage that involves direct methods 
(Tactile, Hand measurement, Total station, EDM, GPS, levelling, 
Drawing) and indirect methods (Photogrammetry, Laser 
scanning, Remote sensing) in addition, the registration forms. For 
the organization of the programmatic content we also use as 
reference: principles for the recording (ICOMOS, 1996); metric 
survey techniques and information management tools, quality of 
data (accuracy, utility, verifiability) (Letellier, 2007); the phases 
of the conservation cycle (Diagnosis, Intervention, Monitoring, 
Evaluation); the classification of digital technologies (Direct and 
Indirect) (Santana-Quintero & Addison, 2008); the 
CIPA/RecorDIM teaching manual (drawing, EDM, Rectified 
Photography, Photogrammetry, GPS, Laser scanning) and the 
differentiation of digital sensors (visual, Dimensional, 
Locational, Environmental) (Quintero, Blake, Eppich, 2007). We 
use the metric data acquisition technologies according to 
different levels of detail: low accuracy recognition; preliminary 
record with average accuracy, and detailed record with high 
accuracy. 
 
The course covers the methodological sequence for the metric 
survey (photographic coverage, reading of texts and research of 
existing iconography, schematic drawings, measurement and 
annotation on materials, construction methods, state of 
conservation and final design). We emphasize the importance of 
the multispectral survey, in the complementation of the metric 
recording, to survey damages, anomalies, infestation, humidity, identification of internal materials to the constructive elements 
(identification of physical properties: irradiation, emissivity, 
reflection, wave and density). 
 
We discuss about the characteristics of architectural design, since 
the graphic representation, that are translations and reductions of 
the real, and the capacity of influence directly on the quality of 
information and communication analysis. Concerning to the 
iconographic record, we highlight the importance of the 
photography record in Brazilian inventories of architectural 
heritage, as well as identify the guidelines and parameters to be 
adopted, procedures for image correction, manipulation and 
registration of the metadata. 
 
Concerning the digital photogrammetry for recording, we present 
a historical perspective of the use of technology in the 
conservation of architectural heritage, its different types 
(spherical, panoramic, short distance, DSM, videogrametry), the 
integration with other technologies (Georeferencing, CAD, 
Geoprocessing, Laser scanner) and products produced from the 
processed data. We briefly present the point cloud processing, 3d 
modelling and the existence of many applications (123DCatch, 
My3Dscanner, Meshlab, VisualSFM, OpenMVG, ArcGIS). 
 
On the topic of technologies for documentation we classify them 
as SCIENTIFIC PROCESS (Owen et al, 2004): image 
processing, digital drawing, 3D modelling and Data/Information 
systems. About 3D modelling, we approach in the context of the 
digital heritage (UNESCO, 2003) (3D visualization, Digital 
library, Image processing, Field of interpretation) emphasizing 
the principles for interpretation of information and the 
importance of scientific transparency in documentation and 
interpretation (paradata) (Seville Charter, 2010). We present the 
steps of scientific method adopted for 3D modelling: information 
gathering, hypothesis formulation, predictions, experiments, data 
checking (Hermon in Bentkowska-Kafel et al, 2012). 
 
We have included a brief presentation of the different CAD-BIM-
CIM, CAM, CAE systems as well as the parameterization 
processes of 3d modelling. We highlight the 3D-Icons-
EUROPEANA project which proposes the digitization of a series 
of architectural and archaeological of cultural heritage and 
provides 3D models and digital content at Europeana. One of the 
objectives is to allow access to post-processing products (filling 
in holes, correcting corrupted duplicates, refinement and cleaning 
of image anomalies, texturing) of scans (444 posted models of 
2941 3D scans) through EUROPEANA. We emphasize the 
possibility of structuring information through the metadata using 
the CARARE2 scheme. This plays an important role to ensure 
that the digital content of Europe's unique archaeological 
monuments, important buildings, historic city centers and world-
class industrial monuments are accessible from national libraries, 
archives, museums and other content providers. 
 
Specifically, for the methodology of Building Information 
Modelling-BIM, Heritage Building Information Modelling-
HBIM (Murphy, 2007) and City Information Modelling-CIM, we 
approach the principles (parametrization, interoperability, 
precision and collaboration) applied to the process of 
conservation the architectural and urban sites heritage. These 
“tools” help to identify ambiguities and to define strategies of 
conservation. They could generate a source of reliable data for 
verification of interferences, conflicts, behaviour analysis 
(energy, structural) and building performance, as well as data 
sharing in integrated and collaborative work. The HBIM allows 
the integration of the acquired geometric data (TLS and/or 
Photogrammetry) in the digital models considering the 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
111 
constructive components and their parameters. It is possible to 
register the modifications during the life cycle of the 
construction, helping in the management (operation and 
maintenance - O&M) of the cultural heritage. 
 
We present the EPOCH Project (2004-2008) as a research 
reference. It brought together many European institutions to 
improve the quality and effectiveness of the use of information 
and communication technologies applied to cultural heritage. 
They tried to overcome the fragmentation of the research in the 
field. There were many challenges, such as the high cost of the 
technology (software and hardware) for processing the 
information, fragility of the equipment, the need for specialized 
training, lack of automation of procedures, difficulties in 
managing information from different resources and formats, lack 
of standardization of record data formats. The following tools 
were developed within the scope of the project: City Engine, 
Arc3D, Minidome, Imodelaser and UPGRADE, MeshLab, AMA 
and MAD, MobiComp and Cimad Application Broker, 
VHDPlus, Scene assembly Toolkit, Epoch Viewer. 
 
In terms of information systems, we approach the documentation 
concepts (Pereira Filho, 2015), archival, audio-visual and 
iconographic documentation, documentation management, 
documents and its information (Architectural archival section –
SAR /International Council on Archives). We reinforce the 
importance of control systems, the use of metadata (CIDOC-
CRM), the thesauri, the quality criteria (reliability, accessibility, 
security). As an example, we present MIDAS HERITAGE 
(1998) developed by Forum of Information Standards in Heritage 
(FISH) that established guidelines to register information about 
historic sites in the United Kingdom. It provides a common basis 
for the development of information systems in the creation of 
historical records, in information sharing, data recovery and 
giving greater consistency to knowledge construction. Another 
example is the ARCHES (2010-2011) from the Getty Institute 
(GCI) and World Monuments Fund (WMF), an open source 
platform to store information on inventories of tangible and 
intangible cultural heritage. ARCHES make possible to register 
the heritage, register inventory, carry out research and analysis, 
monitoring of risks, help decision making by research of 
priorities and conservation actions. It uses Geographic 
Information System-GIS technology and the Core Data Standard 
for Archaeological and Architectural Heritage-CIDOC-CRM 
documentation methodology, approved by CIPA-ICOMOS. The 
last example is the Integrated Knowledge and Management 
System - SICG (2012), the first geographical intelligence to 
document cultural heritage developed by IPHAN (Brazil).  
 
In the last thematic group of the discipline, 
DISSEMINATION/VISUALIZATION (Owen et al, 2004), we 
approached the digital media and its concepts, such as digital 
barrier, cyberspace, convergence, participatory culture, 
collective intelligence, hyper-reality, interactivity, interface, 
digital games, multimedia, security and surveillance, tracking, 
ubiquity, speed and virtuality. We include examples of virtual 
reality and augmented reality that can show the potential of 
interactions between users and information. We have identified 
several applications in the field of cultural heritage such as 
Architecture Walks, the NAI - Urban Augmented Reality, 
Augmented Reality Encyclopaedia (2006), the Archeoguide 
(Vlahakis, 2001). We also cover 3D printing technologies (Fused 
Deposition Modelling-FDM, Fused Filament Fabrication-FFF, 
Stereolithography-SLA, Digital Light Processing-DLP, Selective 
Laser Sintering-SLS, MultiJet, Colour Printing, Catalyst Resin, 
Die Casting and Microfusion, Plastic Injection Molding, CNC 
laser cutting / Milling / Router, Finishing and Post-Processing. The survey in Latin America (Sperling, 2015) has revealed the 
use of digital fabrication in FabLabs to create historical building 
models, for example. Models printed by digital pathways can be 
useful as research tools for renovation and conservation studies, 
for documentation and source of information, for awareness and 
heritage education. 
 
In order to improve the discipline, it is still necessary to update 
each topic considering national and foreign research, as well as 
the planning of implementing practical activities for the training 
of undergraduate and postgraduate students. In this sense, we set 
out to systematize the research through the identification of 
keywords, which facilitate the study of concepts, theories and 
practices. 
 
 
4. SURVEY OF TOPICS AND RESEARCHERS IN 
BRAZILIAN AND FOREIGN RESEARCH 
 
4.1  Survey of the keywords as descriptors that synthesize 
the research 
 
The survey of keywords in scientific articles was carried out to 
facilitate the selection of articles by relevant topics to the ongoing 
research, and programmatic plans of undergraduate and post-
graduate courses. “Keywords” is the smallest section of writing 
in scientific articles. It exposes the scope of a subject and the 
main concepts. In general, there is no pre-definition by the 
scientific committees of the events. Therefore, we can assume 
that authors can choose freely from the thematic axes of each 
meeting, symposium or scientific congress. Keywords are terms 
that have a direct link with the central themes of the investigation 
and serve to guide, give more selectivity and speed in the search 
for subjects, bringing a higher efficiency in the retrieval of 
information. Strategically, they should not be too generic, nor too 
specific, and should serve mainly for indexing in databases. 
Keywords can be simple or compound. It indicates that certain 
topics can be combined with others, or, when necessary, be more 
specific. Keywords are descriptors and their survey can form a 
thesaurus. An exhaustive collection of terms of determined 
knowledge that are arranged in alphabetical and semantical order. 
 
A total of 373 keywords related to digital heritage topics were 
selected from the 304 Brazilian scientific articles and matched to 
the keywords published in the annals and archives of the CIPA 
2017 Scientific Symposium. Due to the large number of 
keywords, we separated them into six large topic groups: 
DISCOVERY: 3d recording (71); SCIENTIFIC PROCESS: 3D 
imaging (33), 3D modelling (76), documentation (126); 
VISUALIZATION (56); PRINCIPLES (12). In the tables 1 to 6, 
gray texts were cited only by foreign researchers, and black texts 
only by Brazilian researchers. 
 
We identified 34 keywords that occurred more frequently. In 
Table 1 we present the most cited keywords by more than ten 
researchers. The keywords highlighted in grey are those referred 
to by both foreign and Brazilian researchers: 
 KEYWO RDS (373) RESEARCH.  ARTICLE S 
3D RECORDING (71)  9 2 
Photogrammetry  94 40 
(3D) Laser scanning  50 28 
Point cloud 38 14 
Close range (Photogrammetry)  26 8 
Digital workflow  23 4 
Remote sensing  20 4 
Terrestrial laser scanning  19 5 
SFM (structure from motion)  18 10 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
112 
Digitization  15 7 
UAV (Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle) / VANT  14 4 
Emergency recording  10 2 
IMAGING (33)  17 3 
Mapping 11 4 
3D MODELLING  (76) 21 9 
BIM 42 34 
HBIM 34 15 
Computer Aided Drawing  10 2 
NURBS 11 2 
DOCUMENTATION (126)  35 28 
GIS / SIG  26 13 
Heritage Documentation  16 10 
IT Documentation  16 2 
Digital Documentation  15 10 
Geomatics  13 2 
CH Documentation  13 1 
Decay (analysis)  12 2 
Classification  11 4 
VISUALIZATION (56)  9 4 
Augmented reality 10 9 
PRINCIPLES (12)  1 2 
LOD (Level of Detail)  10 3 
LOI (Level of Information)  10 2 
LOG (Level of Geometry)  10 2 
Table 1: Keywords with more frequency of appearance 
 
In terms of 3D RECORDING technologies (table 2), Brazilians 
and foreigners have researched on Photogrammetry, 3D laser 
scanning, Point cloud, Digitization and Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle/VANT . However, we didn’t find in Brazilian articles the 
keywords: Digital workflow, Handheld measurement, Remote 
sensing, Rapid documentation, Total station, Electronic Distance 
Measurement-EDM, and Distributed monitoring systems . The 
group of keywords about the topic 3D RECORDING was the one 
that involved the largest number of researchers (table 1) 
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN Only By 
BRAZILIAN 3D, 
3d recording  Recording methods   
Photogrammetry , 
Close range  Automated,  
Drone based  Aerial Photogrammetry, 
Close range  Digital Photogram. 
Spherical Photogram. 
Laser scanning, 
Terrestrial laser Scan Triangulation,  
Structure light,  
Laser scanner,  
Simultaneous localization 
and mapping, Range based technique  3D scanning,  
3D Laser scanning  
Digitization  Digitization small objects, 
Digitization world heritage sites  Digitalization of 
collections Scanning, 
3d digitization  
Table 2: 3D RECORDING keywords 
 
In the 3D IMAGING topic (table 3), we noticed that the 
keywords Mapping, Orthophoto  and Image based technique  are 
used both in Brazilians and foreign articles. The Dense Image 
Matching-DIM technique  was used only by foreign researchers 
while similar terms like Dense Stereo Matching-DSM  (DSP) and 
Dense Stereo Matching Tools  were referred to only in Brazilian 
articles. We also verified the use of Panoramic Images  and 
Spherical Panorama  keywords by foreign surveys, and a similar 
keyword, Panoramic mosaic,  by Brazilian surveys. Other terms 
identified were not referred to in Brazilian surveys such as: Image 
fusion, Near Infrared Images-NIR, Multispectral imaging, 
Texturing and Texture mapping . 
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN By 
BRAZILIAN 3D imaging Image techniques 
Image Fusion 
NIR Images 
Multispectral (imaging)  Image based Technique Image processing 
Mapping Condition Mapping 
Digital survey mapping 
technology, 
Mobile mapping  - - 
- Map projection, 
Normal map, Decay (analysis)  - - - Orthoimage, 
Rectifying photograph Orthophoto Ortho rectification 
Rectification 
images Photo rectified  
- Texturing 
Texturing mapping Texture baking  - - 
- Dense image matching 
- Dense stereo 
matching, 
Dense stereo matching tools  
- Photographic lighting, 
Photometric stereo  - Photography 
- Panoramic images, 
Spherical panorama  - Panoramic mosaic 
- - - Vectorization  
Table 3: IMAGING keywords 
 
In the group of terms related to 3D MODELLING (table 4), we 
found that Modelling , BIM and HBIM were most keywords 
referred to in both Brazilian and foreign articles. More generic 
terms like Model and 3d Models  are used by both Brazilian and 
foreign researchers. However, more specific terms like Mesh 
model and 3D surface model were used only by Brazilians. More 
specific methods for modelling considering the information to be 
extracted such as Cloud to model , 3D segmentation , Surface 
morphology , Semantic modelling , Semantic enrichment , 
Semantic technologies  have not been identified in Brazilian 
research. Terms about modelling for interpretation such as 
Simulation , Algorithm , Parametric modelling , Parametric 
design, Numerical modelling and Program language  were used 
by both Brazilians and foreigners. However, terms related to the 
modelling of larger spatial scales such as Cartography, CIM, City 
Geographic Markup languag e and Smart city  were found only in 
Brazilian research. Terms related to modelling with traditional 
tools like Computer Aided Design-CAD , Computer graphics  
were used by Brazilian and foreign researchers, but similar terms 
such as Computer aided drawing , Computer aided drafting , CAD 
drawings were only identified in foreign research. Terms related 
to interaction and collaboration in a modelling process as 
Interactive model , Integrated digital model  and Modelling and 
management information systems  were only referred to by 
foreign researchers. Finally, 2D representation process as 
Drawing and Digital Drawing  were identified in Brazilian 
research while Line drawing  and Sketching  in foreign research.  
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN By 
BRAZILIAN 3D modelling, 
Modelling Building modelling, 
Procedural modelling, 
Typological modelling, Solid modelling  Digital modelling Built heritage 
modelling 
Point cloud Cloud to 3d model, 
3D segmentation  Segmentation TIN – Triangular 
Irregular Network  
HBIM, 
BIM BHIMM, 
Scan to BIM, 
As-built BIM, Revit Family Library  IFC Autodesk Revit 
- Line drawing, 
Sketching  - Drawing, 
Digital drawing  
- Structural analysis 
Structural dynamic 
analysis, 
FEM (Finite element 
method), 
FEA (Finite element analysis) Simulation Rendering 
- 3D parametric modelling, 
Parametric model Parametric modelling, 
Numerical modelling Algorithm, 
Algorithmic 
design, 
Generative system, Parametric design  
Table 4: 3D MODELLING keywords 
 
The group of terms related to DOCUMENTATION (table 5) is 
quite extensive, reflecting the variety of topics, techniques and 
technologies involved in the scientific processing of information. 
We emphasize that generic terms such as Digital documentation , 
Heritage documentation  were the most cited by Brazilian and 
foreign research works. We have observed many variants (16) of 
the term Documentation which specify the object to be 
documented and procedures. Other recurrent terms such as 
Digital Heritage documentation , IT documentation , Database , 
Classification, Geomatics  were referred to only in foreign 
articles. Different types of documents such as Digital document , 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
113 
Document resources  and Photography  were used only in 
Brazilian articles.  
 
Many terms semantically related to Data have been identified as 
Data fusion , Historical data , Big data, Reusable Big data , Open 
data, Public data , Metadata , Data visualization . The keywords 
in relation to Database, found in Brazilian research, refer to 
different types of cultural heritage such as Architectural 
conservation database , Database of cultural objects , while other 
terms such as Heritage database  and Inventory , Heritage 
databases , Heterogeneous database , Heritage registry  refer 
more to procedures.  
 
Many foreign articles have referred to Classification techniques 
terms such as Annotation , Ontology, Formal Ontology , 
Querying , Thesauri, Topics, SKOS, Defects keynote dictionary , 
Archiving , Digital archiving , Digital archive , Archival material  
and Image archives . Some terms found only in Brazilian research 
are related to the field of archivology such as Documentary 
organization, Semantic , Archive, Archivology , Archivology of 
architecture and urbanism .  
 
With respect to Information management, we found terms such 
as Information systems  and Information retrieval  in Brazilian and 
foreign surveys. Types of information representation were also 
identified in Brazilian research works such as Architectural 
Information , Representation of Information , Graphic 
Representation , Cartographic Representation  and only 
Historical maps  in foreign research. We found established 
documentation references such as CIDOC-CRM, DOCU-
TOOLS, Arches (project), CHER-Ob and MOLAB only in 
foreign articles.  
 
Finally, we detected terms related to Collections which most 
were identified in Brazilian research works such as Digital 
collection , Documentary collection , Iconographic collection , 
Collection management. Only two terms were cited by foreign 
articles such as Digitalization of collections  and Digital 
preservation. 
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN By 
BRAZILIAN Documentation, 
Digital documentation, 
Heritage 
documentation 
Cultural heritage 
documentation, 
IT documentation  3D documentation, 
Initial documentation, 
Documentation 
challenges, 
Documentation 
requirements - Documentation 
centre, 
Photographic 
documentation 
- Digital inventory, 
Digital cultural heritage, 
Digital record 
 - Digital heritage 
Inventory, 
Record 
Architectural digital record  
- Data fusion, 
Historical data 
Big data, 
Reusable big data, Public data  Data Metadata, 
Data visualization 
Database Heritage database and 
inventory, 
Heritage databases, 
Heterogeneous dataset, Heritage registry  - Architectural 
conservation 
database, 
Database of cultural objects  
Classification Annotation, 
Ontology, 
Formal ontology  - Documentary 
organization 
- Multidisciplinary inf. 
System 
Information flow, 
Information integration 
Information settings Heritage info. integration  Information management 
Information systems 
Information retrieval Informational 
practices 
Table 5: DOCUMENTATION keywords 
 
In the group of keywords related to VISUALIZATION (table 6) 
we observe terms related to interaction, dissemination and 
interpretation technologies. Compared to the other thematic 
groups, few terms were cited both by Brazilians and foreigners: 
Visualization , Virtual Reality , Augmented Reality , Virtual 
reconstruction , Virtual restoration  and Animation . Generic terms such as 3D visualization  and Spatial visualization , Animation , 
Dissemination , Disseminating heritage information , Virtual 
Learning environments  and GIS were identified only in foreign 
research and Advanced technologies of representation  and 
visualization  and Terrestrial heritage Atlas  only in Brazilian 
research. Other comprehensive terms such as Artificial 
Intelligence , Cyberspace , Cybernetics , Robotics, Technology  and 
Technology of Information and Communication  have been 
identified only in Brazilian articles.  
 
Technologies for direct communication such as Fabrication , 3D 
printing, Laser cutting , Scaled museum maquette  were referred 
to in foreign research works, while similar terms such as Digital 
fabrication , FABLAB and Rapid prototyping  only in Brazilian 
research. Terms related to device-mediated interaction prevailed 
such as, Virtual reality , Immersive , Immersive virtual reality , 
Sequential reality , Virtual tour , Virtual museum , Virtual 
recomposition , Virtual reconstruction , Virtual restoration  and 
Virtual Simulation . Analogous terms such as Virtuality , 
Virtualization , Virtual Heritage  and Human-Computer 
Interaction were found only in Brazilian surveys.  
 
Tools used in heritage education such as Digital storytelling  and 
Serious game  were referred to in foreign research while Game, 
Videogame , Digital game , Engine game , Gamification  appeared 
only in Brazilian articles. The Web environment technologies 
were identified in foreign research: Web application , Web 
services, Web sharing  and New media  and most of the terms in 
Brazilian: Website, Mobile apps , Mobile devices , Online 
platform, Platform, Digital media , Locative media , 
Hyperdocuments, Video documentary  and QR code.  
 
With regards to Geo Information we have identified a range of 
terms in both foreign ( Geomatics, QGIS, Web GIS, Spatial 
Information, Google Earth ) and Brazilian research (3D GIS, ARC 
GIS, Geoprocessing, Geodesign, Referencing, Georeferencing, 
Geotechnology ). GIS was the only keyword used by both.  
 
Terms that relate to conditions of access and manipulation of 
information have been referred to mostly in foreign research 
(New technologies, Multimedia Documentation, Internet of 
things, Open source, Open access, Real time, Tablet based 
documentation Network design, Interactive Information Motion 
Design). Two programming languages were found in Brazilian 
research ( HTML 5 and Java script ). 
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN By 
BRAZILIAN Visualization 3D visualization, 
Spatial visualization 
- Adv. Tech. Of 
representation and 
visualization, 
Territorial heritage atlas 
- Digital Technologies, 
Fabrication, 
3D Printing, 
Laser cutting, Scaled museum  maquette - Digital fabrication, 
FABLAB, 
Rapid prototyping 
- Immersive, 
Immersive virtual reality, 
Sequential reality Virtual reality Virtuality, 
Virtualization, 
Human-computer interaction  
Augmented reality Virtual tour, 
Senate virtual tour, 
Virtual museum  - - 
- Digital storytelling, 
Serious games Animation Game, 
Videogame, 
Digital game, 
Engine game, Gamification  
Geomatics, 
GIS QGIS, 
WEBGIS, Google earth  - ArcGIS, 
3D GIS 
- Virtual recomposition, 
3D reconstruction, 
3D/4D reconstruction, 4D Virtual reconstruction, 
Virtual restoration Virtual simulation, 
Virtual heritage 
Table 6: VISUALIZATION keywords 
 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
114 
The last group of keywords related to PRINCIPLES (table 7) 
include terms referring to quality criteria. We verified that there 
were a few words referred to by few researchers. All terms were 
used only in foreign articles ( Accuracy, Level of accuracy-LOD, 
Geometric accuracy, Grade of accuracy, Precision, Level of 
detail-LOD, Mixed and reverse LOD, Level of information-LOI, 
Grade of information, Level of geometry-LOG e Grade of 
generation ). 
 
MOST CITED By FOREING By FOREING AND 
BRAZILIAN By 
BRAZILIAN 
- Principles, 
Accuracy, 
LOA (level of accuracy) 
Geometric accuracy, Grade of accuracy - - 
- Precision - - 
LOD (Level of detail)  Mixed and reverse LOD  - - 
LOI (Level of 
information)  Grade of information, 
Grade of generation  - - 
LOG (Level of 
geometry)   - - 
Table 7: PRINCIPLES keywords diagram 
 
4.2 Survey of Brazilian and foreign researchers 
 
The intention is to identify a network of researchers. Five 
countries were identified aggregating the majority of foreign 
researchers: Italy (100), Canada (51), Belgium (20), Germany 
(19) and United Kingdom (15) (figure 7). However, there are 
thirteen countries that haven’t interacted with other countries 
(figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1: Interaction of foreign researchers by countries 
 
 
Figure 2: Interaction of Brazilian researchers by regions 
 In Brazil, we identified that most of the researchers are located in 
the southeast region (86), which is home to the largest number of 
educational institutions in the country, followed by researchers 
from the northeast (61) and the south (41). We observed that there 
are few researchers from the central-west (12) and north (03) 
regions. There is a better integration among researchers from the 
southeast and northeast regions (figure 2). 
 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
We found a profusion of terms with very similar meaning which 
makes research difficult to establish more representative terms. 
Very broad and generic terms serve only to situate the field of 
research but couldn’t clarify the progress of studies on a topic. 
We plan to systematize techniques, technologies by objectives 
and conclusions for each thematic group (discovery, scientific 
process, dissemination) to deepen the research of discovery 
technologies. 
 
We discovered that Brazilian articles refer to most topics. 
Principle/criteria group of keywords, although crucial such as 
Digital workflow, wasn’t found. It suggests that further research 
about these themes is needed in Brazil. 
 
In the group of Discovery technologies,  some keywords 
organized in 3D RECORDING keywords, considered as keys to 
this kind of research diagram, weren’t mentioned by Brazilian 
research works (Remote sensing, Emergency surveying and 
Digital workflow). We have a several cultural heritage in risk, 
and we evaluate that these themes are essential in Brazilian 
research. 
 
About technologies of Scientific Process , we also didn’t observe 
terms related to Texturing in the group of keywords 3D 
IMAGING diagram. We know the relevance of this in damage 
mapping analysis. In the 3D MODELLING terms group, we 
didn’t observe research that refers to Segmentation and Semantic 
modelling techniques of Point cloud files, nor to NURBS mesh 
modelling. These are important to ensure that the 3d modelling is 
capable to provide manageable information for further 
evaluations. In the DOCUMENTATION group we didn’t 
identify the use of the keywords related to Classification, 
Ontology and Thesauri and information systems that are 
important to organize the data to useful information in 
multidisciplinary works. 
Concerning to the technologies of Dissemination , the group of 
keywords related to VISUALIZATION, we can identify that all 
the themes were found in Brazilian articles. That indicates that 
there is much interest about these topics in Brazil.  
 
In both undergraduate and postgraduate education at UFRRJ, we 
discuss about these technologies only theoretically. It is 
necessary to train educators and students to use digital 
technologies in all phases of heritage documentation because it is 
very important to overcome the difficulties of gathering a large 
set of information, of different sources and formats, to be 
available to a multidisciplinary team, and guarantee scientific 
validation and reviewable process of documentation. 
 
We conclude that, even though we find many Brazilian 
researchers, most of them architects and urbanists, it is 
imperative to promote new contacts to form a multidisciplinary 
network to accomplish research with more integration as 
evidenced in the CIPA Scientific Symposium. 
 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
115We
 will continue this research including more recent articles 
published by scientific journals, master and doctoral thesis to 
subsidize the current research, and keep looking at all 
technologies applied to cultural heritage to ensure greater 
integration between the multidisciplinary surveys of our post-
graduate course.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa 
do Estado do Rio de Janeiro – FAPERJ, Edital IC: Bolsa de 
Iniciação Científica – 2018/1, for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
3º Seminário Ibero-americano Arquitetura e Documentação . 
Anais...Belo Horizonte (MG) UFMG, 2013. ISSN: 1983-7518 
4º Seminário Ibero-americano Arquitetura e Documentação . 
Anais...Belo Horizonte (MG) UFMG, 2015.  
5º Seminário Ibero-americano Arquitetura e Documentação . 
Anais...Belo Horizonte (MG) UFMG, 2018. ISSN: 2237-5619.  
Hermon, S, 2012. Scientific Method, chaine opératoire and 
Visualization: 3D Modelling as a Research tool in Archaeology. 
In: Bentkowska-Kafel, Anna, Denard, Hugh, Baker, Drew. 
Paradata and Transparency in Virtual Heritage . Routledge, 
pp.13-22, ISBN: 978-0754675839 
ICOMOS/ISPRS - International Scientific Committee on 
Heritage Documentation (CIPA). 26th International CIPA 
Symposium – Digital Workflows for Heritage Conservation,  28 
August–1 September 2017, Ottawa, Canada. Editor(s): J. Hayes, 
C. Ouimet, M. Santana Quintero, S. Fai, and L. Smith (Volume
IV-2/W2, https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W2-1-2017  , 
Volume XLII-2/W5, 2017 https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-
XLII-2-W5-1-2017 , 2017.
II Simpósio Científico 2018 – ICOMOS Brasil , Anais...Belo 
Horizonte (MG) Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, vol.1, 
pp.1-3471., vol.2, pp.3416-7359. ISBN: 978-85-5722-038-6 
Le
tellier, R., Schmid, W., Leblanc, F., 2007. Recording, 
Documentation, and Information Management for the 
Conservation of Heritage Places: Guiding Principles . Los 
Angeles, CA: Getty Conservation Institute, vol 1, 154p. ISBN 
978-0-89236-925-6.
Murphy, M., 2007. Parametric Vector Modelling of Laser and 
Image Surveys of 17th Century Classical Architecture in Dublin. 
In: D. Arnold, F. Niccolucci, A. Chalmers (Editors). The 8th 
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and 
Cultural Heritage. VAST (2007), pp.1-6. 
Owen, R., Buhalis, D., Pletinckx, D., 2004. Identifying 
technologies used in cultural heritage. In: Proceedings of 5th 
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archeology and 
Cultural Heritage. VAST (2004). incorporating 2nd 
Eurographics Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage, 
Conscience-Auditorium, Brussels and Ename Center, 
Oudenaarde, Belgium, December 7-10, pp. 155-163 
Pereira Filho, H. F., 2015. Documentação. In: Rezende, M. B.; 
Grieco, B., Teixeira, L., Thompson, A. (Gros.). Dicionário IPHAN de Patrimônio Cultural . 1. ed. Rio de Janeiro, Brasília: 
IPHAN/DAF/Copedoc. ISBN 978-85-7334-279-6 
Quintero, M. S., Blake, B., Eppich, R., 2007. Conservation of 
Architectural Heritage: The Role of Digital Documentation 
Tools: The Need for Appropriate Teaching Material.  
International Journal of Architectural Computing , june, 2007, vol. 5, issue 2, pp. 239-253. 
Santana-Quintero M., Addison A.C., 2008. Digital Tools for 
Heritage Information Management and Protection: The Need of 
Training. In: Wyeld T.G., Kenderdine S., Docherty M. (eds) 
Virtual Systems and Multimedia . VSMM 2007. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, vol 4820. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 
35-46, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78566-8_4 
Sperling, D. M., Celani, G., Herrera, P. C., Scheeren, R.., 2015. 
Fabricação digital na América do Sul: um mapeamento de linhas 
de ação a partir da arquitetura e urbanismo. In: Proceedings of 
XIX SIGraDi 2015: Project information for interaction . São 
Paulo: Blucher Design Proceedings, 2015, pp.119-125, https://doi.org/10.5151/despro-sigradi2015-30212   
Vlahakis, V., Karigiannis, J., Tsotros, M., Gounaris, M.; 
Almeida, L., Stricker, D.; Gleue, T., Christou, I. T., Carlucci, R., 
Ioannidis, N., 2001. Archeoguide: first results of an augmented 
reality, mobile computing system in cultural heritage sites. In: 
VAST '01 Proceedings of the 2001 Conference on Virtual reality, archeology, and cultural heritage , pp. 131-140, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/584993.585015   
VII Encontro de Tecnologia de Informação e Comunicação na 
Construção - Edificações, Infraestrutura e Cidade: do BIM ao 
CIM. Recife (PE), nov. 2015, vol. 2, no. 2, ISSN: 2357-7592  
https://doi.org/10.5151/engpro-tic2015-001 
XVII SIGraDi  2013: Knowledge-based Design  [Blucher Design 
Proceedings, v.1, n.7] . São Paulo: Blucher Design Proceedings, 
2014, pp.1-663, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/despro-sigradi2013-
0000 
XVIII SIGraDi  2014: Design in Freedom  [Blucher Design 
Proceedings, v.1, n.8]. São Paulo: Blucher Design Proceedings, 
2014, pp. 1-652, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/despro-sigradi2014-
0001 
XIX SIGraDi 2015: Project information for interaction . [Blucher 
Design Proceedings, v.2, n.3]  São Paulo: Blucher Design 
Proceedings, 2015, pp.1-840, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/despro-
sigradi2015-10288  
XX SIGraDi 2016: Crowdthinking . [Blucher Design 
Proceedings, v.3, n.1] São Paulo: Blucher Design Proceedings, 
2016, pp. 1-985, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/despro-sigradi2016-
0000 
XXI SIGraDi 2017: Resilience Design . [Blucher Design 
Proceedings, v.3, n.12] São Paulo: Blucher Design Proceedings, 
2017, pp. 1-663, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/sigradi2017-101  
XXII SIGraDi 2018: Technopolíticas. [Blucher Design 
Proceedings, v.5, n.1] São Paulo:  Blucher Design Proceedings , 
2018, pp. 1-1360, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/sigradi2018-00B  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLII-2/W15, 2019 
27th CIPA International Symposium “Documenting the past for a better future”, 1–5 September 2019, Ávila, Spain
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-2-W15-109-2019 | © Authors 2019. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
116