Global Knowledge, Memory and Communication
Discovering the contextual factors for digital library education in Vietnam
Hung Van Do, Daniel G. Dorner, Philip Calvert,
Article information:
To cite this document:
Hung Van Do, Daniel G. Dorner, Philip Calvert, (2019) "Discovering the contextual factors for
digital library education in Vietnam", Global Knowledge, Memory and Communication, https://
doi.org/10.1108/GKMC-08-2018-0071
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/GKMC-08-2018-0071
Downloaded on: 24 January 2019, At: 22:19 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 61 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 10 times since 2019*
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-
srm:387340 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald
for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission
guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as
well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and
services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for
digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Discovering the contextual factors
for digital library education
in Vietnam
Hung Van Do
University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vietnam National University,
Hanoi, Vietnam
Daniel G. Dorner
Victoria University of Wellington –Pipitea Campus, Wellington, New Zealand, and
Philip Calvert
School of Information Management, Victoria University of Wellington,
Wellington, New Zealand
Abstract
Purpose –The purpose of this paper is to discover the contextual factors affecting the development of
digital library education (DLE) in Vietnam and to determine how those factors are enabling or hindering itsdevelopment.
Design/methodology/approach –Based upon the literature and the theories of Fullan (2007) ,Nowlen
(1988) and Rogers (2003), an initial model of contextual factors that were potentially affecting DLE
development in Vietnam was developed. The model was then tested using a qualitative methodologyinvolving interviews and focus groups with key stakeholders, along with the gathering of documentary
evidence. The data were then analysed using the interactive model of Miles et al. (2014) , and the initial model
was then revised.
Findings –The initial model allowed for the depiction of potential factors, both internal and external, along
with some relationships between the factors. Based on the data analysis, a revised model was developed
composed of seven major contextual factors that were enabling and/or hindering DLE development in theVietnamese context. These are grouped into three categories: external factors –government, IT infrastructure
and social and cultural values; internal factors –stakeholders ’attitudes, DLE characteristics and the personal
and organisational nexus; and change agents, which is both an internal and external factor. These factors had
different levels of in ﬂuence on DLE development and are inter-related.
Originality/value –No prior study has looked at contextual factors affecting DLE development in a
developing country such as Vietnam.
Keywords Digital libraries, Change agents, Vietnam, Continuing education, Educational change,
Digital library education
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
The concept of the “digital library ”wasﬁrst popularised in the 1990s and is in widespread
use today. A digital library (DL) uses technologies that were not previously available;therefore, the library and information management (LIM) ﬁeld requires educational
programmes better attuned to the needs of the profession in which employment in a DL isbecoming more commonplace. The central topic of this paper is the demand for digital
library education (DLE) in developing countries. This paper describes the creation of aDigital library
education
Received 17 August 2018
Revised 27 November 2018
Accepted 28 November 2018
Global Knowledge, Memory and
Communication
© Emerald Publishing Limited
2514-9342
DOI 10.1108/GKMC-08-2018-0071The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/2514-9342.htm
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
conceptual model of the factors that affect the development of DLE, a model that can be used
to analyse the DLE environment in Vietnam and any similar country.
The authors contend that DLE has grown too slowly in Vietnam and, as a result, libraries
cannot recruit suf ﬁcient LIM graduates with the necessary competencies to work in a DL. If
this is so in Vietnam, then other countries are likely to have the same problem, especiallythose in Southeast Asia with cultures similar to Vietnam and also those that have yet tobuild a digital information economy.
Country background
Vietnam has seen the slow but steady introduc tion of computerised systems and digital
resources into its larger libraries. Applying ne w technologies to modernise the library sector
with a particular focus on DL development and th e digitisation of highly valued materials were
objectives stated in the Master Library Development Plan (
MCST-Ministry of Culture, Sports
and Tourism, 2007 ). After one decade (2000-2010) focusing intensively on automation,
Vietnam ’s libraries moved on to establish digital lib raries, develop digital collections and
provide online services ( Do, 2014 ). A signi ﬁcant problem with continuing the transformation of
Vietnam ’s libraries is that they have been challenged by the lack of suitably quali ﬁed staff;
reports show that 49 per cent of LIM practitioners do not have DL competencies ( Tran and Do,
2014), and there is an urgent need for digital librarians ( Nguyen, 2017b ); hence, improving the
quality of the human resource is the main priority of the Vietnam library strategy ( MCST-
Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, Library Department, 2017 ).
The problem
Staff who work in DLs need knoweldge and com pentieces not previousy associated with
library work ( Bury and Jamieson, 2014 ;Muhammad and Khalid, 2010 ) and traditional
education programmes have not prepared staff f or it. Recent research has shown globally the
number of DLE programmes has increased ( Nieuwenhuysen, 2011 ;Nguyen and Chowdhury,
2013;Myburgh and Tammaro, 2013 ;Audunson and Shuva, 2016 ) though none of these was in
Vietnam. This research project sought to ﬁll a gap not only in our knowledge of DLE in
Vietnam but also to contribute to developments i n this area that might be relevant to countries
similar to Vietnam. The different pace of DLE d evelopment in countries around the world must
depend upon the local situation so this resear ch examines the context of DLE development.
Purpose
The intention of the study was to discover the cont extual factors that either enable or hinder the
development of DLE in Vietnam. The practical va l u eo ft h i si sc l e a r :i fg o v e r n m e n ts t a f f ,p o l i c y
makers, academics and leading practitioners unde rstand the factors that are currently standing
in the way of developing DLE then those barrie rs can be removed or lowered. If the enabling
factors are appreciated then actions can be t aken to stimulate more DLE development. The
theoretical value lies in the development of a mo del of contextual factors affecting DLE. The
model also shows relations between the factors . Some factors are enablers, some are barriers
and some operate as both. This is an addition to the literature on DLE.
Research questions
RQ1. What are the contextual factors affecting the development of DLE in Vietnam?
RQ2. How do the contextual factors affect the development of DLE in Vietnam?GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Literature review
This section is a review of studies relating to DLE, in particular issues affecting itsdevelopment. Elements from the literature review were used in combination with theories of
Fullan (2007) ,Nowlen (1988) and Rogers (2003) to develop an initial model of factors
affecting the development of DLE in Vietnam. This was used as a basis for data analysis in
the investigation. The initial model was re ﬁned in light of the data analysis to become the
ﬁnal model.
Digital library education
Working in the networked environment with digital information and computers is a key
driver of the changing roles of LIM practitioners and requires them to acquire new skills and
knowledge ( Bury and Jamieson, 2014 ;Dakshinamurti and Braaksma, 2005 ;Fourie, 2004 ;
Muhammad and Khalid, 2010 ). To become DL professionals, future LIM practitioners must
learn, and current LIM practitioners need to upgrade, technical knowledge and skills; this isone of the main issues in DLE development ( Maet al., 2009 ;Maroso, 2005 ).
From the literature, especially from Choi and Rasmussen (2006) ,Myburgh and Tammaro
(2013) ,Hartnett (2014) ,Raju (2014) and Tammaro (2017) , the competencies of DL
professionals can be summarised into three categories: technological knowledge and skills(e.g. personal IT skills, knowledge/awareness of IT systems and applications, Webknowledge, data mining and data management); library-related knowledge and skills (e.g.
users ’needs, user/customer care and user education, digital archiving and preservation,
cataloguing, metadata, indexing, collection development, visual reference services); andother knowledge and skills (e.g. information literacy, research skills, communication skills,understanding of relevant legal matters). The identi ﬁcation of these competencies informed
this study in terms of examining LIM education in Vietnam and the DLE needs of LIM
practitioners.
The development of digital libraries in Vietnam
In the early 2000s, library systems in Vietnam received signi ﬁcant investment from
universities, the government and international organisations ( National Library of Vietnam,
2008). In 2001, the National Library of Vietnam started the national project “Building the
National Electronic/Digital Library in the National Library of Vietnam ”, which focused on
building the infrastructure of information technology and electronic resources. In the pastdecade, integrated library systems have been implemented in major public and academic
libraries and information centres. Most public libraries today provide online searching, and
share catalogue records ( National Library of Vietnam, 2008 ).
Signiﬁcantly, academic libraries in Vietnam have been active in building digital libraries.
A considerable grant from the World Bank, the East Meets West Foundation and AtlanticPhilanthropies funded the improvement in the capacity of university libraries. Various
projects have focused on improving the IT infrastructure, library system software, relevant
information resources and on educating librarians. Consequently, some digital libraries andﬁve Learning Resource Centres (LRCs) have been built (
The Atlantic Philanthropies, 2018 ),
one of which, in Hue, houses an ongoing project to digitise texts that preserve the royal
history and culture of the city.
Despite some improvements in the digital infrastructure, Vietnam has a large number of
libraries and information centres that still need to be modernised. The demands are stated insome national project plans. The
National Library of Vietnam (2008) claimed that in future
Vietnam must prioritise library development, encourage the implementation of information
technology and promote digitisation. In addition, high-level technology must be applied toDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
modernise the library sector with particular focus on digital and e-library development, and
100 per cent of highly valued materials must be digitalised ( MCST-Ministry of Culture,
Sports and Tourism, 2007 ). For academic libraries, building digital library systems to share
national information resources, as well as to link to digital resources of international
universities, is the highest priority ( MOET-Ministry of Education and Training, 2009 ).
Researchers such as Cao (2000) ,Nguyen (2005) ,Ta (2000) ,Vu (2007) ,Do (2014) and
Nguyen (2017b) have examined the LIM ﬁeld in Vietnam and agree that there has been
signiﬁcant development in applying technologies. The researchers, however, warned of the
challenges for stakeholders in developing DLs such as ﬁnances, staff development,
stakeholder attitudes and government policies. These issues contributed to the development
of the initial model in this research.
The above researchers also pointed out challenges for the LIM profession in Vietnam.
First, librarians have to establish plans for developing digital resources and DLs though
they lack experience and knowledge of advanced technology in these areas. Second, andimportantly for this research, LIM schools have to upgrade their curricula as well as create
new curricula for educating a modern labour force to meet the requirements for LIM
development.
LIM educational change and digital library education
LIM education curricula and teaching methods have been partially reformed (MOET-
Ministry of Education and Training, 2009). For instance, from 2007 to 2009, the Faculty of
Library and Information Science in the University of Social Sciences and Humanities in
Hanoi reformed its curriculum in terms of content and teaching methods. Some older
subjects were eliminated, while subjects focused on developing new knowledge and skills
for LIM practitioners were added to the curriculum. The contents of some subjects were also
updated (
Do, 2014 ;Lam, 2014 ;Nguyen, 2017b ).
Some universities (e.g. Can Tho University and Hanoi University of Culture) worked
collaboratively with international institutions to develop LIM educational programmes
(Welch and Murray, 2007 ). They aimed to enhance the quality of educational programmes
and to reach international standards in LIM education. Some DLE subjects were added to
their curricula. Murray and Welch (2007 , 2009 ), who have been involved in designing and
delivering LIM training and education in Vietnam, reported that the shortage of quali ﬁed
staff is a challenge for introducing a new internationally recognised curriculum in Vietnam.
Research on DLE in Vietnam has focused mostly on speci ﬁc aspects of DLs (such as the
contents of a DL) rather than DLE. The research on DLs in Vietnam was started by Vu
(1999) . He analysed the conditions in Vietnam and the opportunities for developing DLs,
recommending that they should be implemented in Vietnam. Nguyen (2014) gave an
overview of DLs in Vietnam as well as DL training on Greenstone software. Tran and Do
(2007) provided an overview of library automation in Vietnam, focussing on the technology,
hardware, software, standards, equipment and education for developing automated library
systems as well as DLs. More recently, a conference on DLE in Vietnam focused mostly on
developing digital collections, archiving and preservation, software solutions, management
and bene ﬁts of digital libraries rather than discussing educating human resources and DLE
(Nguyen, 2017a ).
Nguyen (2008 ,2016) used the performance model developed by Nowlen (1988) to identify
and prioritise the learning needs for continuing professional development of Vietnamese
academic library managers and operational staff. She identi ﬁed competencies related to DLs
as one of the main areas of their learning needs. Speci ﬁc content included digital library
creation, digital collection development and copyright issues in the digital environment.GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Tran (2009) ,Do (2014) andNguyen (2017b) identi ﬁed a gap between theory and practice
in the LIM ﬁeld in Vietnam, in other words between what is taught in universities and what
is required in practice. In particular, most graduates lack suf ﬁcient knowledge of technology
(Nguyen, 2008 ) and according to one educator, only 51.8 per cent of librarians are competent
in using computers ( Do, 2014 ). Others have noted that only 30 per cent of librarians in
Vietnam are equipped with the competencies required to meet the needs of its libraries ( Do
and Pham, 2009 ). Indeed, many researchers have found that education and training for
librarians in Vietnam needs to be reformed and updated with new knowledge to meet the
requirements of the information age ( Cao, 2003 ;Tran, 2009 ;Nguyen, 2017 ).
The conference on Human Resources for the Library and Information Field, which was
held at the Vietnam National University, Hanoi in 2009, concluded with two key points.
First, the human resources in libraries did not match demand, especially the demands of
library automation and developing DLs. Second, library education institutions needed to
have curricula better suited to provide the knowledge and skills for librarians in the digital
world ( VNU-Vietnam National University, 2009 ).Murray and Welch (2009) said of the
Vietnamese LIM ﬁeld that “there is a shortage of quali ﬁed library staff and the library
schools are not producing enough graduates with the necessary levels of expertise ”(p. 86).
This problem cannot be solved instantly and the LIM ﬁeld is challenged with the shortage
(Do, 2014 ;Nguyen, 2017b ).
Perhaps as a result of the concerns mentioned above, LIM schools in Vietnam have
started to update their curricula to move into the era of DLs. Nguyen (2008) , Chowdhury
(2013) and Do (2014) raised the level of awareness of DLE needs for Vietnamese LIM
practitioners by introducing a knowledge map of core topics for DLs and outlining the trend
of DL development in Vietnam. More recently, Lam (2014) conducted a survey of IT subjects
related to DLs in current LIM educational programmes in Vietnam. She found that LIM
schools have introduced roughly 33 per cent new ICT-related subjects into their educationalprogrammes. LIM education in Vietnam, however, has still not achieved signi ﬁcant progress
in DLE development.
Although Vietnamese scholars and professionals have acknowledged the importance of
DLE and made some suggestions for DLE programmes, their work has focused primarily on
describing DL concepts and has emphasised the role of LIM departments in educating
human resources for DLs. Their work has not examined the underlying causes of the
situation in Vietnam, i.e. it has not identi ﬁed the enabling and inhibiting factors that are
affecting DLE development.
Methodology
Based on the recursive research process of Gorman and Clayton (2005) , the research was
implemented in three stages:
(1) developing an initial conceptual model;(2) testing the model with qualitative data; and
(3) revising the conceptual model.
Based upon the literature and three theories described later in this section, an initial model
was created with several contributing factors that might enable or hinder the growth of DLEin Vietnam. The factors were subjected to analysis using documentary evidence and
qualitative data from interviews and focus groups.
To investigate the contextual factors affecting DLE development we drew upon the
spoken words of people closely involved with DLE development in Vietnam. TheDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
interpretivist viewpoint facilitates a deep understanding of the phenomena through the
explanations, thoughts, perceptions and words of research participants. Qualitative researchseeks to understand social reality and provides a rich description of people and interactionin natural settings. It aims to “understand how social order is created through talk and
interaction ”(
Bryman, 2008 , p. 367).
The data collection included 17 interviews and 11 focus groups involving 70 participants:
LIM practitioners; LIM managers; LIM lecturers and deans of LIM schools (including the
school that set the curriculum that other schools had to use); chairpersons of professional
associations; and representatives from business and government. Interviewees and focusgroup members were chosen using purposive sampling. The logic of purposive sampling:
Lies in selecting information-rich cases for study in depth. Information-rich cases are those from
which one can learn a great deal about issues of central importance to the purpose of the research
(Patton, 2002 , p. 169).
Data analysis procedures used the interactive model ( Miles et al.,2 0 1 4 ) that consists of four
sequential steps: transcribing the interview data, reducing data (coding and comparing),displaying data and drawing conclusions. Reducing data strictly followed three steps:
identifying initial codes, developing concepts and establishing categories. To establish
validity, the results of data analysis were checked against other sources, for example,responses of key stakeholders were compared with existing publications from their
organisations. To improve reliability, we ensured consistency in the use of the criteria to
select the participants in the research.
We used MS Excel with the initial codes that were developed from the raw data. This
programme allowed ﬂexibility in creating, ﬁltering and grouping ideas, concepts, categories
and themes. The ideas, views, comments and stat ements from all participants and documents
were recorded verbatim. The keywords us ed to extract quotations were initially ﬁltered and
grouped by concepts that were then ﬁltered and grouped into categor ies. Finally, the categories
were used to establish themes which highlight ke y factors affecting DLE development. This
use of Excel to analyse qualitative data is similar to that of Swallow et al. (2003) . The revised
themes and categories were subsequently used to revise the initial model.
The initial model
Based on the theories of Fullan (2007) ,Nowlen (1988) and Rogers (2003) and elements from
the literature review, a range of potential factors were identi ﬁed and adapted for inclusion in
the initial model. A key concept is that of an “innovation ”. Rogers (2003) de ﬁned an
innovation as “an idea, practice, or object that is perceived as new by an individual or other
unit of adoption ”(p. 12). Though this de ﬁnition is most often used for research related to
new technologies or devices as innovations, it can also be used for intangibles such as a new
management practice or a new curriculum for an educational programme, and it is the
deﬁnition used in this research.
According to Fullan (2007) , educational change is a complex proposition and educational
innovation is multidimensional. Fullan comprehensively discussed factors affecting
educational change at all levels, from national governments to learners, emphasising social
factors in the change process. As he stated, “educational change is technically simple and
socially complex ”(p. 84). He grouped factors into three main categories: characteristics of
change; local characteristics; and external factors. Characteristics of change are need, clarity,
complexity and quality/practicality. Local characteristics are district, community, principaland teacher and external factors lie in government and other agencies. In the context of thisstudy, “need ”is easy to understand (and very similar to Nowlen ’s use of the concept);GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
“clarity ”means the goals of the innovation and that the means of its implementation must
be clear for success; “complexity ”is about the dif ﬁculty and extent of change, and therefore
the knowledge and skills required to put the change into practice, so for DLEimplementation, this factor was considered to be related to the skills required, the beliefs ofindividuals, teaching strategies and the use of required materials by LIM educators and LIMpractitioners; “quality and practicality ”relate not only to the perceived value of the
innovation but also the resources needed for its implementation. In this study, the “local
characteristics ”were re-interpreted for a university environment; hence, the experiences and
opinions of deans, lecturers and students were all highly relevant, as were the opinions ofrepresentatives of the professional LIM community and professional associations.
To identify additional factors that were potentially affecting the development of DLE in
Vietnam, this project used Nowlen's Performance Model (1988) of continuing education for
professionals. The model consists of eight elements: update needs; new role preparation;
applied human relations; critical skills of mind; individual/organisational learning skills;personal/organisational development balance; life skills; and in ﬂuences of environments and
cultures of practice. Update needs are particularly important and are self-explanatory:practitioners continuously need to acquire fresh knowledge and skills to keep up-to-date
with new technology and new legislation required by their current as well as future work.
The in ﬂuence of the environment and culture is also very important. In the model cultural
values, government policies and ﬁnancial resources need to be considered as factors
affecting the learning agendas of individuals and organisations. In Vietnam, people hold
strong traditional social/cultural values, there is an education system that is centrally
controlled, and LIM programmes that are highly conventional in their content; these arepotential factors affecting the development of DLE.
Change agents were deemed important for the implementation of an innovation by both
Fullan (2007) and Rogers (2003). It is the latter ’sd eﬁnition that has been used in this study: a
change agent is “an individual who in ﬂuences clients ’innovation-decisions in a direction
deemed desirable by a change agency ”(p. 366), but the point that a change agent can be
internal or external is taken from both Fullan and Rogers.
The factors adapted from the theories were gro uped into seven categories. The initial model
included the potential contextual factors affe cting DLE development in Vietnam, which were
separated into internal factors (existing insid e the educational system) and external factors
(that come from outside the system). It was assu med that many of these factors would interact
with and affect each other, and some would have a stronger in ﬂuence than others.
Figure 1 provides the initial model of potential factors affecting the development of DLE
in Vietnam.
Internal factors
Internal factors are those closest to the core of DLE development –for example, stakeholders
have the closest ties to DL services and resources, and the DLE needs identi ﬁed by those
stakeholders. The internal factors were:
Stakeholders and their characteristics
Fullan (2007) contended that internal as well external stakeholders contribute to educational
change.
LIM practitioners/students are the learners who should be at the centre of educational
activities. Their characteristics in this model were seen as learning needs, attitudes, basicknowledge and skills and aspirations and motivations, all of which potentially affect the
objectives, content, format and methods of DLE.Digital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
LIM educators (lecturers) need to understand the importance of DLE and to act as advocates
for its development (though they can also resist change), so their attitudes were consideredto be crucial for DLE development in Vietnam.
LIM leaders are the directors of libraries and deans of LIM educational programmes.
They are the key decision makers who represent their organisations in internal and externaldiscussion of issues pertinent to the need for DLE, and therefore can affect its development.
LIM professional bodies are the LIM associations in Vietnam. They work with the
professional community to identify the knowledge and skills required for LIM practitioners.
Other stakeholders include individuals or organisations with an interest in DLE
development, such as the university administrations that fund academic programmes, andprivate companies involved in developing DL products for libraries.
Needs for digital library education
Understanding the needs for DLE was considered vital for this research.
Fullan (2007)
recognised that successful educational change not only requires identi ﬁcation of the needs
but also requires formal recognition of those needs. By identifying the knowledge and skillsthat organisations require to provide DL resources and services, and that LIM practitionersmust acquire, it then becomes possible to determine the content for DLE.
Characteristics of DLE: clarity, complexity, quality/practicality
This factor, as might be expected, is closely related to the previous factor, DLE needs .I ti s
through the understanding of DLE needs that the characteristics of DLE become clear. Withclarity, it is easier for potential providers to conceptualise what DLE involves, to determinehow complex it will be to develop and to decide how practical it will be in terms of theresources needed to achieve a high quality outcome.
Fullan (2007) pointed out that “lack ofFigure 1.
The initial model of
potential factorsaffecting the
development of DLE
in Vietnam
GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
clarity - diffuse goals and unspeci ﬁed means of implementation –represents a major
problem at the implementation stage [ ...]”(p. 89).
Personal and organisational development balance
According to Nguyen (2008) ,the nexus of personal and organisational needs plays an
important role in continuing professional development. For this study, if the DLE needs ofthe practitioners and their organisations were balanced, the performance of both would be
improved and therefore DLE would be considered to be of greater value.
Digital library profession
This factor refers to digital librarians, and in particular, the competencies they must have to
perform their roles. In the Vietnam context, th eD Lp r o f e s s i o ni sr e p r e sented by the Vietnam
Library Association.
External factors
External factors considered to be contextual were those with the potential to affect the
development of DLE.
Social and cultural values
The social and cultural values in Vietnam are considered relevant because they affect what a
society perceives to be important in terms of the educational needs of individuals andorganisations (
Nowlen, 1988 ).Nguyen (2008 ,2016), for example, found that social and
cultural values affected Vietnamese society's views of library work, which ultimatelyaffected library practitioners' choices for professional development.
Economic conditions
Economic conditions will very likely affect the development of DLE and so are considered a
part of the external environment.
Government
The Library Department of the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism (MCST) has
responsibility for governing libraries and information centres in terms of professional andtechnical standards, and the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) for governing thecurricula and quality of education of LIM schools. Other government agencies also haveresponsibilities that affect LIM education.
Change agents
Managers, deans, practitioners and educators as well as their organisations are possible change
agents among the internal factors, and government of ﬁcials and their organisations are potential
change agents among the external factors. It was necessary to identify who the change agents
were, what their actual roles were in DLE deve lopment and factors that were affecting their
success.
Results and discussion
The government
Data from the interviews, focus groups and the documentary evidence pointed to the
Vietnamese government as the most in ﬂuential factor affecting DLE development inDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Vietnam, both as an enabler and as a barrier. Government also has a signi ﬁcant impact on
the LIM profession, education (schools and universities) and the IT infrastructure.
As an enabling factor, the government introduced policies aimed at enhancing education
quality and developing the use of technology. The Ordinance of Libraries (Standing
Committee of the National Assembly, 2000 ) was a landmark policy guiding the future
development of LIM. It stated that all libraries and information centres play important rolesin developing knowledge among citizens and supporting the development of education andtechnology. MOET has released many regulations and requirements, such as standards foracademic libraries ( MOET-Ministry of Education and Training, 2007 ) and for high school
libraries ( MOET-Ministry of Education and Training, 2003 ) aimed at helping lecturers and
teachers shift to using more student-centred teaching methods. In addition to policydevelopment, the government aids libraries ﬁnancially. A government of ﬁcial emphasised
how his department was actively involved in developing LIM staff resources:
This Department plays an important role in managing the LIM ﬁeld. Developing human
resources is a natural and important role of the Department because the human resource
determines the success of all activities in the LIM ﬁeld. The government emphasises that
investment in the labour force has to meet the demands of development of the LIM ﬁeld.
In terms of management, some government actions hindered the development of DLE. One
of the deans described a gap between policies and practice in Vietnam, saying the policiesnormally looked good on paper, but faced challenges when applied in practice.
An issue that deans and lecturers frequently mentioned was the strict governance by
MOET of issue curriculum content. At the level of government management, power distance(PD –see later) was evident. It prevented LIM schools communicating their need for changes
to LIM curricula to the Ministry, thus constraining LIM change. The deans complained thatthe government ignored suggestions about content for the basic LIM curriculum from allschools except a chosen few. The two current LIM educational curricula that are managedby the government were released from just one school; that is, one LIM school decided thecurriculum that has to be applied by all other LIM schools. One dean expressed his dismay:
We [his school] sent our comments about the curriculum, but did not receive any feedback. Now
we have to follow their curriculum. It is not fair.
This form of direct government control limited the creativity and independence of LIM
schools and LIM organisations.
Stakeholder attitudes
Rogers (2003) contended that stakeholders only adopt something new (which in this
research is DLE) when they know what it is and why they should adopt it. This researchfound that stakeholders thought DLs are important for the future of the LIM, but many didnot clearly understand the DL concept. This situation resulted in stakeholder attitudeshaving both positive and negative effects on DL development and ultimately on DLE.
Level of understanding of DL concepts
The cloudy understanding of the DL concept amongst many stakeholders slowed the
development of DLE in Vietnam, partly because it meant LIM practitioners had only alimited ability to express their needs for DLE. The data show that only a small number ofstakeholders thoroughly understood the DL concept, while most others did not have a clear
understanding. One library manager said some in the profession used “digital library ”as aGKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
fashion term (i.e. they did not understand the term but heard so many others using it they
decided to follow suit). Another manager said:
Sometimes they do DL projects as they want to improve their image. They implemented DL
projects because other libraries have done so, not because of their actual needs.
Some stakeholders suggested developing a general de ﬁnition of DLs for use in the LIM ﬁeld. It
would act as a framework that wou ld provide the requirements, standards and structures of DLs.
With this understanding, managers would then b e capable of deciding if LIM practitioners
(current staff) needed education in digital library competences. A government of ﬁcial said:
First, we have to develop a DL de ﬁnition for Vietnam. Then we have to reach an agreement on the
deﬁnition among the LIM community. Based on that, we have to de ﬁne the framework of digital
libraries, identify the functions, aspects, and requirements of DLs. Above all, we have to educate
people who can manage the system. Based on the de ﬁnition and framework we will identify who
is needed for DLs, what the knowledge and skills are for DLs that should be o ﬀered for LIM
professionals.
Attitudes of stakeholders to change
There is a Vietnamese saying that “the only people who like change are wet babies ”.B o t h
Fullan (2007) and Rogers (2003) contended that most people do not want to change, and this
project has shown that taking the necessary steps to initiate change was a challenge formany LIM stakeholders. There were positive exceptions, but some could still see largebarriers in the form of staff resistance. One library manager said:
Our LIM ﬁeld is like a housewife who does not know or care that non-stick pans are already
invented. Instead of choosing a non-stick pan with advanced technology to make her work easier,
she insists on using the old aluminium pan, and wastes time in scrubbing. It is so hard to change
the minds of people in the LIM ﬁeld.
In the LIM schools, some deans were active in c hanging curricula by adding more DL content,
but others preferred to continue teaching trad itional competences. They argued that many
libraries, mostly in the rural areas, had not cha nged, so if LIM schools teach digital competencies
many graduates would not be able to work in non-computerised libraries. A dean said:
We still have to teach traditional library skills such as how to present a catalogue card. If we
teach technology or digital libraries, students will not be able to work in libraries that do not have
the technological and digital environment
This perception is clearly a barrier to DLE.
Limited cooperation among stakeholders
Hallam and Partridge (2004 , p. 21) stated that “collaborative partnerships are the key to the
future of LIS education ”. In this study, we found little cooperation between library
departments, professional associations, LIM schools and in ﬂuential libraries related to DLE
development. There were two reasons for the lack of cooperation in the development of DLcurricula among LIM schools. First, the government imposed the LIM curriculum. Second,
the deans restricted curriculum sharing because they were afraid that other schools might
copy them. It is acknowledged that in many countries, LIM schools develop curriculaindependently, but in Vietnam, the stakeholders, many of them working in LIM schools,expressed a wish to cooperate more on curriculum development but could not do so. Anadditional factor for deans to consider was the growing competition for students withinDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
universities. Adding new and popular subjects is a device that can be used by LIM schools
as a way to attract more students.
The younger generation ’s perspective
There is a gap between younger lecturers and older lecturers in their attitudes to educationalcontent and pedagogy. The younger LIM lecturers appear to be active in LIM educationalchange; they want to research DLs, and they are willing to change their current teachingsubjects to DLE subjects if required. In this research, younger lecturers are those under 35years old; the documentary evidence showed that two-thirds of LIM academic staff are
younger lecturers. Their enthusiasm is an enabler for DLE.
Some older lecturers had a different view. One older lecturer provided the following
perspective:
Some younger lecturers are very expert in technology, software libraries, and new library
standards. However, they do not have a theoretical framework of the LIM ﬁeld. They need to ﬁnd
a balance between theory and practice.
Digital library education characteristics
This factor relates to the need for DLE, the DLE content in current LIM educational
programmes and the ability of LIM schools to develop and implement DLE. According to
Fullan (2007) ,“need ”is one of the most important characteristics of educational change, and
the need for DLE was expressed by LIM practitioners, LIM managers, LIM school deans andby students. Some LIM practitioners, particularly younger ones and LIM studentsrecognised that they needed DLE programmes to update their skills and knowledge so theycould ﬁnd work in the changing environment. As a contrast, some practitioners suggested
that DLE should be offered to LIM managers to help them understand DLs and possibly
change their attitudes about DL development. LIM managers need staff with DLcompetencies so they expect LIM schools to develop DLE for current LIM practitioners.
The recognition of the educational need of many stakeholders was an enabling factor for
DLE development. Figure 2 presents the effects of the LIM profession ’s need for change in
LIM education in which DLE is considered a new element that will enable LIM schools tosatisfy educational needs.
This paper has not suggested content for DLE programmes. Fullan (2007) says “precise
need is often not clear at the beginning ”(p. 89). As an example of the debate about content,
Figure 2.
Effects of LIMprofessional need on
LIM education
GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
most LIM managers and educators argued that a digital librarian needs competence in IT
but does not need to become an IT expert and only some digital librarians need to beproﬁcient in writing code.
Eﬀect of the lack of infrastructure and lecturers
The data indicate that there were two factors hindering LIM schools in developing DLE
programmes: the de ﬁciency of infrastructure for DLE development, and the lack of lecturers
for DLE.
All the deans thought that DLE needed modern computer labs for students. Of the ﬁve
LIM schools in this study, only one had a dedicated computer lab for its students; the otherschools had to rent labs. A senior lecturer at one school commented that the lack ofopportunities for practice inhibited her school from introducing new DLE subjects.
Another serious issue was the fact that LIM schools lacked lecturers who could
implement DLE programmes. All deans in this study con ﬁrmed that the shortage of
lecturers was a major issue that restricted the growth of DL subjects in the LIM curricula.Several deans said they lacked lecturers for DLE subjects and usually needed to recruit from
outside the school if they wished to offer those subjects. One dean said
I understand that there are many interesting subjects that can be added to our curriculum. Myself,
I would like to introduce new subjects, or even open a new programme. However, looking at ourstaﬀ, who can teach these subjects? How many lecturers do we have to teach these subjects? No,
we do not have sta ﬀfor these subjects.
It can be seen that these issues negatively affect the development of DLE. However, as one
dean emphasised, LIM schools have to be active in preparing for change if they do not wantto be losers in the ﬁerce competition among LIM schools.
Information technology infrastructure
Stakeholders agreed that IT has changed the LIM ﬁeld dramatically in terms of its
management and the technological infrastructure. Most of the interviewees believed that the
development of DLs bene ﬁted from IT development in Vietnam. For example, Internet
access in Vietnam had increased sharply in the past decade (
VNNIC-Vietnam Network
Information Centre, 2018 ). The data from documentary evidence also indicated signi ﬁcant
development in IT applications in libraries and information centres.
Social and cultural values
The social and cultural environment is an important factor for bringing about educational
change. Ely (1990) contended that besides the characteristics of the innovation, the
environment in which the innovation is to be introduced plays a crucial part in the change ’s
success. According to Nguyen (2009) , Confucianism has a profound impact on Vietnamese
culture. It in ﬂuences the attitude, beliefs and behaviours of Vietnamese people in many
respects, including the status of education. This research found that generally social and
cultural values acted as a barrier restricting DLE development.
Social beliefs in education
Vu (2009) found that Vietnamese people believe having high academic quali ﬁcations will
make their lives better. Some managers, however, said that LIM practitioners attendedcontinuing education (CE) programmes because they wanted to get certi ﬁcates rather than
through a desire to obtain new knowledge.
Nguyen (2008) called them “degree hunters ”.A s
a result, it was hard for library managers to approve all staff requests to take CEDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
opportunities because they realised some staff preferred degree programmes that take a
long time to complete, were mostly focused on theory, and were costly. The emphasis on
theoretical knowledge comes from Confucianism and has sometimes hindered educational
change in Vietnam ( Vu Thu Hang et al.,2 0 1 5 ). Staff were sometimes unwilling to take short
courses that would train them in necessary DL skills. In other words, what these staff want
for themselves is often not what is best for the library.
Power distance
According to Hofstede (2001 , pp. 83, 97, 102), power distance (PD) is a cultural dimension
that re ﬂects the degree of inequality that exists and is accepted by the less powerful
members of a group, organisation, institution or society. He found that in a high PD
workplace, employees perceive managers as less approachable, communication ﬂows
downward and respect upward, while in a low PD workplace, employees perceive managers
as peers and are more willing to share ideas. Confucianism stresses a hierarchical order withits core objective being a stable and well-ordered society ( Berthrong and Berthrong, 2000 ).
The power distance (PD) aspect was identi ﬁed inside LIM organisations. The data show that
PD existed at the organisational level and this prevented LIM practitioners from proposing
their needs (especially educational needs) to their manager. Normally it is only the manager
who decides how and when staff need to improve their skills.
Viewpoint of society on the LIM ﬁeld
Views in society about the role of libraries and information centres were an important
barrier to the development of DLE. According to the participants, the LIM ﬁeld did not
receive attention, and people still thought that working in a library was a “simple job ”. This
led to LIM practitioners having little motivation for study because they thought that nothing
would change even after further training.
Personal and organisational nexus
The relationship between individual need and organisational need is a crucial factor
affecting organisational development ( Nowlen, 1988 ).
Interactions of learning needs
In this study, we found that the learning needs of LIM practitioners and those of LIM
organisations were closely related. LIM organisations needed staff with competencies to run
their IT systems. Individuals needed competencies to perform new tasks at work, and veryoften they needed the support of the organisation to take educational opportunities. This
intertwining of needs and expectations explains why the term “nexus ”is used.
Though LIM practitioners sometimes proposed their learning needs to managers, the
ﬁnal decision usually depended upon the managers believing that their organisations would
beneﬁt, rather than any consideration for the personal development of the staff. According
to
Nguyen (2008) , LIM managers in Vietnam have a strong effect on their staff ’s education.
She found that some demanding managers, to meet their organisation ’s need, forced staff to
attend CE programmes.
In this study, there were two types of relationships between individual and
organisational learning: con ﬂict relationships and balanced relationships. There was
conﬂict between LIM practitioners and their libraries in terms of the need for professional
development. As an example, in libraries not fully computerised some managers believed
their staff did not need DLE or any IT courses; however, many of their staff wanted toGKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
attend DLE courses for their personal development. In balanced relationships, the learning
needs of the organisation matched those of LIM practitioners. Managers in these libraries
wanted to attract and keep quali ﬁed staff who could help their organisation change to the
digital environment, so they gave staff opportunities to further their education.
Research suggests that the need for organisational learning generally leads to the need
for individual learning, but Antonacopoulou (2006) found that individual learning does not
have a signi ﬁcant impact on organisational learning. This research discovered similar
results in LIM. This is signi ﬁcant for DLE because if LIM educators or change agents want
to develop an educational programme for LIM practitioners they will need to demonstrate
the organisational need for it to get agreement from LIM managers.
In the LIM academic setting, there was no con ﬂict on professional development of
lecturers and the organisational development of LIM schools, which is a positive factor fordeveloping DLE.
Change agents
In his Change Communication Model describing the environment of educational change,
Ellsworth (2000) situated change agents at the beginning of the process. They adopt a new
idea or innovation and try to spread it through their community. Given that DLE progresswas slow, it was worth asking what factors affected the efforts of change agents trying to
develop DLE.
Change agents as a positive factor
Change agents have played three crucial roles in DLE development in Vietnam:
(1) understanding the current situation within the LIM ﬁeld;
(2) exploring and promoting LIM educational needs; and
(3) advocating (and trying to initiate efforts) for change in LIM education. Change
agents had positive effects in all of these roles.
This research shows that leaders (managers, decision makers –ofﬁcials, chairpersons and
deans) often acted in isolation. In some cases, there was a lack of mutual respect amongthese stakeholders and they blamed each other for slow progress. There was little
cooperation among government departments, LIM associations, libraries and LIM schools.
In an attempt to overcome this, some change agents built relationships among theseagencies and encouraged leaders to work together to introduce innovations in the LIM ﬁeld.
The LIM associations did not have a strong impact on LIM professional practice and
education; however, these associations had varying degrees of impact on DLE development.
Change agents recognised this and worked with the LIM associations at the beginning of the
educational change process. LIM associations offered some DLE courses and/or educationalprogrammes that included DL subjects.
Change agents (themselves often opinion leaders) used other opinion leaders to promote
new ideas and change the attitudes of potential adopters. According to Rogers (2003),
“change agent success in securing adoption of innovations by clients is positively related to
the extent that he or she works through opinion leaders ”(p. 388). Research by
Valente and
Pumpuang (2007) andYoungsang et al. (2012) also demonstrated that opinion leaders have a
strong impact on the adoption of products or services in the diffusion of innovations. This
research shows that opinion leaders play an important role in promoting new LIMeducational programmes through workshops, conferences and library journals to in ﬂuence
stakeholders ’attitudes about DLs and DLE.Digital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Barriers restricting change agents' e ﬀorts in developing DLE
In this study, we identi ﬁed PD as a major barrier to change agents' efforts in developing
DLE. Government management of educational programmes/curricula, for example, limited
the impact of change agents ’efforts to in ﬂuence stakeholder ’s development of DLE, which
can be ascribed to high PD in Vietnam. In Vietnamese society, a change agent needs to have
power in terms of her or his position, such as being a manager, dean or government of ﬁcial.
We found an example of a senior LIM staff member respected by other LIM practitionerswho published research on DLs, yet he could not in ﬂuence the LIM community because he
was not a manager.
Other barriers to change agents' efforts were government management; the viewpoint of
society about the LIM ﬁeld; the lack of lecturers for DLE; the lack of cooperation among
stakeholders; and stakeholders ’reluctance to change.
Model revision of contextual factors
Based on the results of the data analysis we revised the initial model. Figure 3
shows the
factors that have changed. There are several key changes between the initial model and the
ﬁnal model. First, the Social environment factor was divided into three factors: government,
IT infrastructure andsocial and culture values. The data indicate that the social environment
is a big and complex component, which upon analysis involved three separate factors within
the environment. IT infrastructure is a new factor that was not included in the initial model.
Second, the Stakeholders and their characteristics factor and a part of Digital library
profession were combined in a new Stakeholder attitudes factor. The reason for this
combination is that the attitudes of stakeholders towards digital libraries and the LIM
practitioners' viewpoints on digital competencies are similar, and both strongly affected the
development of DLE. Perceived requirements of the digital library profession were stated by
all stakeholders.
Figure 3.
Change betweeninitial model and
revised model
GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Third, the DLE needs factor was merged into the Characteristics of DLE factor because it
was already identi ﬁed as a characteristic of DLE. Therefore, to avoid repetition, they were
combined into one factor. Initially, the Digital library profession factor was de ﬁned as the
knowledge of and skills for LIM practitioners. The knowledge and skills were revealed bystakeholders through their expressions of educational need. The need is a part of theCharacteristics of DLE factor. Therefore, the Digital library profession factor was merged
into the Characteristics of DLE factor.
The original Personal and organisation development balance factor was renamed the
Personal and organisational nexus factor. The term “personal and organisational
development balance ”comes from the Nowlen model. It re ﬂected the idea that the
development needs of individuals should be similar to or a part of the organisation ’s needs.
The original term did not fully express the close and complex relationship between theprofessional development needs of LIM practitioners and the needs of their organisations;therefore, we have chosen Personal and organisational nexus to explain the nature of this
relationship more clearly.
The revised model
The seven major contextual factors affecting DLE development in the Vietnamese context
are grouped into three categories:
(1) external factors, which include government, IT infrastructure and social and
cultural values;
(2) internal factors, which include stakeholders ’attitudes, DLE characteristics, and the
personal and organisational nexus; and
(3) change agents, which is both an internal and external factor.
These factors had different levels of in ﬂuence on DLE development and are inter-related.
The factors are presented in Figure 4 .
Figure 4.
Model of factors
affecting DLE
development in
Vietnam
Digital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
There was a signi ﬁcant change in terms of model presentation from the initial version. The
factors were initially depicted in a circle with three layers, but the ﬁnal model presents the
factors as separate entities with relationships indicated by linking arrows. The reason for
this change is because the revised model can present clearly three aspects that the former
missed. First, it can present LIM educational change as a process. Fullan (2007) viewed
educational change to be a process with three phases: initiation, implementation and
institutionalisation. In this study, we found DLE development in Vietnam to be in transition
moving slowly between the initiation and implementation phases. For example, althoughthe Vietnamese Government was supporting the development of the country's IT
infrastructure, LIM schools overall did not have the facilities nor the staff with the
competencies necessary for DLE. Second, the revised model illustrates the relationships
between factors as shown by the arrows. Finally, it shows both the direct and indirect effects
of the contextual factors on DLE development.
The “relationships ”arrows present the relationships between factors rather than the type
of relation. For example, the Change agents factor in ﬂuences the Government factor (policies
and funds) and the Stakeholder attitudes factor (LIM practitioner competencies). “Direct
effects ”illustrate that a factor directly affects DLE development. For example, the Change
agent factor directly affects policies and funds of the Government and in ﬂuences the
Stakeholder attitudes. “Indirect effects ”means that a factor affects the DLE development
through other factors. For instance, the Social and cultural values factor in ﬂuences DLE
development through affecting Stakeholder attitudes and the Personal and organisational
nexus .
Government
The Vietnamese Government is recognised as the most in ﬂuential factor affecting the
development of DLE in Vietnam. The government acted both as an enabler and as a barrier
with regard to the development of DLE. The Government factor has relationships with the
Change agents factor and the IT infrastructure factor. The government was affected by
change agents through their lobbying. Some change agents used their organisations to
inﬂuence the government in terms of developing standards, acquiring new technology and
changing LIM educational requirements. Change agents said that this was a good way to
deliver new technologies/LIM standards to the LIM ﬁeld in the Vietnamese environment in
which central planning plays a critical role. Change agents have been successful in the pastin approaching the relevant government ministries to promote the introduction of integrated
library systems and MARC21. In addition, they in ﬂuenced MOET to allow for basic LIM
educational programmes. Change agents thus were able to reduce the limiting effects of the
government ’s management control.
The government directly affected the development of the IT infrastructure through
policies that prioritised investment in IT that created a basic IT infrastructure for education
and other sectors. This created the environment required for the development of DLs and
DLE.
Change agents
This factor includes individual change agents and change organisations. The effects of
change agents on DLE were identi ﬁed through the enablers and hindrances. Change agents
were an enabling factor. They made efforts to deliver DLE into the LIM ﬁeld.
The Change agents factor has relationships with the Government factor and the
Stakeholder attitudes factor. The relationship with Government was discussed above. In theGKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
relationship with Stakeholder attitudes , change agents played an important role in positively
inﬂuencing stakeholders' opinions about DLs and DLE.
In Vietnam, as would be the case for many similar countries, the centralised diffusion
process (Rogers, 2003) is the most likely to succeed. Change agents work with the top level ofmanagement and in ﬂuence decision makers to decide whether the innovation (e.g. a new
software product, new technology, or new educational programme) should be introduced tothe LIM community.
Stakeholder attitudes
Stakeholder attitudes was one of the most important factors that affected the development of
DLE. This factor presented the current understanding and viewpoint about DLs and DLEand explored the needs of the LIM profession. This factor had both positive and negativeeffects on DLE development.
In its relationships with other factors, the Stakeholder attitudes factor was in ﬂuenced
both by Social and cultural values and by Change agents . According to
Wood (2000) , the
speed of the change process increases when the attitudes of stakeholders change. Therefore,an important ﬁnding in this study was that change agents believed that it was necessary to
help the various stakeholders to understand the DL concept, which in turn would help
change their attitudes towards the importance of DLE development. The Stakeholder
attitudes factor was also affected by the Social and cultural values factor.
Social and cultural values
TheSocial and cultural values factor was a barrier which restricted DLE development. The
aspects of this factor such as the attitudes in Vietnamese society to those in the LIM ﬁeld,
the lack of cooperation among LIM organisations, the stakeholders ’hesitation to change and
the power distance in society were barriers to DLE development.
In its relationship with other factors, the Social and cultural values factor affected the
Stakeholder attitudes factor (this was discussed above) and the Personal and organisational
nexus factor. Power distance, an aspect of the Social and cultural values factor, restricted LIM
practitioners stating their educational needs. This led to a “conﬂict”relationship between
individuals and organisations.
Personal and organisational nexus
This factor was both an enabler and a barrier. It has relationships with the Social and
cultural values factor and the DLE characteristics factor. The ﬁrst relationship was discussed
above. In its relationship with the DLE characteristics factor, the Personal and
organisational nexus affected the educational needs of LIM practitioners. It would prompt
DLE needs if it was a “balanced ”relationship, or restrict the need if it was a “conﬂict”
relationship.
Digital library education characteristics
This factor includes the need for DLE, the DLE content in current LIM educational
programmes, and the ability of LIM schools to develop and implement DLE. The factor wasboth an enabler and a barrier. The recognition of the need for DLE was an enabling factorfor DLE development, however, the lack of lecturers who could implement DLEprogrammes was a barrier for DLE development. This factor has a relationship with the
Personal and organisational nexus factor.Digital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Information technology infrastructure
The development of a national digital environment, the trends in using digital content and
the need for staff to work in DLs, created the need for DLE. The IT infrastructure was anenabler for the development of DLE. The IT infrastructure factor was affected by theGovernment factor because of the impact of government policies and funding for IT.
In summary, the various factors had different levels of impact on DLE development.
Some factors played important roles in DLE development and in ﬂuenced other factors, while
others had less impact on the development. In addition, each factor does not stand alone,rather it has relationships with others, and together they affect DLE development.
Conclusion
The revised model with its seven major factors illustrates the context in which DLE in
Vietnam must try to grow. Some factors are enablers, some are barriers, and some are both.Those who are involved with DLE development in countries such as Vietnam, especially thechange agents, can use the model to help them understand what sorts of opportunities andchallenges they will face with each attempt to promote DLE. As an example, government isby far the most in ﬂuential contextual factor, yet it is both an enabler and a barrier, so it is
possible to use government as a positive force but necessary to bear in mind that it can alsooffer resistance to change. The model shows relationships between factors, so again takingthe example of government it can be seen that it affects the IT infrastructure. If governmentcan be encouraged to be supportive, it can improve the IT infrastructure that will become apositive factor for DLE development. The same use of relationships and direction ofinﬂuence can be used for all the factors to assist in DLE development.
Vietnam is not alone as a Southeast Asian country with a growing demand for LIM
graduates with the necessary competencies to work in and manage digital libraries.Therefore, the model developed in this study can potentially play an important role inunderstanding the factors affecting DLE development in other South East Asian countries.We invite researchers in these countries to replicate this study to further validate the model,thereby establishing it as a standard for the region.
References
Antonacopoulou, E.P. (2006), “The relationship between individual and organisational learning: new
evidence from managerial learning practices ”,Management Learning , Vol. 37 No. 4, pp. 455-473.
Audunson, R.A. and Shuva, N.Z. (2016), “Digital library education in Europe: a survey ”,SAGE Open ,
Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 1-17.
Berthrong, J.H. and Berthrong, E.N. (2000), Confucianism: A Short Introduction , Oneworld, Oxford.
Bryman, A. (2008), Social Research Methods , 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bury, R. and Jamieson, H. (2014), “A service in transition: how digital technology is shaping
organizational change ”, in Mackenzie, M. and Martin, L. (Eds), Mastering Digital Librianship:
Strategy, Networking and Discovery in Academic Libraries , Facet, London.
Cao, M.K. (2000), “Digital libraries: de ﬁnitions and issues ”,Journal of Information and Documentation ,
Vol. 4 No. 3, pp. 5-11.
Cao, M.K. (2003), “Education and training for librarians in the new situation ”, in Tran, Q.T and Do, V.H.
(Eds), Improving the Quality of Education for Library and Information Staff , USSH, Vietnam
National University, Hanoi, pp. 20-27.
Choi, Y. and Rasmussen, E. (2006), “What do digital librarians do? ”, in Marchionini, G., Nelson, M.L.
and Marshall, C.C. (Eds), JCDL '06 Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on
Digital Libraries , ACM, Chael Hill, NC, pp. 187-188.GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Dakshinamurti, G. and Braaksma, B. (2005), “Preparing academic librarians for changing roles: a case
of a Canadian information literacy programme ”, in Genoni, P. and Walton, G. (Eds), Continuing
Professional Development - preparing for New Roles in Libraries: a Voyage of Discovery , K.G.
Saur, Munchen, pp. 112-125.
Do, T.M. and Pham, T.T. (2009), “Educating librarians and information professionals ”, in Tran Q.T.
and Do V.H. (Eds), Human Resources for the Library and Information Field , Vietnam National
University, Hanoi, pp. 11-18.
Do, V.H. (2014), “Digital libraries and digital librarians ”,Journal of Information and Documentation ,
No. 6, pp. 3-11.
Ellsworth, J.B. (2000), Surviving Change: A Survey of Educational Change Models , ERIC Clearinghouse
on Information and Technology, Syracuse, New York, NY.
Ely, D. (1990), “Conditions that facilitate the implementation of educational teachology innovations ”,
Journal of Research on Computing in Education , Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 298-305.
Fourie, I. (2004), “Librarians and the claiming of new roles: how can we try to make a difference? ”,Aslib
Proceedings , Vol. 56 No. 1, pp. 62-74.
Fullan, M. (2007), The New Meaning of Educational Change , 4th ed., Teachers College Press, New York,
NY.
Gorman, G.E. and Clayton, P. (2005), Qualitative Research for the Information Professional: A Practical
Handbook , 2nd ed., Facet, London.
Hallam, G. and Partridge, H. (2004), “ITþLIS = the perfect partnership for the twenty- ﬁrst century!
The Queensland University of Technology (QUT) formula for success ”, Paper presented at the
Poised to Pounce: The Power of Convergence, Association for Library and Information Science
Education 2004 Annual Conference (ALISE 2004), San Diego, CA.
Hartnett, E. (2014), “NASIG's core competencies for electronic resources librarians revisited: an analysis
of job advertisement trends, 2000-2012 ”,The Journal of Academic Librarianship , Vol. 40 Nos 3/4,
pp. 247-258.
Hofstede, G. (2001), Culture ’s Consequences: Comparing Values, behaviors, institutions, and
Organizations across Nations , 2nd ed., Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Lam, T.T.H. (2014), “The percent of ICT related subjects in the LIM educational programmes ”,Vietnam
Library Journal , Vol. 4 No. 48, pp. 7-11.
Ma, Y., Clegg, W. and O'Brien, A. (2009), “A review of progress in digital library education ”, in Yin-
Lang Theng, S.F., Goh, D. and Na, J.C. (Eds), Handbook of Research on Digital Libraries: Design,
Development and Impact , IGI Global, Hershey, PA, pp. 533-542.
Maroso, A.L. (2005), “Educating future digitizers: the Illinois digitisation institute ’s basics and beyond
digitization training program ”,Library Hi Tech , Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 187-204.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M. and Saldana, J. (2014), Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook ,
3rd ed., Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
MCST-Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism (2007), The Master Plan for Vietnamese Library
Development until 2010 and Visions to 2020 , Ministry of Culture Sports and Tourism, Hanoi.
MCST-Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, Library Department (2017), Proposal of Vietnam ’sM a s t e r
Library Development Plan until 2050 and Vision to 2030 , MCST Library Department, Hanoi.
MOET-Ministry of Education and Training (2003), Regulation and Standards for School Libraries ,
Issued: 2/1/2003. No.: 01/2003/Q -D-BGD& -DT, MOET, Hanoi.
MOET-Ministry of Education and Training (2007), Standards for Evaluation of the Higher Education
Quality , Issued 01-11-2007. No.: 65/2007/Q -D-BGD -DT, MOET, Hanoi.
MOET-Ministry of Education and Training (2009), “Approval of Vietnam ’s master education development
from 2009 to 2020 ”, available at: www.moet.gov.vn/?page=1.1&view=856 (accessed 20 August
2017).Digital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Muhammad, A. and Khalid, M. (2010), “The changing role of librarians in the digital world: adoption of
web 2.0 technologies in Pakistani libraries ”, paper presented at the World Library and
Information Congress: 76th IFLA General Conference and Assembly, 10-15 August 2010,
Gothenburg, available at: www.i ﬂa.org/ ﬁles/hq/papers/i ﬂa76/145-arif-en.pdf (accessed 17
September 2017).
Murray, J. and Welch, B. (2009), “Perceptions of LIS development in Vietnam: educational outcomes and
the way forward ”,Education for Information , Vol. 27 Nos 2/3, pp. 103-114.
Myburgh, S. and Tammaro, A.M. (2013), Exploring Education for Digital Librarians: Meaning, Modes
and Models , Chandos, Oxford.
National Library of Vietnam (NLV) (2008), “Vietnam country report ”, paper presented at the Libraries
in Asia and Oceania Meeting, Tokyo, available at: www.ndl.go.jp/en/cdnlao/meetings/pdf/
CR2008-Vietnam.pdf (accessed 30 July 2017).
Nieuwenhuysen, P. (2011), “An international training program in library and information science:
looking backward and forward ”,Education for Information , Vol. 28 Nos 2/4, pp. 279-290.
Nguyen, D.D. (2009), “Role and position of confucianism in Vietnamese society ”,Journal of Philosophy ,
Vol. 10 No. 221, pp, pp. 11-20.
Nguyen, D.T. (2005), “Establishing electronic libraries and digitisation in Vietnam ”,Journal of
Information and Documentation , No. 2, pp. 15-20.
Nguyen, H.S. (2008), “A contextual model for planning continuing education programmes for
university library practitioners in Vietnam ”, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington,
available at: http://hdl.handle.net/10063/821 (accessed 10 March 2017).
Nguyen, H.S. (2016), “Investigating factors affecting academic librarians ’continue learning ”,Vietnam
Library Journal , Vol. 3 No. 59, pp. 24-28.
Nguyen, H.S. (Ed.) (2017a), The Development of Digital Libraries in Vietnam: Past, Present and Future ,
Vietnam National University, Hanoi.
Nguyen, T.L.T. (2017b), “Training human resources for digital libraries ”, in Nguyen, H.S. (Ed.), The
Development of Digital Libraries in Vietnam: past, present and Future , Vietnam National
University, Hanoi, pp. 465-470.
Nguyen, M.H. (2014), “Digital libraries and developing DLs in Vietnam ”,Vietnam Library Journal , Vol.
3 No. 47, pp. 20-25.
Nguyen, S.H. and Chowdhury, G. (2013), “Interpreting the knowledge map of digital library research
(1990-2010) ”,Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , Vol. 64
No. 6, pp. 1235-1258.
Nowlen, P.M. (1988), A New Approach to Continuing Education for Business and the Professions: The
Performance Model , Macmillan, New York, NY.
Patton, M.Q. (2002), Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods , 3rd ed., Sage, London.
Raju, J. (2014), “Knowledge and skills for the digital era academic library ”,The Journal of Academic
Librarianship , Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 163-170.
Swallow, V., Newton, J. and Van Lottum, C. (2003), “How to manage and display qualitative data using
‘framework ’and microsoft® excel ”,Journal of Clinical Nursing , Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 610-612.
Standing Committee of the National Assembly (2000), “Ordinance of libraries ”, Issued 28-12-2000, No.:
31/2000/PL-UBTVQH10, SCNA, Hanoi.
Ta, B.H. (2000), “Developing digital libraries in Vietnam: disciplines for development ”,Journal of
Information and Documentation , No. 1, pp. 2-4.
Tammaro, A.M. (2017), “New pro ﬁles, New skills, New education for digital heritage professionals:
European spotlight on Competency-Based system ”,International Information and Library
Review , Vol. 49 No. 4, pp. 290-296.
The Atlantic Philanthropies (2018), Viet Nam , The Atlantic Philanthropies, New York, NY.GKMC
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
Tran, T.M.N. (2009), “Improving the quality of human resources for library and information ﬁeld in
Vietnam at the present ”, in Tran, Q.T. and Do, V.H. (Eds), Human Resources for the Library and
Information Field , Vietnam National University, Hanoi.
Tran, T.Q. and Do, V.H. (2014), “Training digital librarians for academic libraries in Vietnam ”, In Tran,
T.Q. (Ed.), Roles of the Library and Information Field in Vietnam ’s General Education Reform ,
Vietnam National University, Hanoi, pp. 2016-2217.
Valente, T.W. and Pumpuang, P. (2007), “Identifying opinion leaders to promote behavior change ”,
Health Education and Behavior , Vol. 34 No. 6, pp. 881-896.
VNNIC-Vietnam Network Information Centre (2018), “Report on internet statistics of Vietnam ”, The
Vietnam Network Information Centre, available at: www.thongkeinternet.vn/jsp/trangchu/
index.jsp (accessed 14 August 2018).
VNU-Vietnam National University (2009), Human Resources for the Library and Information Field ,
Vietnam National University, Hanoi.
Vu, T.N. (2007), “Challenges and strategies for digital library development ”,Tap Chi Thu Vien
Vietnam –Vietnam Library Journal , No. 2, pp. 19-24.
Vu, V.S. (1999), “Developing digital libraries in Vietnam ”, Tap chi Thong tin - Tu lieu, No. 2, pp. 1-6.
Vu Thu Hang, N., Meijer, M.R., Bulte, A.M.W. and Pilot, A. (2015), “The implementation of a social
constructivist approach in primary science education in confucian heritage culture: the case ofVietnam ”,Cultural Studies of Science Education , Vol. 10 No. 3, pp. 665-693.
Welch, B. and Murray, J. (2007), “Delivering LIS education into Vietnam: a narrative of teaching,
interpreting and translating ”,International Information and Library Review , Vol. 39 No. 2,
pp. 80-88.
Wood, W. (2000), “Attitude change: Persuasion and social in ﬂuence ”,Annual Review of Psychology ,
Vol. 51, pp. 539-570.
Youngsang, C., Junseok, H. and Daeho, L. (2012), “Identi ﬁcation of effective opinion leaders in the
diffusion of technological innovation: a social network approach ”,Technological Forecasting and
Social Change , Vol. 79 No. 1, pp, pp. 97-106.
Further reading
Rogers, E.M. (1995), Diffusion of Innovations , 4th ed., The Free Press, New York, NY.
Corresponding author
Philip Calvert can be contacted at:
philip.calvert@vuw.ac.nz
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comDigital library
education
Downloaded by Göteborgs Universitet At 22:19 24 January 2019 (PT)
