Applied Research
Enhancing the Knowledge and Behaviors of
Fieldworkers to Promote Family Planning
and Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health inBangladesh Through a Digital Health TrainingPackage: Results From a Pilot Study
Rupali J. Limaye1, Anne Ballard Sara1, Naheed Ahmed1, Saori Ohkbuo1,
Sidhartha Deka2, Cassandra Mickish Gross1, and Rebecca Arnold1
Abstract
Community health workers, also known as fieldworkers (FWs), are frontline health-care providers in Bangladesh, where unmet needin family planning outcomes related to maternal and child health are high. A digital health intervention provided netbook computers to
Bangladeshi FWs with eLearning courses and an eT oolkit, which included material on family planning, maternal, newborn, and child
health topics to enhance FWs’ knowledge and skills. T o understand how the intervention affected FW’s knowledge and counselingbehavior, this pre -poststudy measured FWs’ knowledge related to family planning, maternal, newborn, child health, and counseling on
family topics before and after the pilot. Bivariate analyses were used to determine changes in FW knowledge, and multivariate analyses
were conducted to determine changes in behavior, comparing knowledge and behaviors prepilot to postpilot. Comparing meanknowledge scores after and before the pilot, the difference in mean scores was significant ( p<.05) related to knowledge of benefits
of birth spacing (1.26) and benefits of a small family (1.3) and related to maternal health, anemia prevention (0.95), and recommended
number of antenatal care visits (0.13). Regarding newborn and child health, the difference in mean scores was significantly ( p<.05)
related to knowledge of proper attachment for breastfeeding (3.56) and signs of adequate breast milk supply (1.08). Postintervention,
FWs were significantly more likely to counsel couples on all available contraceptive options (adjusted odds ratio: 4.64; 95% CI [3.16,
6.83]) and birth spacing benefits (adjusted odds ratio: 4.54; 95% CI [3.17, 6.50]). Digital health training approaches can improve FWs’knowledge and counseling skills within an international context, specifically in low-resource settings.
Keywords
family planning, maternal health, child health, newborn health, digital health, Bangladesh
Background
Bangladesh has achieved remarkable results in key health
areas, including family planning, maternal health, child
health, and newborn health. The total fertility rate has
declined in the past 30 years, from 6.3 to 2.3 children per
woman, and in conjunction with this decline in the fertility
rate, the use of modern contraceptives has increased from
18% to 54%.1The maternal mortality ratio has decreased
from 574 to 194 deaths per 100,000 live births and in the last
30 years, the under-5 mortality rate has declined from 133 to
46 per 1,000 live births.1,2
Although these improvements are promising, gaps remain
in neonatal, child, and maternal health indicators.3,4For example, among children under the age of 5 years,
36% are stunted (low height-for-age) and 14% are wasted
(low weight-for-height).1Malnutrition begins at birth for
many infants, as nutritional deﬁciencies among pregnant
women have substantially contributed to low birth weight
1Johns Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs, Baltimore,
MD, USA
2American International Health Alliance, Washington, DC, USA
Corresponding Author:
Naheed Ahmed, Johns Hopkins University Center for Communication Programs,
111 Market Place, Baltimore, MD 21202-7112, USA.
Email: naheed.ahmed@jhu.eduInternational Quarterly of
Community Health Education
0(0) 1–7
!The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0272684X19861866
journals.sagepub.com/home/qch
rates in the country.5Only 55% of infants younger than 6
months of age are exclusively breastfed, and complementaryfoods are typically not introduced according to recom-mended guidelines.
1,5Regarding hand washing, although
95.5% of observed households in 2014 had a designatedarea for handwashing, the majority (64%) lacked a cleaningagent, such as soap.
1As evident by these numbers, signiﬁcant
gaps remain in basic health indicators, and Bangladesh mustintensify its efforts in the health sector to achieve the UnitedNations’ sustainable development goals (SDG) by 2030. Forexample, the SDG targets aim to reduce under-5 mortalityto 25 per 1,000 live births, ensure universal access to sexualand reproductive health services, and end all forms ofmalnutrition.
6
A key challenge to improving upon these indicators is that
three fourths of the total population of Bangladesh resides inrural area, and, as a result, experience difﬁculty accessingprompt, proper medical care when needed, as most trainedmedical personnel provide care in primarily urban areas.
7
In addition to inequitable distribution, Bangladesh is char-acterized by other problems related to its health workforce—including a severe shortage as well as an inappropriateskill mix.
7
Community health workers can help mitigate the negative
effects of a health workforce shortage, particularly withinrural settings.
8In Bangladesh, community health workers
(known as ﬁeldworkers (FWs)) play a crucial role in provid-ing health care for the poor rural population in remote andunderserved areas, and two cadres of FWs provide serviceswith regard to family planning, and maternal, newborn,and child health—family welfare assistants and healthassistants.
7,8
In order for Bangladesh to achieve the SDG targets to
reduce under-5 mortality, FWs need access to accurate andup-to-date information regarding family planning, andmaternal, newborn, and child health.
9This is particularly
critical as FWs are often the primary source of health infor-
mation and health care in much of the country.7Increased
knowledge among health workers can lead to positivechanges in their counseling behaviors.
10For example, a sys-
tematic literature review on the effectiveness of nutritiontraining on health workers’ knowledge and skills foundimprovements not only in health worker knowledge butalso in capacity and practices related to the management ofunder nutrition.
11With increased knowledge, FWs in turn
have the ability to increase the knowledge and behaviors ofthose they counsel.
12,13
Increasing FWs’ knowledge has historically been achieved
through traditional training models such as didactic andclassroom instruction accompanied with an adult learningapproach that includes role-playing, simulation, and groupdiscussion.
14,15These methods can increase knowledge and
skills among FWs, foster FW motivation, and serve as a keynonﬁnancial incentive for FW retention.
16,17Critical to effective training is the notion that such train-
ings are directed and developed by their end-user, and adultlearning methods enable participants to problem-solve care-
giving processes with limited supervision.
18While more
scenario-based teaching methods have proven to resonatewith FWs, many traditional training models in the South
Asian context are mired by limitations such as the ability
of trainers and the delivery of trainings through rote-basedclassroom learning.
19Moreover, longitudinal studies in
Kenya and Guinea-Bissau have shown that continuous class-
room instruction may have the potential to decrease FW
knowledge and performance due to lack of consistency of
curriculum reinforced in refresher trainings and ongoingchanges in national clinical guidelines.
20,21
Digital health training models are now gaining popularity
in building the capacity of FWs. Digital health trainingmodels can take a variety of forms and may include
mHealth or mobile health approaches, deﬁned as “the use
of portable electronic devices with software applications toprovide health services and manage patient information,”
and eLearning, deﬁned as “learning conducted via electronic
media.”
22,23mLearning or mobile learning has been deﬁned
as “learning across multiple contexts, through social and con-
tent interactions, using personal electronic devices,” includ-ing formal courses and self-directed and informal learning.
24
A review conducted in 2013 of mHealth approaches for
FWs in low- and middle-income countries found that suchapproaches used one of three applications: one-way, two-
way, or multiway.
23One-way applications “push” informa-
tion to recipients, commonly through short message service
(SMS) or robocalls. Two-way communication, including
both synchronous and asynchronous communication, ismore interactive; these approaches may require more effort
and skill but may also be more engaging. Multiway commu-
nication includes social media applications.
23
A variety of digital health interventions have been used to
improve FWs’ and physicians’ knowledge and practice,
including SMS messages, digital job aids on mobile phones,smart phone applications for screening protocols, and digital
health applications. A randomized controlled trial in Kenya
found that regular SMS messages sent to health workers with
information about key outpatient management of malaria
improved treatment adherence.
25Florez-Arango et al.26
found that FWs in Colombia who were provided with job
aids for clinical guidelines with interactive rich media on
mobile phones made fewer errors and were more protocol-compliant than FWs using paper guidelines. In Pakistan,
FWs were provided with an interactive algorithm on
mobile phones to screen suspected patients for tuberculosis,
which was associated with increased case notiﬁcation.
27
The Botswana School of Medicine provided a small group
of resident physicians with high-level educational resources
on Android-based smartphones, including point-of-care and
drug information applications and a telemedicine applicationfor correspondence with local mentors; residents reported2 International Quarterly of Community Health Education 0(0)using the applications while seeing patients in resource-
limited settings as well as for self-directed learning.28Zolfo
et al.29equipped a small group of physicians in Peru with
smartphones with a set of simulated clinical learning scenar-ios and a discussion forum linking physicians to specialists.
29
Although most physicians had no prior mobile learning expe-rience, they found the resources relevant and useful andenjoyed the portability and convenience of the applications.
29
Researchers noted that barriers to smartphone usage formLearning in resource-limited settings include a lack of soft-ware interoperability and high investment costs.
29A review of
eLearning in medical education in low- and middle-income
countries found that eLearning expanded access to educationand often used blended learning approaches, but theseapproaches assumed sufﬁcient skills and infrastructure thatmay not be present in all environments.
30Others have recom-
mended that eLearning initiatives for FWs use simple lan-guage with multimedia and interactive features withoutreliance on Internet access and reinforce content with blendedlearning opportunities and a social support network.
31
As frontline health-care providers, FWs in Bangladesh
require access to current guidance on a variety of healthissues. To that end, the aims of this study were to determinehow an eHealth digital training package (which consisted ofeLearning courses and eToolkits) loaded onto netbooksaffected learning among FWs regarding family planningand maternal, newborn, and child health topics. Netbookswere chosen as the delivery mechanism for these resources asthey are portable and convenient for FWs. The purpose ofthis study was to evaluate the effects of a digital health inter-
vention on FWs’ knowledge of family planning, maternal,
and newborn health and changes in FWs’ counseling behav-ior related to family planning. By examining the effect ofeHealth resources on FWs’ knowledge and skills, thisresearch highlights the importance of nontraditional trainingmodels to improve health outcomes at the point of care andcontributes to the global health workforce literature.
Methods
Study Context
Two districts in Bangladesh, Sylhet and Chittagong, have
among the highest fertility and lowest contraceptive preva-lence rates in Bangladesh. As such, the Ministry of Healthand Family Welfare prioritized these two districts to serve as
the sites for the eHealth pilot. In each district, six upazilas
were selected, two urban and four rural. The interventionwas then delivered to speciﬁc FWs within these selectedareas.
Study Design and Population
This study used a cross-sectional design, with data collectedbefore (pre) and after (post) the pilot in Sylhet andChittagong. As we were interested in understanding changes
in knowledge and behaviors among FWs, FWs at both time
points—pre ( n¼306) and post ( n¼265)—were purposively
chosen by district-level government ofﬁcials to partake in the
study. Each wave included a combination of FWs: some who
received the netbook with the digital health training packageand some who did not receive the netbook with the digital
health training package. We hypothesized that the knowledge
of all FWs’—not just those given the netbooks—wouldincrease, due to fact that many of the FWs communicated
and shared resources regularly with one another.
Intervention
The intervention was an educational digital health interven-tion and was targeted toward FWs, with the intent of chang-
ing FW knowledge and behavior related to family planning,maternal health, and newborn and child health. Through the
Bangladesh Knowledge Management Initiative project, FWs
identiﬁed by district-level government ofﬁcials, participatedin the eHealth pilot. FWs who were chosen to be in the pilot
received netbooks loaded with an eHealth digital training
package that included eToolkits (print materials, televisionspots, ﬂipcharts, and job aids related to speciﬁc technical
topics) and eight video-based eLearning courses. The
eToolkits were intended for use as a counseling tool, whilethe eLearning courses were meant to supplement the in-
person trainings received by FWs. In total, the eToolkit con-
sisted of 116 materials relevant to health, population, andnutrition, including 67 for maternal, newborn, and child
health, and 23 for family planning. The eight eLearning
courses included two on maternal and newborn health, twoon family planning, two on nutrition, one on interpersonal
communication and counseling, and one on integrated mes-
saging. Due to concerns about Internet access and connec-tivity, the eHealth digital training package was made
available in an off-line version. Contributors of materials
included the government of Bangladesh, nongovernmentalorganizations, development partners, and private sector part-
ners. Technical experts and FWs vetted all materials included
in the eHealth digital training package, and the package wasdesigned to be easy-to-navigate and targeted to those with
low computer literacy.
Prior to the intervention, FWs were given a 2-day, hands-
on orientation on basic netbook operation and how to use
the eHealth digital training package. The eHealth pilot lastedfor four months (May-August 2013). To ensure proper
implementation, four monitoring and troubleshooting ofﬁ-
cers worked in each district. The four monitoring and trou-bleshooting ofﬁcers circulated among the FWs every 2 weeks
to assist with any technology-related issues.
Data Collection Tools and Techniques
The intervention was implemented from May to August of2013. Data were collected at two time points: before the pilotLimaye et al. 3and after the pilot. The same cross-sectional survey was
administered at the two time points. We were interested in
changes in knowledge across a number of topics as well as
changes in counseling behavior related to family planning,
maternal health, and newborn and child health; therefore,the survey included questions related to these topics and
behaviors. Surveys were administered in-person by a team
of researchers that had been trained by the project. Beforeadministering the survey, the research team obtained oral
consent. Participants did not receive any incentive for partic-
ipation. Ethical approval was obtained from the BangladeshMedical Research Council in Bangladesh and the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Institutional
Review Board in the United States.
Outcome Variables
We were interested in two outcomes: changes in knowledgeand changes in behavior, comparing postpilot to prepilot.
Regarding knowledge change, we measured FWs’ level of
knowledge before and after the pilot in family planning,maternal health, and newborn and child health. Regarding
family planning, we asked three questions about beneﬁts of
birth spacing and three questions about the beneﬁts of havinga small family. Related to maternal health, three questions
were asked about how to prevent anemia, one question was
asked related to the recommended number of antenatal visits,and three questions were asked related to danger signs of
labor and pregnancy. Related to newborn and child health,
nine questions were asked related to proper attachment forbreastfeeding and three questions were asked related to signs
of adequate breast milk supply. In addition, four questions
were asked related to newborn danger signs, two questionswere asked related to how to care for a preterm infant, one
question was asked related to how to prevent diarrhea in a
newborn, and six questions were asked related to symptoms
of malnutrition.
Regarding behavior change, we were interested in two
behaviors related to family planning: whether or not the
FW counseled couples on all available contraceptive optionsand whether or not the FW counseled couples on the beneﬁts
of birth spacing. All FWs were asked: “When you talk with
newly married couples, do you provide to them informationabout available contraceptive options?” This outcome indi-
cator is a dichotomous variable (yes or no). They were also
asked: “When you talk with newly married couples, do youprovide them with information on the beneﬁts of spacing
their children?” This outcome indicator is a dichotomous
variable (yes or no).
Covariates and Other Variables
We collected information about FW age, education level, andjob tenure. Age was a continuous variable (years), educationlevel was categorical (illiterate, some primary education,
some secondary education, some undergraduate education,and some masters education), and job tenure was a continu-
ous variable (years).
Statistical Analysis
To ascertain changes in knowledge, we compared the differ-
ence in mean knowledge scores by topic from postpilot toprepilot using bivariate analysis. Knowledge questions wereasked in a true/false format and correct responses wereawarded 1 point. We then computed a composite score pertopic. For example, as we asked three questions relatingto the beneﬁts of birth spacing, a participant could score 0(no knowledge) or a 1, 2, or 3, with a score of 3 indicating thehighest level of knowledge.
To ascertain changes in behavior, we compared odds of
engaging in the desired behavior through multiple regressionequations that controlled for the effects of select sociodemo-graphic variables (age, education level, and job tenure),comparing postpilot to prepilot.
Results
Comparing sociodemographic variables (age, education, andjob tenure) of prepilot respondents compared to postpilotrespondents using v
2tests showed no statistically signiﬁcant
difference (Table 1). Comparing mean knowledge scores pre-and postpilot (Table 2), within the context of family plan-ning, the difference in mean scores was signiﬁcantly ( p<.001)
related to the knowledge of the beneﬁts of birth spacing(1.26) and beneﬁts of a small family (1.3). Related to mater-
nal health, the difference in mean scores was signiﬁcantly
related to knowledge of how to prevent anemia, (0.95), therecommended number of antenatal care visits (0.13), anddanger signs related to labor and pregnancy (0.41) whencomparing pre- and postpilot scores. Related to child andnewborn health, the difference in mean scores was signiﬁ-cantly related to knowledge of the proper attachment forbreastfeeding (3.56) and signs of adequate breastmilksupply (1.08) from pre- to postpilot. In addition, the differ-ence in mean scores in relation to the recognition of newborndanger signs (1.26), how to care for preterm infants (0.93),how to prevent diarrhea, (0.35), and symptoms of malnutri-tion (1.71) were also signiﬁcant from pre- to postpilot.Overall, these results indicate that postpilot mean scores
Table 1. Sociodemographic Characteristics of Fieldworkers ( n¼571).
CharacteristicsPre
(n¼306)Post
(n¼265) pa
Age (mean) ( SD¼9.10) 35.02 33.93 .07
Education (mean years completed)
(SD¼.93)12.21 12.16 .28
Job T enure (mean years working)
(SD¼9.27)12.32 11.50 .14
apValues obtained using v2tests.4 International Quarterly of Community Health Education 0(0)increased in comparison to prepilot mean scores
among FWs.
Postintervention, related to family planning behaviors,
FWs were signiﬁcantly more likely to counsel couples onall available contraceptive options (adjusted odds ratio[OR]: 4.64; 95% CI [3.16, 6.83]) and birth spacing beneﬁts
(adjusted OR: 4.54; 95% CI [3.17, 6.50]) compared with pre-
intervention (Table 3).
Discussion
The eHealth pilot demonstrated that the digital health mate-rials included in the intervention can have a positive effect onFW knowledge related to family planning, and maternal,
newborn, and child health, as well as behaviors related to
family planning. These preliminary results provide evidenceregarding the use of digital health interventions to affectknowledge and behaviors.
Our results also support other ﬁndings related to utilizing
a digital health approach in building the capacity of FWs.For example, in the Indian context, short videos deployed on
mobile phones motivated government FWs to digest newknowledge compared with didactic refresher trainings.
32
FWs in Lesotho found that access to mobile video contentwas akin to having access to a trainer at all times,
33and a
pilot in Uganda demonstrated that text messages to facility-based health workers that reinforced key clinical trainingaspects were more cost-effective compared with in-personcoaching and mentoring.
36
Based on these results, efforts are underway to scale-up
the use of the eHealth digital training package by theMinistry of Health and Family Welfare, due to the successof the (blinded for review) Project’s eHealth pilot. TheeToolkit is available online, ofﬂine, and as an Android appli-cation, while eLearning courses are available online, and arein the process of being made available ofﬂine. In addition, theDirectorate General of Health Services has procured 23,000Android-based tablets for distribution to health assistantsand their supervisors. In addition, computers with anInternet connection have been placed in 13,136 communityclinics and in approximately 2,000 family welfare centers. Inaddition, the project is promoting the use of the digitalresources to nongovernmental and private-sector stakehold-ers who have community-based service providers.
While our results are promising, we learned several lessons
relating to implementing a digital health intervention amongFWs. In our opinion, we believe that support from the gov-ernment was critical to successful implementation. In the caseof this intervention, the government of Bangladesh was will-ing and able to invest in the large-scale dissemination ofcomputers and mobile devices. Second, we were able to pro-cure ongoing training and troubleshooting regardingTable 2. Change in Fieldworker Knowledge Mean Scores Across Family Planning and Maternal, Newborn and Child Health
T opics From Pre- to Postpilot ( n¼571).
Health topicPrepilot
mean score
(n¼306)Postpilot
mean score
(n¼265)Mean score
difference
Family planning
Benefits of birth spacing (range: 0–3) 1.32 2.58 1.26*Benefits of a small family (range: 0–3) 1.28 2.58 1.30*
Maternal health
How to prevent anemia (range: 0–3) 1.34 2.29 0.95*Recommended number of ANC visits (range: 0–1) 0.86 0.99 0.13*Danger signs related to labor and pregnancy (range: 0–3) 2.31 2.72 0.41*Newborn and child healthProper attachment for breastfeeding (range: 0–9) 3.0 6.56 3.56*Signs of adequate breast milk supply (range: 0–3) 1.48 2.56 1.08*Newborn danger signs (range: 0–4) 2.01 3.27 1.26*How to care for pre-term infants (range: 0–2) 0.56 1.49 0.93*How to prevent diarrhea (range: 0–1) 0.63 0.98 0.35*Symptoms of malnutrition (range: 0–6) 2.81 4.52 1.71*
Abbreviation: ANC, antenatal care.
*p<.001 obtained using ttests.
Table 3. Odds Ratios Comparing Fieldworker Behavior Related to
Family Planning From Post- to Prepilot ( n¼569).
Variables Adjusted ORaand 95% CI
Counsel couples on all available
contraceptive options4.64 [3.16, 6.83]*
Counsel couples on benefits
of birth spacing4.54 [3.17, 6.50]*
Abbreviation: OR, odds ratio.
aAdjusted for age, education level, and job tenure.
*p<.001.Limaye et al. 5netbook use. As some FWs had never used digital technology
before, we suggest that a well-planned system for training,
promoting, supervising, troubleshooting, and monitoring theuse of technology is crucial to the implementation of digitalhealth interventions.
This study has several limitations. Given that this study
was not longitudinal, we were not able to compare the sameFWs pre- and postpilot and were therefore not able to attrib-ute changes over time. We were unable to control for poten-
tial confounding factors such as other simultaneous health
interventions or education activities. There was also no con-trol group in this study.
Regarding biases, social desirability bias is also possible
given that FWs were asked to self-report counseling behav-iors. Sampling bias may also be present as FWs were chosenthrough a convenience sample. In the future, we would rec-ommend a longer implementation period, as well as baseline
and endline behavioral indicators.
Conclusions
This is one of the ﬁrst studies that examined the effects of
providing a digital health training package to frontline FWsin a rural setting, and such approaches have the potential toimprove the health and status of underserved, difﬁcult toreach populations. This study demonstrated that not onlycan FWs effectively use technology and integrate digital com-
munication tools into their work but also the use of these
resources measurably improves knowledge and changescounseling behaviors. Digital resources, including video andimages, can communicate critical health information in enter-taining and engaging ways. Even when literacy is limited,
clients can easily understand the content when the resources
are shared as part of a counseling session, which serves toreinforce guidance from FWs. Digital resources can be reg-ularly updated to reﬂect the most up-to-date national policyand clinical guidelines along with evidence-based literature,
so that FWs always have consistent and accurate informa-
tion. The resources in this study concentrated on family plan-ning and maternal, newborn, and child health, but FWs alsoexpressed a desire for more materials in additional healthareas, including immunizations, childhood illnesses, adoles-cent health, noncommunicable diseases, and food safety
issues. If provided in conjunction with appropriate in-
service training at the national scale, a high-quality digitalhealth training package has the potential to elevate theknowledge of FWs and the quality of care they provide.FWs have an essential role in health education and basic
health care for much of the world’s hard to reach popula-
tions. With engaging, high quality, accurate, culturallyappropriate digital tools and resources, FWs can strengthentheir own knowledge and skills and empower families tomake informed decisions to protect their health. As connec-tivity continues to improve, technology will increasingly be
used to connect FWs, the health system, and communities inreal time to facilitate faster, more responsive exchange of
information.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support forthe research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This
article was supported by the Knowledge for Health-II Project,funded by the Ofﬁce of Population and Reproductive Health,
Bureau for Global Health, US Agency for International
Development, Cooperative Agreement No. AID-OAA-A-13-
00068. The views expressed in this document do not necessarily
reﬂect those of the US Agency for International Development or
of the US government.
References
1. National Institute of Population Research and Training, MaA,
and ICF International. Bangladesh demographic and health
survey . Dhaka, Bangladesh: National Institute of Population
Research and Training, 2014.
2. Chowdhury AM, Bhuiya A, Chowdhury ME, et al. The
Bangladesh paradox: exceptional health achievement despite
economic poverty. Lancet 2013; 382: 1734–1745.
3. Amin R, St. Pierre M, Ahmed A, et al. Integration of an essen-
tial services package (ESP) in child and reproductive health andfamily planning with a micro-credit program for poor women:experience from a pilot project in rural Bangladesh. World Dev
2001; 29: 1611–1621.
4. Akhter F. Decentralization and integration of health and
family planning services in Bangladesh. Development 2004;
47: 140–144.
5. Ahmed T, Mahfuz M, Ireen S, et al. Nutrition of children and
women in Bangladesh: trends and directions for the future.J Health Popul Nutr 2012; 30: 1–11.
6. United Nations. Sustainable development goals, http://www.un.
org/sustainabledevelopment/ (accessed 25 June 2019).
7. Mridha MK, Anwar I and Koblinsky M. Public-sector maternal
health programmes and services for rural Bangladesh. J Health
Popul Nutr 2009; 27: 124–138.
8. El Arifeen S, Christou A, Reichenbach L, et al. Community-
based approaches and partnerships: innovations in health-service delivery in Bangladesh. Lancet 2013; 382: 2012–2026.
9. Sachs JD. From millennium development goals to sustainable
development goals. Lancet 2012; 379: 2206–2211.
10. Swider SM. Outcome effectiveness of community health work-
ers: an integrative literature review. Public Health Nurs 2002;
19: 11–20.
11. Sunguya BF, Poudel KC, Mlunde LB, et al. Nutrition training
improves health workers’ nutrition knowledge and competenceto manage child undernutrition: a systematic review. Front
Public Health 2013; 1: 37.
12. Sunguya BF, Poudel KC, Mlunde LB, et al. Effectiveness of
nutrition training of health workers toward improving6 International Quarterly of Community Health Education 0(0)caregivers’ feeding practices for children aged six months to two
years: a systematic review. Nutr J 2013; 12: 66.
13. Adam MB, Dillmann M, Chen MK, et al. Improving maternal
and newborn health: effectiveness of a community healthworker program in rural Kenya. PLoS One 2014; 9: e104027.
14. World Health Organization. Strengthening the performance of
community health workers in primary health care . Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1989.
15. Bhutta Z, Lassi ZS, Pariyo G, et al. Global experience of com-
munity health workers for delivery of health related MillenniumDevelopment Goals: a systematic review, country case studies,and recommendations for integration into national health sys-tems. Global Health Workforce Alliance 2010; 1: 61.
16. Ludwick T, Brenner JL, Kyomuhangi T, et al. Poor retention
does not have to be the rule: retention of volunteer communityhealth workers in Uganda. Health Policy Plan 2014;
29: 388–395.
17. Mpembeni RN, Bhatnagar A, LeFevre A, et al. Motivation and
satisfaction among community health workers in MorogoroRegion, Tanzania: nuanced needs and varied ambitions. Hum
Resour Health 2015; 13: 44.
18. Campbell C and Scott K. Retreat from Alma Ata? The WHO’s
report on task shifting to community health workers for AIDScare in poor countries. Glob Public Health 2011; 6: 125–138.
19. Morgan CJ and Deutschmann PW. An evolving model for
training and education in resource-poor settings: teachinghealth workers to ﬁsh. Medical journal of Australia 2003; 178
(1): 21–25.
20. Rowe SY, Olewe MA, Kleinbaum DG, et al. Longitudinal anal-
ysis of community health workers’ adherence to treatmentguidelines, Siaya, Kenya, 1997–2002. Tropical Med Int Health
2007; 12: 651–663.
21. Lopes SC, Cabral AJ and de Sousa B. Community health work-
ers: to train or to restrain? A longitudinal survey to assess theimpact of training community health workers in the BolamaRegion, Guinea-Bissau. Hum Resour Health 2014; 12: 8.
22. e-learning, http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/deﬁnition/
american_english/e-learning (accessed 23 June 2019).
23. Kallander K, Tibenderana JK, Akpogheneta OJ, et al. Mobile
health (mHealth) approaches and lessons for increased perfor-
mance and retention of community health workers in low- and
middle-income countries: a review. J Med Internet Res 2013;
15: e17.
24. Crompton H. A historical overview of mobile learning: toward
learner-centered education. In: ZL Berge and LY Muilenburg(eds) Handbook of mobile learning . London: Routledge, 2013,
pp. 3–14.
25. Zurovac D, Sudoi RK, Akhwale WS, et al. The effect of mobile
phone text-message reminders on Kenyan health workers’adherence to malaria treatment guidelines: a cluster randomisedtrial. Lancet 2011; 378: 795–803.
26. Florez-Arango JF, Iyengar MS, Dunn K, et al. Performance
factors of mobile rich media job aids for community healthworkers. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2011; 18: 131–137.27. Khan AJ, Khowaja S, Khan FS, et al. Engaging the private
sector to increase tuberculosis case detection: an impact evalu-ation study. Lancet Infect Dis 2012; 12: 608–616.
28. Chang AY, Ghose S, Littman-Quinn R, et al. Use of mobile
learning by resident physicians in Botswana. Telemed J E
Health 2012; 18: 11–13.
29. Zolfo M, Iglesias D, Kiyan C, et al. Mobile learning for HIV/
AIDS healthcare worker training in resource-limited settings.AIDS Res Ther 2010; 7: 35.
30. Frehywot S, Vovides Y, Talib Z, et al. E-learning in medical
education in resource constrained low- and middle-incomecountries. Hum Resour Health 2013; 11: 4.
31. Reisach U and Weilemann M. Organisational aspects and
benchmarking of e-learning initiatives: a case study withSouth African community health workers. Glob Health
Promot 2015; 23: 57–66.
32. Ramachandran D, Canny J, Das PD, et al. Mobilizing health
workers in rural India. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI confer-
ence on human factors in computing systems , pp. 1889–1898.
Atlanta, GA: ACM, 2010.
33. Molapo M and Marsden G. Software support for creating dig-
ital health training materials in the ﬁeld. In: Proceedings of the
sixth international conference on information and communicationtechnologies and development: full papers – volume 1 , Cape
Town, South Africa, pp. 205–214. New York, NY: ACM, 2013.
Author Biographies
Rupali J. Limaye , PhD, MPH, MA is a social and behavioral
scientist and is faculty at the Johns Hopkins BloombergSchool of Public Health.
Anne Ballard Sara , MPH is a program ofﬁcer at the Johns
Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.
Naheed Ahmed , MA, MPH was a program ofﬁcer at the
Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.
Saori Ohkbuo , MA is a senior program ofﬁcer at the Johns
Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.
Sidhartha Deka , MSPH was a program ofﬁcer at the Johns
Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.
Cassandra Mickish Gross , MPH is a senior program ofﬁcer at
the Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.
Rebecca Arnold , MPH was a senior program ofﬁcer at the
Johns Hopkins Center for Communication Programs.Limaye et al. 7