Library Hi Tech
eReadiness of public university libraries in Malawi to use mobile phones in the
provision of library and information services
Aubrey Harvey Chaputula, Stephen Mutula,
Article information:
To cite this document:
Aubrey Harvey Chaputula, Stephen Mutula, (2018) "eReadiness of public university libraries in
Malawi to use mobile phones in the provision of library and information services", Library Hi Tech,
https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-10-2017-0204
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-10-2017-0204
Downloaded on: 07 February 2018, At: 17:35 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 54 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 8 times since 2018*
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-
srm:277069 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald
for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission
guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as
well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and
services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for
digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
eReadiness of public university
libraries in Malawi to use mobile
phones in the provision of library
and information services
Aubrey Harvey Chaputula
Library and Learning Resources Centre, Mzuzu University, Mzuzu, Malawi, and
Stephen Mutula
Department of Information Studies, School of Social Sciences,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa
Abstract
Purpose –The purpose of this paper is to present findings of a study conducted to determine eReadiness
status of public university libraries in Malawi to use mobile phones in the provision of library and
information services.
Design/methodology/approach –The researcher carried out in-depth semi-structured interviews with
university/college librarians and information and communications technology (ICT) directors using interview
guides. Students were also administered with a survey questionnaire that contained closed- and someopen-ended questions. Proceedings of the interviews were recorded using a tape recorder whilst backup notes
were recorded in a notebook. Qualitative data were transcribed and analysed using NVivo software whilst
quantitative data were analysed using SPPS.
Findings –The study findings revealed that institutions studied had the ICT infrastructure necessary for
offering library and information services on the mobile phone platform. Moreover, students had mobile
phones which were connected to internet to facilit ate their access to services offered. However, the
institutions covered by this study did not have operat ional ICT policies to govern the operations of library
and information services offered through mobile phones although draft ICT policies were available. The
study further concluded that though the human resources required to manage the provision of library and
information services through mobile phones in the in stitutions studied were available, they did not have
the necessary skills and numbers to provide quality services. Other findings revealed that attitudes oflibrary staff and students to the offering and access to services through mobile phones were positive. The
study also revealed that there are some factors that cou ld impact the offering of library services through
mobile phones.
Research limitations/implications –Although Malawi has four public universities, this study only
focused on three of them. Moreover, academic staff is another important user group of academic libraries.
In this case, findings reported in this paper only focus on students. This implies that library ’s readiness to
offer services through mobile phones to this group remains unknown hence may have to be covered by
future studies. Much as the study incorporated a quantitative strand in addition to the qualitative one,
it neither involved theory testing nor confirmation as is the case with other related studies. This impliesthat the two theories used in this study (the uni ﬁed theory of acceptance and use of technology and the
technology-organisation-environment) were not used in the strict sense, which is empirical at the core,
but rather to put the problem studied in the context of other related studies.
Practical implications –The findings have practical implications in that they can be used for planning the
implementation of library and information services through mobile phones in public university libraries in
Malawi. Other related institutions can also use the findings as a reference point in planning theimplementation of similar services.
Originality/value –Studies relating to the use of mobile phones in the delivery of library and information
services have not been conducted in public universities in Malawi. Findings of this study will, therefore,inform researchers intending to conduct similar or related studies not only in public universities in Malawi
but other related institutions as well.
Keywords Malawi, Factors, Mobile phones, Library and information services, Public university libraries,
eReadiness
Paper type Research paper
Library Hi Tech
© Emerald Publishing Limited
0737-8831
DOI 10.1108/LHT-10-2017-0204Received 2 May 2017
Revised 19 September 2017
12 October 2017
23 November 2017
Accepted 12 December 2017The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com /0737-8831.htm
eReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
Introduction
Lou (2010) defines eReadiness as the ability of a country, enterprise or organisational unit
to be prepared, willing to adopt, use and benefit from e-innovations such as e-business,
e-procurement, e-learning, etc. In other word s, eReadiness refers to the extent to which a
society, country or an organisation is prepare d to partake competitively in the digital age.
Such an e-ready society, cou ntry or organisation will have in place an enabling
information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure (mobile, Wi-Fi and
broadband internet connectivity), human capacity, relevant policy and regulatory
framework and a conducive business envi ronment (Mutula and van Brakel, 2006).
The proliferation of mobile phones the world over has particularly made these tools
important determinants of eReadiness of societi es, countries or organisations in the digital
dispensation. A country, society or organis ation that is e-ready is bound to register
greater usage of ICTs. On the contrary, uptake of ICTs would diminish in an environment
in which these indicators are lacking.
University libraries are increasingly offe ring their services thro ugh a number of mobile
phone applications (Luo, 2014) and also creating webpages that are accessed through
mobile phones (Bridges et al., 2010; Wilson and McCarthy, 2010) . In the context of Malawi,
no studies on the use of mobile phone to prov ide library and information services are
available. From the broader African perspect ive, a few university libraries have adopted
the use of mobile phones in libraries, whic h use them mainly for SMS text messaging
(Anbu and Mavuso, 2012; Sekyere, 2011). A st udy conducted by Sekyere (2011) involving
79 academic libraries in ten West African co untries found that none of the libraries
surveyed used mobile phones i n service delivery. However , a recent study conducted by
Baro et al. (2014) covering 36 Nigerian University lib raries found that less than half of the
libraries used mobile phone SMS for referen ce services. A pilot SMS project conducted by
Anbu and Mavuso (2012) at the University o f Swaziland revealed that SMS was used
successfully to market library services.
Public university libraries in Malawi are under-resourced especially with regard to ICT
infrastructure such as computers (Chaputula, 2012; Bates et al., 2011). In addition, most of
the days, libraries are open for limited hours because of limited human capacity. Moreover,
most students stay off-campus (official student enrolment statistics, February 2015) and
have limited access to the library most of the time. This is exacerbated by the fact that the
library collections are in limited supply (Mapulanga, 2011).
The use of mobile phones to provide library and information services in Malawi has the
potential to enhance access to library resources beyond the normal opening hours hence can
assist to overcome the obstacles of time and space (Malik and Mahmood, 2013), and bring
convenience to library users (Ballard and Blaine, 2013). This would also help provide access
to e-resources by those who do not have access to institutional computer facilities thereby
assist to erase the challenge of PC shortage which is common in many libraries of
developing countries (Palumbo, 2014).
This study, therefore, investigated the eReadiness of public university libraries in
Malawi to use mobile phones to provide library and information services. The study
specifically addressed the following research questions:
RQ1. What is the eReadiness status of public university libraries in Malawi in relation to
ICT infrastructure to deliver library and information services through mobile phones?
RQ2. To what extent do public university libraries in Malawi have the requisite
human resources to enable them deliver lib rary and information services through
mobile phones?
RQ3. How well are public university libraries in Malawi e-ready in terms of policy to
deliver library and information services through mobile phones?LHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
RQ4. What are the attitudes of library staff and students towards the potential use of
mobile phones in providing and accessing library and information services?
RQ5. Which possible factors influence the adoption and use of mobile phones by library
staff and students, respectively, in providing and accessing library and
information services?
It is expected that the outcome from the study would pave the way for policy, practical and
managerial interventions in areas of infrastructure development, capacity building,
awareness creation, institutional framework and budgetary support to prepare the ground
for using mobile phones to provide library and information services at public university
libraries in Malawi.
Literature review
Literature reviewed in this section focusses on the level of preparedness of public university
libraries in Malawi in terms of ICT infrastructure, policy framework and human capacity for
the adoption and use of mobile phones in providing library and information services. These
issues deal with the eReadiness status of the libraries. Literature relating to attitudes of
library staff and students to the use of mobile phones in the delivery of library services is
also reviewed.
eReadiness status of public university libraries in relation to ICT infrastructure
ICT infrastructure is vital in determining the eReadiness status of a library with regard to the
offering of library and information services. A number of studies (Li, 2013; Wang et al., 2012;
Bridges et al., 2010) have shown that libraries are making use of mobile internet, SMS and
MMS in the delivery of both user and reference services. The successful implementation of
such services requires computer hardware and software, campus networking equipment
and a robust mobile telecommunications network. Whilst students may use service
provider mobile network service to access SMS and internet-based services on their mobile
devices, other services such as video streaming as provided at the Oriental Institute of
Technology Library in Taiwan (Wang et al., 2012) may prove very costly on this platform.
University-provided Wi-Fi connection, which can be accessed whilst students are on campus,
may help to overcome this challenge. A university may, therefore, have to invest in such
type of infrastructure to promote mobile phone access to such services. Although the
university-managed ICT infrastructure is of primary importance in deciding whether a library
is ready or not to offer library services through the use of mobile phones, the external or
national mobile telecommunications infrastructure is equally important. This is because indeciding whether or not to commence offering of such services, a library would be interested
to know whether its clients (in this case students) would be able to access the services offered.
A mobile telecommunications network that has broader coverage, performs reliably, is easy to
connect to, offers high-speed internet access and has broader service offering is, therefore,
desirable. A library will also be interested to know if its clients have the requisite skills to
access the services on offer before making a decision on whether or not to offer its services
through the use of mobile phones.
eReadiness status of public university libraries in relation to human resources
Human resource is another important element for determining the eReadiness status of
libraries with respect to the delivery of services through the use of mobile phones. Lessons
learnt from projects aimed at offering library and information services through mobile
phone undertaken at both Ryerson University Library (Wilson and McCarthy, 2010) and
Oregon State University Library (Bridges et al., 2010) indicate that joint teams of expertseReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
that included professional librarians and ICT personnel worked together in overseeing the
successful implementation of such projects. The role of librarians was to plan and oversee
the implementation of the whole project in terms of determining the content to be displayed
on the mobile websites, soliciting views of users in terms of content and services to include
on mobile website, and assessment of use after project implementation. The role of the ICT
team was to offer technical support in terms of building the website and managing it. It can,
therefore, be seen that the presence of various individuals with different types of expertise
played a critical role in the successful implementation of such projects.
A preliminary study conducted in the institutions surveyed revealed that they possess
the requisite human resource complement both in the library and the ICT departments.
However, it is not known whether the staff is adequate to enable them to successfully
manage the provision of library and information services through mobile phones. It is also
feared that the available staff may lack the necessary skills to enable them to successfully
manage the delivery of library and information services through mobile phones. This study
will, therefore, help expose the magnitude of the existing challenges, and offer possible
solutions to those challenges.
eReadiness status of public university libraries in relation to availability of policy
Policy is equally important in project implementation. Evans et al. (2000) define policy as a
statement intended to guide and channel staff thinking in making decisions. Policies may
also be looked at as rules or instructions that are intended to facilitate decision making
(Stueart and Moran, 2002). Policies are advantageous in that they help in ensuring
consistency in decision making, particularly in an environment whereby several decision
makers exist. However, the downside of policies is that they do not give much room for the
decision maker to operate in, as the decision-making process is bound by the policy.
Several types of policies exist. These include originated, appealed, implied and imposed
policies (Stueart and Moran, 2002; Evans et al. , 2000). An originated policy is one that is
developed to guide the general operations of an organisation. This sort of policy is internally
influenced as it is initiated by top management, and is meant to guide the operations of the
organisation as it strives to achieve its objectives. An appealed policy is another kind of
policy that mainly arises from a situation where there is no policy. This sort of policy is,
therefore, formulated in response to appeals from those affected by the lack of policy to sort
out challenges that may have come about due to the absence of the policy. Implied policy is
yet another type of policy that exists in an organisation. This type of policy is mainly
unwritten hence informal, and arises from the actions that people see around them andhence believe to constitute a policy. The final type of existing policy is what is called an
imposed policy which normally comes from outside entities which an organisation must
work with. These entities include companies, donor agencies, government, etc.
Policies, as already discussed, play a crucial role in the operations and activities of a
library organisation and are important in determining the eReadiness status of a library
with regard to the offering of library and information services through the use of mobile
phones. For instance, policies that govern the allocation of financial resources could
positively impact a library ’s ability to offer services through mobile phones if such policies
favour allocation of adequate resources to the library to enable it to carry out its activities.
On the other hand, such activities could be negatively affected if resources are inadequate.
Similarly, policies on human resource recruitment and training could either negatively or
positively impact the eReadiness status of the library to offer services through mobile
phones as this could affect the availability of well-trained human resources to manage the
project. Policies pursued by external entities such as publishers, donor agencies and
government could equally have both a positive and negative impact on a library ’s ability to
offer services through the use of mobile phones. For instance, a library ’s ability to offerLHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
services through mobile phones could be affected if publisher ’s formulated policies restricted
access to e-resources. This could particularly be a major limiting factor if e-resources were the
main resource users wished to access on the mobile phone platform. Furthermore, favourable
or unfavourable government policies on mobile telecommunications, recruitment and training,
particularly to subvented organisations or even funding could also greatly affect a library ’s
ability to offer services through mobile phones.
Malawi launched the national ICT policy in 2013. This development would likely assist in
the implementation of ICT projects including library and information services through mobile
phones. However, most of the institutions surveyed seem not to have operational ICT policies,
a development that could negatively impact the management of library and information
services through mobile phones as the service may lack a framework for regulation.
Theoretical framework
This study was underpinned by two main theories: the uni ﬁed theory of acceptance and use
of technology (UTAUT) and the technology-organisation-environment (TOE) framework.
UTAUT
UTAUT is a model that is often used in ICT-related studies. The model was developed and
validated by Venkatesh et al. (2003) through the review, mapping and integration of eight
dominant theories and models that originated from different theoretical disciplines such as
psychology, sociology and information systems (Williams et al., 2012; Kijsanayotin et al., 2009).
UTAUT was developed on the basis that constructs of existing theories were similar in
nature; therefore, it was logical to map and integrate them to create a uni ﬁed theoretical basis
(Venkatesh et al., 2003). The model identifies four key drivers of the adoption of information
systems: performance expectancy (PE), effort expectancy (EE), social influence (SI) and
facilitating conditions (FC) (Martin and Herrero, 2012). The model centres on two key issues,
namely behavioural intention (BI) and actual usage (AU). PE, EE and SI influence BI which in
turn influences AU. Empirical studies have shown that FC, on the other hand, does not have
any influences on BI but directly influences AU (Venkatesh et al., 2003). Besides the four main
constructs of the model (PE, EE, SI and FC), UTAUT identifies the moderating effect of four
other factors such as gender, age, experience and voluntariness of usage (Keong et al., 2012).
The strength of the UTAUT model lies in the fact that it was founded on so many
models and thus providing the researcher with a broader view of all existing models.
Moreover, UTAUT is a much stronger model as it accounts for an explanatory power of
up to 70 per cent unlike the other previous m odels that account for only between 17 and
53 per cent of the variance in use intentions (Venkatesh et al., 2003). UTAUT has its own
weaknesses too. Scholars such as Straub and Burton-Jones (2007) have claimed that the
ten constructs of UTAUT are not parsimon ious. In spite of this weakness, the use of
UTAUT in this study is justified on the basis that its strengths far outweigh its
weaknesses. Besides, the model has been used in other related studies such as the study of
the adoption of mobile devices (Carlsson et al. , 2006), the use of “near ﬁeld
communication ”, adoption of mobile phone service (Chen and Chang, 2013) and the use
of mobile internet (Wang and Wang, 2010).
TOE framework
TOE is an organisational-level theory that was introduced by Tornatzky and Fleischer in
1990 (Baker, 2012; Oliveira and Martins, 2011). TOE framework posits that technological
adoption in an organisation is mainly driven by technological, organisational and
environmental factors. Some scholars (Yang et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2014; Ramdani et al., 2013)
postulate that the TOE framework is grounded on Rogers ’DOI theory. Hsu et al. (2014),
specifically, argue that both the technological and organisational factors in the TOEeReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
framework are similar to other factors in the DOI theory such as innovation, communication
channels and social system, and that Tornatzky and Fleischer only added the new
component of the environmental context. This argument is made on the basis that most of
the elements that make up the technological and organisational factors are largely drawn
from the DOI theory.
The technological context
The technological context includes all of the technologies that are relevant to the ﬁrm
(Baker, 2012). They include technologies that are already in use at the ﬁrm as well as those
not currently deployed but are available in the market place hence capable of being used in
future. According to Collins et al. (1988), a ﬁrm’s existing technologies are important in that
they set a broad limit on the scope and pace of technological change that a ﬁrm can
undertake. On the other hand, innovations that exist but are not yet in use at the ﬁrm are
equally important because they in ﬂuence innovation in two main ways. First, they
demarcate the limits of what is possible; and second, they show ﬁrms ways or means
through which technology can enable them to evolve and or indeed adapt to changes taking
place. Some of the notable elements that comprise the technological context include
compatibility, relative advantage, ease of use, cost and trialability (Al-Somali et al., 2015).
All these elements are derived from the component of innovation of the DOI theory.
Organisational context
Organisational context addresses the trait s and characteristics of the organisation
that influence innovation adoption decisions (Hsu et al. , 2014). Ramdani et al. (2013)
identified top management support, organisat ional readiness, experience and size as some
of the critical organisational factors that in fluence technological adoption. Baker (2012),
whilst highlighting the same issues raised by Ramdani et al. added intra- ﬁrm
communication processes and the amount of slack resources available to the firm as
being equally important.
The environmental context
Baker (2012) defines environmental context as the structure of the industry, the presence or
absence of technology service providers and the regulatory environment. All of these factors
affect technology adoption in various ways. With regard to the structure of the industry,
two main players that include business partners and clients tend to have a great influence in
terms of what type of technologies an organisation adopts. In case of the library and
information field, a library could be forced to adopt technologies such as the use of mobile
phones in providing library and information services to properly serve the information
needs of its clients. This could be done either in response to the changing information-
seeking patterns of its clients or based on demand. Again, a library could be forced to adopt
certain technologies with the aim of keeping pace with other players in the same field. This
is what DiMaggio and Powel (1983) described as mimetic pressure, which is defined as the
influences of structurally equivalent organisations that have initiated an innovation
successfully (Figure 1).
Justification for use of the TOE framework in this study
The TOE framework was chosen for use in this study for two main reasons. First, it is
flexible and adaptable in various contexts. Zhu and Kraemer (2005) observe that the TOE
framework is a generic theory that only suggests different sources of influence without
specifying the variables in each context unlike most of the other theories and models. This
enables researchers to choose different technological, organisational and environmentalLHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
factors for different innovations. Second, the model has been used in other related studies
such as the study of e-business/e-commerce adoption (Awiagah et al. , 2016), adoption of
cloud computing (Hsu et al., 2014) and eReadiness at the firm level (Aboelmaged, 2014).
Methodology
This study made use of a multi-case study design. Malawi has four public universities. They
include the University of Malawi (UNIMA), Mzuzu University (MZUNI), Lilongwe
University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR), and Malawi University of
Science and Technology (MUST). UNIMA has four constituent colleges, namely Chancellor
College (CHANCO), Kamuzu College of Nursing (KCN), The Polytechnic and College of
Medicine (COM) whilst the other universities only have one campus. Although potentially
seven study institutions existed, this research covered only five of them: MZUNI, LUANAR,
The Polytechnic, COM and KCN. Libraries selected for this study are affiliated to older andwell-established institutions except MUST which was established in 2013, and did not have
students in the third, fourth and fifth years at the time of data collection. CHANCO was not
included in the study despite being older and well established because the permission was
not secured to access the respondents. The combined student population in the institutions
studied exceeded 10,000. The case study was deemed appropriate for this study because it
enabled the researcher to examine the phenomena under investigation in depth individually
in the five institutions, and also draw conclusions collectively across the study sites.
Self-completed questionnaires were administered to a sample of 370 students in
years 3, 4, 5 and postgraduates drawn using a s ampling table provided by Israel (2013).
A decision to limit the study to these catego ries of students was made because they are
involved in more intensive research activities hence capable of using their mobile phones
for a wider range of academic-related purpos es including library use. The researcher also
conducted semi-structured interviews wit h a purposefully drawn out sample of five
university/college libraria ns. The university/college librarians were seen as the most
appropriate sample for this study because the y were in a position to provide information
that helped to answer most of the study question s as heads of their institutional librariesExternal Task Environment 
Industry Characteristics and  
Market Structure 
Technology Support Infrastructure 
Government Regulation Organization
Formal and informal linking
structures
Communication processes
Size
SlackTechnological
innovation decision
making
Technology
Availability
CharacteristicsExternal task environment
Industry characteristics and market
structure
Technology support infrastructure
Government regulation
Source:  Baker (2012)Figure 1.
The technology-
organisation-
environment (TOE)
frameworkeReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
(Sekaram and Bougie, 2010). In terview guides that contained open-ended questions were
used in conducting semi-structured intervi ews whilst tape recorders and notebooks were
used to capture and record proceedings of th e interviews respectively. The researcher
personally conducted these interviews. This was done because the number of interviewees
was small, hence manageable, and also to ma intain consistency in coding. Conversely,
quantitative data for this study were collected by a team of five research assistants
(one research assistant for each study site). The research data were collected between
November 2015 and March 2016.
A number of methods were used to validate the data collection instruments.
The interview guides were given out to some experienced researchers who commented on
their appropriateness. Comments received from such experts together with observations
and feedback received during pilot testing were used in amending the instruments to
enhance their effectiveness. The researcher also used another technique called member
checking to validate the research findings. This is a commonly used technique in qualitative
studies, and has been described by Lincoln and Guba (1985, p. 314) as “the most critical
technique for establishing credibility ”. Member checking involves taking data, analyses,
interpretations and conclusions back to the participants so that they can judge the accuracy
of the account (Creswell, 2013). The aim is to enable participants check not only the accuracy
of the findings but also the language used. In practice, the researcher sent the university/
college librarians findings drawn from the interviews through e-mail so that they could
verify its accuracy. Reliability of some of the questionnaire items in this study were
determined by calculating Cronbach ’sαvalues of the variables in the questions. Cronbach ’s
αvalues were over 0.7 which shows that the items in the questionnaires used had high levels
of internal consistency (Nunnally, 1978).
Research ethics was accomplished by, among others, getting gate keepers ’permission
before entering the study sites, and soliciting the informed consent of the participants before
administering the questionnaires and conducting the interviews. Results of the study are
known only when the data are analysed. Being a mixed methods study, both qualitative and
quantitative data were collected that necessitated the use of different methods of analysis.
Data analysis in qualitative studies involves preparing and organising the data for analysis,
then reducing the data into themes through a process of coding and condensing the codesand finally representing the data in figures, tables or a discussion (Creswell, 2013).
The qualitative data collected from this study were first transcribed into MS Word and
cleaned. After transcription, the data were subjected to codification. The researcher
personally undertook both exercises although the latter was accomplished with the aid of
NVivo software. Use of NVivo did not only simplify the process of codification as large
volumes of data were collected in the five interviews conducted but also assisted in
achieving consistency. Codification assisted in deducing themes from the data. Conversely,
quantitative data were analysed using SPSS Version 23 to generate tables and graphs. SPSS
was chosen over other comparable software such as QDAP and QDA Miner because it
accommodates a wide range of research methods including mixed methods research which
was being deployed in this study. Moreover, SPSS is a widely used programme for
statistical analysis in the social sciences (Neuman, 2011).
Research delimitations and limitations
Although Malawi has four public universities, this study only focused on three of them.
Moreover, academic staff is another important user group of academic libraries. In this case,
findings reported in this paper only focus on students. This implies that library ’s readiness
to offer services through mobile phones to this group remains unknown hence may have to
be covered by future studies. Much as the study incorporated a quantitative strand in
addition to the qualitative one, it neither involved theory testing nor confirmation as is theLHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
case with other related studies. This implies that the two theories used in this study
(UTAUT and TOE) were not used in the strict sense, which is empirical at the core, but
rather to put the problem studied in the context of other related studies.
Findings and discussion
eReadiness of public university libraries in Malawi in terms of ICT infrastructure for the
adoption and use of mobile phones in providing library and information services
Availability of ICT infrastructure at the institutional level . ICT infrastructure plays a very
important role both in the delivery and access to library and information servicesthrough mobile phones. Therefore, the study sought to find out the availability of ICT
infrastructure at the institutional level which is critical for the offering of library and
information services through mobile phones by the libraries, and access to library
and information services through mobile phones by students. Findings indicated that all the
libraries studied that had most of the requisite ICT infrastructure to facilitate the offering oflibrary and information services through mobile phones save bandwidth which was
inadequate in all the institutions. The available ICT infrastructural resources available were
mainly internet infrastructure and ICT systems such as library management system (LMS),servers, tablet computers, desktop computers and fibre-optic backbone that facilitated
access to both wired and Wi-Fi internet access. Furthermore, the Polytechnic had an E2
Proxy Server which could facilitate remote access to e-resources.
Besides the ICT infrastructure, institutions studied had plans to acquire and install other
ICT-related infrastructure to facilitate the offering of library and information services
through mobile phones. The Polytechnic, for instance, was planning to install theUnstructured Supplementary Service Data SMS gateway to assist in the offering of the SMS
reference service. Conversely, MZUNI was hoping to acquire an electronic library and
e-granary which could potentially be offered on the mobile phone platform. LUANAR wasalso exploring the possibility of using cloud infrastructure to support ICT projects including
the offering of library and information services through mobile phone. Moreover, most of
the ICT equipment, which the institutions needed, save cloud infrastructure and wasavailable on the local market. This implies that the institutions in the current study could
easily acquire such type of infrastructure if they had financial resources.
Findings further revealed that although much of the required ICT infrastructure was
available, libraries in the institutions surveyed faced some challenges which could
negatively affect the offering of library and information services through mobile phones.Most notably, MZUNI indicated that it needed more desktop and tablet computers, and
servers with bigger capacity. KCN acknowledged using cheaper ICT equipment due to cost
considerations whilst COM conceded that some of the servers in use were old hence needed
to be replaced with more modern servers. Besides, all the institutions faced the challenge of
limited internet bandwidth in spite of various initiatives undertaken aimed at increasing
their bandwidth.
A number of case studies undertaken to probe projects aimed at delivering library and
information services through mobile phones (Li, 2013; Wang et al., 2012; Bridges et al., 2010)
have shown that libraries that were making use of mobile internet, SMS and MMS among
others in the delivery of both user and reference services needed a robust network
infrastructure, desktop and laptop comp uters, tablet PCs, an d more. Similarly,
the technological context of the TOE framework identifies all of the technologies that are
relevant to the ﬁrm (both at the firm level and outside the firm) as critical to technological
adoption (Baker, 2012). Furthermore, FC of the UTAUT model state that existence of thetechnical infrastructure to support the use of a particular system aids in technology
adoption and use (Venkatesh et al. , 2003). The fact that most of the required ICTeReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
infrastructure was available in the study institutions suggests that they had built the
capacity necessary to support the offering of library and information services using the
mobile phone platform.
The availability, quality and affordability of the mobile telecommunications infrastructure
were investigated in the current study. This was deemed necessary because mobiletelecommunications network acts as a conduit for the offering of library and information
services on the mobile phone platform by public university libraries on one the hand, and
access to the service offering by students on the other. Findings showed that places where thestudy institutions were located had overall good mobile telecommunications network
coverage. There were reported incidents of erratic coverage for some buildings in certain
institutions but most reported having good coverage. Some of the respondents attributed thisto the setting indicating that urban areas where most of the study institutions were located
normally had good network coverage. However, LUANAR which was situated in a rural area
also reported having good mobile telecommunications network coverage which means that
most of the areas in the country could have good network coverage. These findings reflect
those of a study conducted by Nyirenda (2012) who found that Malawi had achieved a99.55 per cent land coverage of mobile cellular network by 2012. The implications of these
findings are that students in public universities in Malawi could use their mobile phones from
almost any part of the country. FC of the UTAUT model state that the existence of thetechnical infrastructure to support the use of a particular system facilitates technology
adoption and use (Venkatesh et al. , 2003). Availability of the mobile telecommunications
infrastructure in the country implies that public university libraries in Malawi were in aposition to provide library and information services through mobile phones as users
(students) could easily access such services using the mobile telecommunications network.
Although mobile telecommunications network coverage was good, findings of this study
found that the network performance was far from being efficient. Most of the university/
college librarians and ICT directors rated the network performance between 80 and 90 per cent.Some of the areas of concern to the respondents were mobile internet, SMS and even voice
calls. The technological context of the TOE framework states that technology or an innovation
is easily adopted if it is perceived to be better than the idea that it supersedes (Rogers, 2003).Therefore, issues affecting the performance of the mobile telecommunications network could
negatively impact the offering of library and information services through mobile phones if
they are not adequately addressed. Fi ndings made in relation to the mobile
telecommunications network reflect those obtained in the MACRA quality of service report
for the fourth quarter covering October to December 2015. The report, whilst applauding
operators for making progress in achieving network quality, pointed out that challenges inrelation to call setup success rate, call drop rate, SMS success rate, GPRS content activation
success rate and others still remained (MACRA, 2015).
Mobile phone ownership and use amongst students . The research findings show that
mobile phone ownership amongst students was very high with many of them owning one or
more devices. Findings shown in Figure 2 indicate that 315 (99.7 per cent) students owned amobile phone whilst only 1 (0.3 per cent) indicated that he or she did not own a mobile phone.
Whereas 215 (68.5 per cent) students indicated that they owned only one mobile phone,
a significant part of the student body (90, 28.7 per cent) indicated that they owned twomobile phones. Moreover, seven (2.2 per cent) students indicated that they owned three
mobile phones and only two (0.6 per cent) students pointed out that they owned more than
three mobile phones. These findings imply that much as single ownership of mobile phonewas prevalent, dual and multiple ownerships were increasingly becoming a trend.
This study has further revealed that 299 (94.9 per cent) students owned mobile phones
with internet capabilities whilst 16 (5.1 per cent) owned mobile phones without this capability.LHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
Students who owned more than one mobile phone were asked to indicate how many of
them had internet capabilities. A total of 48 (49 per cent) students stated that two of their
mobile phones had this capability whilst 46 (46.9 per cent) indicated that only one of theirphones had internet capabilities. Only four (4.1 per cent) had three or more mobile phones that
had internet capabilities.
The technological context of the TOE framework identifies technologies available both
to the firm and the market place as critical to technological adoption. The fact that students
owned mobile phones, most of which had internet capabilities, implies that libraries in this
study could easily adopt the use of mobile phones in providing library and information
services. This is because students who are the primary consumers of the service offering
have the means of accessing the services offered.
eReadiness of public university libraries in Malawi in terms of policy framework for the
adoption and use of mobile phones in providing library and information services
The findings of the present study indicated that all the five institutions surveyed did not have
operational ICT policies to govern the operations of library and information services currently
on offer and those to be potentially offered throu gh mobile phones. However, all the institutions
had draft ICT policies that were being refined in readiness for adoption and implementation.
KCN, COM and The Polytechnic are part of the federal system of UNIMA. Consequently,
the process of developing and implementing this policy was done centrally with the involvement
of stakeholders from al l these institutions. Surprisin gly, MZUNI and LUANAR seemed to have
been moving at a correspondingly slow pace in the development of the ICT policy in spite of
them being autonomous public institutions. The environmental context of the TOE framework
identifies the regulatory environment as on e of the factors that could impact technology
adoption both negatively or positively (Baker , 2012). The absence of the institutional ICT
policies would likely have a detrimental effect on the offering of library a nd information services
through mobile phones as there would be no unified approach to decision making in this regard.2159072
682921
0 50 100 150 200 250OneTwoThreeMore than three
Percentage Frequency
Note:  n=314
Source:  Survey data (2016)Figure 2.
Mobile phone
ownership among
studentseReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
The slow pace observed in the development of the ICT policies in the institutions in this
study are not isolated cases but symptomatic of the challenges that exist at the national
level. Malawi adopted the National ICT Policy in the last quarter of 2013. The researcher
from the experience gained working in university library environment in Malawi observed
that most of the public university libraries operate without other relevant policy documents
such as selection and collection development policies which are necessary for providing an
effective library and information service.
Besides ICT policy, respondents indicated that their institutions were planning or had
developed other policies to promote access to library and information services. For example,
the UL for MZUNI indicated that the library had already developed an institutional
repository policy which they were hoping to implement alongside the ICT policy. The ICT
manager for LUANAR noted that though their draft ICT policy had some statements that
guided provision of library services, there was none to guide implementation of library and
information service offering through mobile phone platforms. The findings of the current
study also revealed that the majority of the respondents feared that the absence of the ICT
policy could have an adverse impact on the implementation of library and information
services offered through mobile phones. However, the CL for COM and ICT director for
LUANAR were of the opinion that absence of the policy would not have much impact on the
provision of library and information services offered through mobile phone platform as this
would be guided by their strategic plans.
Stueart and Moran (2002) point out that the advantage of a policy is that it helps in
ensuring consistency in decision making, particularly in an environment whereby several
decision makers exist. Considering that libraries have become complex organisational
structures with several layers of decision making at both managerial and operational levels,
as revealed in the libraries studied, it is important that policies be formulated to provide a
unified approach to decision making. The absence of ICT policies in the institutions may
lead to lack of consistency in decision making that may affect the overall quality of library
and information services delivered through mobile phones. However, the availability of
draft ICT policies in all the institutions surveyed gives hope that the final policy framework
would be completed in the near future to facilitate the implementation of library and
information services through mobile phones.
eReadiness of public university libraries in Malawi in terms of human capacity for the
adoption and use of mobile phones in providing library and information services
Library and ICT staff collaborates in the offering of library and information services
through mobile phone. However, findings obtained in the present study revealed a mixed
picture in relation to the human resource base available in public universities in Malawi to
manage the provision of library and information services through mobile phones. Most of
the libraries were adequately staffed but much of the staff lacked knowledge, skills and even
experience in the delivery of library and information services on the mobile phone platform.
The organisational component of the TOE framework recognises human resources as being
crucial for IT adoption. Therefore, the absence of skilled human resources could affect the
quality of library and information services offered through mobile phones if not addressed.
However, most of the ICT departments were not adequately staffed. Although some of the
ICT directors openly acknowledged the existence of the staff shortages, others downplayed
the issues of staffing. The problem of staff shortages meant that the ICT departments were
struggling to service departments that required their services including the library.
The implementation of library and information services through mobile phones might pile
more pressure on the ICT existing staff. Nonetheless, most of the ICT staff had the requisite
skills to enable them support the provision of library and information services through
mobile phones as only minor cases of skill gaps were reported.LHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
Human resource capacity is an important elem ent for determining the preparedness of a
library with respect to the delivery of services t hrough mobile phones. Projects undertaken at
the Kimbel Library of the Coastal Carolina Univers ity (Felts, 2014), Ryers on University Library
(Wilson and McCarthy, 2010) and Oregon State University Library (Bridges et al. , 2010)
on offering library services through mobile phone show that joint teams of experts that include
professional librarians and ICT personnel a re needed to work together in overseeing the
successful implementation of such projects. As overall managers o f the whole project, the role of
librarians was to determine the services and content to be displayed on the mobile websites after
soliciting views of users, and assess the use of th e project after implementation. The role of the
ICT team was to offer technical support in ter ms of building the website and managing it.
Likewise, the presence of librarians and technica l staff in the study institutions, many of whom
were conversant with the offering of library and information services on the mobile phone
platform, denotes that the various institut ions in the current study had the necessary human
resources to enable them offer library and information services through mobile phones.
Barnhart and Pierce (2011) in their thematic paper titled “Becoming mobile: reference in the
ubiquitous library ”identify staf ﬁng for offering services 24/7 as one of the challenges libraries
face in their bid to offer library services throug h mobile phone. Instituti o n si nt h i ss t u d yw o u l d
similarly face this challenge as they offer library and information services on the mobile phone
platform hence more staff need to be recruited b oth in the library and ICT departments to ensure
that they cope with the added workload that ma y come with the introduction of these services.
Attitudes of library staff and students towards the potential use of mobile
phones in providing and accessing library and information services
The study findings based on the interviews conducted with university/college librarians
show that the attitudes of library staff and students towards the potential use of mobile
phones in providing and accessing library and information services were largely positive.
The only exception was the KCN whereby findings showed that students did not show
greater willingness to use their mobile phones to access library services when the library
piloted the SMS project in 2014. However, even non-use of the service is not enough to
interpret their attitudes as being negative as no studies were conducted to ascertain reasons
for the failure of the students to use the service. The findings of this study indicated that the
poor response of the students to the pilot SMS project had not deterred the KCN Library
from proceeding with its plans of offering library services through mobile phones.
Findings based on the survey presented in Figure 3 show that the majority of the students
either strongly agreed (143, 45 per cent) or agreed (144, 46 per cent) that the library shouldformalise the provision of services through the use of mobile phones. On the contrary,
20 (6 per cent) students neither agreed nor disagreed, five (2 per cent) disagreed whilst three
(1 per cent) strongly disagreed that the library should formalise the provision of services
through the use of mobile phones. This shows that majority of the students (287, 91 per cent)
were in favour of the library adopting the provision of services through mobile phones.
Student respondents who were in favour of the library formalising the provision of
library and information services through mobile phones were asked to indicate the services
they wished to be prioritised. An analysis of their responses shown in Table I indicate that
175 (57.9 per cent) students strongly wanted to access e-books, 172 (57.0 per cent) e-journals,
151 (50.0 per cent) OPAC, 139 (46.0 per cent) reference services, 124 (41.1 per cent) lending
services (overdue reminders, book renewals, etc.) and 121 (40.1 per cent) information
services (notification of recent acquisitions, change of opening hours and news). Slightly
fewer students (119, 39.4 per cent) wanted to be able to check availability of short loan items
and make reservations/bookings and 105 (34.8 per cent) wanted user awareness or
information literacy offerings. Very few (65, 21.5 per cent) wanted to be able to carry out
inter-library loan transactions.eReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
Findings of a number of other studies have similarly shown students to exhibit positive
attitudes about the use of mobile phones in the delivery and access to library and
information services through mobile phones. Kumar (2014), for instance, conducted a study
that involved 180 students at Jawaharlal Nehru University in India. Findings of the study
revealed that 89.44 per cent of the respondents did not have problems if the library reached
out to them through mobile phone. This figure was slightly higher than that recorded in the
109
90
18
549
41
8
2
020406080100120
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree nor disagree DisagreeFrequency Percentage
Note:  Students n=315
Source:  Survey data (2016)Figure 3.
Responses of studentson whether the library
should adopt the
provision of services
through the use of
mobile phones
Service offeringStrongly
agree AgreeNeither
agree
nor
disagree DisagreeStrongly
disagree Total
Online public access catalogue (OPAC) 151 100 47 4 0 302
50.0% 33.1% 15.6% 1.3% 0.0% 100.0%
E-journals 172 91 37 1 1 302
57.0% 30.1% 12.3% 0.3% 0.3% 100.0%
E-books 175 89 37 1 0 302
57.9% 29.5% 12.3% 0.3% 0.0% 100.0%
Reference services 139 100 57 6 0 302
46.0% 33.1% 18.9% 2.0% 0.0% 100.0%
Lending services (overdue reminders, book
renewals, etc.)124 105 56 16 1 302
41.1% 34.8% 18.5% 5.3% 0.3% 100.0%
Information services (n otification of recent
acquisitions, change of opening hours and news)121 116 57 8 0 302
40.1% 38.4% 18.9% 2.6% 0.0% 100.0%
Inter-library loans 65 96 120 18 3 302
21.5% 31.8% 39.7% 6.0% 1.0% 100.0%
Checking availability of short loan items and
making reservations/bookings119 113 59 10 1 302
39.4% 37.4% 19.5% 3.3% 0.3% 100.0%
User awareness or information literacy offerings 105 115 77 5 0 302
34.8% 38.1% 25.5% 1.7% 0.0% 100.0%
Notes: n¼302. Average Cronbach ’sαvalue of the items in the table was 0.859
Source: Survey data (2016)Table I.
Services students
wanted libraries to
prioritise afteradopting the
use of library
and informationservices through
mobile phonesLHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
current study (87 per cent). In yet another study, Walsh (2010) conducted a series of focus
groups in 2009 at the University of Huddersfield to study student attitudes about the use of
mobile phones in libraries. Findings indicated that student attitudes towards text
messaging from the library were overwhelmingly positive.
Factors that influence the adoption and use of mobile phones by library staff
and students, respectively, in providing and accessing library andinformation services
Findings resulting from data collected from university/college librarians and ICT directors
indicated that there were some factors that could have a bearing on the offering of library
and information services on the mobile phone platform. These include: periodic disruption of
internet services due to vandalism of fibre-optic cables experienced by the service providers;
the network may get congested due to increased usage brought about by the introduction of
library and information services through mobile phones; the hustle of registering clients ’
mobile phone numbers into the database; and high cost of accessing services through mobile
phone by students. The high-cost mobile phone services made most of the institutions to
focus on investing in Wi-Fi infrastructure to enable students connect their mobile phones to
the campus network so that they can access library and information services through
mobile phones. MZUNI was also planning to preload information in tablets that it was
planning to acquire as a means of overcoming the high cost of accessing the planned library
and information services through mobile phones.
Findings of the current study further indicated that the majority of the students
(255, 80.9 per cent) either strongly agreed (128, 40.6 per cent) or agreed (127, 40.3 per cent)
that poor network quality is a factor they would face in using mobile phones in accessing
library and information services through the use of mobile phones. The rest of the students
(60, 19 per cent) neither agreed nor disagreed (35, 11.1 per cent), disagreed (23, 7.3 per cent)
or strongly disagreed (2, 0.6 per cent) that poor network quality was a factor they would face
in using mobile phones to access library and information services through mobile phone.
High service costs, delayed response and query not adequately addressed are some of the
notable factors which students identified as likely to impact their use of mobile phones in
accessing library services. These findings are presented in Table II.
The (Dahlstrom et al. , 2015) study of undergraduate students ’ownership and use of
mobile devices in the USA indicated that students living on campus rated their network
experiences considerably lower than students living off-campus whereby only three in
five students stated that they had reliable access to Wi-Fi throughout their campus
(58 per cent) or in classrooms/instruct ional spaces (63 per cent) (Dahlstrom et al. , 2015).
This challenge came about mainly because of a large number of mobile devices which
students connected to the campus network as 61 per cent of students connected at leasttwo devices to the campus network at the same time. Likewise, a study conducted by
Research ICT Solutions (2015) found that call tariffs were still higher in Malawi compared
to neighbouring countries although they had gone down over the years. The technological
context of the TOE framework also identifies c ost as a factor in technology adoption and
use (Baker, 2012). The high cost of mobile phone services in Malawi and poor network
quality could impact negatively the offering library and information services through
mobile phones.
Conclusions and recommendations
Findings indicated that public university libraries in Malawi possessed the LMS, servers,
tablet computers, desktop computers and Wi-Fi. Moreover, students had mobile phones
many of which had internet capabilities. It is, therefore, concluded that the institutionseReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
studied had the ICT infrastructure necessary for offering and accessing library and
information services on the mobile phone platform.
The findings indicated that all the five institutions covered by this study did not have
operational ICT policies to govern the operations of library and information services offered
via the mobile phone platform. However, all the institutions had draft ICT policies that were
being refined in readiness for adoption and implementation. It is, therefore, concluded that
the absence of ICT policies in the institutions in this study may affect the overall quality of
library and information services delivered through mobile phones.
The study findings revealed a mixed pi cture in relation to the human resources
available to manage the provision of libra ry and information services through mobile
phones in the institutions in this study. Whils t the libraries were adequately staffed, the
ICT departments were not. Addi tionally, most of the library s taff lacked knowledge, skills
and even experience in the delivery of library and information services through mobile
phones. In light of these findings, it is concluded that though the human resource required
to manage the provision of library and information services through mobile phones in the
institutions studied were available, they d id not have the necessary skills and numbers to
provide quality library and information services through mobile phones.
Findings revealed that the attitudes of library staff and students towards the potential
use of mobile phones in providing and accessing library and information services were
largely positive. The perceived positive attitudes of library staff and students towards
the use of mobile phones in the delivery of library and information services could lead to the
success of the service offering on this platform.
High service costs and poor network quality were identified as the main factors that
could affect the offering of library and information services through mobile phones.
Public university libraries in Malawi need to find ways of overcoming these challenges if
they were to successfully offer services using mobile phones.
The overall conclusion from this study, therefore, is that public university libraries in
Malawi were generally e-ready to offer library and information services through mobileFactorsStrongly
agree AgreeNeither agree
nor disagree DisagreeStrongly
disagree Total
High service costs 118 97 62 34 4 315
37.5% 30.8% 19.7% 10.8% 1.3% 100.0%
Poor network quality 128 127 35 23 2 315
40.6% 40.3% 11.1% 7.3% 0.6% 100.0%
Mobile phones (mobile devices) quicklyget outdated35 51 129 88 12 315
11.1% 16.2% 41.0% 27.9% 3.8% 100.0%
Lack of knowledge on usage 30 91 81 92 21 315
9.5% 28.9% 25.7% 29.2% 6.7% 100.0%
Received no response to queries 33 81 148 49 4 315
10.5% 25.7% 47.0% 15.6% 1.3% 100.0%
Library policies that prohibit use ofmobile phones in the library70 77 96 56 16 315
22.2% 24.4% 30.5% 17.8% 5.1% 100.0%
Delayed response 60 117 102 32 4 315
19.0% 37.1% 32.4% 10.2% 1.3% 100.0%
Reference query not adequatelyaddressed52 121 104 36 2 315
16.5% 38.4% 33.0% 11.4% 0.6% 100.0%
Messages not delivered 45 91 123 50 6 315
14.3% 28.9% 39.0% 15.9% 1.9% 100.0%
Notes: n¼315. Average Cronbach ’sαvalue of the items in the table was 0.762
Source: Survey data (2016)Table II.
Factors that wouldimpact students ’
access to library and
information servicesoffered through
mobile phonesLHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
phones notwithstanding certain infrastructure, policy and skills issues that must be
addressed. In light of these findings, university/college librarians are urged to take steps to
address issues that may negatively impact the delivery of library and information services
through mobile phones. Specifically, action needs to be taken to ensure that draft ICT policies
are finalised and adopted for use. Human resources and skills gaps observed should equally
be addressed. Issues observed in relation to ICT infrastructure such as network performance
also need to be addressed to ensure efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery.
References
Aboelmaged, M.G. (2014), “Predicting e-readiness at firm-level: an analysis of technological,
organizational and environmental (TOE) effects on e-maintenance readiness in manufacturingfirms ”,International Journal of Information Management , Vol. 34 No. 5, pp. 639-651.
Al-Somali, S.A., Gholami, R. and Clegg, B. (2015), “A stage-oriented model (SOM) for ecommerce
adoption: a study of Saudi Arabian organisations ”,Journal of Manufacturing Technology
Management , Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 2-35.
Anbu, J.P. and Mavuso, M.R. (2012), “Old wine in new wine skin: marketing library services through
SMS-based alert service ”,Library Hi Tech , Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 310-320.
Awiagah, R., Kang, J. and Lim, J.I. (2016), “Factors affecting e-commerce adoption among SMEs in
Ghana ”,Information Development , Vol. 32 No. 4, pp. 815-836.
Baker, J. (2012), “The technology-organization-environment framework ”, in Dwivedi, Y.K., Wade, M.R.
and Schneberger, S.L. (Eds), Information Systems Theory: Explaining and Predicting Our Digital
Society , Vol. 1, Springer, London, pp. 231-245.
Ballard, T.L. and Blaine, A. (2013), “A library in the palm of your hand ”,New Library World , Vol. 114
Nos 5/6, pp. 251-258.
Barnhart, F. and Pierce, J. (2011), “Becoming mobile: reference in the ubiquitous library ”,Journal of
Library Administration , Vol. 51 No. 3, pp. 279-290.
Baro, E.E., Efe, B.U. and Oyeniran, G.K. (2014), “Reference inquiries received through different
channels: the challenges reference librarians face in university libraries in Nigeria ”,Reference
Services Review , Vol. 42 No. 3, pp. 514-529.
Bates, I., Phillips, R., Martin-Peprah, R., Kibiki, G., Gaye, O., Phiri, K., Tagbor, H. and Purnell, S. (2011),
“Assessing and strengthening African universities ’capacity for doctoral programmes ”,PLOS
Medicine , available at: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article/file?id =10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001068&type =printable (accessed 9 March 2017).
Bridges, L., Gascho, H. and Griggs, R.K. (2010), “Making the case for a fully mobile library web site:
from floor maps to the catalog ”,Reference Services Review , Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 309-320.
Carlsson, C., Carlsson, J., Hyvönen, K., Puhakainen, J. and Walden, P. (2006), “Adoption of mobile
devices/services –searching for answers with the UTAUT ”,Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences
,4-7 January , available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber =1579556&tag =1 (accessed 9 August 2015).
Chaputula, A.H. (2012), “State, adoption and use of ICTs by students and academic staff at Mzuzu
University, Malawi ”,Program , Vol. 46 No. 4, pp. 364-382.
Chen, K. and Chang, M. (2013), “User acceptance of ‘near field communication ’mobile phone service:
an investigation based on the ‘unified theory of acceptance and use of technology ’model ”,
The Service Industries Journal , Vol. 33 No. 6, pp. 609-623.
Collins, P.D., Hage, J. and Hull, F.M. (1988), “Organizational and technological predictors of change in
automaticity ”,Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 512-543.
Creswell, J.W. (2013), Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design , 3rd ed., Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Dahlstrom, E., Brooks, D.C., Grajek, S. and Reeves, J. (2015), “ECAR study of students and information
technology, 2015 ”, research report, ECAR, Louisville, CO.eReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
DiMaggio, P.J. and Powel, W.W. (1983), “The iron cage revisited: institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organisational fields ”,American Sociological Review , Vol. 48 No. 2,
pp. 147-160.
Evans, G.E., Ward, P.L. and Rugaas, B. (2000), Management Basics for Information Professionals ,
Neal-Schuman Publishers, New York, NY.
Felts, J.W. Jr (2014), “Enhancing mobility: integrating new services into your library ’s mobile platform
to increase traffic ”,Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning , Vol. 8
Nos 3/4, pp. 263-274.
Hsu, P., Ray, S. and Li-Hsieh, Y. (2014), “Examining cloud computing adoption intention, pricing
mechanism, and deployment model ”,International Journal of Information Management , Vol. 34
No. 4, pp. 474-488.
Israel, G.D. (2013), Determining Sample Size , University of Florida Fact Sheet PEOD-6, available at:
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdffiles/PD/PD00600.pdf (accessed 4 May 2015).
Keong, M.L., Ramayah, T., Kurnia, S. and Chiun, L.M. (2012), “Explaining intention to use an enterprise
resource planning (ERP) system: an extension of the UTAUT model ”,Business Strategy Series ,
Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 173-180.
Kijsanayotin, B., Pannarunothai, S. and Speedie, S.M. (2009), “Factors influencing health information
technology adoption in Thailand ’s community health centers: applying the UTAUT model ”,
International Journal of Medical Informatics , Vol. 78 No. 6, pp. 404-416.
Kumar (2014), “Students opinion about the success of mobile technology in libraries ”,New Library
World , Vol. 115 Nos 9/10, pp. 471-481.
Li, A. (2013), “Perspectives on mobile library service in key Chinese academic libraries ”,The Journal of
Academic Librarianship , Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 223-226.
Lincoln, Y.S. and Guba, E. (1985), Naturalistic Enquiry , Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Lou, E. (2010), “E-readiness: how ready are UK construction organizations to adopt IT ”, in Egbu, C.
(Ed.), Proceedings of 26th Annual ARCOM Conference , Association of Researchers in Construction
Management, Leeds, Leeds, 6-8 September, pp. 947-956.
Luo, L. (2014), “Text a librarian: a look from the user perspective ”,Reference Services Review , Vol. 42
No. 1, pp. 34-35.
MACRA (2015), “Fourth quarter quality of service Report (October to December, 2015) ”,M A C R A ,B l a n t y r e .
Malik, A. and Mahmood, K. (2013), “Infrastructure needed for digital reference service (DRS)
in university libraries: an exploratory survey in the Punjab, Pakistan ”,Library Review , Vol. 62
Nos 6/7, pp. 420-428.
Mapulanga, P. (2011), “Effects of budgeting and funding on the provision of library and information
services in the University of Malawi Libraries ”,Performance Measurement and Metrics , Vol. 12
No. 3, pp. 172-182.
Martin, H.S. and Herrero, A. (2012), “Influence of the users ’psychological factors on the online purchase
intention in rural tourism: integrating innovativeness of the UTAUT framework ”,Tourism
Management , Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 341-350.
Mutula, S.M. and van Brakel, P. (2006), “An evaluation of e-readiness assessment tools with respect to
information access: towards an integrated information rich tool ”,International Journal of
Information Management , Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 212-223.
Neuman, W.L. (2011), Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches , 7th ed.,
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA.
Nunnally, J.C. (1978), Psychometric Theory , 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.
Nyirenda, P. (2012), “Report #1 on Malawi ICT sector key ICT indicators on infrastructure and access ”,
Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme Malawi Programme, Blantyre.
Oliveira, T. and Martins, M.F. (2011), “Literature review of information technology adoption models at
firm level ”,The Electronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation , Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 110-121.LHT
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
Palumbo, L.B. (2014), “Mobile phones in Africa: opportunities and challenges for academic librarians ”,
New Library World , Vol. 115 Nos 3/4, pp. 179-192.
Ramdani, B., Chevers, D. and Williams, D.A. (2013), “SMEs ’adoption of enterprise applications ”,
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , Vol. 20 No. 4, pp. 735-753.
Research ICT Solutions (2015), “Malawi ’s phone tariffs among highest in Africa ”,The Daily Times ,
16 January, 16, BNL Times, Blantyre.
Rogers, E.M. (2003), Diffusion of Innovations , 5th ed., Free Press, New York, NY.
Sekaram, U. and Bougie, R. (2010), Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach , 5th ed.,
John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.
Sekyere, K. (2011), “Virtual reference service in academic libraries in West Africa ”,Journal of Library &
Information Services in Distance Learning , Vol. 5 Nos 1-2, pp. 3-9.
Straub, D.W. and Burton-Jones, A. (2007), “Veni, vedi, vici: breaking the TAM logjam ”,Journal of the
Association for Information Systems , Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 223-229.
Stueart, R.D. and Moran, B.B. (2002), Library and Information Center Management , Libraries
Unlimited, Greenwood Village, CO.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M.G., Davis, G.B. and Davis, F.D. (2003), “User acceptance of information
technology: toward a unified view ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 425-478.
Walsh, A. (2010), “Mobile phone services and UK Higher education students, what do they want from
the library? ”,Library and Information Research , Vol. 34 No. 106, pp. 22-36.
Wang, C., Ke, H. and Lu, W. (2012), “Design and performance evaluation of mobile web services in
libraries: a case study of the Oriental Institute of Technology Library ”,The Electronic Library ,
Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 33-50.
Wang, H. and Wang, S. (2010), “User acceptance of mobile internet-based on the unified theory of
acceptance and use of technology: investigating the determinants and gender differences ”,
Social Behavior and Personality , Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 415-426.
Williams, M.D., Rana, N.P. and Dwivedi, Y.K. (2012), “A bibliometric analysis of articles citing the
unified theory of acceptance and use of technology ”, in Dwivedi, Y.K., Wade, M.R. and
Schneberger, S.L. (Eds), Information Systems Theory: Explaining and Predicting Our Digital
Society , Vol. 1, Springer, London, pp. 37-62.
Wilson, S. and McCarthy, G. (2010), “The mobile university: from the library to the campus ”,Reference
Services Review , Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 214-232.
Yang, Z., Sun, J., Zhang, Y. and Wang, Y. (2015), “Understanding SaaS adoption from the perspective
of organizational users: a tripod readiness model ”,Computers in Human Behavior , Vol. 45,
pp. 254-264.
Zhu, K. and Kraemer, K.L. (2005), “Post-adoption variations in usage and value of e-business by
organizations: cross-country evidence from the retail industry ”,Information Systems Research ,
Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 61-84.
Further reading
MACRA (2013), “National ICT policy ”, available at: www.macra.org.mw/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/
Malawi-ICT-Policy-2013.pdf (accessed 28 April 2017).
Corresponding author
Aubrey Harvey Chaputula can be contacted at: achaputula@yahoo.co.uk
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comeReadiness
of public
university
libraries
Downloaded by UNIVERSITY OF TOLEDO LIBRARIES At 17:35 07 February 2018 (PT)
