Original Paper
Facilitators and Barriers to Chronic Disease Self-Management
and Mobile Health Interventions for People Living With Diabetes
and Hyper tension in Cambodia: Qualitativ e Study
Lesle y Steinman1*, MPH, MSW ; Hen Heang2*, MS; Maurits van Pelt2*, LLM, MSc; Nicole Ide3, MPH; Haixia Cui2,
PhD; Mayuree Rao3,4*, MD; James LoGerfo5,6*, MD, MPH; Annette Fitzpatrick6,7,8*, MA, PhD
1Department of Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
2MoPoTsyo Patient Information Centre, Phnom Penh, Cambodia
3Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
4General Medicine Service, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, United States
5Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
6Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
7Departments of Family Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
8Department of Epidemiology , University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
*these authors contrib uted equally
Corr esponding Author:
Lesle y Steinman, MPH, MSW
Department of Health Services
University of Washington
1107 NE 45th St Suite 400
Seattle, WA, 98105
United States
Phone: 1 2065439837
Email: lesles@uw .edu
Abstr act
Backgr ound: In many low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), heart disease and strok e are the leading causes of death as
cardio vascular risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension rapidly increase. The Cambodian nongo vernmental organization,
MoPoTsyo, trains local residents with diabetes to be peer educators (PEs) to deliver chronic disease self-management training
and medications to 14,000 people with hypertension and/or diabetes in Cambodia. We collaborated with MoPoTsyo to develop
a mobile-based messaging interv ention (mobile health; mHealth) to link MoPoTsyo’ s database, PEs, pharmacies, clinics, and
people living with diabetes and/or hypertension to impro ve adherence to evidence-based treatment guidelines.
Objecti ve: This study aimed to understand the facilitators and barriers to chronic disease management and the acceptability ,
appropriateness, and feasibility of mHealth to support chronic disease management and strengthen community-clinical linkages
to existing services.
Methods: We conducted an exploratory qualitati ve study using semistructured intervie ws and focus groups with PEs and people
living with diabetes and/or hypertension. Intervie ws were recorded and conducted in Khmer script, transcribed and translated
into the English language, and uploaded into Atlas.ti for analysis. We used a thematic analysis to identify key facilitators and
barriers to disease management and opportunities for mHealth content and format. The information-moti vation-beha vioral model
was used to guide data collection, analysis, and message development.
Results: We conducted six focus groups (N=59) and 11 intervie ws in one urban municipality and five rural operating districts
from three provinces in October 2016. PE netw ork participants desired mHealth to address barriers to chronic disease management
through reminders about medications, laboratory tests and doctor’ s consultations, education on how to incorporate self-management
into their daily lives, and support for obstacles to disease management. Participants preferred mobile-based voice messages to
arrive at dinnertime for impro ved phone access and family support. They desired voice messages over texts to communicate trust
and increase accessibility for persons with limited literac y, vision, and smartphone access. PEs shared similar views and percei ved
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 1 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXmHealth as acceptable and feasible for supporting their work. We developed 34 educational, supporti ve, and reminder mHealth
messages based on these findings.
Conclusions: These mHealth messages are currently being tested in a cluster randomized controlled trial (#1R21TW010160)
to impro ve diabetes and hypertension control in Cambodia. This study has implications for practice and policies in Cambodia
and other LMICs and low-resource US settings that are working to engage PEs and build community-clinical linkages to facilitate
chronic disease management.
(JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(4):e13536) doi: 10.2196/13536
KEYW ORDS
diabetes mellitus; hypertension; chronic disease; noncommunicable diseases; health educators; mHealth; qualitati ve; disease
management; developing countries
Introduction
Backgr ound
There is an increasing burden of noncommunicable diseases
(NCDs) across the world and particularly in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs) as they go through the
epidemiological transition from infectious to chronic diseases
that accompanies economic development [1]. In 2016, NCDs
accounted for 60% of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs)
lost, a common measure of disease burden, and for 71% of all
deaths [2]. Most deaths from cardio vascular diseases now occur
in LMICs [3], and 80% of global deaths in LMICs are from
NCDs [4].
Cambodia is experiencing the same epidemiological transition
as other LMICs. Life expectanc y is on the rise, increasing from
an average of 56 and 60 years in 1990 to 66 and 72 years in
2015 for men and women, respecti vely [5]. The 2016 Global
Burden of Disease Study’ s visualizations show an increasing
burden of NCDs, with NCD DALYs increasing by 55% from
1990 to 2016 for countries such as Cambodia with a
low-to-middle sociodemographic index [6]. In Cambodia,
diabetes, strok e, and heart disease have demonstrated the largest
percentage change in years lived with disability since 1990.
Ischemic heart disease has been the leading cause of death since
2005, and cerebro vascular disease became the second leading
cause of death in 2015 [5]. A large proportion of deaths due to
heart disease, strok e, and diabetes are attrib utable to metabolic
risks such as high blood pressure, cholesterol, glucose, and BMI,
all of which are modif iable risk factors that can be managed or
prevented outside of the health system.
The 2010 World Health Organization’ s (WHO) Stepwise
Approach to Surveillance survey first found a prevalence of
diabetes and hypertension of 2.9% and 11.2%, respecti vely, in
the general Cambodian population [7], but this had rapidly
increased to 9.6% and 14.2% in 2016, respecti vely, when that
survey was repeated. These prevalence rates are higher in more
vulnerable populations such as among Cambodians living with
HIV [8]. Although a variety of methods have been developed
to assist patients in managing their diabetes or hypertension and
to increase access to care, the use of community- and peer-based
interv entions seems especially promising for reaching
underserv ed populations [9-11]. In a review by Joshi et al [12]
on studies involving task shifting for the management of chronic
conditions in LMICs, it was found that nonph ysician healthworkers could successfully screen patients and impro ve patients’
control of blood pressure and glucose levels when compared
with usual health care. Lay health workers also have more time
to provide behavioral counseling services and patient education
as clinicians in LMICs often have limited time to spend with
patients [13-17].
Mobile health (mHealth) offers a promising approach for
managing chronic conditions in LMICs. mHealth is a subset of
electronic health and encompasses a wide range of mobile and
wireless technologies to help impro ve health and health care
[18]. mHealth typically supports four functions: (1) health
promotion and awareness, (2) remote monitoring and care
support, (3) disease surveillance and outbreak detection, and
(4) decision support system [19,20]. mHealth interv entions can
provide opportunities for impro ved chronic disease management
in LMICs, given the limited health system infrastructure [21]
and high cell phone coverage (90%) [22,23]. In Cambodia, 94%
of the people report owning their own phone, with 99% being
reachable by phone [24]. mHealth can also support people living
with chronic conditions outside of the health care system where
they spend most of their time and can benef it from regular
self-management and routine long-term monitoring [25-27].
Although it is promising, more evidence is needed for mHealth
for the management of chronic conditions in LMICs. Most
mHealth evidence to date is on communicable diseases (eg,
tuberculosis) and on maternal and child health [28]. A recent
2016 systematic review found eight randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) to date of mHealth interv entions to support chronic
conditions in LMICs [19], specif ically in China, Honduras,
India, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Taiwan, and Uruguay . The
mHealth interv entions included two studies on health promotion,
five studies on remote monitoring and care (eg, appointment
reminders and medication adjustments), and one study on a
clinical decision support system. The studies targeted people
living with diabetes, hypertension, and asthma, and all studies
but one reported some impro vements in their outcomes of
interest, which included clinical measures, symptoms, health
service utilization, and self-rated health. As such a diversity of
interv entions, outcomes, and diseases was targeted by these
mHealth interv entions, it is hard to generalize these findings.
Objecti ves
We aimed to contrib ute to the research and practice about
chronic disease management in Cambodia by conducting an
exploratory study to identify the facilitators and barriers to
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 2 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXdiabetes and hypertension management and user preferences
for mHealth-based messages for chronic disease
self-management and community-clinical linkages.
Our specif ic formati ve research questions were as follows:
1. What are people living with diabetes and/or
hypertension currently doing to mana ge their chronic
condition?
2. What are the facilitator s and barrier s to mana ging
diabetes and/or hypertension, from the perspectives
of people living with diabetes and/or hypertension
(patients) including peer educator s (PEs)?
3. What are the user (patient and PE) preferences for
the format and content of cell phone messa ges to
support people living with diabetes and/or
hypertension, including PEs?
4. What are the facilitator s and barrier s to using
mHealth technolo gy from the perspectives of people
living with diabetes and/or hypertension, including
PEs?
We used these findings to develop an mHealth mobile-based
messaging interv ention to impro ve chronic disease management
in Cambodia. As such, our fifth research question was as
follows:
5. How acceptable , appropriate , and feasible are the
mHealth messa ges to people living with diabetes
and/or hypertension, and what revisions are needed
to improve the mHealth messa ges befor e the RCT
effectiveness-implementation study?
This qualitati ve study is the first phase of a larger RCT to test
the effectiveness and implementation of the mHealth
interv ention to impro ve clinical outcomes via better
evidence-based disease management practices (eg,
self-management, regular monitoring of blood pressure and
glucose, and medication adherence) for people living with
diabetes and hypertension in Cambodia.Methods
Design
We used an exploratory qualitati ve study design to better
understand patient and PE perspecti ves on chronic disease
management and mHealth. We used the 32-item checklist
Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitati ve Research [29]
to guide the design, data collection, analysis, and reporting of
our research study . We recei ved institutional review board
appro val from the University of Washington Human Subjects
Division and the Cambodian National Ethics Committee for
Health Research.
Theor etical Framew ork
We used the information-moti vation-beha vioral (IMB)
theoretical frame work [30] to guide data collection and mHealth
message development. The IMB is a well-established behavior
change model that has been applied to other diabetes
self-management interv entions to impro ve clinical and care
outcomes [31,32]. Figure 1shows our modif ied IMB model for
this study . The IMB suggests three main determinants of starting
and maintaining health behaviors: (1) accurate information
(which includes reducing misinformation) that can be easily
translated into health behavior changes, (2) personal and social
motivation to act on this information, and (3) behavioral skills
to implement the health behavior with confidence and
effectiveness [30]. Our study will gather information on
facilitators and barriers to chronic disease management to craft
mHealth messages that can impro ve knowledge, motivation,
and skills for self-management. Impro ving these three behavioral
determinants can then impro ve chronic disease care (medication
adherence, regular monitoring of blood pressure and glucose,
regular doctor consultations, and regular visits with PEs) and
ultimately clinical outcomes (controlled blood pressure and
blood sugar). In addition, impro ved health outcomes can in turn
motivate people to maintain change, which may reduce
interv ention fatigue and impro ve the sustainability of the
interv ention.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 3 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 1. Modif ied information-moti vation-beha vioral model for impro ving diabetes and hypertension management through a mobile health interv ention
in Cambodia. NCD: noncommunicable disease.
Participants and Setting
The study was conducted in close partnership with the
Cambodian nongo vernmental organization (NGO), MoPoTsyo
Patient Information Centre [33-35]. MoPoTsyo was established
in 2005 to impro ve NCD management in Cambodia using the
six strate gies for impro ving the quality of chronic disease care,
as recommended by the chronic care model [36]:
self-management support, decision support, delivery system
design, clinical information systems, health care organization,
and community resources. MoPoTsyo trains people living with
diabetes and/or hypertension to serve as PEs for their
community , similar to a lay health worker or community health
worker model. These PEs provide education and support for
chronic conditions (eg, nutrition guidelines and self-monitoring
of blood glucose and pressure) as well as linkages with the
health system for regular laboratory profiles, medical
consultations, and routine medication dispensing. To facilitate
community-clinical linkages and chronic disease management,
MoPoTsyo maintains a centralized database that tracks
participants’ demographics and health outcomes, laboratory
results, doctor’ s visits, and pharmac y invoices when patients
pick up medications.
Recruitment
We recruited the study participants from two poor urban areas
in the capital, Phnom Penh, and four areas where PE netw orks
cover rural operational districts: Chamkar Leu, Baray-Santuk,
Kampong Speu, and Kong Pisey. These six areas were
purposefully selected using maximum variation sampling [37]
to represent different patient demographics and access to
MoPoTsyo’ s chronic disease management services. We used
convenience sampling to select focus group (FG) and intervie w
(IW) participants from these six areas. For FGs with peopleliving with diabetes and/or hypertension (called patients by
MoPoTsyo), the eligibility criteria included active participation
in MoPoTsyo’ s peer education program and being present for
their doctors’ consultation on the day of the FG. PEs notified
patients of the FG opportunity and explained that they were not
required to participate to receive other services from MoPoTsyo.
For the IWs, all PEs were invited to participate from these six
geographical areas. We obtained written informed consent from
both patients and PEs.
Data Collection
The study team developed a semistructured IW and FG guide
to better understand patient and PE perspecti ves on chronic
disease management and mHealth. The guide included main
questions and follow-up questions and probes depending on
how participants answered the main questions. Participants
could skip any question that they did not wish to answer . We
also conducted a brief demographic survey at the start of each
FG and IW. Data were collected by trained qualitati ve
researchers: HH conducted the FGs and half of the IWs in
Khmer and LS conducted half of the IWs in the English
language with a Khmer interpreter . The FGs lasted 90 min and
the IWs lasted 20 to 30 min. Each group included 8 to 12
participants with a similar composition of mixed ages and
genders. Refreshments were provided at each group and IW,
and the participants were provided a small amount of cash to
reimb urse them for the personal cost of their time and
transportation. The FGs and IWs took place at the community
health center or a nearby restaurant where participants came
regularly and were familiar with.
Data Analysis
Hard copies and electronic data were stored securely and without
any identif iable information. We analyzed the survey data using
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 4 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXStata 14 [38] for descripti ve statistics. FGs and IWs were audio
recorded and transcribed, and the recordings were destro yed
one month following transcription. We analyzed the transcripts
using a deducti ve thematic analysis, using Atlas.ti for data
management. A thematic analysis is a method for identifying,
analyzing, organizing, describing, and reporting themes found
within a dataset [39]. It applies a well-structured approach to
understand and organize key features of the data and for
highlighting the similarities and differences across diverse
research participants and for generating unanticipated insights
[40]. We used the six phases for the thematic analysis articulated
by Nowell et al [40]: familiarizing ourselv es with the data;
coding data using a standardized coding scheme [41,42];
searching for themes from the coded and collated text; reviewing
coded text within each theme to add additional codes or themes
and collapse themes with insuf ficient or inconsistent data;
defining, naming, and describing the scope and content of each
theme and revising after a research team review; and producing
a summary report of the findings to provide an account of the
data across and within themes and quotes to illustrate each
theme. We used this report to create mobile phone voice
messages for the chronic disease management mHealth
interv ention.
We used Lincoln and Guba’ s [43] criteria for credibility ,
transferability , dependability , and confirmability to help
establish the trustw orthiness of our data. For credibility , or
goodness of fit between participants’ perspecti ves and how we
represented these perspecti ves, we used prolonged engagement
with the data, research triangulation with multiple members of
our team, and data collection triangulation with the IW and FG
data. For transferability , we provided descriptions of the setting,
participants, and their perspecti ves so that the readers can
determine whether the findings are applicable to their conte xt.
For dependability and confirmability , we created an audit trail
of codes and themes to document decisions made throughout
the course of the study .
Mobile Health Message Development
We used findings from IWs and FGs to develop mHealth cell
phone messages to impro ve MoPoTsyo patients’ clinical
outcomes (eg, blood pressure and glucose). Specif ically , the
messages were created to impro ve evidence-based chronic
disease management via better access to health care (doctor’ s
consultations, laboratory monitoring, medications, and PEs)
and self-management (diet, weight management, physical
activity, alcohol, and smoking). We created a matrix with each
of these eight categories and grouped current practices andfacilitators and barriers to disease management by each of these
categories. For each of these categories, we then developed
message content aimed at impro ving knowledge, motivation,
and skills to either strengthen the facilitators or address barriers
that were identif ied in the FGs. We used the findings about how
mHealth would help or hinder disease management to inform
the format of the messages (eg, frequenc y and duration of
messages). The research team reviewed the draft messages
together to come up with final messages to record and pilot test.
We pilot tested four messages with 5 MoPoTsyo patients to
assess message acceptability , appropriateness, and feasibility
using open-ended discussion questions and a brief
multiple-choice survey. In the survey, patients were asked to
rate on a 5-point Likert scale (1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly
agree) whether the messages: got their attention, were
belie vable, were convincing, and were important to them;
whether the messages put thoughts in their mind and helped
them feel able to change how they were managing their chronic
disease; and whether they agreed with or enjoyed the messages.
We used input from the discussions and from the ratings to then
revise the messages using this feedback before the RCT began.
Results
Participants
The study engaged 70 participants: 59 individuals (patients )
and 11 PEs living with diabetes, hypertension, or both diabetes
and hypertension (Table 1). Patients had a mean age of 55.9
years (SD 9.1), were 63% (37/70) women, completed on average
4.2 years (SD 3.2) of education, had smok ed in the last 30 days
(9/59, 15%), and had been in MoPoTsyo’ s program for
approximately 3 years (SD 2.82). A majority of these patients
were living with both diabetes and hypertension (43/59, 73%),
and over 70% (33/46) with diabetes and 75% (42/56) with
hypertension) of them felt they were successfully managing
their disease. A greater proportion of PEs were men (6/11, 55%),
were educated (mean years of school 8.6, SD 4.3), felt they
were successfully managing their chronic conditions (over
10/11, 90% with diabetes and 8/8, 100% with hypertension),
and enrolled in MoPoTsyo’ s program (mean 4.9 years, SD 2.3).
A summary of findings on patients’ (FG) and PEs’ (IW)
perspecti ves on chronic disease management and mHealth
support is provided in the following sections, along with
illustrati ve quotes from patients and from PEs living with
diabetes, hypertension, or both diabetes and hypertension.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 5 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 1. Study participants (N=70).
Total Peer educators (intervie ws) MoPoTsyo patients (focus groups) Participant characteristics
70 11 59 Number of participants, n
55.4 (8.8) 52.8 (6.5) 55.9 (9.1) Age (years), mean (SD)
Sex, n (%)
42 (60) 5 (45) 37 (63) Female
28 (40) 6 (55) 22 (37) Male
Education
4.89 (3.67) 8.55 (4.25) 4.20 (3.15) School completed (years), mean (SD)
51 (72) 8 (73) 43 (73)DMa+HTNb, n (%)
6 (9) 3 (27) 3 (5) DM only, n (%)
13 (19) 0 (0) 13 (22) HTN only, n (%)
Successfully managing DM?, n (%)
43 (75) 10 (91) 33 (72) Yes, or more yes than no
14 (25) 1 (9) 13 (28) No, or more no than yes
Successfully managing HTN?, n (%)
50 (78) 8 (100) 42 (75) Yes, or more yes than no
14 (22) 0 (0) 14 (25) No, or more no than yes
11 (16) 2 (18) 9 (15) Smok ed in the past 30 days, n (%)
3.2 (2.8) 4.9 (2.3) 2.9 (2.8) Length of time in the peer educator program (years), mean (SD)
aDM: diabetes.
bHTN: hypertension.
Chronic Disease Management: Knowledge, Attitudes,
and Practices
Both patients and PEs were well informed about the
recommended diabetes and hypertension management practices.
Participants were knowledgeable about the following
evidence-based practices: (1) taking daily medications to manage
their blood pressure and blood glucose; (2) eating less salt and
more fruits and vegetables; (3) exercising or other physical
activities; (4) regularly meeting with their PE to recei ve support
and education regarding their self-management activities; to
monitor diabetes and hypertension outcomes; to discuss
symptoms and complications; to discuss their medical
prescription; to monitor their blood pressure, blood glucose,
and weight; and to discuss their yearly visits for laboratory and
doctor consultations. As one participant shared:
We need to do physical exercise and follow a healthy
diet to reduce blood glucose and so on. I also take
medicines regularly .[FG3]
Very few participants mentioned traditional remedies for chronic
disease management.
Although individuals and PEs knew about evidence-based
chronic disease management strate gies, there were deficits in
IMB skills to carry out these strate gies on a regular basis.
Knowledge gaps included misunderstandings about what
constitutes the appropriate frequenc y, intensity , and duration
of physical activity and how to incorporate dietary changes into
their lifestyle. As one patient shared:For me, the most signif icant content is about physical
exercise—how to do physical exercise properly and
what are the advanta ges of doing physical exercise?
[FG6]
Challenges to incorporating recommended dietary changes into
their daily routine included that household meals are prepared
by other household members and that other household members
prefer more salt and sugar for better taste, they work long days
and get fatigued when they do not eat their typical foods, and
healthier foods are more expensi ve and harder to access.
MoPoTsyo helps with access to care by providing services as
close as possible to where people live and having a fixed low
price for medications, laboratory tests, and consultations that
patients get through their PE netw ork membership. That said,
even with this assistance from MoPoTsyo, resources such as
time and mone y are limited for accessing care as many people
live in rural areas and spend half a day travelling to and from
and waiting for services as there is a very limited public
transportation system in Cambodia. As one PE shared:
At the start of the month, their childr en get salary for
working and they have mone y to come hospital, so
there are more patients. But at the end of the month,
there are fewer and fewer patients to come because
they do not have mone y for firstly, transportation cost,
secondly , consultation fee and thirdly, medicine
payment. For the furthest village from Orm Laing ,
they have to spend about 6 to 7.50 USD for
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 6 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXtransportation, this doesn’ t include expense for food.
[IW9]
Access to quality care is further limited in rural areas where
doctors have varying training in chronic disease management
and laboratory monitoring is not offered regularly . Patients may
also forget to take medicines regularly or may have difficulty
taking medicines with food when they are working during the
day. As one patient described:
My problem is that I am mostly absent-minded. For
instance , I am rushing to go to work in the morning!
I do not have time to have breakfast, so I plan to have
breakfast at workplace , and then I forget to take my
medicines. [FG4]
Family and peer support are important cultural norms that
facilitate chronic disease management, as well as having routines
and feeling better when they follow recommended strate gies.
For example:
We ask their family to help remind them about
consultation appointment; especially the patients with
hypertension to see their doctor regarding the
appointment because they may not feel badly .[IW9]
Every morning , even when I was very busy, I prepared
my medicines on my desk. So, if I walk ed around in
my house , I took a look to see my medicines on my
desk, then I recognized immediately , and I took the
medicines soon. So I never miss in taking the
medicines. [FG4]
Mobile Health for Chronic Disease Management
Patients and PEs viewed mHealth mobile-based messages as
an acceptable, feasible, and appropriate interv ention to support
chronic disease management. Cell phones are increasingly
accessible in Cambodia—one FG participant shared that
“Nowadays, Cambodian people are having a mobile phone in
every house and a person can have more than one phone” [FG3].
However, participants highlighted that older , poorer , and rural
communities have less access or have less phone literac y even
if they have access to a phone. mHealth messages are seen not
just as ways to educate, support, and remind patients but also
as a way to support PEs who can in turn reinforce the messages.
Most participants preferred voice messages over text messages,
given the small screen size on older phones, limited literac y
and low vision (eg, a participant from FG1 shared that she would
need her child to read text messages for her), and a preference
for a familiar , friendly voice from a trusted organization
(MoPoTsyo). Suggestions included “announcing MoPoTsyo
before the messages start so they will trust the messages” [IW4]
and “having a rhythm of a diabetes song so when I hear the
song, I know it’s MoPoTsyo!” [FG4]. A few PEs preferred text
messages so that they could share them more easily with their
patients.
Limited interacti vity was desired (“just pressing the answer key
and listening” [FG3]) given the low education and digital
literac y of many middle-aged and older Cambodians.
Participants recommended that messages be simple, interesting,
and brief—as one participant requested, “use daily words; do
not used technical words! Since we are farmers, please usesimple words, then we can understand, if you use the words that
we never heard before, it will be difficult to understand!” [FG5].
It was desired that messages be sent two times per week during
dinnertime so that patients know when to expect them, could
be available (not working or out on errands), have access to
their cell phones (since many share phones with spouses or
children), and have their family around to support them in
listening to and carrying out message recommendations. As one
PE described:
two times per week is enough; if we send the messa ges
more often, it will be hard and it could annoy their
time; the patients would feel boring with the messa ges
and then that would be a problem; or the patients
may not have to time for messa ges.[IW11]
Participants also wanted to be able to listen to the mHealth
messages more than once and did not see each message as a
onetime resource or as an individual-le vel interv ention—the y
saw utility for their whole family and community for promoting
health.
Sharing phones with family members was seen as both a
facilitator and barrier to using an mHealth interv ention for
chronic disease management. As described earlier , sharing
phones meant that family members would often be around when
they recei ved the mHealth messages, providing support,
reinforcement, and reminders about what was shared. However,
sharing phones meant that the targeted MoPoTsyo participant
was not always near the phone through which the message was
sent. One PE shared:
The difficulty is that the person who handles the phone
is not always staying near the patients; the phone is
with their childr en who are working far from home ,
while their parents who are patients are staying at
home! So the messa ge may not be received by the
patients but by their childr en; even though their
childr en will convey the messa ge content, it is not like
what the patients will hear the messa ge by them
directly! [IW8]
Other barriers to cell phone access include cell phone numbers
changing often for patients to get low promotional SIM cards
and limited cell phone literac y. As one participant shared:
My husband has one, my child has one, but I don’t
have one—I don’t know how to use the phone! [FG6]
In addition, participants viewed mHealth as an interv ention that
could help connect the dots for chronic disease management,
supplementing the information, motivation, and skills they
recei ve from their PE as well as linking them to needed
medicines, doctor consultations, and laboratory monitoring.
One PE shared:
The messa ges through a mobile phone can be an
additional support to educate patients besides the
verbal explanation by peer educator s to patients. The
messa ges could help improve patient’ s practice
lifestyle such as attitude in taking medicines, physical
exercise and checking blood pressur e and blood
glucose! The messa ge is a reminder or a doctor to
remind patient to practice a healthy lifestyle . [IW9])
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 7 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXHowever, they did not see mHealth as a panacea as it cannot
fully solve problems for patients having limited time, mone y,
and other resources to manage their conditions. As one patient
described:
I don’t have any difficulties [using the phone], but on
the day I have to come to buy medicines, I don’t have
much time because I need to look after my grandc hild
at home . It is hard for me.[FG1]
Mobile Health Message Development
Table 2shows the four messages that were pilot tested. During
the pilot test, patients strongly agreed with the message’ s
acceptability , agreeability , and feasibility , with a 80%-100%
(4/5-5/5) rating of the survey statements as strongly agree.
Furthermore, the advisory committee suggested shortening and
simplifying several of the messages that were too long or
comple x and changing the voice to a more upbeat, jovial female
voice from the more formal, masculine voice that was pilot
tested.
Overall, 34 mHealth messages were created to impro ve chronic
disease management for Cambodians living with diabetes,
hypertension, or both conditions. Guided by the IMB model,
the messages were (1) informational (eg, reminders that it was
time to pick up medications, get laboratory tests, or go to their
doctor’ s consultations and education about what constitutes
health y food); (2) motivational (eg, rationales for why
exercising, diet, and medications are important for chronic
disease management and supporti ve messages that ackno wledge
how hard it can be to manage their chronic condition, such as
eating less salt when not in charge of cooking for the family),
and (3) behavior al(eg, creati ve strate gies for incorporating
regular medications, physical activity, and health y eating into
their daily life). Multimedia Appendix 1provides informationon each of the mHealth messages, including the message script,
length of message (in seconds), type (IMB frame work), chronic
disease management topic, and target (whether the message was
sent to all MoPoTsyo patients or a subset of MoPoTsyo
patients).
In the RCT effectiveness study of the mHealth messaging
interv ention [44], the messages will be targeted and tailored to
MoPoTsyo participants according to clinical and service
outcomes. For example, patients due to pick up their medications
will recei ve the following message:
It is time to go to the pharmacy with your patient-book
to buy your medicine for your prescription
[Information and Behavior]. Remember—taking your
medicine every day even if you do not feel sick will
help prevent serious complications. [Information,
Motivation, and Behavior] If you sometimes forget
to take medicine , ask your family to help you
remember when to take your medicine [Behavior].
They care about you! [Moti vation]
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 8 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 2. Messages for pilot testing.
English script Khmer script Message ID
It is time to go to the pharmac y with your patient-book to buy your medicine
for your prescription. Remember—taking your medicine every day even if
you do not feel sick will help prevent serious complications. If you some-
times forget to take medicine, ask your family to help you remember when
to take your medicine. They care about you!
A1
By updating the lab profile at least one time per year the Doctor can see if
he is prescribing the right treatment specially for you. Remember to not eat
or drink anything except pure water for 8 hours before the blood draw.
B3
It looks like you did not see the doctor for more than 1 year. If you went to
another doctor for your diabetes or high blood pressure, press #1, if not,
press #2. Going to your doctor is important so that they can prescribe the
medications and other things you need for your blood pressure and blood
sugar, to stay health y and feel better . They also can tell you whether there
are any medications that you do not need to take any more.
C2
It looks like your blood sugar (blood pressure) is too high which may make
you feel worse or have other health problems. Please go to see a Doctor
who can prescribe the right medicines for you. You can also contact your
PE to get an appointment with a doctor .
D1
Discussion
Summary of Findings
In this study , we identif ied the facilitators and barriers to
diabetes and hypertension management in Cambodia from the
perspecti ves of people living with these chronic conditions,
including trained lay health workers (PEs) to support chronic
disease management. Not surprisingly , given their involvement
in the PE netw ork, many people living with chronic conditions
are aware of the best practices for disease management (eg,
medications, regular doctor’ s visits and laboratory monitoring,
physical activity and health y eating, and less smoking and
alcohol use). However, challenges remain on how to best
incorporate these practices into daily lives. Key barriers include
limited time and resources to access medications, clinical
support, and recommended guidelines for physical activity (eg,
aerobic and muscle strengthening activities) and healthier diets
with reduced sodium intak e. Access to effective, quality chronic
care remains to be a challenge, particularly in rural areas.This study also identif ied the preferred mHealth mobile-based
message format and content to inform our RCT of an mHealth
interv ention to strengthen self-management for diabetes and
hypertension and to impro ve community-clinical linkages to
existing services and support systems in Cambodia. Study
participants see mHealth as providing opportunities for
reminders about medications, laboratory studies, and doctor
visits; education about how to include best practices for chronic
disease management where they live and work; and support for
those barriers that cannot easily be overcome. Many participants
have access to cell phones and prefer simple, short voice
messages over texting because of limitations in literac y, vision,
and cell phone facilities as well as the trust conveyed by a
familiar voice. Participants also prefer that messages be
delivered at dinnertime to increase the likelihood that they will
recei ve the messages and can engage their family and friends
for support in their disease management. We did not find any
major differences in perspecti ves on chronic disease
management and mHealth between people living with chronic
conditions (FG discussions) and those persons who were trained
as PEs (one-on-one IWs).
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 9 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXComparison With Existing Literatur e
The literature on chronic disease management in Cambodia is
scarce. The few existing peer-reviewed publications highlight
a variety of limitations and challenges in screening and
diagnosis, service delivery, financing and insurance schemes,
health workforce, drug supply , health information systems, and
governance [45,46]. These findings are similar to many other
studies conducted in LMICs specif ic to the management of
hypertension and diabetes. Other common health service
challenges reported in these studies include an insuf ficient
number of trained health care workers coupled with a high
patient load, few diagnostic capabilities especially for glycated
hemoglobin, low remuneration of health workers often leading
to low motivation, no electronic databases for monitoring patient
data, limited services available in rural or community settings,
and few trained specialists such as ophthalmologists or
podiatrists [13,14,16,17,47-50]. Poor access to essential
medicines is also reported as a common challenge in LMICs,
where the drug stock is often unavailable, particularly in
government subsidized facilities as well as rural settings
[13,16,51,52]. These challenges in health service delivery
prompted the creation of MoPoTsyo in 2005 to empo wer
patients by (1) training and maintaining a lay health workforce
that can support chronic disease self-management and (2)
creating a financially sustainable system for continuous access
to low-cost medications, laboratory monitoring, and doctor
consultations that cooperates with Cambodia’ s public health
care system.
As reported in our study , the financial burden for ongoing
management of chronic conditions such as hypertension and
diabetes are one of the most typical barriers that patients face.
Financial barriers can include the cost of clinical care (eg, doctor
fees, laboratory tests, medications, and catastrophic health
expenditures), higher costs for health y food, and transport costs
for traveling to health facilities or pharmacies
[13,14,16,17,47,49,53]. Khatib et al [54] reported that in rural
LMICs, expenditures on hypertension medications alone can
constitute up to 49% (IQR 20-100) of a household’ s capacity
to pay. Some patients are forced to borro w or take mone y from
friends or relati ves, spend less on other household needs, or are
unable to renew their required prescriptions in full or on time
[50,55]. Although the costs of clinical care and medications
within the MoPoTsyo netw ork are more affordable than health
services outside the netw ork, participants still reported a cost
burden from medications, laboratory tests, and annual visits
with a physician. These costs were both direct monetary costs
for these services as well as indirect costs from transportation
or spending the day to travel for clinical care. This suggests
additional structural support and system changes are needed to
supplement an mHealth interv ention and the access to care
provided via MoPoTsyo’ s negotiated low, fixed prices for health
services.
Patients also face a variety of personal challenges in
implementing changes to their behaviors and lifestyle, as was
confirmed by our study . A variety of sources in LMICs report
that the most common self-management practices for people
living with diabetes and hypertension are medication use, diet
control, and physical activity [55-59]. The literature discussingpatient-reported barriers to medication adherence describes
many similar challenges reported by participants in our study ,
including unwanted side effects, dislik e of taking medications,
the belief that medications are not necessary , and financial and
access barriers, as described in the previous paragraph
[16,55,58]. Adherence to a recommended diet is also a common
patient-reported barrier , both in the literature from LMICs and
in the results from our study . Challenges include understanding
how to implement diet changes [57]; ease of access to unhealth y
foods, particularly foods high in fat, salt, and sugar [17,58];
problems obtaining health y food at home if they are not the
primary cook in the household [49,58]; and still feeling hungry
after eating the recommended diet [55]. Other patient barriers
reported in the literature include cultural norms that are not
conduci ve to health y behaviors [48], not having access to
devices for regular self-monitoring of blood glucose or blood
pressure [49,60], and a preference of traditional remedies over
Western medications [16,17]. These barriers were not cited
frequently by either MoPoTsyo participants or the PEs.
Social support emer ged as a key factor for both chronic disease
management and for using mHealth to support disease
management. The MoPoTsyo PE netw ork [33] is built on the
evidence that trained members of the patient community can
provide social support (along with education, identif ication,
and referral) for people living with chronic conditions [61].
Family members have often been identif ied as the main source
of social support available to people living with diabetes and
hypertension in LMICs [62], yet this can be both a facilitator
and barrier , as was identif ied in this study . Specif ically , although
family members can provide instrumental support (eg, driving
patients to appointments) and emotional support (eg, helping
patients cope with their disease), recommended lifestyle changes
can conflict with regular family routines and family members
may provide misinformation or increase the stress levels of
patients [63]. Future mHealth interv entions may benef it from
engaging family members more directly given their key role in
both cell phone access and usability and from facilitating
recommended disease management strate gies around diet and
exercise and obtaining medications and accessing health care
providers.
As described earlier , it is too early to conclude whether mHealth
messaging interv entions for chronic conditions in developing
countries are effective or not [19], with studies showing mixed
results [64-71]. Although it is not exactly clear what contrib utes
to the success of mobile messaging programs, it is likely that
features such as the specif ic content, frequenc y, timing,
personalization, interacti ve capabilities, and usability can affect
outcomes. For example, most interv entions with successful
outcomes reported sending participants messages at least once
a week, whereas daily messages were typically viewed as
intrusi ve by participants and sending messages less than once
a week was too infrequent to have an impact. Similarly ,
according to the opinions of participants in our study , most
preferred to recei ve two messages per week.
From the available literature, it appears that most mHealth
messaging programs utilized only text messaging; few
incorporated voice messages into the interv ention [66,72,73].
However, our results showed that participants often preferred
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 10 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXvoice over text messages because of low literac y (both limited
ability to read and to use technology), poor vision, limited
familiarity with sending and recei ving text messages, higher
trust in a familiar voice, and the ability to replay messages if
desired. These findings are not unique in low-income settings;
for example, a study in India found that 89% of participants
preferred recei ving voice reminders for their medications over
text messages [74]. Even with voice messages, more targeted
and tailored dissemination efforts may be needed to reach older
and poorer patients with less cell phone access and lower
technological literac y.
Strengths and Limitations
The primary strength of this study is our conducting of formati ve
research with our target audience to identify the facilitators and
barriers to chronic disease management to develop an mHealth
messaging interv ention for impro ving self-management and
access to care. We worked in close partnership with a successful
Cambodian NGO (MoPoTsyo) to design an mHealth
interv ention for a real-w orld setting and patient population. Our
MoPoTsyo coauthors were involved in each phase of the study
and recei ved training in research methods to build the capacity
for future research studies. The lead author (LS) has over 15
years of experience conducting community-eng aged,
cross-cultural, qualitati ve research with patients and providers.
The second and third authors (HH and MP) lead MoPoTsyo’ s
work including engagement, training, monitoring, and
evaluation. For the past 15 years, the last two authors (JL and
AF) have worked closely with MoPoTsyo and separately with
the lead author on health promotion research and practice with
low-resource settings in the United States. This was the lead
author’ s first project with MoPoTsyo and in Cambodia; as such,
partnering with the study coauthors and the MoPoTsyo team
was imperati ve to yield relevant findings to impro ve NCD
outcomes in Cambodia. Over the course of the study , we also
consulted with an advisory committee of key stakeholders (see
Ackno wledgements) to ensure the messages were designed for
dissemination and sustainability and were aligning with national
policies and priorities such as the National Strategic Plan for
Prevention and Contr ol of Noncommunicable Diseases
2013-2020 .
The limitations of the study are common to formati ve research
studies. We used a convenience sample of participants in anexisting PE netw ork; as such, our findings may not be
generalizable to other conte xts. FGs as a data collection method
may also foster group thinking in which only some perspecti ves
are shared. In this study , the participants knew each other from
participating together in MoPoTsyo’ s peer netw orks, which
may have influenced what responses were shared. In addition,
although the use of the IMB frame work is well established for
designing individual behavior change interv entions, newer
models such as Opoku et al’s mHealth realist frame work [75]
can be useful for evaluating the implementation of the mHealth
interv ention to provide a more systematic appraisal of conte xtual
factors that support or hinder interv ention implementation,
sustainability , and scale-up [76]. Their realist frame work
combines two models to articulate mechanisms between
individual and conte xtual factors and access to care: Anderson’ s
Beha vioral Model of Health Services Utilization [77] calls out
three key factors that determine access to care: predisposing
characteristics (eg, age and beliefs), enabling resources (eg,
availability of providers), and need (eg, disease burden). Davis’s
Technology Acceptance Model [78] adds percei ved usefulness
and percei ved ease of use as two additional factors that lead to
use and acceptance of technology .
Conclusions
This formati ve study adds to the growing literature on using
mHealth to support the self-management of diabetes and
hypertension in LMICs. It provides a model for developing
culturally appropriate mHealth NCD interv entions in LMICs
that are based on patient-identif ied factors. Specif ically , this
study identif ied the facilitators and barriers to chronic disease
management and to using an mHealth messaging interv ention
to impro ve disease self-management and community-clinical
linkages in a PE netw ork in the Cambodian conte xt. Our
formati ve research informed the creation of 34 IMB mHealth
messages that are currently being tested for effectiveness and
implementation in a cluster RCT of 75 health center coverage
areas in Cambodia. Our findings align with the existing literature
on the facilitators and barriers to chronic disease management
and mHealth messaging interv entions in LMICs, suggesting
that there may be implications for other settings. This study will
help build the needed evidence for successful mHealth
messaging interv entions for NCDs in LMICs.
Ackno wledgments
The authors thank MoPoTsyo’ s PEs and patients who participated in the IWs and FGs. They also thank the MoPoTsyo staff who
facilitated participant recruitment. The authors also wish to thank the in-country study advisory committee: Dr Chhea Chhorv ann
(Chair); Dr Kol Hero, Director of Preventive Medicine Department at Ministry of Health (MOH); Ms Channe Suy, Innovative
Support for Emer gencies, Diseases, and Disasters iLab Southeast Asia; Dr Sok Po, Hospital Services Department, MOH; Dr
Touch Khun, Preah Kossamak National Hospital; Dr Mam Sovatha, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology , and STD at
the MOH; Dr Khim Sam Ath, NCDs and Health through the Life-Course, WHO, Phnom Penh. Funding for this study was provided
by the National Institutes of Health Fogarty International Center and National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering
mHealth: Technology and Outcomes in LMICs (R21) 2016-2018 (AF, principal investig ator). The sponsor was not involved in
the review or appro val of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 11 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXMultimedia Appendix 1
mHealth message script, length, information-moti vation-beha vioral content, chronic disease management topic, and target audience
(N=34).
[XLSX File (Microsoft Excel File), 22 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Refer ences
1. Islam SM, Purnat TD, Phuong NT, Mwingira U, Schacht K, Fröschl G. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in developing
countries: a symposium report. Global Health 2014 Dec 11;10:81 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12992-014-0081-9 ]
[Medline: 25498459 ]
2. Roser M, Ritchie H. Our World in Data. 2020. Burden of Disease URL: https://ourw orldindata.or g/burden-of-disease
[accessed 2020-02-09] [WebCite Cache ID 75fr4R8uE ]
3. Benziger CP, Roth GA, Moran AE. The Global Burden of Disease study and the preventable burden of NCD. Glob Heart
2016 Dec;11(4):393-397. [doi: 10.1016/j.gheart.2016.10.024 ] [Medline: 27938824 ]
4. Dans A, Ng N, Varghese C, Tai ES, Firestone R, Bonita R. The rise of chronic non-communicable diseases in southeast
Asia: time for action. Lancet 2011 Feb 19;377(9766):680-689. [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61506-1 ] [Medline: 21269677 ]
5. Institute for Health Metrics Evaluation (IHME). 2017. Country Profiles: Cambodia URL: http://www .healthdata.or g/
cambodia [accessed 2020-02-09]
6. GBD 2016 DALYsHALE Collaborators. Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) for 333
diseases and injuries and health y life expectanc y (HALE) for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis
for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet 2017 Sep 16;390(10100):1260-1344 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32130-X ] [Medline: 28919118 ]
7. Oum S, Prak PR, Khuon EM, Mey V, Aim S, Bounchan Y, et al. World Health Organization. 2010 Sep. Prevalence of
Non-Communicable Disease Risk Factors in Cambodia: STEPS Survey, Country Report URL: https://www .who.int/ncds/
surveillance/steps/2010_STEPS_Report_Cambodia.pdf [accessed 2019-01-24] [WebCite Cache ID 75fqD VEhY ]
8. Chhoun P, Tuot S, Harries AD, Kyaw NT, Pal K, Mun P, et al. High prevalence of non-communicable diseases and associated
risk factors amongst adults living with HIV in Cambodia. PLoS One 2017;12(11):e0187591 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0187591 ] [Medline: 29121661 ]
9. Fisher EB, Boothro yd RI, Couf al MM, Baumann LC, Mban ya JC, Rotheram-Borus MJ, et al. Peer support for
self-management of diabetes impro ved outcomes in international settings. Health Aff (Mill wood) 2012 Jan;31(1):130-139
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1377/hlthaf f.2011.0914 ] [Medline: 22232103 ]
10. Tsolekile LP, Abrahams-Gessel S, Puoane T. Healthcare professional shortage and task-shifting to prevent cardio vascular
disease: implications for low- and middle-income countries. Curr Cardiol Rep 2015 Dec;17(12):115. [doi:
10.1007/s11886-015-0672-y ] [Medline: 26482758 ]
11. Park PH, Wambui CK, Atieno S, Egger JR, Misoi L, Nyab undi JS, et al. Impro ving diabetes management and cardio vascular
risk factors through peer-led self-management support groups in western Kenya. Diabetes Care 2015 Aug;38(8):e110-e111
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2337/dc15-0353 ] [Medline: 26207058 ]
12. Joshi R, Alim M, Kengne AP, Jan S, Maulik PK, Peiris D, et al. Task shifting for non-communicable disease management
in low and middle income countries--a systematic review. PLoS One 2014;9(8):e103754 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0103754 ] [Medline: 25121789 ]
13. Alberti H, Boudrig a N, Nabli M. Primary care management of diabetes in a low/middle income country: a multi-method,
qualitati ve study of barriers and facilitators to care. BMC Fam Pract 2007 Nov 9;8:63 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/1471-2296-8-63 ] [Medline: 17996084 ]
14. Beran D. The impact of health systems on diabetes care in low and lower middle income countries. Curr Diab Rep 2015
Apr;15(4):20. [doi: 10.1007/s11892-015-0591-8 ] [Medline: 25721248 ]
15. Manna va P, Abdullah A, James C, Dodd R, Annear PL. Health systems and noncommunicable diseases in the Asia-P acific
region: a review of the published literature. Asia Pac J Public Health 2015 Mar;27(2):NP1-N19. [doi:
10.1177/1010539513500336 ] [Medline: 24097936 ]
16. Mendenhall E, Norris SA. Diabetes care among urban women in Soweto, South Africa: a qualitati ve study . BMC Public
Health 2015 Dec 26;15:1300 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2615-3 ] [Medline: 26706228 ]
17. Risso-Gill I, Balabano va D, Majid F, Ng KK, Yusoff K, Mustapha F, et al. Understanding the modif iable health systems
barriers to hypertension management in Malaysia: a multi-method health systems appraisal approach. BMC Health Serv
Res 2015 Jul 3;15:254 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-015-0916-y ] [Medline: 26135302 ]
18. Abaza H, Marschollek M. mHealth application areas and technology combinations*. A comparison of literature from high
and low/middle income countries. Methods Inf Med 2017 Aug 8;56(7):e105-e122 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.3414/ME17-05-0003 ] [Medline: 28925418 ]
19. Stephani V, Opoku D, Quentin W. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials of mHealth interv entions against
non-communicable diseases in developing countries. BMC Public Health 2016 Jul 15;16:572 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12889-016-3226-3 ] [Medline: 27417513 ]
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 12 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX20. Howitt P, Darzi A, Yang G, Ashraf ian H, Atun R, Barlo w J, et al. Technologies for global health. Lancet 2012 Aug
4;380(9840):507-535. [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61127-1 ] [Medline: 22857974 ]
21. World Health Organization. World Health Statistics 2010. Gene va: World Health Organization; 2010.
22. International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures URL: https://www .itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/f acts/ICTF actsFigures2013-e.pdf [accessed 2019-01-24] [WebCite Cache ID 75fsBGJSb ]
23. Kaplan WA. Can the ubiquitous power of mobile phones be used to impro ve health outcomes in developing countries?
Global Health 2006 May 23;2:9 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1744-8603-2-9 ] [Medline: 16719925 ]
24. Phong K, Solá J. The Asia Foundation. 2014 Oct. Mobile Phones in Cambodia 2014: Research Study URL: https:/
/asiafoundation.or g/resources/pdfs/MobilephonesinCB.pdf [accessed 2019-01-24] [WebCite Cache ID 75ftO5Q1F ]
25. Shippee ND, Shah ND, May CR, Mair FS, Montori VM. Cumulati ve comple xity: a functional, patient-centered model of
patient comple xity can impro ve research and practice. J Clin Epidemiol 2012 Oct;65(10):1041-1051 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.jclinepi.2012.05.005 ] [Medline: 22910536 ]
26. Kadirv elu A, Sadasi van S, Ng SH. Social support in type II diabetes care: a case of too little, too late. Diabetes Metab Syndr
Obes 2012;5:407-417 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S37183 ] [Medline: 23226028 ]
27. Glasziou P, Irwig L, Mant D. Monitoring in chronic disease: a rational approach. Br Med J 2005 Mar 19;330(7492):644-648
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmj.330.7492.644 ] [Medline: 15774996 ]
28. Mbuagba w L, Mursleen S, Lytvyn L, Smieja M, Dolo vich L, Thabane L. Mobile phone text messaging interv entions for
HIV and other chronic diseases: an overvie w of systematic reviews and frame work for evidence transfer . BMC Health Serv
Res 2015 Jan 22;15:33 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-014-0654-6 ] [Medline: 25609559 ]
29. Tong A, Sainsb ury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitati ve research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for
intervie ws and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care 2007 Dec;19(6):349-357. [doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzm042 ] [Medline:
17872937 ]
30. Fisher JD, Fisher WA. The information-moti vation-beha vioral skills model. In: DiClemente RJ, Crosby RA, Kegler MC,
editors. Emer ging Theories in Health Promotion Practice and Research: Strate gies for Impro ving Public Health. San
Francisco, CA: Josse y-Bass; 2002:40-70.
31. Osborn CY, Egede LE. Validation of an information-moti vation-beha vioral skills model of diabetes self-care (IMB-DSC).
Patient Educ Couns 2010 Apr;79(1):49-54 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2009.07.016 ] [Medline: 19699601 ]
32. Gao J, Wang J, Zhu Y, Yu J. Validation of an information-moti vation-beha vioral skills model of self-care among Chinese
adults with type 2 diabetes. BMC Public Health 2013 Feb 4;13:100 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-100 ]
[Medline: 23379324 ]
33. van Olmen J, Eggermont N, van Pelt M, Hen H, de Man J, Schelle vis F, et al. Patient-centred innovation to ensure access
to diabetes care in Cambodia: the case of MoPoTsyo. J Pharm Polic y Pract 2016;9:1 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s40545-016-0050-1 ] [Medline: 26798483 ]
34. Taniguchi D, LoGerfo J, van Pelt M, Mielcarek B, Huster K, Haider M, et al. Correction: Evaluation of a multi-f aceted
diabetes care program including community-based peer educators in Takeo province, Cambodia, 2007-2013. PLoS One
2018;13(4):e0196192 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196192 ] [Medline: 29664971 ]
35. MoPoTsyo %. URL: https://www .mopotsyo.or g/[accessed 2020-02-12]
36. Wagner EH. Chronic disease management: what will it take to impro ve care for chronic illness? Eff Clin Pract 1998;1(1):2-4.
[Medline: 10345255 ]
37. Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoagw ood K. Purposeful sampling for qualitati ve data collection
and analysis in mixed method implementation research. Adm Polic y Ment Health 2015 Sep;42(5):533-544 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1007/s10488-013-0528-y ] [Medline: 24193818 ]
38. StataCorp. Colle ge Station, TX: StataCorp; 2015. Stata Statistical Softw are: Release 14 URL: https://www .stata.com/
stata14/ [accessed 2020-02-12]
39. Braun V, Clark e V. Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qual Res Psychol 2006 Jan;3(2):77-101. [doi:
10.1191/1478088706qp063oa ]
40. Nowell LS, Norris JM, White DE, Moules NJ. Thematic analysis: striving to meet the trustw orthiness criteria. Int J Qual
Methods 2017;16(1):1-13 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1177/1609406917733847 ]
41. Creswell JW. Research Design: Qualitati ve, Quantitati ve, and Mixed Methods Approaches. Fourth Edition. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage; 2014.
42. King N. Using templates in the thematic analysis of text. In: Cassel C, Symon G, editors. Essential Guide To Qualitati ve
Methods In Organizational Research. London, UK: Sage; 2004:257-270.
43. Lincoln YS, Guba E. Naturalistic Inquiry . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1985.
44. Fitzpatrick AL, van Pelt M, Heang H, Steinman L, Ide N, Chhea C, et al. Using targeted mHealth messages to address
hypertension and diabetes self-management in Cambodia: protocol for a clustered randomized controlled trial. JMIR Res
Protoc 2019 Mar 19;8(3):e11614 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/11614 ] [Medline: 30888330 ]
45. Bigdeli M, Jacobs B, Men CR, Nilsen K, van Damme W, Dujardin B. Access to treatment for diabetes and hypertension
in rural Cambodia: performance of existing social health protection schemes. PLoS One 2016;11(1):e0146147 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146147 ] [Medline: 26815916 ]
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 13 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX46. Jacobs B, Hill P, Bigdeli M, Men C. Managing non-communicable diseases at health district level in Cambodia: a systems
analysis and suggestions for impro vement. BMC Health Serv Res 2016 Jan 27;16:32 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12913-016-1286-9 ] [Medline: 26818827 ]
47. van Minh H, Do YK, Bautista MA, Anh TT. Describing the primary care system capacity for the prevention and management
of non-communicable diseases in rural Vietnam. Int J Health Plann Manage 2014;29(2):e159-e173. [doi: 10.1002/hpm.2179 ]
[Medline: 23553675 ]
48. Krishnan AG, Kahandaliyanage A, Garg R. Hypertension in the South-East Asia Region: An Overvie w. Regional Health
Forum 2013;17(1):7-14 [FREE Full text]
49. Abdulrehman MS, Woith W, Jenkins S, Kossman S, Hunter GL. Exploring cultural influences of self-management of
diabetes in Coastal Kenya: an ethnograph y. Glob Qual Nurs Res 2016;3:2333393616641825 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1177/2333393616641825 ] [Medline: 28462335 ]
50. Beran D, Higuchi M. Delivering diabetes care in the Philippines and Vietnam: polic y and practice issues. Asia Pac J Public
Health 2013 Jan;25(1):92-101. [doi: 10.1177/1010539511412177 ] [Medline: 21727084 ]
51. Metta E, Haisma H, Kessy F, Geubbels E, Hutter I, Baile y A. 'It is the medicines that keep us alive': lived experiences of
diabetes medication use and continuity among adults in Southeastern Tanzania. BMC Health Serv Res 2015 Mar 18;15:111
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12913-015-0768-5 ] [Medline: 25890162 ]
52. Beran D, Ewen M, Laing R. Constraints and challenges in access to insulin: a global perspecti ve. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2016 Mar;4(3):275-285. [doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(15)00521-5 ] [Medline: 26857998 ]
53. Kank eu HT, Saksena P, Xu K, Evans DB. The financial burden from non-communicable diseases in low- and middle-income
countries: a literature review. Health Res Polic y Syst 2013 Aug 16;11:31 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1478-4505-11-31 ]
[Medline: 23947294 ]
54. Khatib R, McK ee M, Shannon H, Chow C, Rang arajan S, Teo K, PURE study investig ators. Availability and affordability
of cardio vascular disease medicines and their effect on use in high-income, middle-income, and low-income countries: an
analysis of the PURE study data. Lancet 2016 Jan 2;387(10013):61-69. [doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00469-9 ] [Medline:
26498706 ]
55. Bhandari P, Kim M. Self-care behaviors of Nepalese adults with type 2 diabetes: a mixed methods analysis. Nurs Res
2016;65(3):202-214. [doi: 10.1097/NNR.0000000000000153 ] [Medline: 27124256 ]
56. Mogre V, Abang a ZO, Tzelepis F, Johnson NA, Paul C. Adherence to and factors associated with self-care behaviours in
type 2 diabetes patients in Ghana. BMC Endocr Disord 2017 Mar 24;17(1):20 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12902-017-0169-3 ] [Medline: 28340613 ]
57. Rahman AR, Wang J, Kwong GM, Morales DD, Sritara P, Sukma wan R, all members of the Asian Cardio vascular Expert
Forum Committee. Perception of hypertension management by patients and doctors in Asia: potential to impro ve blood
pressure control. Asia Pac Fam Med 2015;14(1):2 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12930-015-0018-3 ] [Medline: 25729324 ]
58. Shima R, Farizah MH, Majid HA. A qualitati ve study on hypertensi ve care behavior in primary health care settings in
Malaysia. Patient Prefer Adherence 2014;8:1597-1609 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2147/PP A.S69680 ] [Medline: 25484577 ]
59. Worku A, Abebe SM, Wassie MM. Dietary practice and associated factors among type 2 diabetic patients: a cross sectional
hospital based study , Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Springerplus 2015;4:15 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-0785-1 ]
[Medline: 25635244 ]
60. Camara A, Baldé NM, Sobngwi-T ambek ou J, Kengne AP, Diallo MM, Tchatchoua AP, et al. Poor glycemic control in
type 2 diabetes in the South of the Sahara: the issue of limited access to an HbA1c test. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2015
Apr;108(1):187-192. [doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2014.08.025 ] [Medline: 25697633 ]
61. Alaofè H, Asaolu I, Ehiri J, Moretz H, Asuzu C, Balogun M, et al. Community health workers in diabetes prevention and
management in developing countries. Ann Glob Health 2017;83(3-4):661-675 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.aogh.2017.10.009 ] [Medline: 29221543 ]
62. Lall D, Engel N, Devadasan N, Horstman K, Criel B. Models of care for chronic conditions in low/middle-income countries:
a 'best fit' frame work synthesis. BMJ Glob Health 2018;3(6):e001077 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2018-001077 ]
[Medline: 30687524 ]
63. Baig AA, Benitez A, Quinn MT, Burnet DL. Family interv entions to impro ve diabetes outcomes for adults. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 2015 Sep;1353:89-112 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1111/n yas.12844 ] [Medline: 26250784 ]
64. Chib A, van Veltho ven MH, Car J. mHealth adoption in low-resource environments: a review of the use of mobile healthcare
in developing countries. J Health Commun 2015;20(1):4-34. [doi: 10.1080/10810730.2013.864735 ] [Medline: 24673171 ]
65. Bobro w K, Farmer AJ, Springer D, Shan yinde M, Yu L, Brennan T, et al. Mobile phone text messages to support treatment
adherence in adults with high blood pressure (SMS-te xt adherence support [StAR]): a single-blind, randomized trial.
Circulation 2016 Feb 9;133(6):592-600 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1161/CIRCULA TION AHA.115.017530 ] [Medline:
26769742 ]
66. Piette JD, List J, Rana GK, Townsend W, Striplin D, Heisler M. Mobile health devices as tools for worldwide cardio vascular
risk reduction and disease management. Circulation 2015 Nov 24;132(21):2012-2027 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1161/CIRCULA TION AHA.114.008723 ] [Medline: 26596977 ]
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 14 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX67. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Ram J, Selvam S, Simon M, Nanditha A, et al. Effectiveness of mobile phone messaging
in prevention of type 2 diabetes by lifestyle modif ication in men in India: a prospecti ve, parallel-group, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2013 Nov;1(3):191-198. [doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(13)70067-6 ] [Medline: 24622367 ]
68. Islam SM, Niessen LW, Ferrari U, Ali L, Seissler J, Lechner A. Effects of mobile phone sms to impro ve glycemic control
among patients with type 2 diabetes in Bangladesh: a prospecti ve, parallel-group, randomized controlled trial. Diabetes
Care 2015 Aug;38(8):e112-e113. [doi: 10.2337/dc15-0505 ] [Medline: 26207059 ]
69. Kamal AK, Shaikh Q, Pasha O, Azam I, Islam M, Memon AA, et al. A randomized controlled behavioral interv ention trial
to impro ve medication adherence in adult strok e patients with prescription tailored Short Messaging Service
(SMS)-SMS4Strok e study . BMC Neurol 2015 Oct 21;15:212 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/s12883-015-0471-5 ] [Medline:
26486857 ]
70. Van Olmen J, Kegels G, Korachais C, de Man J, Van Acker K, Kalob u JC, et al. The effect of text message support on
diabetes self-management in developing countries - a randomised trial. J Clin Transl Endocrinol 2017 Mar;7:33-41 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.jcte.2016.12.005 ] [Medline: 29067248 ]
71. Rubinstein A, Miranda JJ, Beratarrechea A, Diez-Canseco F, Kanter R, Gutierrez L, GISMAL group. Effectiveness of an
mHealth interv ention to impro ve the cardiometabolic profile of people with prehypertension in low-resource urban settings
in Latin America: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016 Jan;4(1):52-63. [doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(15)00381-2 ] [Medline: 26653067 ]
72. Rodrigues R, Shet A, Anton y J, Sidne y K, Arumug am K, Krishnamurth y S, et al. Supporting adherence to antiretro viral
therap y with mobile phone reminders: results from a cohort in South India. PLoS One 2012;7(8):e40723 [FREE Full text]
[doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040723 ] [Medline: 22952574 ]
73. Kunutsor S, Walley J, Katabira E, Muchuro S, Balida wa H, Namag ala E, et al. Using mobile phones to impro ve clinic
attendance amongst an antiretro viral treatment cohort in rural Uganda: a cross-sectional and prospecti ve study . AIDS Beha v
2010 Dec;14(6):1347-1352. [doi: 10.1007/s10461-010-9780-2 ] [Medline: 20700644 ]
74. DeSouza SI, Rashmi MR, Vasanthi AP, Joseph SM, Rodrigues R. Mobile phones: the next step towards healthcare delivery
in rural India? PLoS One 2014;9(8):e104895 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104895 ] [Medline: 25133610 ]
75. Opoku D, Stephani V, Quentin W. A realist review of mobile phone-based health interv entions for non-communicable
disease management in sub-Saharan Africa. BMC Med 2017 Feb 6;15(1):24 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12916-017-0782-z ] [Medline: 28162090 ]
76. Opoku D, Busse R, Quentin W. Achie ving sustainability and scale-up of mobile health noncommunicable disease interv entions
in Sub-Saharan Africa: views of polic y makers in Ghana. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2019 May 3;7(5):e11497 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.2196/11497 ] [Medline: 31066706 ]
77. Andersen RM. Revisiting the behavioral model and access to medical care: does it matter? J Health Soc Beha v 1995
Mar;36(1):1-10. [doi: 10.2307/2137284 ] [Medline: 7738325 ]
78. Davis FD. Percei ved usefulness, percei ved ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology . Manag Inf Syst Q
1989 Sep;13(3):319-340. [doi: 10.2307/249008 ]
Abbreviations
DALY: disability-adjusted life year
FG: focus group
IMB: information-moti vation-beha vioral
IW: intervie w
LMIC: low- and middle-income country
mHealth: mobile health
MOH: Ministry of Health
NCD: noncommunicable disease
NGO: nongo vernmental organization
RCT : randomized controlled trial
WHO: World Health Organization
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 15 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderXEdited by G Eysenbac h; submitted 29.01.19; peer-reviewed by D Opoku, J Chen, R Rodrigues; comments to author 25.04.19; revised
version received 04.07.19; accepted 24.09.19; published 24.04.20
Please cite as:
Steinman L, Heang H, van Pelt M, Ide N, Cui H, Rao M, LoGerfo J, Fitzpatric k A
Facilitator s and Barrier s to Chronic Disease Self-Mana gement and Mobile Health Interventions for People Living With Diabetes and
Hypertension in Cambodia: Qualitative Study
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(4):e13536
URL: http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
doi: 10.2196/13536
PMID: 32329737
©Lesle y Steinman, Hen Heang, Maurits van Pelt, Nicole Ide, Haixia Cui, Mayuree Rao, James LoGerfo, Annette Fitzpatrick.
Originally published in JMIR mHealth and uHealth (http://mhealth.jmir .org), 24.04.2020. This is an open-access article distrib uted
under the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR mHealth and
uHealth, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://mhealth.jmir .org/,
as well as this copyright and license information must be included.
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e13536 | p. 16 http://mhealth.jmir .org/2020/4/e13536/
(page number not for citation purposes)Steinman et al JMIR MHEAL TH AND UHEAL TH
XSL•FO
RenderX