CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITION ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Implementation Science
Keywords: implementation science,
mHealth program, maternal health,
infant development, infant nutrition
Copyright © American Society for Nutrition 2019.
All rights reserved. This is an Open Access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ),
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use,
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
Manuscript received June 18, 2019. Initial review
completed September 20, 2019. Revision accepted
September 24, 2019. Published online October 3,
2019.
UNICEF provided ﬁnancial support for the qualitative
evaluation. UNICEF did not participate in the design,
implementation, data analysis, or interpretation of the
results in the manuscript.
Author disclosures: PG-R, SCL, ACPN, AAE, MRVG,
and MV-C, no conﬂicts of interest.
Supplementary Material is available from the
“Supplementary data” link in the online posting of
the article and from the same link in the online table
of contents at https://academic.oup.com/cdn/ .
Address correspondence to MV-C (e-mail:
mireya.vilar@ibero.mx ).
Abbreviations used: AEA, American Economic
Association’s registry for randomized controlled trials;
FOI, ﬁdelity of implementation; mHealth , mobile
health; PD, Prospera Digital; PROSPERA, Social
Inclusion Program; RCT, randomized controlled trial;
SMS, short messages service; T1, Treatment 1:
delivery of SMS messages; T2, Treatment 2: delivery
of SMS messages and community leaders sign
‘contract’ with beneﬁciaries, and community leaders
send predeﬁned messages; T3, Treatment 3: delivery
of SMS messages, and beneﬁciaries anonymously
evaluate medical care through their mobile phone,
and best performing clinics receive additional days of
vacation as an incentive.Fidelity of Implementation of Prospera Digital:
Evaluation of a Multi-Site mHealth Intervention
Aimed at Improving Maternal Health Outcomes
in Mexico
Pablo Gaitán-Rossi ,1Selene De la Cerda Lobato,1Alma Cecilia Pérez Navarro,1
Arturo Aguilar Esteva,2Manett Rocío Vargas García,2and Mireya Vilar-Compte1
1EQUIDE, Iberoamericana University, Mexico City, Mexico and2Department of Economics, Mexican
Autonomous Technology Institute (ITAM), Mexico City, Mexico
ABSTRACT
Background: Infrastructure and human capital limitations motivate the design of mHealth
programs, but their large-scale implementation may be challenging in a development context.
Prospera Digital (PD) is a pilot mHealth intervention aiming to improve maternal and child health
and nutrition designed as a randomized controlled trial with 3 treatment arms. It was
implemented during 2015–2017 in 326 treatment clinics located in 5 states in Mexico.
Objective: Assess, with an external evaluation, PD’s ﬁdelity of implementation using 6 dimensions:
adherence, quality, responsiveness, intervention complexity, facilitation strategies, and program
differentiation.
Methods: Benchmark for implementation was ﬁrst established by interviewing PD’s developers.
Extensive ﬁeldwork in the 5 states was then conducted to assess its ﬁdelity in heterogeneous
contexts. The evaluation team visited 39 health clinics to assess the initial sign-up events and
conduct a follow-up. Overall, the team made 28 closed observations; conducted 17 focus
groups; and interviewed 74 health providers, 10 community leaders, and 92 beneﬁciaries. Field
notes from the implementation team on all clinics were also examined.
Results: Co-ordination between the Health and Social Development ministries was adequate,
although some health providers were not informed about PD. Program developers added useful
implementation strategies during roll-out to reinforce sign-up events. Key quality facilitators were
the clarity and relevance of the messages from the short messages service. Beneﬁciaries
expressed high satisfaction with PD. In contrast, implementation barriers to adherence in some
localities might reduce the potential impact of PD. Program differentiation was low between the
3 treatment arms.
Conclusions: PD is a promising strategy to contribute to the promotion of early childhood
development in Mexico. Implementation science evaluation can help improve the quality of
large-scale mHealth interventions by anticipating barriers and providing insights on how to
increase performance. This is especially relevant to inform impact evaluation in development
contexts. The trial was registered at the American Economic Association’s registry for randomized
controlled trials with trial registry number ‘AEARCTR-0001035’. Curr Dev Nutr 2019;3:nzz107.
Introduction
Earlylifeisakeystageofanindividual’sdevelopmentanditsinfluenceonlateroutcomeshasbeen
documented as part of the research surrounding the fetal origins hypothesis ( 1,2). In a context
in which high inequality is a primary concern, indicators surrounding access to health early
in life (including fetal development) become the first signs of perpetuating disparities. Mexico,
for instance, faces important challenges with a rate of maternal mortality of 34.6 deaths per
100000livebirthsin2015,whereastheaverageintheOrganisationforEconomicCo-operation
1Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
2Gaitán-Rossi et al.
and Development (OECD) is 7 ( 3). (The coverage of antenatal care
during the first trimester in Mexico was 84% among pregnant women
aged 20–49 y but 75% for women <19 y (4). According to the 2015
UNICEFMultipleIndicatorClusterSurvey(MICS),10.5%oftheinfants
in Mexico have low weight [i.e. the percentage of children born alive
in the previous 2 y who weighed <2500 g at birth]; only 31% receive
exclusive breastfeeding before the first 6 mo; 34% get full vaccine
immunization [i.e. percentage of children between 24 and 35 mo
who received all the vaccines included in Mexico’s National Health
Plan], and 82% of children presented adequate child development [i.e.
the percentage of children aged 36–59 mo who have an adequate
development score in 3 out of 4 dimensions on a scale of infant
development] [ 5]). Wide differences in maternal and child health
outcomesbasedonsocioeconomiclevelneedtobeaddressedinorderto
improvehealth,humancapital,andwell-beingacrossthelifecourse( 6).
Early childhood interventions target a sensitive period where
benefitsindevelopment,growth,nutrition,andreductionsinmorbidity
and mortality may be amplified ( 7). Nonetheless, poor health service
provision and limited resources can be important limitations. In such
ac o n t e x t , mHealth interventions – understood as the use of mobile
devices for public health practice – focusing on this period could
be effective tools by increasing access, distribution, provision, and
surveillance of health services, especially in areas with an insufficient
health infrastructure ( 8).mHealthis attractive because relatively small
and low-cost interventions can reach large and remote populations
(8). Systematic reviews have found positive outcomes on mHealth
interventions (previous work has found they are an effective tool that
empowerspregnantwomenandhealthcareproviders( 9).Theyincrease
antenatalserviceutilization,skilledattendanceatbirth,andvaccination
rates (10); and have a modest impact on exclusive breastfeeding [ 11]);
however, persistent barriers for their implementation can reduce their
potentialeffectsandlimittheirefficientscale-up(someofthesebarriers
are the cost of mobile plans, the lack of network infrastructure, low
digitalliteracy,nonculturallyrelevantcontent,andlackofknowledgeon
how to implement). Moreover, large-scale implementation of mHealth
innovations has been limited by a shortage of empirical evidence,
(although 87% of the countries in WHO are conducting ≥1mHealth
program, only 14% of them reported an evaluation [ 8]), supporting
their value in terms of cost, performance, and health outcomes, as
well as by the lack of process evaluations identifying facilitators and
bottleneckstodeliverthe mHealthinterventioneffectively( 12).
Therefore, fidelity of implementation (FOI) becomes a key input
for adequate evaluation of evidence-based policies and for replication
or scale-up of valuable mHealthinterventions ( 13). FOI examines the
degree to which an intervention was delivered as prescribed in the
originalprotocolorasitwasintendedbytheprogramdevelopers( 14).
FOI allows determining if a lack of impact is due to the program
itselforbecauseofpoorimplementation( 15,16).ResearchontheFOI
explains how and why an intervention is successful by opening the
black box of implementation and linking program components with
program outcomes ( 17). Lastly, FOI eases replication, helps explain
why some studies generate different results, and provides guidelines
forimplementationandscale-up( 15).Consequently,theseevaluations
are useful to optimize the program in specific settings, to expand the
sustainability of the intervention, and to promote its dissemination to
othercontexts( 18).T h i sa r t i c l ed o c u m e n t st h eF O Io fam u l t i - s i t ep i l o tt e s to fa n
mHealthintervention in Mexico aiming to reduce maternal mortality
andimproveearlychildhoodnutritionanddevelopment.Theprogram
targetsagroupofvulnerablemothersandchildrenwhoarebeneficiaries
of the nationwide Social Inclusion Program, PROSPERA, a large
conditional cash-transfer progra m (formerly named Oportunidades,
PROSPERAwaslaunchedin1997aimingtostrengthenthesocialrights
anddevelopmentalcapacitiesoflow-incomefamiliesinordertobreak
the intergenerational poverty cycle by addressing 3 key components:
education, health, and nutrition. In 2017, nearly 7.2 million families
wereaffiliated,including1,255,869childrenaged <5y).Harnessingthe
available social infrastructure, Prospera Digital (PD) was launched in
2015 as a pilot study embedded into PROSPERA’s health component
in a subset of 655 clinics in 5 states. The intervention required a
co-ordinated collaboration between 2 state ministries: 1)P R O S P E R A
delegations – part of the State Ministry for Social Development –
providedthetrainers,deliveredthematerials,andusedtheconditional
structure of the program to motivate the participation of pregnant
women, and 2) the State Ministry of Health co-ordinated the health
clinics (Mexico has a fragmented health system – according to
employmentstatus[ 19]–withdifferenthealthoutcomesand,therefore,
beneficiariesofPROSPERAreceivemedicalservicesfrom2systems:the
StateHealthServices[SeguroPopular]andtheMexicanSocialSecurity
Institute[IMSS]-PROSPERA.Bothtypesofclinicswereconsideredfor
PD)andrecruitedthetargetpopulation.
PD operates by inviting and recruiting pregnant PROSPERA ben-
eficiaries through primary clinics. Women interested in participating
aretrainedintheuseofthe mHealthplatform, and the short messages
service(SMS)textmessagesaresentduringpregnancyandthefirst2y
oflifeoftheirinfants.SMSmessagesarefreeandcontainhealthadvice
onmaternalhealthandchildcare,nutritionandbreastfeeding,warning
signsandhowtorespond,andremindersofmedicalappointmentsand
vaccinations (see Supplementary Material for an explanation of their
design, the target behavior, and examples). Messages are personalized
and tailored to each participant based on self-reported information
and clinical history. Beneficiaries received 2 types of messages: 1-way
messages with general information and 2-way messages, requiring a
response before sending a follow-up message. Moreover, beneficiaries
can prompt actions like reporting obstetric emergencies and changing
appointmentdates.
SMS text messages, training materials (i.e. manuals, posters, and
visual guides), the implementation, and the qualitative strategy were
testedthroughaprepilotformativestudyconductedinSeptember2015
intheStateofMexico.Thisledto561pretestedmessageflowsintending
to modify health behaviors and were delivered through the RapidPro
platform( 20).
Arandomizedcontrolledtrial(RCT)with3treatmentgroupsand1
controlgroupwasdesignedtomeasuretheimpactofthepilot mHealth
intervention. Treatment group 1 (T1) exclusively delivered the SMS
messages described above. In treatment group 2 (T2), participants
received the same SMS messages as in T1 and community leaders
signed a voluntary ‘contract’ with beneficiaries to commit to 1 of 3
possibilities (chosen at will by the beneficiary): 1) taking folic acid
pills,2) attending all the prenatal check-ups, and 3)r e p l y i n gt oa l l
PD2-waymessages.Communityleadersalsosentpredefinedmessages
that reinforced health information to the beneficiaries with whom
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
Fidelity of implementation of Prospera Digital 3
TABLE 1 Comparison of the 5 states included in the pilot of Prospera Digital by sociodemographic variables
GuanajuatoState of
Mexico Hidalgo Puebla Chiapas
Multidimensional poverty146.6% 49.6% 54.3% 64.5% 76.2%
Extreme multidimensional poverty15.5% 7.2% 12.3% 16.2% 31.8%
Indigenous population29.1% 17.0% 36.2% 35.3% 36.1%
Afﬁliation to health services 85.0% 78.7% 82.4% 79.8% 82.3%
Urbanization261.4% 69.2% 28.8% 45.6% 33.9%
Total population (in millions)25.8 16.1 2.8 6.1 5.2
Beneﬁciaries of PROSPERA34.2% 3.6% 7.8% 8.0% 13.5%
1Note: The source is Mexico’s ofﬁcial poverty measure in 2014 – the most recent before program roll-out – as reported by the National Council of Evaluati on (CONEVAL).
2The source is the 2015 intermediate census survey from Mexico’s National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI). The indigenous population w as measured as
self-identiﬁcation to an indigenous community. Urbanization was measured as the percentage of population living in localities with 15,000 inhabit ants or more.
3The source of the data is PROSPERA’s beneﬁciary register from the period July–August 2015.
they signed the ‘contract’ (examples of these messages are in the
Supplementary Material). Treatment group 3 (T3) used the same SMS
messages as in T1 and allowed beneficiaries to evaluate anonymously,
through their mobile phone, the services and medical care received;
healthprovidersdidnothavetodoadditionalactivitiesforPD.Services
andmedicalcareevaluationresultedfromquestionssenttoparticipants
about mandatory medical protocols that should have been followed
during their routine prenatal visits (e.g. weight, height, and blood
pressure measurement and a test for anemia) and perceived quality of
the service (i.e. waiting time, receiving a response to their questions
and concerns, and general satisfaction). Health providers in the best
performing clinics would be awarded additional vacation days as an
incentive.
Randomization was done at the clinic level. The inclusion criteria
for the clinics in the study was: being primary health centers, being
in a locality with connectivity to the mobile network, ≥5p r e g n a n t
PROSPERA beneficiaries in the clinic, and ≥80% of the population
reportingSpanishastheirfirstlanguage.Forthepilotstudy,655clinics
in 5 states (Chiapas, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Puebla, and the State of
Mexico), stratified by urban and rur al status, were randomly assigned.
Most of these states are located in the central region of Mexico but
theywerechosenbecausetheyvaryinpopulationsize,levelsofpoverty,
urbanization, and percentage of self-identified indigenous population;
seeTable 1for a comparison of key variables. Program roll-out began
in December 2015 and 2 rounds of recruitment were considered
(2roundsoftrainingtookplaceineachparticipantclinicineachstate.
The second round was implemented ∼7moafterthefirstonewiththe
objective of signing up more beneficiaries, mainly those who started
theirpregnancies afterthefirstround).Allpregnantbeneficiaries with
<32weeksofgestation(duringtheprepilot,onlybeneficiarieswith <28
weeksofgestationwereinvited,butinthepilottheperiodwasextended
upto32wkastoincludemorebeneficiaries)wereinvitedtoparticipate
in the selected clinics and those who did not own a mobile phone
receivedonefromtheprogram(30%).Intotal,3236beneficiariessigned
up to PD and received messages. The current qualitative evaluation
analysestheFOIofthepilotPDin5Mexicanstates.
Methods
Stemming from implementation science, a qualitative evaluation to
assess PD’s FOI was conducted ( 21). The conceptual frameworkfor implementation of Carroll et al. served to guide the qualitative
evaluation design and data analysis ( 15). The framework poses that
an intervention achieves high fidelity when adherence and program
differentiationishighandmoderators–qualityofdelivery,participant’s
responsiveness, intervention complexity, and facilitation strategies –
positivelycontributetoachievetheintendedoutcomes.Theseelements
are not sharply differentiated and there is overlap between them ( 15).
Thesearetheelementsconsideredinthecurrentqualitativeevaluation:
1)Adherence to the intervention m e a s u r e s2a s p e c t s ,fi r s t ,w h oi n
thetargetpopulationreceivedtheinterventionand,second,how
much and how often the prescribed content of the intervention
was delivered (given and received dosage). Therefore, adher-
ence assesses whether the implementation process succeeded
i n :r e c r u i t m e n t ,c o v e r a g e ,e x p o s u r eo ft h et a r g e tp o p u l a t i o n ,
completionofcontent,andintendeddurationoftheintervention.
Consequently,itexamineswhichobstaclesreducedtheadherence
to the intervention and which population subgroups might
experiencedifficultiesusingtheintervention.
2)Program differentiation (the original framework of Carroll
et al. defines program differentiation as part of Adherence ( 15);
however, due to its importance in the RCT, we separated them
into2elementstoeasethepresentationofkeyresults)referstothe
appropriate adaptation of the essential components in an inter-
vention,i.e.theactiveingredientsrequiredtoreachtheintended
outcomes. Theoretically, an intervention can be meaningfully
implemented if the essential components are preserved even if
othernonessentialelementsoftheinterventionfail.
3)Intervention complexity recognizes that complex interventions
have more elements and actors involved during their imple-
mentation.Therefore,greatercomplexity impliesagreater scope
for variation in delivery and are thus more vulnerable to low
fidelity. Conversely, in interventions where the core components
are simple, and activities specifically designated to a few actors,
theheterogeneityofimplementationtendstobelower.
4)Facilitation strategies refer to support actions or design elements
seekingtooptimizeandtostandardizedelivery,suchasguidelines
andfeedbackloops.Thesestrategiesaimtoensureequaltraining
andsupport.Complexinterventionsmayneedextensivesupport
strategiestoachievehighfidelity.
5)Quality of delivery is related to enabling conditions for the
participants during the implementation of an intervention, such
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
4Gaitán-Rossi et al.
asacomfortablesite,appropriatelytrainedfacilitators,usefuland
comprehensiblematerials,amongstothers.
6)Participantresponsiveness referstotheparticipant’sacceptanceof
the intervention. It assesses participant’s expressions of engage-
ment, satisfaction, and their perception that the intervention is
relevant to them. Moreover, higher levels of fidelity are achieved
when those participating in the delivery of the intervention (i.e.
healthproviders)areenthusiasticaboutit.
Successful completion of these 6 elements means implementation
has been effective and could yield the expected outcomes. Failure to
achieve an element compromises FOI and therefore could reduce the
potentialeffectsoftheintervention.
The current qualitative evaluation was conducted in 2 steps. First,
b a s e do nt h er e s e a r c hp r o t o c o l ,t h ei m p l e m e n t a t i o nm a t e r i a l s ,a n d
discussions with the developers, the evaluation team established a
benchmark for implementation. The 2 key parts of the benchmark
were the identification of the essential components and a logic model
that defined the key processes for the appropriate delivery of the
intervention.Logicmodelsestablishlinksbetweenresources,activities,
outputs,andoutcomesexpectedtohappeninaninterventionandhelp
to communicate among stakeholders the intended intervention ( 22).
Second, fieldwork was performed to assess the degree of compliance
to the benchmark and the barriers and facilitators that moderated the
actual implementation of the PD pilot. This process is guided by the 6
elements of the conceptual framework for implementation analysis of
Carrolletal.( 15).
Data Collection
During fieldwork, the evaluation team worked independently from
the program developers (the evaluation team was co-ordinated by
the first author and the corresponding author of the article, both
holding a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) in Social Welfare and Public
Policy,respectively,trainedinqualitativemethods,andwithsubstantive
experienceusingqualitativemethodsforhealthandnutritionprogram
evaluation.Bothresearchersdesignedtheresearchguidesandstrategy,
tested the materials during the prepilot, trained the research assistants
on data collection for this study, and permanently supervised the data
collectionprocess.Twofemaleresearchassistantsandco-authors–with
a master’s degree in Public Policy and in Anthropology, respectively,
andwithpreviousexperienceinqualitativehealthprogramevaluations
– collected most of the data during the training sessions and follow-
up. Nonetheless, the whole team participated in data collection and
analysis).Theinitialsamplingunitwereclinics,wherepregnantwomen
would be recruited and trained to use the SMS platform. Clinics were
selected according to a maximum variability approach covering the 5
states, the 3 types of treatments, and rural/urban communities. The
evaluationteamvisited28trainingsinthehealthclinicsinthe5states,
57%ofthemwereinruralcommunities.Clinicswithdifferenttreatment
assignmentswereincludedineachstate(exceptPuebla).
Data was collected between January 2016 and September 2017.
Data collection included: 1) field notes from the implementation
staff;2) closed observations of the trainings based on the manuals
designed by developers; 3) focus groups and face-to-face interviewswith participants in the clinics (i.e. when ≥5 beneficiaries attended
the training, all were invited to join a focus group in the health clinic
immediately after the session, but when <5 beneficiaries attended
or when a focus group with ≥5p e o p l ec o u l dn o tb ea s s e m b l e d ,t h e
evaluationteamconductedface-to-faceinterviewsinthehealthclinics);
4) semistructured interviews with health providers (physicians and
nurses)intheclinic;and 5)semistructuredinterviewswithcommunity
leaders(‘vocales’,astheyareknowninMexico)inclinicslinkedtoT2.
Approximately4moafterenrollinginPD,anewsamplewasselected
to collect follow-up data. Eleven clinics which included the 5 states,
urbanandruralvariability,andthe3treatments(withanoversampling
of treatments T2 and T3) were selected. Diverse techniques were
used to collect data: 1) focus groups in the clinics were conducted
among women from the selected clinics who had participated in the
trainings to use the platform; 2) telephone semistructured interviews
wereperformedamongwomenwhoagreedtobecontactedforfollow-
up and who were using PD’s platform; 3) semistructured interviews
in the clinics were conducted with health providers directly involved
in maternal and infant health. A description of the complete data
collectionprocess,bytreatment,isin Table 2.
Specific guides were designed for each data collection technique.
All participants – beneficiaries, community leaders, physicians, and
nurses – signed written informed consent forms before providing
information. PD was registered at AEA as AEARCTR-0001035 and
receivedInstitutionalReviewBoardapprovalbyBristolUniversitywith
number‘26101’.
Analysis
Interviews and focus groups were audiotaped, transcribed, and
anonymized for analysis. Once the data collection was complete, the
evaluation team agreed on a codebook based on the 6 elements of
Carrolletal.( 15).Usinggroundedtheoryasthetheoreticalframework
to analyze the data and the health clinic as the unit of analysis, 2
researcher assistants independently coded the material using NVivo
11, and a third researcher reviewed the coded material to establish
key findings. By contrasting these elements with the logic model, the
expectationwastofindthesourcesofvariationinimplementationthat
mayhavehinderedtheeffectivenessoftheintervention( 15).
Results
ThefirststepoftheFOIwastodefineabenchmarkforimplementation,
i.e. to identify the essential components and to establish the key
delivery processes. The essential components were: delivery of the SMS
messages and appropriation of information (T1, T2, and T3); signing
the contracts and the continuous participation of community leaders
sending predefined messages (T2); and the evaluation of the health
clinics by beneficiaries and the delivery of incentives by the State
MinistryofHealth(T3).
In addition, the delivery process was defined in a logic model as a
processwith3phases: 1)launchingandrecruitmenttotheprogram; 2)
trainingofthebeneficiaries;and 3) thecontinuous useof the platform
(Figure 1). Before the fieldwork began, the developers of the program
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
Fidelity of implementation of Prospera Digital 5
TABLE 2 Description of each treatment in the randomized controlled trial and the data collection for the qualitative evaluation
of fidelity
Randomized controlled trial Qualitative evaluation
Treatment 1 Delivery of SMS messages in Trainings (7 clinics; 4 rural):
107 health clinics −7 closed observations
−2 focus groups (13 beneﬁciaries)
−11 interviews to beneﬁciaries
−12 interviews to health providers
Follow-up (2 clinics; 1 rural):
−3 focus groups (20 beneﬁciaries)
−4 telephone interviews to beneﬁciaries
−1 interview to health providers
Treatment 2 Delivery of SMS messages and Trainings (11 clinics; 7 rural):
community leaders sign −11 closed observations
‘contract’ with beneﬁciaries and −0 focus groups
community leaders −30 interviews to beneﬁciaries
continuously send predeﬁned −10 interviews to community leaders
messages in 111 health clinics −24 interviews to health providers
Follow-up (5 clinics; 3 rural):
−5 focus groups (35 beneﬁciaries)
−10 telephone interviews to beneﬁciaries
−4 interviews to health providers
Treatment 3 Delivery of SMS messages and Trainings (10 clinics; 5 rural):
beneﬁciaries anonymously −10 closed observations
evaluate medical care −3 focus groups (20 beneﬁciaries)
through their mobile phone and −17 interviews to beneﬁciaries
best performing clinics receive −26 interviews to health providers
additional days of vacation in Follow-up (4 clinics; 3 rural):
108 health clinics as an incentive −4 focus groups (35 beneﬁciaries)
−20 telephone interviews to beneﬁciaries
−7 interviews to health providers
Control clinics 329 health clinics No control clinics were included
confirmed that these are the essential components and agreed that
the logic model accurately represented the intended delivery process.
The logic model helped the evaluators identify the key moments
and information needed to assess the fidelity framework of Carroll
et al. The first phase of the logic model (launching and recruitment)
helped identify several parts of adherence, such as recruitment and
coverage, and to assess the complexity of the intervention. The second
phase of the logic model (training) helped to examine the initial
exposure to the treatment, the completion of the content, and the
duration of the training. Key inputs of the section were program
differentiation during the trainings, quality of delivery, and immediate
participants’ response and health provider’s buy-in. The third phase
(continuous use of the platform) complemented information about
the exposure, completion, and duration to the program, confirmed
insights of program differentiation and completed responsiveness of
beneficiaries and health providers. The 3 phases offered information
about the facilitation strategies. The main results of the fieldwork are
summarizedinthefollowing6elements.
Adherence to the intervention
Theimplementationteamtrained ≥1healthproviderperintervention
clinic and, according to the field notes and closed observations, the
recruitmentofthetargetpopulationwasadequateinmosthealthclinics.
Examination of the field notes from the implementation showed thatPD was delivered to 90% of the intended clinics during the first round
and to 86.7% during the second round. The most common causes of
nondelivery were: absence of the target population (i.e. clinics with no
pregnant women at the time of recruitment), missing material, lack
of mobile signal, and road blockages. Health clinics had lists with the
expectednumberofparticipantsforeachtraining.However,theclosed
observationsrevealedthatthisnumbercoincidedwithactualattendants
onlyin11%ofthevisitedclinics.Intherestoftheclinics,thecoverage
was lower: 20–80% of the expected participants arrived at the initial
training.
The training was divided into 3 parts: theory, practice, and sign-
up. It was mostly delivered completely, but a few trainers modified
the order of the sessions. The theory part was designed to last 35
min; however, trainers usually shortened this section by simplifying
theprogramdescription.Theyalwaysmentioneditwasfree,voluntary,
nonpartisan,andthebenefitsofjoining.Signingtheinformedconsent
forms to participate in the program and providing the phones took
longerthanexpected(30minonaverage).
The expected duration of the practice session was 40 min. Trainers
struggledinthispartbecausetheabilitytousethephonevariedamong
participantsandthusthepaceofthesessiondiffered;youngparticipants
wereoftenfasterandthosewhoreceivedanewphonewereslowerthan
therest.Differencesinthephonesforcedthetrainertoomitthesection
onhowtousethem(i.e.addingPDasafrequentnumber).Nonetheless,
participants helped each other to catch-up with the session. Another
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
6Gaitán-Rossi et al.
FIGURE 1 Logic model for the 3 implementation phases of Prospera Digital (PD).
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
Fidelity of implementation of Prospera Digital 7
omission was the explanation on how to activate the trigger words for
emergenciesandappointments.
After the training, the lack of mobile signal inside some clinics or
zones within the locality prevented the beneficiaries from practicing
with PD’s platform; according to the field notes, this happened in 38
clinics during both rounds. Unexpectedly, slight differences among
carriers on how to sign-up delayed the session and excluded some
participants. The program is free, but participants needed to have
minimum credit on their phone (1 Mexican peso, roughly 0.05 Unites
States dollars [USD]) to receive the first SMS and sign-up to the
platform. They often did not know about the need for funds or always
carried the phones without money because participants use them
exclusivelytoanswercalls.Theseproblemsdividedthegroupbetween
thosewhogotintotheplatformandthosewhodidnot,leadingtoalow
sign-upratebytheendofthetrainings:59%inthefirstroundand55%
in the second. In order to solve this issue, the developers of PD added
thepossibilitytosign-upremotely.Becauseofthesedifficulties,trainers
frequentlydidnotprovidethemotivationalclosuremessage.
Once participants started using PD, they reported reading, under-
standing, and responding to the SMS messages. Since the intervention
was personalized, the number of messages the participants received
once enrolled varied by gestational stage. Beneficiaries mostly remem-
ber receiving 2–3 message flows per week and they were sensitive to
messagefluctuation,notingthemomentswhenthenumberofmessages
decreased and increased. They did not mind the fluctuation, but they
wanted to receive more, rather than less messages. Administrative
problems that led to late payments for the service resulted in a
temporarysuspensionoftheservice.AgroupofparticipantsinPuebla
recognizedthisgapintheincomingflowofmessagesandreportedthat
theprogramhad“ abandonedthem ”.Importantly,illiteratebeneficiaries
andwomenforwhichSpanishisnottheirfirstlanguagewereinstructed
toaskfamilymembersforhelp–especiallyteenagers–inordertokeep
interactingwiththeplatform.Follow-upinterviewsconfirmedthatthey
wereabletoaskforhelpandusetheplatform.
Eventhoughmostparticipantsmentionedtheywereabletointeract
seamlesslywiththeplatform,somenetworkissuesreducedtheexposure
to the intervention. One locality in Chiapas and one in Puebla lost the
mobile signal for almost a month. Also, one locality in Chiapas near
the international border received the signal from Guatemalan mobile
carriers,whichresultedindroppingitfromthesample.Anotherbarrier
was that mobile carriers occasionally sent “ No Service ”o r“Invalid”
messagesandbeneficiariestookthemasfailuresinPD.Anotherbarrier
resulted from default messages from phones indicating that sending
messages could result in fees to the users. Beneficiaries interpreted
messages from the carriers about the costs of their service as the cost
forparticipatinginPD.Somedecidedtoaddcredittotheirphones,but
others stopped answering the 2-way messages, “ just in case ”. Likewise,
others reviewed their credit and confirmed the messages were free of
charge. The result was that some read the 1-way messages but did not
respondtothe2-waymessages.Thedevelopersreactedtothislimitation
by designing mostly 1-way messages and ensuring that even if the
message was 2-way, the beneficiaries would receive the relevant piece
ofinformationwithoutneedingtoanswerthemessage.
A worrisome exposure challenge was that several beneficiaries
reportedtheirpregnancyinthesecondorthirdtrimester,whichhalved
the exposure to the intervention during pregnancy. Moreover, anotherkey challenge for full delivery was that beneficiaries frequently lost or
changedmobilephonesbuttheydidnotknowhowtogetbackintoPD
once they got a new one. They ignored the mechanism explained in a
sheet with Frequently Asked Questions handed out during the initial
training.
Program differentiation
D e l i v e r yo ft h em e s s a g e s( T 1 ,T 2 ,a n dT 3 ) .
The main function of the messages was to provide key health
informationaimedatpromotinghealthybehaviors.Participantsvalued
themessages,asoneofthemhighlighted:“ Ilearnedalot,IrealizedIwas
forgetting things, but now I know about the pregnancy, the babies, how
to feed him, about diseases ”. Qualitative evidence suggests participants
did not use the messages to substitute their medical appointments
and the reminders might even increase them; as exemplified in the
followingquote:“ Ididnotbringmyotherdaughtertotheclinic,butnow
I bring her each month, to get her vaccines and all ”. The messages were
useful to solve immediate problems, as another participant expressed:
“Oftentimes, I have no idea what to do, but now I have some guidance
on how to take care of her ”.Triggerwordstochangeanappointmentor
for an emergency call were underused, probably because the trainers
of PD frequently omitted the explanation. Even though an impact
evaluationisneededtoascertaintheeffectsofPD,participantsreported
behaviorchangesassociatedwiththemessagesinseveraldomains,such
asimprovedexperiencewiththeirpregnancy,preparationsfordelivery,
medicalcare,nutrition,breastfeeding,andchildcare.
Treatment 2: community leaders.
Implementation records show that community leaders were recruited
inconsistently.Theydidnotassist5outofthe10observedclinicsand3
leftearly,partiallybecauseofthevoluntarynatureofthetask.According
to the closed observations, only 2 community leaders received the
specialtrainingtoperformtheirtask.Atrainerexplainedthattheclinics
“Did not recruit the leaders, as they did not know they were supposed to
do so”. The community leaders that did attend the trainings faced the
sameproblemssigninguptotheplatformasthosedescribedpreviously.
Records indicate the sign-up rate was 60.8% on the first round and
47% in the second. Community leaders were also allowed to sign-up
remotely.
The evaluation team recorded in their observations a lack a moti-
vation from the community leaders. Interviews with the community
leaders often confirmed this and highlighted that using the platform
was difficult: “ T h et i m et ou n d e r s t a n di ti st o os h o r t ;i fm o s tp e o p l ea r e
slow learners, such as myself, then we ´ll face difficulties ”; “Ih a dt r o u b l e
sending messages, dialing the asterisk, and with all the numbers; it was
tough”.Moreover,interviewsrevealedthattheydidnotknowabouttheir
keyactivities:“ Iunderstoodthattheywillreceivesupporttomanagetheir
pregnancyandnothingelse ”;“Theycalledusbecausewearealsomothers,
for our testimony, so we can explain them how to take care and feed the
baby”. None of the community leaders recalled the contract they had
to sign with beneficiaries as a commitment with PD. One community
leaderexplainedthatshewasabletosign-upbutitwasn’tuntilthethird
monththatshereceivedareminderandstartedsendingmessages;then,
“I sent some during 2 weeks but then I had to stop because PD was not
available anymore ”.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
8Gaitán-Rossi et al.
Unsurprisingly, the community leaders were not present in the
beneficiaries’discourseabouttheintervention.Noneoftheparticipants
in the follow-up interviews reported interactions with their leaders; as
abeneficiarymentioned:“ I never received her messages, zero, I received
the others, though ”; “I saw her (the community leader) and told me to
wait for the messages, she did not know what to do, but expected to find
out soon”. Notably, participants did not feel they needed help from the
communityleaders.
Treatment 3: evaluation of clinics.
The trainers omitted or superficially explained the evaluation element
tothebeneficiariesin7outofthe10observedclinics.Someparticipants
wereunawareofthepossibilitytoevaluatebuttheoneswhounderstood
the component expressed it would be useful so “ They can improve,
provide a better service ”. Importantly, they were not worried about a
backlash due to negative evaluations: “ I do not think so, it is important
forustoexpresshowtheyprovidetheserviceandhowtheytreatpeople ”.
In only 3 of the observed clinics did the health providers receive
specific information about the evaluation and the available incentives.
Some trainers provided a general explanation of PD, as if they were in
themessages-onlytreatment(T1)butdidnotmentionthebeneficiaries
feedback nor the incentives for them. Nonetheless, health providers
that did receive the full training had a positive opinion about the
intervention. They mentioned that “ I would appreciate knowing what
wearedoingwrong,maybe,inadvertently,Iuseaverytechnicallanguage,
andthiscouldhelpmechangeit ”;“Itisagoodpersonalincentiveshowing
that we are doing a good job and also the recognition to our unit would
make me proud ”.Overall,healthprovidersinthistreatmentweremore
knowledgeableaboutPD.
During follow-up, health providers ignored when the evaluation
occurred or which clinics were the winners – an award ceremony
had already taken place. Beneficiaries recognized they were unable
to differentiate information messages from evaluation feedback. They
recalled the evaluation messages but did not realize they were
evaluating.
Intervention complexity
Even though the co-ordination of 2 state ministries introduced
complexity to the intervention, the implementation staff were able to
organize most of the trainings. PROSPERA proved effective because
all the staff were trained, the material was received on time, and
training sessions were mostly adequate. Timely recruitment by the
Health Ministry at the clinics worked with beneficiaries because they
reliedonpreviousmedicalrecordswithcontactinformation.Therefore,
thebasicproceduresforthedeploymentofPDwereplacedcorrectlyand
ontime.
The implementation became too complex when additional actors
were included – especially health providers and community leaders –
andtheadditionaltrainingforT2andT3wasinsufficient.Mosthealth
providersignoredwhatPDwas,hadmisconceptionsaboutit,andonly
those who were directly trained understood their responsibility. The
health providers who knew about PD recognized that they did not
know how the triggers were supposed to work and mentioned they
had not received information related to any emergency. Responses
suggest that participants did not trigger the centralized system of
notificationsorthatthesystemwasnotfunctioningproperly.IntheT2clinics,therecruitmentofcommunityleaderswasinadequate,andthey
lacked incentives to participate. Thus, their role was not noticeable to
beneficiaries.
Facilitation strategies
Trainers used detailed implementation manuals that guided them
throughoutthetrainingandpostersaidedcommunicatingkeymessages
during the session. However, several health providers in charge of
recruitmentcomplainedabouttheabsenceofcommunicationstrategies
to reach the target population. Moreover, they did not have clear
guidelinestohelpilliteratewomenandparticipantswhosefirstlanguage
wasnotSpanish(i.e.indigenouslanguages,especiallyinChiapas).
Beneficiariesreceivedasimpleandvisualguidewithbasicinforma-
tion that explained the program, how to access the platform, and the
typeofinteractions.TheyalsoreceivedaseparatesheetwithFrequently
Asked Questions, but the trainers often forgot to distribute them.
During program roll-out, additional messages were sent to reinforce
the training. These messages were especially useful to explain that the
interventionwasfree.
Anunexpectedsupportstrategywasneededduringtheimplementa-
tionofPD.Lackofsignalanddifficultieswiththecommandstosign-up
forcedtheimplementationteamtoaddasecondoptiontogetintothe
intervention. Developers created a format and instructed trainers that
ifsign-upwasnotpossible,thecontactinformationwouldberecorded
in that format and beneficiaries would automatically be subscribed to
PD.Oncethelistwascompiled,theimplementationstaffenrolledthem
remotely.Thiswasasuccessfulsolutiontoavoidanimportantnumber
of drop-outs. However, several women were still unable to sign-up
because trainers could not do it if the participants’ mobile phones had
insufficientfunds.
Quality of delivery
The setting for several trainings was inadequate because it was not
privateandwasuncomfortableforpregnantwomen(i.e.brokenchairs,
insufficientspace,andbathroomsoutofservice).Thetrainerswereaged
between 30 and 40 y and 50% were male. Beneficiaries described the
trainers (trainers had field experience dealing with matters related to
PROSPERA with the communities. Thus, they were already known to
someparticipantsandknewhowtoacknowledgeandspeaktoacrowd)
as “nice”, “warm”, “respectful”, “trustworthy ”, and highlighted that they
spoke“clearly”andknewwhattheyweretalkingabout.Observersnoted
how most of the time the trainers were able to correctly answer the
participants’ questions. When the implementation team was present,
thetrainerscededauthorityandaskedthemtorespondtothequestions,
whichdistortedtheregularsession.
In87%oftheobservedtrainingsthematerialwasdeliveredfullyand
ontime.Developerswereconcernedthatprovidingamobilephonefor
freetobeneficiarieswhodidnothaveonewouldcreateconflictwithin
the training session. For that reason, they chose to give the cheapest
nonsmartphoneavailableinthemarket(worth20USD).Beneficiaries
usuallyhadbettermobilesand,onaverage,42%receivedone(Chiapas
43%, Guanajuato 37%, Hidalgo 64%, Puebla 29%, and the State of
Mexico37%).Fewconflictswerereportedwiththemobilephones.
Participants considered that the messages were “ clear”a n dt h e
language was “ simple and easy to grasp ”. Messages that required
numbers, such as dates or medical information, were the hardest to
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
Fidelity of implementation of Prospera Digital 9
respond to for them. Moreover, they felt the messages were timely
andmatchedthedevelopmentalchangestheywereexperiencing:itfelt
“like magic, like they could foresee what was going to happen ”. However,
for the program to transition between pregnancy and infant messages,
mothers needed to report the infant’s birthdate in order to get precise
information. This initially did not work and the developers had to
design a transition mechanism that would insist asking mothers and,
ifaresponsewasnotsent,adatewouldbeassumed.
Participantspreferredtoreceivemessagesthroughouttheday–not
inabundle–sotheycould“ understandeachone ”and“avoidconfusions ”
of receiving several messages at the same time, especially when they
receivedtwo2-waymessages,sincetheyignoredhowtoanswerthefirst
one. Receiving them did not interrupt their daily activities; however,
most liked to answer the 2-way messages at night, once they finished
theiractivities.
Participant responsiveness
Interviews and focus groups with participants consistently showed
accurate expectations with PD and considerable satisfaction with the
training.Thetrainingwas“ nice”a nd“interesting” andtheinformation
was generally perceived as “ important ”a n d“useful”. They appreciated
thereminders,thehealthandnutritioninformation,andthepossibility
ofchangingtheappointmentandaskingforhelpduringemergencies.
After the training, most beneficiaries were able to point out the
benefitsoftheprogramandwhatwasexpectedfromthem.Theyfeltthat
practicingwiththetoolwas“ easy”andmostofthemfeltconfidentabout
usingitcorrectly.Theoneswhocouldnotjointheprogramimmediately
felt “frustrated ” and excluded. One participant was unable to send the
sign-upmessageduetoitscostandexpressedthat:“ Icouldnotsendthe
messageanddidnotreceivetheinformation,asotherladiesdid ”.
Once they were using PD regularly, they valued 1-way messages
because they considered them to be the most “ informative ”a n dt h e2 -
way messages because they showed PD is “ interested”i nt h e m .T h e i r
favorite topics were nutrition during pregnancy, breastfeeding, and
infant development. Participants expressed some frustration with the
2-way messages because they would want to extend “ the conversation ”
beyond 2 responses and would like to be able to send their own
questions. Messages were perceived as useful to solve problems and
anticipate different situations. Even among women with previous
pregnancies, the messages were “ helpful reminders of symptoms and
circumstances, a useful update ”. Some beneficiaries even reported that
PD“cared”aboutthemandfelt“ abandoned ”whentheydidnotreceive
messages.Participantsexpressedtheywouldliketheinterventiontolast
untiltheirinfantswereaged2y.
Discussion
The evaluation provided a nuanced description of how PD was used
and implemented, and how the low FOI in the essential components
of T2 and T3 could be affecting its expected outcomes. The results
offered key details on how beneficiaries interact with these programs,
which in turn shape their satisfaction and engagement. For instance,
why they prefer 1-way messages and the reasons they read the 2-way
SMS messages but might not have answered them. Furthermore, the
responses of the participants about the usefulness of the messages, anessential component for the 3 treatments, suggest that the intervention
couldyieldvaluablebehaviorchanges,ashasbeenobservedinprevious
research ( 8,9). Nonetheless, limitations of adherence and inadequate
implementation of the essential components of T2 and T3 might have
hinderedbehaviorchanges.
Important contextual and implementation barriers were related
to the adherence to the intervention. The implementation team was
able to recruit target participants and to deliver the program in the
majority of health clinics; however, the coverage was limited because
training session attendance fluctuated between 20–80%. A contextual
barrierthatreducedtheinterventionexposureperiodwasthepractice
from pregnant women to delay prenatal services until the second or
even third trimester of the pregnancy. More communication materials
like posters and specific strategies for recruitment could help health
providersimprove thisfundamentalstep.Inaddition,therequirement
ofhavingminimumcreditonthemobilephonetosend/receivethefirst
message precluded eligible participants signing up to PD. Insufficient
or absent phone signal hampered the trainings, excluded participants
fromsign-up,andlimitedthereceptionofmessages.Moreover,oncein
the program, unexpected automated error messages from the carriers
confused the participants and suggested that the interaction with the
platform had a cost. An additional obstacle was the high rate at which
participantsloseorchangemobilephonesandtheirunfamiliaritywith
the process of resubscribing. These barriers reduced the exposure to
theintervention,whichmaycausea“voltagedrop”,limitingpopulation
impact and sustainability ( 23). The implementation team had low
leverage over carriers to solve such problems but SMS messages with
remindersofissuessuchaserrors,falsefees,orwaystore-enrollcanbe
usefulandsimplestrategiestoavoidhighattrition.
In contrast, several facilitators strengthened the implementation
of PD. Beneficiaries were highly responsive to the trainers who
conveyed key information in culturally accepted ways. The training
materials were simple, visually attractive, and included all the basic
information. Even though the trainings were not always delivered in
full, participants helped each other, especially with older participants
who were not familiar with the mobile phones. This highlights the
relevanceofadaptingcontextswhenimplementingcomplexandlarge-
scale interventions. Similarly, illiterate women and women with an
indigenous background were able to ask for help, frequently from
teenagers. Identifying these informal strategies was important because
theymayexplainheterogenouseffectsandsuggestwaysofadaptingthe
interventiontoothercontexts.Oneofthesestrategiesmaybetoincrease
the practicing exercises in the platform during the first months and to
sendadditionalremindersoftheinformationcoveredinthetrainings.
Another important facilitator was the quality of the program. The
messageswererelevant,easytounderstandandrespondto,andpartic-
ipants even demanded a higher frequency of SMS messages. Likewise,
the information was timely, useful, and perceived as precise according
to their gestational and development stages. Notably, beneficiaries
reported how the messages triggered an emotional response in which
they felt taken care of by the program or abandoned in the absence
of messages. Health providers showed support for the intervention
and believe it could benefit participants. Both beneficiaries and health
providersexpressedsatisfactionwithPD,whichmayfacilitatethebuy-
in of important stakeholders and effective implementation ( 24). Large
interventionsarecomplex,inpart,becauseoftheco-operationinvolved
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
10 Gaitán-Rossi et al.
amonginstitutionsandpoliciesintheoutersettingoftheprogram( 18).
PD mostly succeeded in co-ordinating 2 state agencies and managed
to deliver the majority of the trainings on time. Nonetheless, the outer
settingshouldnotbetakenforgrantedinanewpoliticalenvironment,
suchastheoneMexicoisfacinginthelightofanewadministration.
A key finding of the evaluation is that the inadequate implemen-
tation of some essential components may hinder the effectiveness of 2
treatmentsintheexperimentalevaluation.PDtested1maintreatment
–messagesonly–and2additionaltreatments;acontractandmotivation
fromcommunityleaders(T2)andanevaluationofhealthserviceswith
incentives for health providers (T3). The main treatment had a high
correspondence with the intended design. Adequate training, precise
recruitment, quality of delivery, and adoption of the intervention sug-
gested how program components may lead to key behavioral changes,
such as additional antenatal visits, improved nutrition, breastfeeding,
and quality childcare. Program fidelity, however, was low in T2 and
T3 when compared with the intended design. T2 failed to recruit
enough community leaders and trainers omitted its specific content,
especiallythecontract.Inaddition,communityleadershaddifficulties
usingthe platformand hadlow motivation toparticipate because they
did not receive incentives. Beneficiaries rarely reported an interaction
with the leaders and did not understand how they could help them.
Therefore, the evidence suggests that the T2 was implemented in a
similarwayasthemaintreatment.T3faceddifficultiesaswell.Trainers
didnotfullyexplainitsessentialfeaturestothebeneficiariesandtothe
healthproviders.Untrainedhealthprovidershadmisconceptionsabout
the program, so the effect of the evaluation was not well understood
by all healthcare providers in participating clinics. In addition, a key
assumption of T3 was to provide incentives to healthcare providers
to improve their performance, while empowering pregnant women.
But incentives were unclear to healthcare providers and evaluation
mechanismswereunperceivedbyparticipatingwomen,soT3mightnot
clearly differentiate from the main treatment. A new implementation
strategyshouldprovideamoreintensiveimmersionofhealthproviders
andamoreengagingmechanismtocommunityleadersinordertofully
observetheirpotentialcontributions.
PD is an example of how complex interventions need additional
facilitationstrategiestoensuretheadequateimplementationofessential
components. These findings can help improve the quality of the
design and the implementation of similar large-scale interventions
through anticipating potential barriers and providing insights on the
way to increase their performance. This is particularly relevant in
a development context, where improving health system quality is
paramounttoimprovehealthoutcomes( 25).
Inconclusion,maternalandinfanthealthandnutritionremainkey
challengesinmiddle-incomecountries. mHealthprograms,suchasPD,
a r ea t t r a c t i v ei n t e r v e n t i o n st h a tc a nc o n t r i b u t et ob u i l du pm o t h e r s ’
knowledgeandempowerment.Moreover,theseinterventionsmayhelp
improve the quality of universal healthcare systems ( 25). Program
evaluations based on implementation science offer useful designs to
strengthenimportantprograms,expanditssustainability,andpromote
itsdisseminationtonewcontexts( 26).
The FOI showed key aspects that might reduce the impact of PD
andthatneedrevisionbeforescale-uporreplicationintoothersettings.
It also revealed that PD might have important population health andnutrition effects in a vulnerable population in Mexico. Therefore, the
adequate implementation of PD is a promising strategy to contribute
to the Sustainable Development Goals in Mexico and other middle-
incomecountries.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) and BabyCenter for
messagedevelopment;theNationalDigitalStrategyoftheOfficeofthe
Presidentforoutstandingco-ordinationofallparticipants;theMinistry
of Health and the National Coordination of PROSPERA Program for
providing content, access to data and invaluable feedback; the State
Health Ministry and State Delegation of PROSPERA Program of the
states of Hidalgo, Puebla, Guanajuato, State of Mexico, and Chiapas.
AAEalsothankstheAsociaciónMexicanadeCultura.
The authors’ contributions were as follows—PGR and MVC:
designed the study, conducted research, analyzed data, wrote the
manuscript, and have primary responsibility for final content; AAE
andMRVG:participatedinthedesignofPD,designedthequantitative
impact evaluation, and revised the manuscript; SCL and ACPN:
conducted research and analyzed data; and all authors have read and
approvedthemanuscript.
References
1. BarkerDJP.Mothers,BabiesandHealthinLaterLife.London,UK:Elsevier
HealthSciences;1998.
2. ContiG, HeckmanJ.EconomicsofChildWell-Being.In:Ben-AriehA,
editor.HandbookofChildWell-Being:Theories,MethodsandPoliciesin
GlobalPerspective.Dordrecht,TheNetherlands:SpringerPublishing
Company;2014.p.363–401.
3. OECD.HealthataGlance2015.OECDIndicators.Paris:OECD;2015.
4. GutierrezJ,Rivera-DonmarcoJ,Shamah-LevyT,Villalpando-HernandezS,
FrancoA,Cuevas-NasuL,Romero-MartinezM, Hernandez-AvilaM.
EncuestaNacionaldeSaludyNutricion2012.ResultadosNacionales.
Cuernavaca,Mexico:InstitutoNacionaldeSaludPublica;2012.
5. INSP,UNICEF.EncuestaNacionaldeNiños,NiñasyMujeresenMéxico
2015-EncuestadeIndicadoresMúltiplesporConglomerados2015,
ResultadosPrincipales.MexicoCity:InstitutoNacionaldeSaludPública
andUNICEFMéxico;2016.
6. RichterLM,DaelmansB,LombardiJ,HeymannJ,BooFL,BehrmanJR,Lu
C,LucasJE,Perez-EscamillaR, DuaT,etal.Investinginthefoundationof
sustainabledevelopment:pathw aystoscaleupforearlychildhood
development.LancetNorthAmEd2017;389(10064):103–18.
7.BrittoPR,L yeSJ,ProulxK,Y ousafzaiAK,MatthewsSG,V aivadaT,
Perez-EscamillaR,RaoN,IpP, FernaldLCH,etal.Nurturingcare:
promotingearlychildhooddevelopment.LancetNorthAmEd
2017;389(10064):91–102.
8. WHOGlobalObservatoryforeHealth.GlobalDiffusionofeHealth:
MakingUniversalHealthCoverageAchievable.Geneva:WorldHealth
Organization;2016.
9. TamratT, KachnowskiS.Specialdelivery:ananalysisofmHealthin
maternalandnewbornhealthprogramsandtheiroutcomesaroundthe
world.MaternChildHealthJ2012;16(5):1092–101.
10. SondaalSFV,BrowneJL,Amoakoh-ColemanM,BorgsteinA,Miltenburg
AS,VerwijsM, Klipstein-GrobuschK.AssessingtheeffectofmHealth
interventionsinimprovingmaternalandneonatalcareinlow-and
middle-incomecountries:asystematicreview.PLoSOne2016;11(5):1–26.
11. LeeSH,NurmatovUB,NwaruBI,MukherjeeM,GrantL, PagliariC.
EffectivenessofmHealthinterventionsformaternal,newbornandchild
healthinlow-andmiddle-incomecountries:systematicreviewand
meta-analysis.JGlobHealth2016;6(1):010401.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
Fidelity of implementation of Prospera Digital 11
12. LabriqueAB,VasudevanL,KochiE,FabricantR, MehlG.mHealth
innovationsashealthsystemstrengtheningtools:12commonapplications
andavisualframework.GlobHealthSciPract2013;1(2):160–71.
13.AgarwalS,LeFevreAE,LeeJ,L’EngleK,M ehlG,SinhaC,LabriqueA;
WHOmHealthTechnicalEvidenceReviewGroup.Guidelinesforreporting
ofhealthinterventionsusingmobilephones:mobilehealth(mHealth)
evidencereportingandassessment(mERA)checklist.BMJ2016;352:i1174.
14. ProctorE,SilmereH,RaghavanR,HovmandP,AaronsG,BungerA,
GriffeyR, HensleyM.Outcomesforimplementationresearch:conceptual
distinctions,measurementchallenges,andresearchagenda.AdmPolicy
MentHealth2010;38(2):65–76.
15.CarrollC,PattersonM,W oodS,BoothA,RickJ,BalainS.Aconceptual
frameworkforimplementationfidelity.ImplementSci2007;2:40.
16. MuralidharanK.Fieldexperimentsineducationindevelopingcountries.
In:BanerjeeA DufloE,eds.HandbookofEconomicFieldExperiments.
HandBookofFieldExperiments.Vol.2.Oxford,UK:Elsevier;2017.
17. SaundersRP,EvansMH, JoshiP.Developingaprocess-evaluationplanfor
assessinghealthpromotionprogramimplementation:ahow-toguide.
HealthPromotPract2005;6(2):134–47.
18. DamschroderLJ,AronDC,KeithRE,KirshSR,AlexanderJA, LoweryJC.
Fosteringimplementationofhealthservicesresearchfindingsintopractice:
aconsolidatedframeworkforadvancingimplementationscience.
ImplementSci2009;4:50.19. DantésOG,SesmaS,BecerrilVM,KnaulFM,ArreolaH, FrenkJ.Sistema
desaluddeMéxico.SaludPúblicadeMéxico2011;53:s220–32.
20. UNICEF.RapidPro:UNICEF;2018[Availablefrom:
https://community.rapidpro.io/about-rapidpro/ ].
21. NilsenP.Makingsenseofimplementationtheories,modelsand
frameworks.ImplementSci2015;10:53.
22. McLaughlinJA, JordanGB.Logicmodels:atoolfortellingyourprograms
performancestory.EvalProgramPlann1999;22(1):65–72.
23. ChambersDA,GlasgowRE, StangeKC.Thedynamicsustainability
framework:addressingtheparadoxofsustainmentamidongoingchange.
ImplementSci2013;8:117.
24. JacobsSR,WeinerBJ, BungerAC.Contextmatters:measuring
implementationclimateamongindividualsandgroups.ImplementSci
2014;9:46.
25. KrukME,GageAD,JosephNT,DanaeiG,García-SaisóS, SalomonJA.
Mortalityduetolow-qualityhealthsystemsintheuniversalhealthcoverage
era:asystematicanalysisofamenabledeathsin137countries.LancetNorth
AmEd2018;392(10160):2203–12.
26. TumilowiczA,RuelMT,PeltoG,PelletierDL,MonterrosaEC,
LappingK,KraemerK,DeRegilLM,BergeronG, ArabiM,etal.
Implementationscienceinnutrition:conceptsandframeworks
foranemergingfieldofscienceandpractice.CurrDevNutr
2019;3(3):1–11.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NUTRITIONDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cdn/article/3/10/nzz107/5580285 by guest on 17 December 2022
