 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020 
https://doi.org/10.4995/var.2 020.13121  
© UPV, SEAV, 2015  
 
Received: February 11 , 2020 
Accepted: June 2 , 2020 
 
 *Corresponding author: Puspita Ayu Permatasari, puspita.ayu.permatasari@usi.ch   
  
 
75 
FROM WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR 
UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN INDONESIA  
DE LA WEB 1.0 A LA WEB 4.0: MAPEO DE LAS PLATAFORMAS DE PATRIMONIO DIGITAL PARA LAS 
PROPIEDADES DEL PATRIMONIO DE LA UNESCO EN INDONESIA   
Puspita Ayu Permatasaria,* , Akhmad Abdul Qoharb , Arief Faizal Rachmanc  
a Institute of Digital Technolog ies for Communication (ITDxC), Universit à della Svizzera Italiana, Via Buffi 13, 6900 , Switzerland . 
puspita.ayu.permatasari@usi.ch  
b Qortama Digital Solution and Department of User Experience  at PT. Telekomunikasi Indonesia, Jl Jendral Gatot Subroto St Kav 38, 
Jakarta  12710 , Indonesia.  akhmad.qohar@gmail.com  
c Department of Tourism Development, Trisakti School of Tourism, Jl. IKPN Bintaro No.1, RT.  4/RW.  10, Bintaro, Kec. Pesanggrahan, 
Kota Jakarta Selatan, Daerah Khusus Ibukota , Jakarta 12330, Indonesia.  arief@stptrisakti.ac.id  
Highlights:   
• Providing a map of the online presence of UNESCO World Heritage Sites (WHS s) in Indonesia by analy sing 180 
webpages in English and Indonesian language s. 
• Identifying several types of digital heritage websites in Indonesia based on the set of categories.  
• Classifying a map of 312 mobile apps dealing with  UNESCO WHS s and Intangible Cultural Heritage  (ICH)  in Indonesia, 
which were retrieve d from Android and iO S platforms.  
Abstract:   
The advent of information and communication technologies (ICTs) has had and is having a major impact on Indonesian 
cultural resource management, and on the safeguarding methods of its tangible and intangible cultural heritages. Despite 
varied levels and visible gaps between rural and urban regions in  terms of technology usage , innovative initiatives have 
been created, which correspond to the needs and expectations of a technology -savvy  public. As a starting point, a number 
of public institutions dealing with tangible cultural heritage (e.g. museums, p alaces, temples, World Heritage Sites  (WHS )) 
do use innovative digital tools in order to communicate to various audiences, as well as to  enrich visitors’ experience, 
especially taking into consideration young generations. This paper will firstly examine th e role of ICTs in intangible cultural 
heritage (ICH) (e.g. Batik, Wayang puppet  theat re, etc.); secondly, the authors will explain how ICTs can help to 
communicate and promote the values, history, and significances of ICH products , both for locals  and tourists, with the goal 
of raising awareness on cultural identity. However, the knowledge of ICH still requires contacts with its own communities 
and is vulnerable , as it can  be exposed to excessive cultural commoditization through e -platforms. This study aims  at giving 
an overview and some examples of digital interventions for cultural heritage communication implemen ted by various 
stakeholders in Indonesia. In addition, this paper analyses  to what extent a participatory approach engag ing local 
communities, aca demics, private sectors, NGOs and the government, can ensure higher levels of effectiveness and 
efficiency, hence supporting the conservation of UNESCO tangible/ ICH in Indonesia.  This paper aims at : (1) presenting 
the development of digital heritage platforms in Indonesia ; (2) providing a grid of analysis of digital heritage knowledge 
platforms dedicated to UNESCO tangible and ICH in forms of websites and mobile apps.  
Keywords:  participative heritage preservation, digital heritage, intangible cultural heritage  (ICH) , information and 
communication technolog y (ICT), mobile apps, heritage dissemination  
Resumen :  
La aparición de las tecnologías de la información y la comunicación (TI C) ha tenido y está teniendo un gran impacto en la 
gestión de los recursos culturales indonesios y en los métodos de salvaguarda de su s patrimonio s cultural es materiales e 
inmateriales . A pesar de los distintos niveles y las brechas existentes  entre las regiones rurales y urbanas en términos de 
uso de la tecnología, se han creado iniciativas innovadoras que corresponden a las necesidades y expectativas de un 
público experto en tecnología.  Como punto de partida, algunas  instituciones públicas que se ocupan del patrimonio cultural 
material  (por ejemplo , museos, palacios, templos , sitios patrimonio de la humanidad  (WHS) ) implementan herramientas 
digitales innovadoras para comunicarse con dive rso público y enriquecer la experiencia de los visitantes, especialmente 
teniendo en cuenta a las generaciones jóvenes. Este artículo examinará  primeramente  el papel de las TIC en el patrimonio 
cultural inmaterial (PCI) (por ejemplo , Batik, teatro de mario netas de Wayang , etc.); en segundo lugar, los autores 
PERMATASARI  et al., 2020  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  76 explicarán cómo las TIC pueden ayudar a comunicar y promover los valores, la historia y el significado de los productos 
del PCI tanto al público local, como a los turistas, con el objetivo de crear conc iencia sobre la identidad cultural. Sin 
embargo, el conocimiento del PCI todavía requiere contactos con sus propias comunidades y es vulnerable , ya que está  
expuesto a la excesiva mercantilización cultural a través de plataformas electrónicas. Este estudio  tiene como objetivo 
proporcionar una visión general y algunos ejemplos de intervenciones digitales en la comunicación del patrimonio cultural 
adoptadas por divers os organismos interesad os en Indonesia. Además, este documento explica en qué medida un 
enfoq ue participativo, que involucra a las comunidades locales, académic as, sectores privados, ONG y al gobierno, puede 
garantizar niveles más altos de efectividad y eficiencia, y , por tanto , apoya r la conservación del patrimonio cultural  
material/inmaterial  de la UNESCO en Indonesia.  Este documento tiene como objetivo s: (1) presentar el desarrollo de 
plataformas de patrimonio digital en Indonesia ; (2) proporcionar una matriz  de análisis de plataformas de conocimiento 
del patrimonio digital dedicadas al patri monio cultural material e inmaterial  de la UNESCO en sitios web y aplicaciones 
móviles.  
Palabras clave:  preservación participativa del patrimonio, patrimonio digital, patrimonio cultural inmaterial, tecnologías de 
la información y la comunicación (TIC) , aplicaciones móviles, di vulgación del patrimonio  
 
1. Introduction  
The conservation of cultural heritage is varied based on 
its categories. Cultural heritage, in general, is defined into 
two types namely, the tangible and the intangible 
heritage. According to the UNESCO Convention on the 
World Heritage Sites (WHS) in 1972  (UNESCO, 1972 ), 
tangible heritage refers to the physical artefacts , such as 
architectural works, monuments temples, which are 
known for their socio -cultural importance for humanity. 
Other than the historic and artistic values, the assessment 
of the cultural heritage has not only emphasized on the 
aesthetic point of view but also evolved by further 
considering the value of identity, the capacity of the 
cultural heritage object to interact with memory and the 
living traditions as the immaterial heritage ( Titchen, 1996 ; 
Vecco, 2010 ). In order to tackle the challenges of 
immaterial heritage  conservation , the UNESCO 
Convention in 2003 on the Safeguarding of Intangible 
Cultural Heritage (ICH) entered into force in 2006 
(UNESCO, 2019 ). It encourages all its member states to 
preserve the living traditions or living expressions 
inherited from the past generations, which are still 
preserved and practi sed by the local communities. The 
elements of the ICH are oral traditions, performing arts, 
social practices, rituals, festive events, knowledge, and 
practices concerning nature and the universe or the 
knowledge and skills to produce traditional crafts 
(UNESCO, 20 19). To improve the conservation of the 
outstanding universal values of cultural heritage, 
UNESCO stipulated the “Five Cs” of Strategic objectives 
namely: Credibility, Conservation, Capacity -building, 
Communication, and Communities  (Albert, 2012 ). To this 
extent, the conservation of UNESCO Cultural Heritage, 
both in terms of tangible and  intangible ones, should be 
directed in preserving  and promoting the cultural heritage 
objects and the liv ing traditions based on the Five Cs 
outlined above. The rise of Information Communication 
Technolog y (ICT) has brought a significant  impact on the 
process of heritage documentation  (Blanco, Carrión, & 
Lerma, 2016 ). ICT plays major roles in cultural heritage 
dissemination, as it provides possibilities to showcase 
cultural heritage information in forms of texts, audio, 
2D/3D images, and videos through various digital 
platfor ms (Redweik, Cláudiob, Carmob, Naranjoc, & 
Sanjosé, 2017 ). It also fosters sustainable heritage 
tourism which not only contributes to the sustainability of 
the tangible/ intangible heritage but also to the wellbeing 
of local communities (Cantoni, 2018 ). The Five Cs 
strategy is an essential aspect to maintain the 
sustainability of UNESCO properties, especially in 
Indonesia. Indonesia –a country loca ted in Southeast Asia– has charted 18 UNESCO properties both in terms 
of tangible and ICH (Table 1 ). The preservation  of 
UNESCO properties h as been one of the top prioriti es for 
the Indonesian government since the 1990s  
(Fitri, Ahmad, & Ahmad, 2015 ). The governmental 
institutions launched several initiatives aiming at 
engaging various stakeholders such as private sectors, 
academicians, start -ups, and local communities in order 
to increase the public’s participation in the heritage 
conservation activities. The Indonesian government also 
supports the creation of digital information platforms 
dedicated to the heritage preservation  and increases  
community capacity building  to improve  the quality of 
cultural tourism at World Heritage conservation .  
This paper aims at (1) presenting the development of 
digital heritage platforms in Indonesia , and (2) providing a 
grid of analysis of digital heritage knowledge p latforms 
dedicated to UNESCO tangible and ICH in forms of 
websites and mobile apps.  
Table 1 : The number  of UNESCO WHS and ICH inscriptions in 
South East Asia (as per September 2019) . 
Country  WHS  ICH Total  
Vietnam  8 12 20 
Indonesia  9 9 18 
Philippines  6 3 9 
Cambodia  3 5 8 
Thailand  5 1 6 
Malaysia  4 2 6 
Laos  3 1 4 
Myanmar  2 0 2 
Singapore  1 0 1 
Brunei 
Darussalam  0 0 0 
Total  41 33 74 
2. Indonesian heritage conservation: an 
overview  
The management of Indonesian cultural heritage 
preservation was initiated during the Dutch colonial era  
in the 18th century. Some of the previous conservation 
works refer to the three cultural heritage sites which  
were later inscribed as UNESCO WHS in 1991 and 1996: 
the Borobudur Temple compounds, Prambanan Temple, 
and the Sangiran pre -historic site of Java Man  FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  77 (Pithecanthropus Erectus Palaeojavanicus). The 
Borobudur and Prambanan  temple comp ounds  were 
founded by S ir Thomas Raffles, a British statesman in 
1811 -1814  (Aljunied, 2004 ). The Sangiran pre -historic 
site was discovered by Eugene Dubois in 1889 (ibid). 
Koninklij k Bataviaasch Genootschape van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen  (Royal Batavia Society of Arts and 
Science) was t he first museum , which was built in 1778 
during the colonial era to conserve  the artefacts  collection 
of the Indonesian archipelago ( Lewis, 2015 ). In January 
1950, the Indonesian government took over the Royal 
Batavia Society of Arts and Science . Later in the 1970s, 
the government decide d to change its name  into the 
National Museum that conserves the principal anc ient 
artefacts of Indonesia ( Katwinto , 2013).  
In effect, the establishment of Monumenten Ordinantie 
(MO) Staatsblad 238/1931  during the Dutch colonial era 
is regarded as the first heritage legislation in Indonesia 
(Fitri et al., 2015 ). In 1945 , Indonesian proclaimed its 
independence and started to  follow the  heritage 
preservation  protocols and policy guidelines issued by 
several international agreements . First, at the beginning 
of 1960s, following the Venice Charter of 1964, the 
Borobudur temple restoration  campaign  was launched 
and supported by ICOMOS (Charter, 1964 ). Later, the 
Borobudu r restoration project was conducted  from 1973 
until 1983  and became one of the pilot projects managed 
under UNESCO Convention for the Protection of Cultural 
and Natural Heritage in 1972  (UNESCO, 2017 ). The 
project also received important international support s in 
terms of technology transfer, restoration experts, and 
researches . These assistances contribute d to the rise of  
local initiatives  on reviving the cultural heritage  at the 
national level . In 1992, the Indonesian government issued 
Law no. 5 in 1992 on the assessment criteria of national 
cultural property ( Indonesian Ministry of Education and 
Culture, 1992 ). This regulation emphasized  the 
registration and  the preservation of heritage for education 
purposes. However, the legislation has not sufficiently 
specified the roles and the involvement of the community 
as one of the key  stakeholders who contribute to heritag e 
preservation . Hence, the previous legislation was 
amended by Law No. 11 of 2010 on cultural heritage 
conservation. The new legislation highlights the concept 
of sustainability  and strengthens multi -stakeholder s 
engagement in order to maintain the cultural heritage  
conservation  and its outstanding universal values 
(Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture, 2010 ; 
Praharini, 2014 ). 
Along with the advancement of ICT and the rise of 
industry 4.0 , the Indonesian government improved the 
legislation  by stipulating the Law number 5 of 20 17 on 
Cultural Advancement. The industry 4.0 involves the 
seamless integration of advanced Information 
Technology and automation technology  within the 
industrial value chain, which brings on versatile 
organizational implications  (Lasi, Fettke, Kemper, Feld, & 
Hoffmann, 2014 ; Smit, Kreutzer, Moeller, & Carlberg, 
2016 ). The law is intended to build and improve the  
cultural database  with an integrated cultural heritage 
registration system , community capacity building,  cultural 
event promotions, and  cultural village revitalization  in 
each region ( Indonesian Ministry of Education and 
Culture, 2017 ). It also views the integration of ICT as a 
means to facilitate the va lorization of the cultural heritage 
by developing a database containing information of local 
wisdom, indigenous arts, and fostering cultural education for youth, as well as promoting tourism and living 
traditions of the region ( Zulki fli & Azhari, 2018 ). Thanks to 
this new policy, Indonesian Directorate General of  
Culture collected  a number of online registration entries  
for 435 museums, 28 cultural parks, and 86425 tangible 
and ICH across 34 provinces in Indonesia in 2019 
(Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture, 2019 ). 
Among them, a total of 41898 of cultural heritage objects 
and sites have been verified. The  Indonesian  government 
also approved 819 ICH nominations that have been  
proposed by the local government. The central 
government also increased its financial supports in order 
to enhance 2001 cultural communities and improve  the 
preservation of  453 indigenous cultural villages  that are 
spread  over 34 provinces in Indonesia (ibid).  
3. New media to promote virtual 
communities in digital heritage and 
tourism  
The history of New Media is preceded by the history of 
human communication across centuries. McLuhan  
(McLuhan , 1964 as cited in Logan, 2002 ) classifies the 
history of human communication into five periods: tribal 
age (pre -literate ), age of literacy, the print age, electronic 
age, and lastly the new media cultures ( Logan, 2002 ). The 
electronic age was marked by the invention of television 
and the radio in 1906. After the digitalization of signals 
and the bir th of multimedia 1980, the development of 
media technology radically increases the potential range 
of diffusion and dissemination of information on cultural 
products ( Veltman, 2005 ). In the era with a high 
dependency on technology, McLuhan explains that 
communication technologies become the primary cause 
of the change in culture. Media technologies play a central 
role in structuring social arrangements and facilitate 
broader relationships. Generally, McLuhan explains that 
technology determination leads to cultural change that 
shapes the changes in human life and affects the cultural 
institutions of the community. On the other hand, the 
opposite pole of technology determinism is social 
constructivism. Elbanna ( 2009) states that , “Social 
constructivism suggests, with different degrees of 
strength, the importance of the social in shaping the 
technology, either in use or in production”. The two 
different perspectives lead the way to open a discussion 
in the Actor -Network Theory, which elaborates the 
networks of connections between human agents, 
technologies and objects, as well as global and local 
networks, as the vehicle of development (Stanforth, 
2006) . Kéfi & Pallud ( 2010 ) further investigat e the 
success of the Actor -Network theory in the field of digital 
heritage in the museum, which also correlates well with 
this study. The study on digital heritage dedicated to 
UNESCO WHS  and ICH in Indonesia can be analyzed 
further with the Actor -Network Theory framework. It could 
be investigated by looking at the presence of ICTs, in 
which way they communicate the heritage objects and the 
stakeholders who produce and promote it  (Fig. 1). 
Lechner & Schmid ( 2000 ) point out that media plays a 
vital role within the virtual community formation in two 
possible areas: facilitation and constitution. The study 
further elaborates that ICT functions as a medium to 
facilitate communication among the community  (Lechner 
& Schmidt , 2000 ). In one case, a community or an 
organization may design a structured communication 
technology based on the necessities and employ the ICT PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  78 to facilitate and foster  their communication  processes 
(Cantoni  & Tardini , 2006 ). On the other hand, ICTs may 
spur the constitution of a community by adopting the 
same digital communication technology. ICT serve s as a 
medium that is used by the community members to  
communicate and share e xperiences ( ibid). The advent of 
ICT facilitates  the possibility of people frequently 
interacting through the world wide web and form virtual 
communities, discussing their interest in many different 
fields, including cultural heritage. Tardini ( 2003 ) mentions 
that virtual communities are “a group of people to whom 
interactions and communications via computer play an 
important role in creating and maintaining significant 
social relations”. Thus, a community or certain group of 
people may use ICT as a medium , as it helps to  spur the 
communication or information exchange related to 
particular  interests. Digital technologies can also facilitate 
the constitution of an organization, as frequent online 
interaction activities may lead to comm on logical space 
and promote activities in the real -world ( Lechner & 
Schmid, 2000 ; Cantoni & Tardini, 2006 ).  
Since ICTs play a fundamental role in the success of 
enhancing community awareness on the importance of 
Outstanding Universal Values, the advent of digital 
innovations shall not be a threat in fostering the 
preservation of both tangible and intangible heritage.  
It must go hand in hand in all ways, not only to be used 
for promoting the tourism destination of WHS s, but also 
to raise the awareness of the tourists and local 
communities to participate in the heritage conservation 
(Cantoni , 2018 ). The communication strategy shall be 
directed to raise the understanding and awareness of 
different communities in the light of protecting their 
cultural identity as well as to facilitate local business  and 
thus increase the economic benefits to the local 
community ( Robbins, 2010 ). To this end, the ICTs 
innovations shall be localized and adapted to the needs 
of local society, heritage conservation,  as well as  bring a 
sense of empowerment . According to Cantoni ( 2018 ),  
the roles of ICTs in promoting  sustainable tourism and the  
preservation  of cultural heritage can be singled out in five 
main areas:  
• Access : Widen access & raise awareness; broaden 
access of information to the relevant stakeholders;  
• Better experience:  Enrich visitor’s experience while 
onsite with digital communication devices such 
mobile access, location -based services (LBS), 
Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), 
multiple voices, gamif ication, etc.  • Connect : Connect local stakeholders to the heritage 
(locals with heritage, locals with visitors, visitors with 
heritage); increase ownership and promote 
interpersonal encounters throu gh digital storytelling, 
informal learning, gamification, sharing economy; 
connecting young generations with their heritage, 
and empowering them through it , e.g. WHACY (World 
Heritage Awareness Campaign for Youth ) in 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) 
where >100000 students involved in «Junior Minister 
Competition»  (Adukaite & Cantoni, 2016 ); listening to 
online travel review s, e.g. Saint Paul Outside the 
Walls (Rome, Italy) ( De Ascaniis & Cantoni, 201 3) 
and Lalibela rock-hewn churches in Ethiopia 
(Mutinda & Cantoni, 201 6); social media campaigns , 
e.g. #faces4heritage campaign in support of the 
global #Unite4Heritage UNESCO initiative ( Ascaniis, 
Della Monica, & Cantoni , 2017 ). 
• Dis-intermediate:  (Dis)intermediate (some) 
relationships in terms of i nformation distri bution , 
communication  support , and promotion al activities.  
ICTs are used in many business activities in order to 
ensure direct benefits between stakeholders . For 
example, ICTs for connecting between the museums  
and the visitors;  ICTs for  facilitat ing the visitors with 
the SMEs and local communities who live at the WHS  
(Davida & Cantoni 2015 ). 
• Education:  To facilitate training and education 
activities to the relevant stakeholders through  
e-learning platforms, digital archives, MOOCs 
(Massive Online Open Courses) , e.g. MOOC on 
Tourism Management at UNESCO WHS s vol. 1  
that gained  >6500  registered learners  from 166 
countries. ( Rosani, De Ascaniis, Gravari -Barbas, & 
Cantoni , 2018 ).  
3.1. Web technologies  
The world  wide web, known for its abbreviation the 
“WWW”, was invented by Tim Berners -Lee in the years 
1989 and 1990 at CERN (Conseil Europ éen pour la 
Recherche Nucléaire –European Organization for 
Nuclear Research) in Geneva, Switzerland ( Berners -Lee, 
2000 ). Through all external hardware such as cables, 
infrared, satellites, etc ., the WWW or the internet 
connects through Transfer Control Protocol (TCP) and 
Internet Protocol (IP), which was invented in 1973. This 
communication protocol (TCP/IP)  facilitates the  
communication between the computer and the systems, 
and enable all types of data and media (audio, textual, 
visuals) to be shared between the digital devices. 
Website s become the most used online platforms  that 
allow broader conversations, interactions an d file sharing . 
It connects all kinds of documents in several accessible 
online platforms (ibid). According to Webopedia, a 
website is a site (location) on the WWW . Each website 
contains a homepage as a landing page where users can 
find other additional do cuments and files based on the 
categories assigned to them ( Cantoni  & Tardini, 2008 ). 
Each site could be owned by an individual, company or 
organization that manages the site based on the defined 
communication strategy. The websites represent 
structured contents whose electronic format text 
(hypertext) provides links to access the other page  on the 
internet . The internet search engine operates in 3 main 
activities: by spidering the web, organizing (indexing) 
submission of websites to the internet database, and 
responding to the users’ queries entered in the searc h 
Figure 1 : The relation between ICT, Tangible/ ICH, and Tourism 
(Cantoni , De Ascaniis , Marchiori , & Mele , 2016) . FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  79 engine. The internet gathers the related web pages to 
create a list of web resources and provides users access 
to a large range of other information resources and media 
(ibid). Other than websites, other online entries such as 
newsgroups, social media ac counts, images, audio, and 
videos, blogs, maps, etc . are indexed in the internet 
search engine.  
Based on Cantoni & Tardini ( 2006) , there are two types of 
websites which are dominating the online presence in the 
last few years , namely blogs and wikis. Blogs ( a short 
term for weblogs) are defined as a type of online outlet 
that was originally int ended to be used as a personal 
journal for individual purposes, publicly accessible and 
regularly updated. Today, the blogs serve as a publication 
outlet for multiple types of information, whose contents 
are designed based on the communication goals of the  
web publisher. As web -based electronic diaries, blogs are 
very useful tools for one direction micro -publishing , as 
they usually provide  limited discussion  or comments  on 
site page  (Hall, 2002  as cited in Danesi, 20 13). On the 
other hand, Wikis or wiki is a form of publication outlet, 
whose name is taken from the Hawaiian word ‘wiki wiki’ 
that means ‘quick’ ( Serrat, 2009 ). The Wikis are 
collaborative websites that allow users to contribute to 
building the content or make any changes to the original 
content (Danesi, 2013 ).  
In 2004, Dale Dougherty introduced web 2.0 as the 
evolution of the web 1.0 version developed in the 1990s. 
Web 2.0 is the second generation of the WWW that offers 
more dynamic and interactive web experiences. It is 
known as a participative website platform that expands 
the virtual space for users to collaborate in broader 
contexts. The platform function s as ‘a medium’ for sharing 
information online in forms of posts, comments, inputs via 
social media, blogging, and websites. It allows users not 
only to experience more flexible web design, but also 
facilitates its creative reuse, updates, collaborative and 
modification of content creations ( Murugesan, 2007 ; 
Aghaei, Nematbakhsh, & Farsani, 2012 ). At this point,  
social media sites such as Faceboo k, Youtube, Flickr , etc. 
are commonly used by user s. From the development of 
web 2.0, users may interact with the computer machines 
to join in a virtual community and its conversation 
activities such as listening (reading), speaking (writing), 
and vice ver sa (Cantoni & Tardini, 2008 ). Later in 2006, 
web 3.0  was developed  as the third generation of the web  
1.0, which marked the birth of Internet of Things (IoT) and 
the rapid development of mobile service ecosystem 
(mobile apps)  (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010 ). Web 3.0 is 
regarded as a web of coope ration, which operates with 
two main platforms , namely semantic technologie s and 
social computing environment ( Aghaei et al, 2012 ). It 
integrates the link and perform s discovery and data 
analysis from various data sets, as well as au tomation 
and reuse across multiple  applications.  
Along with the development of digital technologies 
outlined above, online users prone to voluntarily 
contribute and share information or media in forms of text 
and audiovisual  data (images, videos). This interaction of 
content suppliers and content consume rs contributes to 
the aggregation of  user-generated content  (UGC)  in the 
semantic web. UGC  is a result of pattern recognition over 
online users’ behavio ur by recognizing the keywords they 
use in accessing digital content  (Krumm, Da vies, & 
Narayanaswami, 2008 ). It also implies the generic  results 
of links  that are the most referred or accessed by online 
users with certain keywords  (ibid). The most frequented online platforms, either in forms of websites or mobile 
apps, may have  high user-generated contents that are 
promoted by the online interaction s among online users  
(O’Hern & Kahle, 2013 ). 
3.2. Mobile apps  
The second type of ICTs for  cultural heritage is mobile 
apps. The mobile application is a type of  ICT containing a 
program or software operated on a mobile device 
(smartphone, Personal Digital Assistant  (PDA) , etc. ). 
Mobile apps are developed by mobile application 
developers and publishers . The  mobile  apps are usua lly 
developed to perform  one or a few tasks and provide  
certain functionalities on  particular  topics based on  its 
objectives or user requirements (Islam, Islam, & 
Mazumder, 2010 ; Basole & Karla, 2012 ). 
The study of  web 4.0  reached its peak during 2014 -2017  
(Almeida, 2017 ). The emergence of web 4.0 also marked 
the birth of artificial intelligence that fosters 
interconnectivity  and faster performance of human and 
machine interaction  (Aghaei et al., 2012 ). The symbiotic 
interaction of users and machine learning in artific ial 
intelligence plays a central role in fostering the 
development of industry 4.0  (Demartini & Benussi, 2017 ). 
Beside cyber -physical systems, the new revolution of 
industry 4.0 emphasizes cloud -based systems with real -
time responsiv eness, which are well provided by web 
technologies 4.0  (ibid). In terms of culture and tourism 
domain, web 4.0  allows  greater participation and 
collaboration among online user communities. It connects 
all tourism and heritage stakeholders into global onlin e 
networks. Destination Management Organizations  
(DMOs) and  tourism -related stakeholders extensively use 
ICTs to promote tangible/ ICH as the cultural attraction of 
the tourism destination  both through websites and mobile 
applications. Websites and mobile a pps become  the most 
used publication outlets when it comes to communicating 
the cultural heritage and its related aspects (tourism, 
fashion). The ABCDE (Access, Better Experience, 
Connect, (Dis)intermediate, Education) theory may help 
to provide an insight about the  use of ICTs in relation to 
culture and tourism domain, as outlined in the previous 
section (Cantoni, 2018 ). 
4. The digital converge of Indonesian 
cultural heritage   
The digital convergence of tangible cultural heritage 
refers to the convergence of technologies, software and 
categorizing systems in documenting, archiving, as well 
as mediating cultural heritage ( Stuedahl, 2007 ). It is also 
defined as the digital transformation of recorded 
knowledge, document s, and data into electronic 
information, which leads to broader access and the 
functional integration of libraries, archives, and museums 
(Dempsey, 2000  as cited in Marty, 2014 ; Dabello, 2016 ). 
The digital transformation in the field of cultural heritage 
conservation covers not only in the forms of visualization 
technologies for documenting archaeological data and 
related documents but also the ICTs for dissem ination 
and mediation purposes (Redweik  et al., 2017 ). 
According to the Five Cs UNESCO Strategic Objectives, 
the dissemination and the mediation of cultural heritage 
play significant  roles in engaging more stakeholders, 
which in turn, contributes to the continuity and the 
sustainability of cultural heritage c onservation. Thus, 
more attentions have been paid on how WHSs and its PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  80 Outstanding Universal Values (OUV) are presented on 
and offline . The online presentation of tangible/ ICH shall 
be aimed to foster responsible and respectful behavio ur 
among visitors and raise public awareness about the 
importance of this heritage ( Garbelli, Adukaite & Cantoni, 
2017 ). The digital convergence of Indonesian cultural 
heritage started by  the development of Digital Heritage 
Network in 1998 as part of th e first digital library project 
initiated by  KMRG  (Knowledge Management Research 
Group ) of Bandung Institute of Technology in Indonesia  
(Fahmi, 2002 ). The following years later,  the more and 
more public institution developed digital heritage 
platforms , which involve d broader stakeholders from 
private sectors, education institutions, and local 
communities.  
4.1. ICTs for tangible cultural heritage  
Since 2010, the use of ICT in Indonesia has started  to 
grow extensively, characterized by the growing number of 
social media users, the advancement of e -tourism, and 
financial technology. Based on the Global Digital Report 
of January 2019 ( Kepios , 2019 ), Indonesian internet 
users and social media users both reach 56% of the total 
population which counts as much as 150 million people, 
compared to 132.7 million internet users in 2017. 
Indonesia also ranks the 4th country in the world after 
India, China, and the USA in terms of inte rnet absolute 
growth rankings. This result shows the dynamic growth of 
Indonesian virtual communities. Kuswarno ( 2015 ) 
indicates that internet users reach 51% in urban 
communities and 49%  in rural areas. Based on his 
research, s everal factors are deemed essential  to 
accelerat e the growth of online users in Indonesia, such 
as software applications, social networks, communication 
devices and extensive IT infrastructure in rural areas with 
wider broadband coverage . The Indonesian go vernment 
also encourages the youth community –including the 
heritage community – to support national goals to become 
the Digital Energy of Asia in 2020 by launching national 
movements of 1000 start -ups creation in 2017. The 
government also encourages all re lated stakeholders to 
support national creative industries and cultural tourism, 
as well as to foster the preservation of tangible and ICH 
through digital technologies ( Indonesian Ministry of State -
owned Enterprises, 201 9). 
The development of the digital heritage platform in 
Indonesia was first started by pro bono movements. This 
initiative corresponds to voluntary work coordinated by a 
group of Indonesian scientists with the aim to facilitate the 
development of Indonesian cu ltural heritage inventory in 
2008 ( Situngkir, 2010 ; Avi, 2014 ). The increasing number 
of endangered Indonesian artefacts  and weak cultural 
database  led the cultural activists to create a significant 
digital initiativ e. The first wiki -based website platform  
(www.budaya -indonesia.org ) was created by a group of 
scientists  involved in Bandung Fe Institute in collaboration 
with Sobat Budaya Cultural Association. In 2011, the 
initiative was amplified by the launch of a cultural 
movement called “Towards 1 million Cultural Data 
Inventory”. The goal of this movement was to encourage 
all stakeholders in order to sup port the protection of 
Indonesian tangible/ ICH by inviting public participation  in 
enriching the cultural database and  registering local 
heritage into the digital heritage platform (Situngkir, 
2019 ). In 2019, the digital database  movement has 
succeeded in collecting more than 50000 digital cultural entries submitted by the online contributors across 34 
provinces in Indonesia (ibid).  
The implementation of law number 5 in 2017 on Cultural 
Advancement increases the awareness of heritage and 
tourism -related stakeholders to employ new media 
technologies. Heritage sites and destination managers 
are active to promote heritage sites and raise  public 
participation in conservation activities through online 
publication and advanced web technologies. Digital 
innovations can be found in some of the UNESCO 
properties in Indonesia. For example, Borobudur 
Conservation Center invests in social media ma rketing 
and online publications, such as a mobile app, interactive 
website and other media outlets. The Borobudur 
interactive website features 360° images, videos, virtual 
tour of Borobudur temple and provides blogs to promote 
other cultural tourism offers  in the area ( Gunarto, 20 07; 
Diarta, 2016 ). 
4.2. ICTs for ICH  
ICH is characterized by tacit knowledge shared by the 
community and maintained as such through 
intergenerational transmission. As of August 2019, 508 
ICH elements of 122 countries were enlisted by UNESCO 
(UNESCO, 2019 ). The funda mental aspects  of this ICH 
reside on safeguarding practices, as well as its artistic, 
historical and cultural related values such as the making 
process, meanings and philosophy behind each cultural 
symbol. The intangible heritage underlines the 
importance of the know -how or savoir -faire and ‘in the 
know’ behind each cultural practice. Boily ( 2004 ) defines 
the “in the know” or ‘savoir -être’ as ‘the incorporation of 
knowledge and the process of know -how’. The tacit 
knowledge incorporated in the ICH is commonly 
transmitted by oral traditions and through face -to-face 
interaction and experiences by local practit ioners. ICT 
intervention on the preservation of living heritage shall be 
based  upon the following principles ( Garbelli, 2015 ): 
• Inclusive : The public participation through ICTs 
contributes to social cohesion and encourages a 
sense of identity and responsibility. It also helps 
individuals to feel part of one or different communities 
and foster a sense of belongin g. Different 
stakeholders could take part in building a  digital 
technology platform, cross -cultural storytelling 
content, and contextual mediation of the living 
heritage  for their society .  
• Representative : The use of ICTs to document and 
showcase all kinds of tacit knowledge concerning  
living heritag e. It facilitates users to access the 
knowledge database regarding the m aking process, 
skills, cultural symbols , and philosophies as the 
elements  of the living heritage.  
• Community -based : ICT helps intercultural dialogue, 
and encourages mutual respect for safeguarding 
living heritage. The importance of ICH is not the 
cultural manifestation itself, but rather the wealth of 
knowledge and traditional skills, transmitted through 
ICTs from  generation to  generation . 
The digital interventions should help to alleviate the 
participation of the society by attracting people in 
producing t heir own story of the living heritage based on 
their own perspective in the form of written or audiovisual  
narratives. Overall, the functions of ICT intervention in the FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  81 field of intangible heritage conservation are as follows: (i) 
Identify, (ii) Capture, (iii) Transmit, (iv) While maintaining 
its authenticity ( Garbelli, 2015 ). 
Indonesia leverages on its rich l iving traditions as 
cultural tourism assets to boost  the local economy .  
The rural tourism development goes hand in  hand  
with the use of d igital technologies  that play major  roles 
in connecting the local stakeholders, the destination 
managers with the tourists  (Jonathan & Tarigan, 2016 ). 
To this end, the local stakeholders could engage 
academicians , young artists , and communities to  
make the best use of the ICTs by creating dedicated blog 
posts, websites, and mobile apps for the living heritage. 
Such initiative could increase the online presence of 
living heritage, as presented in the case study  
of Indonesian Batik textile heritage in relation  
to Indonesian cult ural tourism and digital mediation 
(Permatasari & Cantoni, 2019a ; Rakhmawati, 2016 ).  
5. Methodology  
The number of Indonesian digital knowledge platforms 
has increased in the last recent years, thanks to the 
continuous support of cultural heritage preservation 
through the use of ICTs. In order to better understand 
the digital knowledge platform of cultura l heritage 
existing in Indonesia, this study aims at (i) identifying  the 
online presence of Indonesian WHS and its type of 
publishers  by analysing 180 webpages  in English and 
Indonesian language s, (ii) classifying several digital 
heritage  webs ites which se rve as  important cultural 
heritage knowledge platforms in Indonesia, (iii) providing  
a map of  312 mobile apps dedicated to WHS  and ICH 
retrieved from Android and iO S platforms. The study is 
conducted by investigating the type of mobile apps, 
formats, type of publishers, features and functionalities 
according to the given indicators.  
The study was conducted from 15th July to 15th October 
2019 by analyzing 180 web pages and 322 mobile apps 
in Indonesian  and English languages covering 18 
UNESCO’s properties: nine WHS s and nine ICHs in 
Indonesia. The research adopts a top -down  
methodol ogy based on the indicators drawn from  
the previous studies and bottom -up method s by 
searching for new possible indicators  drawn from the 
samples and the research experimentation  (Lizzi, 
Cantoni, & Inversini,  2011 ). The bottom -up approach, 
according to Chi  (1997 ), allows further discovery and 
experimentation to get a better understanding of  
the online narratives of the specific subject at the  
bottom level.  
5.1. Website data collection  
The data samples are collected by pri marily entering the 
name of one UNESCO WHS s in Indonesia as  
the keywords in the search query. For example: 
“Borobudur Temple Compounds” in English and “Candi 
Borobudur” in the Indonesian language. Once the  
query was entered , the Google search engine shows the 
results of web pages and articles related to the keywor ds. 
Only web pages shown on the first page of the search 
result are examined and classified based on the type of 
online publishers . The study  exclud es the links of 
scientific papers and advertised web pages. The research 
collects  180 webpages in English an d Indonesian as data 
sample s, 90 webpage s in Indonesian language and  
90 webpages in English one. The collected samples were  analysed iteratively by using grid analysis with the 
predetermined indicators  (Table 2 ). The indicators  used 
the grid analysis are drawn from the Online 
Communication Model ( Cantoni, 2006 ), Indonesian 
tourism and Batik: an online map ( Permatasari & Cantoni , 
2019a ), and online platforms for 3D visuali sation of 
heritage ( Statham, 2019 ).  
Table 2 : Indicators of website grid analysis . 
Type of 
Publication  Type of Digital 
Heritage  Features  
UNESCO WHS  Top – down 
approach  Thematic Map  
Blogs  Bottom up 
approach  Thematic blogs  
Travel Guides   Simulation  
Encyclopedia   Online sources and 
database  
Social Media   3D objects  
News & Media   360 pictures  
Virtual tour  
Online travel 
review   Participative 
cultural database  
Tourism Board 
and Official 
Bodies   Scientific Rigorous  
Association and 
Foundations    
Research 
Centers and  
Museums    
Travel 
Agency/Tour 
Operator    
Adhoc Websites    
Others    
5.2. Mobile app data collection  
As for the mobile apps, similarly, each name of the 
UNESCO heritage site/ ICH was entered as the keywords 
in the search query both within the Google Play for 
Android smartphones , and within the Apple store for iO S 
mobile devices . All the apps retrieved from Google Play 
and Apple Store were examined and identified based on 
the relevant  indicators. The main indicators were  set 
based on the triangulation of the Online Communication 
Model ( Cantoni, 2006 ), mob ile apps dedicated to WHS s 
(Schieder, Adukaite , & Cantoni, 2014 ), mapping mobile 
apps on Batik ICH (Permatasari & Cantoni, 2019b ), and 
online platforms for 3D visualisation of heritage ( Statham, 
2019 ). The apps that operate in two different platforms 
(Android and iO S) are  counted as one single app in the 
grid analysis. After identifying each name of WHS s and 
the year of its inscription , each mobile app was analysed  
according to the following set of indicators  (Table 3 ). 
5.3. Grid analysis  
The study combines  the qualitative method of content 
analysis with the quantitative assessment in order to PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  82 analy se the presence of a given type of content in a given 
set of data (webpages, mobile apps) ( Cantoni, Faré, 
Bolchini, & Giulieri, 2007 ). The qualitative method was 
conducted by analysing each app, both in terms of th e 
contents and the features provided. This analysis is 
intended to identify the presence of each type of content 
and annotate them into the relevant indicators  (Figure 2 ). 
The table of indicators consists of the main indicators, 
which are taken from the pr evious scientific works, 
together with additional indicators that emerge during the 
qualitative analysis process (ibid).  
 
Figure 2 : The grid analysis of the online presence of 
Indonesian WHS s: websites and mobile apps . 
The quantitative process was done to clarify the 
qualitative judgment by assigning the grid value of “1” 
when the indicator is present. Otherwise, the value of “0” 
was given whe n it is absent. These qualitative -
quantitative analysis processes are performed on the 
dataset until thematic saturation was reached 
(Permatasari & Cantoni, 2019b ).  
6. Results   
6.1. Indonesian WHS  online presence  
Based on Google organic results, the three most frequent 
type of publishers covering Indonesian WHS s in the 
English language (n=90 webpages) are ‘UNESCO WHS’ 
(14%), Blogs (14%), and Travel Guides (14%)  of the total 
webpages . The result also shows the activ e roles of 
international tourists and travel guides to discuss 
Indonesian WHS s online , indicated by the good presence 
of blogs and travel guides site pages.   
The analysis conducted on 90 Indonesian webpages 
shows that ‘Social Media’ (23%) and ‘News and Med ia’ 
(22%), and ‘Encyclopedia’ (18%) are the three common 
online platforms presenting the Indonesian UNESCO 
WHS s (Figure 3 ). The high presence of ‘social Media’ 
shows active participation of the Indonesian public 
towards their national heritage. The outcome  also 
indicates the strong support from ‘News and Media’ 
agencies who produce creative and informative content 
about Indonesia WHS. The digital encyclopedia is shown 
as one of the highest user -generated contents on 
Indonesia cultural heritage . 
In terms of digital heritage platforms, there are several 
websites which are dedicated to disseminating cultural 
knowledge as well as to provide access for the public for 
learning the Indonesian cultural heritage. Table 4  
presents the lists of the digital heritage pla tforms, which 
Table 3 : Indicators of mobile apps’ grid analysis . 
Categories  Sub categories  
1. No. apps 1.1. Android  (An.)  
1.1. iOS 
2. Type of 
mobile apps 
for WHS  2.1. Encyclopedia  
2.2. Travel  
Games (Quiz, animation)  
2.3. Mix Reality  (AR/VR)  
3.Type of 
mobile apps 
for ICH 3.1. Encyclopedia  
3.2. 
Multimedia  
 
 3.2.1.  Videos 
Entertainment  
3.2.2. Fashion  
3.2.3. Image   
Catalogues (textile, 
heritage objects)  
3.2.4. Music Instruments  
3.3. Games  3.3.1. Quiz 
3.3.2. A nimation games  
3.4.Mix Reality  
(AR/VR)   
4. Type of 
publishers  4.1. Association  
4.2. Independent developers  
4.3. Media agency  
4.4. Companies  
4.5. Research institutes and museums  
5. General 
information  5.1. General description of the app  
5.2. History of the site  
5.3. Geography of the site  
5.4. P hilosophical values of the place  
5.5.Tourism information (map s, 
transportation, accom modation)  
6. Information 
on UNESCO 
WHS/ICH  6.1. Information on WHS  
6.2. Information about UNESCO 
convention 1972  
6.3. Year of inscription  
6.4 Explicit reason of inscription  
7. Language  7.1. Indonesian  
7.2. English  
8.Formats  8.1. Text 
8.2. Photo gallery/slide show  
8.3. Audio material  
8.4. Video material/YouTube channel  
9.Features  9.1. Games with animation  
9.2. Quiz games  
9.3. I nteractive tools  
9.4. Scientific content  
9.5. AR 
9.6. VR 
9.7. 360 and virtual tour  
9.8. Sharing by users  
10. No. 
downloads  10.1. 10-50 downloads  
10.2. 100+  
10.3. 500+  
10.4 1000+  
10.5. 5000+  
10.6. 10000+  
10.7. 50000+  
10.8. 100000+  FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGI TAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  83 are managed by the government, museums, and national 
library and other heritage stakeholders. The digital 
heritage platforms are also classified based on their 
approaches in communicating the website, e.g. top -down 
and bottom -up approaches. S ome of the se digital 
heritage platforms are managed by public initiatives and 
media agencies  (Figure 4 ). Such efforts give rooms for 
broader online users' participation in terms of enriching 
cultural database and contents related to cultural 
information. T hese sites are administered by certain  expert committees, as they are also in charge of editing 
and verifying the information submitted by the users 
(Situngkir, 2019 ). 
6.2. Indonesian WHS  mobile apps ’ presence  
The study collects a total of 13 mobile apps, consisting of 
nine Android mobile apps and four mobile apps in iO S. 
The result shows that only four out of nine Indonesian 
WHS s that have dedicated mobile apps. All collected 
samples are classified as one single mobile app that only 
operates in one single platform ( Android /iOS). This study 
is done by investigating all mobile apps retrieved from the 
two mobile app platforms into the grid of analysis.  
Table 5  reveals mobile apps’ functionalities based on 
major categories, e.g. encyclopaedia ( five apps), travel 
guide ( four apps), and games/AR/VR ( four apps).   
Table 6  shows detailed information about the type of 
publishers. Independent developers  are the most 
frequent publishers of the studied mobile apps.  
Few of them are produced by ‘Research Centre and 
Museum, ‘Association’, and ‘Tech Company’. In terms of 
the numbe r of downloads, five out of 9 Android apps 
dedicated to Indonesian WHS gain 100+ downloads. 
There is only one animation game app called Prambanan 
education game, which gained popularity and  
crossed >100000 downloads.  
Table 7  indicates that all mobile apps  provide general 
information and geographical information. Even though 
most of them do cover the history and related information 
about the cultural heritage, however, the inscription and 
other relevant  information about UNESCO WHS s, are 
scarcely mentioned.  Nine mobile apps do present tourism 
information at WHS s, such as transportation, maps, 
hotels, and attraction highlights. In terms of engagement, 
the study captures the number of downloads o n Android 
mobile apps.  
Table 8  shows the number of mobile apps th at provide 
additional features such as AR, VR, and game animation. 
It also presents detail classification about the type of 
formats (video, photos, audio materials) and the number 
of apps with qualified scientific content. The “Interaction 
tool” indicator in the analysis is related to additional 
console features for gamification built in the mobile app. 
Figure 5  illustrates an example of storytelling mobile app 
of Prambanan Temple  Compounds. This mobile app 
provides interesting animation, audio material, te xtual 
information, and games. Figure 6  presents an example of 
Borobudur mobile app that features 3D images and virtual 
tour navigation.   Table 4 : Classifications of common Indonesian digital heritage 
websites . 
Name of Websites  Platform 
Manager  Features  
Top-down a pproach  
www.perpusnas.go.id  
www. kebudayaanindonesia.
net Government 
and national 
library  Thematic Map  
Online database 
(manuscripts, 
ebooks, etc)  
www. situsbudaya.id/  Media 
Agency  Thematic blogs  
www.museumnasional.or.id  
www.museumkaa.indonesia
heritage.org  Museums  Thematic  blogs  
3D objects  
360 pictures  
Virtual tour  
Participative – bottom -up appr oach  
www.budaya -indonesia.org  Research 
Center  Participative blogs  
https://www.kairaga.com  
 
 
www.aksakun.org  Cultural 
Association 
of 
Indonesian 
Ancient 
Letters  Thematic maps  
Ancient Letter 
Simulation  
Thematic blogs  
www.indonesiakaya.com  Foundation  Participative 
cultural database  
Thematic blogs  
Figure 3 : Online presence  of Indonesian WHS s. 
Figure 4 : An example of participative digital heritage platform  
run by the public initiative.  www.budaya -indonesia.org   PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  84  
Table 6 : Classification of type of publishers and the number of 
downloads  (WHS mobile apps) . 
Type of 
publishers  OS No. 
downloads  No WHS 
apps 
(An.) An. iOS 
Association  1 - 10-50 dl  2 
Independent 
developers  5 4 100+  5 
Compan ies 1 - 500+  1 
Research 
institutes and 
museums  2 - 1000+  
- 
Total  9 4 5000+  - 
   10000+  - 
   50000+  - 
   100000+  1 Table 7 : Results on general information and information about 
UNESCO  WHS s (the sum does  not always correspond to 100% 
since all indicators presented in the table are not mutually 
exclusive ). 
General 
information  No. 
apps Information about 
UNESCO WHS  No. 
apps 
General 
description of 
the app  13 Information on 
WHS  10 
History of the 
site 12 Information 
UNESCO/  
UNESCO 
convention 1972  3 
Geography of 
the site  
 13 Year of 
inscription  1 
philosophical 
values of the 
place  3 Explicit reason of 
inscription  1 
Tourism 
information 
(map, 
transportation, 
accom modation)  9   
 
Table 8 : Results on formats, language, and features (the sum 
does  not always correspond to 100% since all indicators 
presented in the table are not mutually exclusive) . 
Formats  No. 
apps Features  No. 
apps 
Text 10 Games  2 
Photo 
gallery/slide 
show  6 Augmented 
Reality  1 
Audio material  3 Virtual Reality  2 
Video 
material/ Youtube 
channels  - Animation  1 
Language   Interactive tools  3 
Scientific content  4 
Indonesian  9 360/Virtual Tour  2 
English  4 Sharing by users  4 
 
 
Figure 5 : Example of an educational mobile app of Prambanan 
Temple Compounds. The app presents the storytelling about 
the history of Prambanan Temple and the folktale of Princess 
Roro Jonggrang and Prince Badung Bondowoso ( Studio , 2018 ). 
Table 5 : Classification of mobile apps dedicated to Indonesian 
WHS s (Android ≡An.).  
No WHS s Year 
of 
Inscrip
tion Operating 
system  (OS) Type of mobile apps  
An. iOS Encycl
opedia  Trav
el AR/ga
mes/V
R 
1 Borobudur 
Temple 
Compounds  1991  3 3 2 3 1 
2 Komodo 
National Park  1991   1  1  
3 Prambanan 
Temple 
Compounds  1991  3  2  1 
4 Ujung Kulon 
National Park  1991       
5 Sangiran  Early 
Man Site  1996  3  1  2 
6 Lorentz 
National Park  1999  - - - - - 
7 Tropical 
Rainforest 
Heritage of 
Sumatra  2004  - - - - - 
8 Cultural 
Landscape of 
Bali 
Province:the  
Subak  System 
as a 
Manifestation 
of the  Tri Hita 
Karana  Philos
ophy  2012  - - - - - 
9 Ombilin Coal 
Mining 
Heritage of 
Sawahlunto  2019  - - - - - 
 Total sum 9 4 5 4 4 
 Total mobile apps  in 
An. and iO S 13 13 FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIE S IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  85  
Figure 6: Example of virtual tour mobile app dedicated to 
Borobudur Temple Compounds . It is equipped with two 
interaction features for navigating th e view of Borobudur 
through the screen  (Indonesia 3one3 , 2019 ). 
6.2. Indonesian ICH mobile apps ’ presence  
The study finds 299 mobile apps dedicated to Indonesian 
ICH in the Android platform. Such findings show a higher 
interest of the Indonesian public towards the mobile apps 
dedicated to preserving the living traditions. The study 
also finds that 10 mobile apps operate in both Android and 
iOS platforms. Since similar  apps are counted as a single 
app, hence, the study only takes the mobile apps 
collected from the Android platform. Seven out of nine 
Indonesian ICH have dedicated mobile apps, namely 
Indonesian Kris traditional dagger, Wayang puppet 
theatre, Indonesian Ba tik wax -resist dyeing textile 
heritage, three genres of Bali traditional dance s, and 
Pinisi, the art of boatbuilding in South Sulawesi. The list 
of mobile apps  is outlined in Table 9. 
Table 9 : Classification  of mobile apps dedicated to  
Indonesian ICH. 
No Name of ICH  Year of 
Inscription  No. mobile apps  
An. iOS 
1 Indonesian Kris  
traditional dagger  2008  6 - 
2 Wayang puppet theatre  2008  110 - 
3 Indonesian Batik  wax-
resist dyeing textile 
heritage  2009  164 
*items 
number 
3&4 are 
related to 
the similar 
type of 
ICH 4 
4 Education and training in 
Indonesian Batik ICH 2009  
5 Indonesian Angklung  2010  10 3 
6 Saman dance  2011  - - 
7 Noken woven handcraft 
of the people of Papua  2012  - - 
8 Three genres of 
traditional dance in Bali  2015  5 3 
9 Pinisi, art of boatbuilding 
in South Sulawesi  2017  4 - 
 Total  299 10 
 Total apps in Android and iO S 309 
 
The major type of publishers shown in Table 10  is mostly 
independent developers. The apps created by 
independent developers accounted for 51% of the total 
mobile apps or 151 mobile apps (n=299). The second biggest type of publisher is new and media stakeholders 
who published 96 mobile apps or 36% of t he total 
samples. In terms of the number of downloads, we 
assumed that mobile apps for Indonesian ICH draw much 
bigger engagement than those of the WHS s. For 
example, there are 32% of the total apps (95 mobile apps) 
which gain more than 1000 downloads. In addition, 70 
mobile apps or 23 % of total mobile apps gain more than 
100 downloads. The “Pazia Angklung” music instrument 
mobile app achieves the highest number with more than 
100000 downloads on Android  (Pazia, 2012 ). 
Table 10  provides the number of mobile apps based on 
the major clusters and its subcategories. In terms of apps’ 
purposes, the research identifies 22 mobile apps that 
serve as an encyclopaedia and provide quality content 
about the history and the knowledge behind the 
Indonesian ICH.  
Table 10 : Classification of type of publishers and the number of 
downloads (ICH mobile apps) . 
Type of 
publishers  
 No. 
apps 
(An.) % No. downloads  
(Google Store)  No. apps 
(An.) % 
Companies (IT 
company, 
SMEs)  34 11 10-50 70 23 
News and 
media  96 32 100+  70 23 
Research 
centr e and 
museum  18 6 500+  18 6 
Independent 
developers  151 51 1000+  95 32 
Total  299  5000+  24 9 
   10000+  18 6 
   50000+  3 1 
   100000+  1 0.1 
   Total  299 100 
 
Table 11 : Classification result of type of publishers and the 
number of downloads (ICH mobile apps) . 
No. Category  Subcategory  No. apps 
(An./iOs)  % 
1 Encyclopedia  Encyclopedia  22 8 
2 Multimedia  2.1. Videos -
Entertainment  88 30 
2.2. Fashion  115 38 
2.3..Image 
catalogs (textile, 
heritage 
objects)  45 15 
2.3.Music 
instruments  13 4 
3 Games  Quizzes and 
animation 
games  10 3 
4 Mix Reality  AR/VR  6 2 
 Total  299 100%  
PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  86  
Figure 7 : Types of mobile apps dedicated to Indonesian ICH 
(n=299).  
Table 11  shows a much high presence of multimedia 
apps, in comparison to the number of encyclopaedias  and 
games apps. The percentage of each indicator is 
presented in Figure 7 . The study finds 88 mob ile apps that 
are dedicated to showcasing Indonesian Wayang Puppet 
performance. Wayang is an ancient form of storytelling of 
wisdom, religious values, and ancient epics. It is 
originated from the Indonesian Java island, existed since 
around 15 BC. It was i nscribed in UNESCO’s Masterpiece 
of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity in 2008.  
Its performance involves various repertories, musical 
accompaniments consisting of bronze instruments and 
gamelan drums. The Wayang performance is conducted 
and led by the master puppeteer, or Dhalang.  
He performs the shadow theatre by manipulating the 
puppets with compelling storytelling of ancient epics and 
spiritual wisdom. The Dhalang profession is one of the 
most prestigious cultural professions in Indonesian, given  
their talents and abilities ( Boonstra, 2014 ). They are able 
to conduct Wayang performance in a way that is 
entertaining the audience with senses of humour, 
teaching wisdom and life lessons conveyed through 
Wayang stories repert ory (ibid). In this case, the ICT in 
forms of mobile apps also serve as digital tools for the 
Dhalang, or the master puppeteer to maintain their 
connections with their loyal viewers or fans. These apps 
do contain video materials/YouTube channel of Wayang 
performances, as well as some textual information about 
the Wayang characters. Besides, it also provides the 
users with access to watch the audiovisual recordings of 
Wayang performances conducted in many cities on Java 
island.  Figure 8 presents an example o f a mobile app for 
Wayang that provide s educational contents and 
interactive games.  
The second subcategory of ‘Multimedia’ is the fashion 
mobile apps for Batik textile heritage  (Table 11  and  
Figure 7 ). Batik is a textile made by using the wax-resist 
dyeing technique and decorated with intricate patterns 
incorporating socio -cultural importance of Indonesian 
society. The Batik textile permeates in the life of 
Indonesian society as a symbolic textile used in every 
social occasion such as spiri tual ceremonies for the 
religions, the birth, the wedding, the death, as well as the 
outfits for the royals or public figures ( UNESCO, 2009b ). 
UNESCO recogni sed two nominations of Batik under the 
List of ICH of Humanity, namely ‘Batik safeguarding 
practice’ and ‘Education training of Batik intangible 
cultural heritage’ ( UNESCO, 2009a ). Since the two 
nominations refer to Batik ICH, no differentiation was made within the mobile apps’ analysis. The mobile  apps 
for the fashion category are explicitly intended for 
fashionistas to get inspirations and ideas about Batik 
clothing designs for men, women, family, and traditional 
gowns ( Permatasari & Cantoni, 2019b ). The apps also 
provide  suggestions in terms of modern and traditional 
wearing rules of Batik textile. Figure 9  presents an 
example of Batik encyclopedia app, called Map of Batik. 
It depicts more than 500 Batik motifs across Indonesian 
archipelago ( Situn gkir, 2011 ). 
 
Figure 9: Example of encyclopedia map for Batik intangible 
heritage (Situngkir , 2015 ). 
The third subcategory of multimedia  (Table 11  and  
Figure 7 ) is related to the mobile apps which display 
images catalogue of the heritage objects. For example, 
the images related to Batik textile patterns, the  Javanese  
Figure 8: Example of an educational game for Wayang Puppet 
Theater. The game provides not only informative content about 
the character of wayang figures, but it also provides the 
personalization in terms of storyline and figure choices 
(Surakarta, 2016 ). FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  87 Keris traditional dagger, the figures of Wayang theatre 
puppets, and the Pinisi boat of South Sulawesi. The fourth 
subcategory is addressed to mobile ap ps that serve as a 
learning app for Indonesian Angklung traditional 
instruments. Angklung is a bamboo traditional music 
instrument that can be played by single and multiple 
players. Since one angklung instrument only represents 
one tone of melody, so in a musical ensemble, one player 
is responsible for producing a sound/tone through an 
angklung s/he carries. An expert player can play multiple 
instruments at once producing a harmonious melody 
according to its musical arrangement. The mobile apps 
for angklung  are designed with various user interactions 
to produce audio outputs. For example, some apps do 
provide functionalities to produce angklung tone by 
shaking the mobile device. Some other mobile apps allow 
possibilities to play multiple angklung instruments  by 
screen touch interactions  (Figure 1 0). Other than mobile 
app for learning musical instruments, it exists a mobile 
app that provide s a complete tutorial for learning 
traditional Bali dance ( Figure 1 1). 
 
Figure 1 0: Example of educational mobile app for Angklung 
traditional music  available on Google Play . The app presents  
information about Angklung history and 3D image that can be 
played by the user. The user may touch or shake the phone to 
produce the sound of Angklung  (Raza, 2016 ). 
As seen in Table 12 , all mobile apps provide general 
information about the app (n=299). Within the general information, 37% of the total mobile apps mention History 
of the App, 34% provide information on Geography of the 
concerned WHS/ICH, 38% indicate philosophical values 
of the WHS/ICH, and 12% suggest tours at WHS or visit 
galleries of ICH. In terms of mobile apps for ICH, t he result 
shows a good number of mobile apps (66%)  that provide 
information concerning historical aspects and 
philosophical values  of the ICH in apps’ general 
information . On the other hand, only 6% of the total mobile 
apps state explicit information about UNESCO WHS s and 
safeguarding goals.  
Table 13  indicates the details of formats and features 
provided within the mobile apps. The majority of mobile 
apps (84%) display the collection of images and slide 
shows. 32 % of the mobile apps are equipped by audio 
material such as recordings and voice over for games, 
AR, VR, and encyclopaedia. 20% of the total sample s 
display long textual information within the e ncyclopedia 
apps, education games and AR. Many apps classified in 
Multimedia apps (video entertainment, fashion, images 
catalogues, and music instrument) as presented in  
Table 11 , only display titles, images, and audiovisual 
contents, without providing qu alitative written information. 
The result shows 88% of mobile apps samples dedicated 
to ICH are in the Indonesian language and the rests  are 
in English. The study also finds that ICH is promoted  
in various types of digital technologies. The study finds 
that 11 mobile apps  for ICH are equipped with fascinating 
animation and games apps. Some games provide 
quizzes and additional control menu to personali se or 
choose characters ( Table 13 ). Those app s also provide 
immersive features such as AR and VR. The resea rch 
observes that 13% of the total mobile apps can be used 
as e-learning tools, as they do provide scientific contents 
Figure 1 1: Example of a mobile app for learning Bali dance. 
The app presents the tutorial of Bali dance step by step ( Arya 
IT, 2016 ). PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  88 about history, philosophy, or other specific information 
about the ICH objects. The apps present scientific content 
in different modes an d formats, such as through textual 
information, games, pictures, AR, and VR.  
Table 12 : Results on general information and information about 
UNESCO ICH (the sum does  not always correspond to 100% 
since all indicators presented in the table are not mutually 
exclusive) . 
General 
information  No. 
apps % Information 
about 
UNESCO 
ICH No. 
apps % 
General 
description 
of the app  299 100 Information 
on ICH  197 66 
History of 
the object  112 37 Information 
about 
UNESCO 
ICH 
convention 
2003  17 6 
Geography 
of the 
WHS/ICH  101 34 Year of 
inscription  12 4 
Philosophica
l values 
(identity, 
moral, 
sacred)  113 38 Explicit 
reason of 
inscription  13 4 
Suggested 
tour(s) at 
WHS or 
Galleries of 
ICH 36 12 Safeguardin
g goals  19 6 
Table 13 : Results on formats, language and features in ICH 
mobile apps (the sum does  not always correspond to 100% 
since all indicators presented in the table are not mutually 
exclusive) . 
Formats  No. 
apps 
(An.) % Features  No. 
apps % 
Text 60 20 Games with 
animation  11 4 
Photo 
gallery/slide 
show  250 84 
Quizzes  3 1 
Audio 
materia l 97 32 Interactive tools  
(game console, 
character 
options)  16 5 
Video  
material/You
Tube 
channel  10 3 
Scientific 
content  40 13 
Languages  Augmented 
Reality  3 1 
Indonesian  262 88 Virtual Reality  3 1 
English  37 12 360 and Virtual 
tour 4 1 
   Sharing by users  164 55 5. Conclusion  
The study captures the journey of Indonesian society to 
preserve the UNESCO WHS s and ICH from the 19th 
century until the digital era 4.0. Since the beginning of the 
2000s, the rise of ICTs brought significant impacts in 
fostering the growth of internet users and the creation of 
digital start -ups in Indonesia. Facing the critical challenge 
of heritage conserv ation, digital heritage platforms 
become an undeniable solution to raise public 
engagement, to disseminate cultural heritage values and 
its conservation aspects, as well as to promote 
sustainable tourism at the heritage sites. By analy sing 
180 webpages and  322 mobile apps through the lens of 
the online communication model and related studies , this 
research  has contributed to providing an online map of 
UNESCO WHS s and ICH in Indonesia. The result shows 
that Indonesian digital heritage platforms are developed  
both by top -down approach and bottom -up approaches. 
The governmental support in terms of facilitation and 
policy guidelines combined with the strong local initiative 
helps the expansion of digital heritage platforms such as 
online cultural database websit es, blogs, and mobile 
apps. The study reveals that in terms of addressing the  
English audiences, the online presence of Indonesian 
WHS s is mostly referred through UNESCO WHS official 
website and travel -related webpages for English 
audiences . The e ncyclopaedia  is one of the most 
common types of publishers when it comes to covering 
the cultural heritage in the Indonesian language. 
Therefore, it is deemed important to provide informative 
and educative content within the ICTs for heritage and 
tourism,  in order to improve the capacity of the local 
stakeholders and to raise the awareness of international 
tourism towards the conservation of the heritage. In terms 
of mobile apps, most of the developers are coming from 
private sectors consisting of independe nt developers , 
tech companies, the research centres , and museums. We 
assumed that the high presence of mobile apps and the 
number of downloads  illustrated in the study  indicate a 
certain level  of enthusiasm from Indonesian online users 
regarding the dissem ination of cultural heritage  through 
ICTs . Such tendenc ies would bring benefi cial impacts to  
the improvements in cultural heritage conservation in the 
future. In terms of the number of mobile apps, t he 
Borobudur and the Prambanan Temple Compounds are 
the only two sites among all UNESCO WHS s in Indonesia 
that possess  several dedicated mobile apps. As for the  
UNESCO ICH, the study also records a huge number of 
mobile apps  in relation to Batik and Wayang  puppet 
theatre . This research finds that s ome mobile apps offer 
innovative ways of communicating cultural heritage 
through interactive quizzes, gamification apps with 
animation, AR /VR, etc. Since the scope of the research is 
only limited to analy se the online presence of WHS s in 
Indonesia, this study can be improved by further  research , 
such as the online presence of Indonesian ICH. This 
study focuses on  the analysis of the type of publishers, 
contents, and functionalities of mobile apps dedicated to 
UNESCO WHS s and ICH. Therefore, the research  could 
be expanded to other  topic s such as  usability , apps ’ user 
experiences , as well as the content analysis of the users’ 
comments on both Android and i OS platforms . Such 
researches  may give a theoretical  contribution that can be 
used to assess the quality of the apps . As the research 
shows that only a few apps communicate the UNESCO 
related information and safeguarding goals, it is deemed 
important to define a standard content requirement when 
it comes to communicating good  quality  messages  about FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  89 the cultural heritage through digital technologies. It should 
be noted that the issue of cultural heritage is not only 
related to local identity but also related to socio -cultural 
sustainability , which implies shared responsibilities 
among stakeholders. It is necessary for the Indonesian 
government to maintain the inclusion of local 
communities, education al institutions, media, and 
tourism -related stakeholders in the creation of ICTs for 
culture and heri tage. It is also suggested that each 
UNESCO tangible  and ICH in Indonesia could have at 
least one or a number of  representative mobile apps . Those apps would be valuable  to facilitate and better 
promote the cultural importance  and to support the 
cultural c ommunities of the concerning heritage.  
Acknowledgements  
Indonesian LPDP (Lembaga Pengelola Dana Pendidikan) 
Endowment Funds Scholarships, Ministry of Finance, 
Republic of Indonesia ; UNESCO Chair in ICT to develop 
and promote sustainable tourism in World Heritage Sites 
USI - Università della Svizzera Italiana, Switzerland .
References   
Adukaite, A., & Cantoni, L. (2016). Raising awareness and promoting informal learning on World Heritage in Southern 
Africa: The case of WHACY, a gamified ICT-enhanced tool.  International Journal of Education and Development Using 
Information and Communication Technology , 12 (2), 50–67. Retrieved  May 24, 2020  from 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1111509   
Aghaei, S., Nematbakhsh, M. A., & Farsani, H. K. (2012). Evolution of the world wide web : from web 1.0 to web 4.0 . 
International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology, 3 (1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10. 5121/ijwest.2012.3101  
Albert, M. T. (2012). Perspectives of world heritage: towards future -oriented strategies with the five ‘Cs.’ In M. T. Albert, M. 
Richon, M. J. Viñals, & A. Witcomb (Eds.),  Community development through World Heritage  (pp. 16 –26). Retr ieved 
May 18, 2020 from https://whc.unesco.org/en/series/31/   
Aljunied, S. M. K. (2004). Shades of Alterity: A study of Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles’ discourse on religions amongst the 
Malays (Doctoral dissertation) . National University of Singapore, Singapore . Retrieve  May 18, 2020  from 
https://scholarbank.nus.edu.sg/handle/10635/13867   
Almeida, F. L. (2017). Concept and dimensions of web 4.0. International Journal of Computers & Technology, 16 (7), 7040 –
7046. https://doi.org/10.24297/ijct.v16i7.6446   
Arya, I. T. (2016). Berlatih tari Cendrawasih  [Learning Cendrawasih dance] [Mobile App Software]. Retrieved May 31, 2020 
from https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=id.ardev.taribali&hl=en   
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The internet of things: a survey. Computer Networks, 54 (15), 2787 –2805 . 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010   
Avi, E. (2014). Gerakan sejuta data budaya dilaunching dari Bandung . [One million cultural database launched in 
Bandung]. Retrieved May 23, 2020 from https://news.detik.com/berita -jawa-barat/d -2602920/gerak an-sejuta -daya -
budaya -dilaunching -dari-bandung   
Basole, R. C., & Karla, J. (2012). Value transformation in the mobile service ecosystem: a study of app store emergence 
and growth . Service Science, 4 (1), 24 –41. https://doi.org/10.1287/serv.1120.0004   
Berners -Lee, T. (2000). Weaving the Web. The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by its Inventor . 
New York: Harper Collins.  
Blanco, S., Carrión, B., & Lerma, J. L. (2016). Review of augmented reality and virtual reality techniques in Rock Art. In 
Proceedings of the 8th International Congress on Archaeology, Computer Graphics, Cultural Heritage and Innovation  
(pp. 176–183). https://doi.org/10.4995/arqueologica8.2016.3561   
Boily , L. (2004). Économie du savoir, identités plurielles et nouvelles formes d’exclusion. [Knowledge economy, plural 
identity and new forms of exclusion]. L’Interculturel et l’ Économie à l’ Œuvre (pp. 128 -153). Paris: Les édition David.   
Boonstra, S. N. (2014). Changing wayang scenes Heritage formation and wayang performance practice in colonial and 
postcolonial Indonesia  (Doctoral Dissertation) . Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam , Netherlands . Retrieved from 
https://research.vu.nl/en/publications/changing -wayang -scenes -heritage -formation -and-wayang -performance -  
Cantoni, L., Faré, M., Bolchini, D., & Giulieri, F. (2007). European cities and web tourism communication . An indicators -
based pilot study.  Proceedings of the Travel Distribution Summit, Europe, Research Conference  (pp. 45-54). London: 
Axon Imprint.  
Cantoni, L., & Tardini, S. (2006). Internet . London: Routledge.  
Cantoni, L., & Tardini, S. (2008). Communicating in the information society: new tools for new practices. In Pier Cesare 
Rivoltella (Ed.), Digital Literacy. Tools and Methodologies fo r Information Society  (pp. 26 –44). New York: IGI Publishing.  PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  90 Cantoni, L. (2018). Heritage and sustainable tourism. The role and challenge of information and communication 
technologies. In Silvia De Ascaniis, M. Gravari -Barbas, & L. Cantoni (Eds.), Tourism Management at UNESCO World 
Heritage Sites , (pp. 68 –74). Retrieved from https://www.fun -mooc.fr/courses/course -
v1:Paris1+16008+session01/about   
Charter, V. (1964). International charter for the conservation and restoration. The IInd International Congress of Architects 
and Tec hnicians of Historic Monuments, Venice, 1964.  Retrieved May 23, 2020 from 
https://www.icomos.org/en/participer/179 -articl es-en-francais/ressources/charters -and-standards/157 -the-venice -
charter   
Chi, M. T. H. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: a practical guide . Journal of the Learning Sciences, 
6(3), 271 -315. Retrieved July 13, 2020 from 
http://web.eecs.umich.edu/~mjguz/csl/home.cc.gatech.edu/allison/uploads/4/chi1997.pdf  
Dabello, M. (2016). The past in the pr esent. In P. S. Richards, W. A. Wiegand, & M. Dalbello (Eds.), A history of modern 
librarianship : constructing the heritage of western cultures  (Vol. 69, p. 6). California: Libraries Unlimited/ABC -CLIO.  
Davida, S., & Cantoni, L. (2015). Co-design of eTourism application . The case of Ilha de Mozambique.   Enter eTourism 
Conference 2015 . https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1785.6488   
Danesi, M. (2013). Encyclopedia of media and communication.  University of Toronto Press.  
De Ascaniis, S., Della Monica, C., & Cantoni, L. (2017). A social media campaign to raise awareness about violent heritage 
destruction. The case of #faces4heritage.  HTHIC2017 - Heritage, Tourism and Hospitality , Pori (Finland). 27 -29 
September 2017. Retrieved  May 21, 2020  from http://www.unescochair.usi.ch/faces4heritage/destroyed -heritage   
De Ascaniis, S., & Cantoni, L. (2013). Artistic and religious experiences in online travel reviews about saint paul outside 
the walls (Rome).  Proceedings of ICOT 2013, International Conference on Tourism , 160 –173. Limassol, Cyprus: 
Konstantinos Andriotis.  Retrieved May 29,  2020 from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275209839   
Demartini, C., & Benussi, L. (2017). Do web 4.0 and industry 4.0 imply education  X.0? IT Professional, 19 (3), 4 –7. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2017.47   
Diarta, I. K. S. (2017). Promotion strategy of Borobudur world cultural heritage site for international tourists. Udayana 
Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, 1 (2), 190. https://doi.org/10.24843/ujossh.2017.v01.i02.p12   
Elbanna, A. R. (2009). Actor -network theory in ICT research. International Journal of Actor -Network Theory and 
Technological Innova tion, 1 (3), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.4018/jantti.2009070101   
Fahmi, I. (2002). The Indonesian digital library network is born to struggle with the digital divide. International Information 
and Library Review, 34 (2), 153–174. https://doi.org/10.1006/iilr.2002.0191  
Fitri, I., Ahmad, Y., & Ahmad, F. (2015). Conservation of tangi ble cultural heritage in Indonesia: a review current national 
criteria for assessing heritage value. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 184,  71–78. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.0 5.055   
Garbelli, M. (2015). World heritage sites, tourism, and ICT . Presentation material presented in UNESCO Summer School 
in ICT for Gastronomic tourism 2015 , Milan, Italy.  
Garbelli, M., Adukaite, A., & Cantoni, L. (2017). Value perception of world heritage sites and tourism sustainability matters 
through content analysis of online communications. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology, 8 (3), 417–431. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JHTT -09-2016 -0046  
Gunarto, H. (2007). Digital preservation of Borobudur world heritage.  Journal of Ritsumeikan Studies in Language and 
Culture, 19(2),  263–278. Retrieved from https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Digital -preservation -of-Borobudur -
world -heritage -Gunarto/7ae35860a6f96a44f9e08392fc48aa4d48e7adec#paper -header   
Indo3one3.  (2019). Borobudur explorer. Retrieved May 28, 2020 from 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ciihuy.borobudurexplorer&hl=en   
Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture. (1992). Undang – undang no. 5 tahun 1992 tentang benda cagar cudaya 
[Law number 5, 1992 on cultural heritage]. Retrieved  May 28, 2020  from 
https://peraturan.bpk.go.id/Home/Details/46597/uu -no-5-tahun -1992   
Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture. (2010). Undang – undang no. 11 tahun 2010 tentang cagar budaya  [Law 
number 11, 2010 on cultural heritage]. Retrieved  May 28, 202 0 from http://www.bpkp.go.id/uu/filedownload/2/2/77.bpkp   FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE PLATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  91 Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture. (2017). Undang – undang no. 5 tahun 2017 tentang pemajuan budaya [Law 
number 5, 2017 on cultural cdvancement]. Retrieved  May 28, 2020  from http://pema juankebudayaan.id/undang -
undang/   
Indonesian Ministry of State Owned Enterprises. (2019 ). Rumah Kreatif BUMN  [The launching program of creative house 
for SMEs by Ministry of State Owned Enterprises]. Retrieved May 28, 2020 from http://www.bumn.go.id/berita/0 -
RUMAH -KREATIF -BUMN .  
Islam, R., Islam, R., & Mazumder, T. (2010). Mobile application and its global im pact. International Journal of Engineering 
& Technology, 10 (6), 72 –78. Retrieved  May 22, 2020  from http://ijens.org/107506 -0909%20IJET -IJENS.pdf   
Jonathan, C. J., & Tarigan, R. (2016). The effects of e -tourism to the development of tourism sector in Indonesia . CommIT 
(Communication and Information Technology) Journal, 10( 2), 59. https://doi.org/10.21512/commit.v10i2.1669   
Katwinto, E . (201 3). National Museum of Indonesia. Retrieved from Virtual Collection on Asian Masterpieces (VCM). 
website: http://masterpieces.asemus.museum/museum/detail.nhn?museumId=1 067  
Kéfi, H., & Pallud, J. (2011). Digital heritage the role of technologies in cultural mediation in museums: An actor -network 
theory view applied in France.  Museum Management and Curatorship, 26 (3), 273–289. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09647775.2011.585803   
Kepios . (2019). Everything you need to know about mobile, internet, social media, and e -commerce use in Indonesia in 
2019. Retrieved  May 22, 2020  from https://datareportal.com/digital -in-indonesia  
Krumm, J., Davies, N., & Narayanaswami, C. (2008). User -generated content. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7 (6), 10 –11. 
Kuswarno, E. (2015). Potret wajah masyarakat digital Indonesia . [The portrait of Indonesian digital society].  Jurnal 
Communicate, 1 (1), 47 –54. Retrieved from 
http://ejournal.jayabaya.ac.id/index.php/Jurnal_Communicate/article/view/36  
Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H. G., Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Industry 4.0. Business and Information Systems 
Engineering, 6 (4), 239 –242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599 -014-0334 -4  
Lechner, U., & Schmid, B. F. (2000). Communities and media -towards a reconstruction of communities on media. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , vol.1, 10.  
https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2000.926817   
Lewis, G. (2015). Museums and their precursors: a brief world survey. Manual of curatorship  (2nd ed., pp. 23 –39). 
Retrieved from https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781315810126/chapters/10.4324/9781315810126 -10  
Lizzi, G., Cantoni, L., & Inv ersini, A. (2011). When a magazine goes online: a case study in the tourism field . Information 
and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2011  (pp. 355 –366). https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-7091 -0503 -0_29   
Logan, R. K. (2002). The five ages of communication. Explorations in Media Ecology, 1 (1), 13 –20. 
https://doi.org/10.1386/eme.1.1.13_1   
Marty, P. F. (2014). Digital convergence and the information profession in cultural heritage organizations: Reconciling 
internal and external demands. Library Trends, 62 (3), 613 –627. https://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2014.0007   
Murugesan, S. (2007). Understanding web 2.0. IT Professional, 9 (4), 34 –41. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2007.78  
Mutinda, R., & Cantoni, L. (2016). The efficacy of heritage interpretation at the lalibela rock -hewn churches i n Ethiopia: 
exploring the need for integrating ICT -mediation.  International Journal of Religious Tourism and Pilgrimage, 4 (3), 4(3), 
17–28. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.21427/D7PH8M   
O’Hern, M. S., & Kahle, L. R. (2013). The empowered customer: user -generated content and the future of marketing . 
Global Economics and Management Review, 18 (1), 22 –30. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2340 -1540(13)70004 -5  
Pazia. (2012). Pazia Angklung. Retrieved May 30, 2020 from Google Play website: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=picodio.project.angklung&hl=en   
Permatasari, P. A., & Cantoni, L. (2019a). Indonesian tourism and batik: an online map.  E-Review of Tourism Research, 
16(2/3). Retrieved May 21, 2020 from https://journals.tdl.org/ertr/index.php/ertr/article/view/331/   
Permatasari, P. A., & Cantoni, L. (2019b). Mapping mobile apps on Batik: a journey across herit age and f ashion.  In N. 
Kalbaska, T. Sádaba, F. Cominelli, & L. Cantoni (Eds.) , Fashion Communication in the Digital Age  (pp. 166–178). 
Cham : Springer . https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030-15436 -3_15   PERMATASARI et al., 2020 
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  92 Praharini, A. (2014). Menanti peraturan pelaksanaan dari undang -undang nomor 11 tahun 2010 tentang cagar budaya  
[The implementation of law no. 11, 2010 on cultural heritage]. RechtsVinding Online, 1 –5. Retrieved May 24, 2020 from 
https://rechtsvinding.bphn.go.id  
Rakhmawati, Y. (2016). Batik Madura: heritage cyberbrand ing. Jurnal Komunikasi, 10 (1), 57.  
https://doi.org/10.21107/ilkom.v10i1.1840  
Raza, A. (2016). Angklung 4D [Mobile App Software]. Retrieved May 30, 2020 from https://apkpure.com/id/angklung -
4d/com.focusar.angklung4d   
Redweik, P., Cláudio, A. P., Carmo, M. B., Naranjo, J. M., & Sanjosé, J. J. (2017). Digital preservation of cultural and 
scientific heritage: Involving university students to raise awareness of its importance. Virtual Archaeology Review, 
8(16), 22 –34. https://doi.org/10.4995/var.2017.4 629  
Robbins, C. (2010). Beyond preservation: New directions for technological innovation through intangible cultural heritage.  
International Journal of Education and Development Using ICT, 6 (2). 
Rosani, I., De Ascaniis, S., Gravari -Barbas, M., & Cantoni, L. (2018). ICTs to train on world heritage and tourism: the case 
of “Tourism management at UNESCO World Heritage Sites”  MOOC  (pp. 783-791). Proceedings of Gangemi. 
Architettura, Urbanistica, Ambie nte. World Heritage and Knowledge. Capri.  
Schieder, T. K., Adukaite, A., & Cantoni, L. (201 4). Mobile apps devoted to UNESCO  world heritage sites: a map . In Z. 
Xiang, & I. Tussyadiah ( Eds.), Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism  (pp. 17 –29). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-03973 -2_2  
Serrat, O. (2017). Collaborating with Wikis. In Knowledge Solutions  (pp. 609 –613).  Singapore : Springer . 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -981-10-0983 -9_66  
Situngkir, H. (2010). From data to celebration of cultural heritages: preservations, acquisitions, and intellectual property 
regulations  - Munich Person al RePEc Archive. Acquisitions, and Intellectual Property Regulations. Retrieved from 
http://mpra.ub.uni -muenchen.de/27021/   
Situngkir, H. (2011). The phylomemetics of Batik. SSRN Electronic Journal, 1 –9. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1481394  
Situngkir, H.  (2015). Map of Batik. Retrieved May 27, 2020, from https://apps.apple.com/us/app /map -of-
batik/id1040359216   
Situngkir, H. (2019). Reinvensi budaya nusantara di era siber  [Reinventing Indonesian culture in cyber era]. Proceeding 
dan Seminar Nasional Seni dan Desain  2019. Retrieved July 13, 2020 from 
https://proceedings.sendesunesa.net/media/289169 -reinvensi -budaya -nusantara -di-era-siber -437eb25e.pdf  
Smit, J., Kreutzer, S., Moeller, C., & Carlberg, M. (2016). Industry 4.0. European Parliament, Document No. 
IP/A/ITRE/2015 -02. Retrieved  May 25, 2020  from 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/570007/IPOL_STU(2016)570007_EN.pdf   
Stanforth, C. (2007). Using actor -network theory to analyze e -government implementation in developing countries . 
Information Technologies and International De velopment, 3 (3), 35 –60. https://doi.org/10.1162/itid.2007.3.3.35   
Statham, N. (2019). Scientific rigour of online platforms for 3D visualisation of heritage.  Virtual Archaeology Review, 10 (20), 
1–16. https://doi.org/10.4995/var.2019.9715   
Studio , E. (2018). Cerita anak: Roro Jonggrang dan Bandung Bondowoso  [Kids story: princess Roro Jonggrang and prince 
Bandung Bondowoso] [Mobile application software]. Retrieved May 30, 2020, from 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.educastudio.cerirorojongg rang&hl=en   
Stuedahl, D. (2007). Convergence, museums and digital cultural heritage. In T. Storsul & D. Stuedahl (Eds.), The 
Ambivalence towards  Convergence : Digitalization and Media Change (pp. 129–144). Sweden: Nordicom.   
Surakarta , U. (2016). Wayang fighters by Prodi D3 Teknik Informatika FMIPA UNS Surakarta [Mobile application software]. 
Retrieved May 30, 2020, from https://play.google.co m/store/apps/details?id=com.IrfanCorporation.WayangFighter   
Tardini, S. (2003). Keywords as passwords to communities.  Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the International 
Society for the Study of Argumentation . Amsterdam: Sic Sat.  
Titchen, S. M. (1996). On the construction of ‘outstanding universal value’: Some comments on the implementation of the 
1972 UNESCO World Heritage Convention . Conservation and Management of Archaeological Sites, 1 (4), 235 –242. 
https://doi.org/10.1179/135050396793138971   FROM  WEB 1.0 TO WEB 4.0: THE DIGITAL HERITAGE P LATFORMS FOR UNESCO’S HERITAGE PROPERTIES IN 
INDONESIA  
 Virtual Archaeology Review , 11(23): 75-93, 2020  93 UNESCO. (1972). Convention concerning the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage . Retrieved  May 30, 2020  
from http://whc.unesco.org/uploads/activities/documents/activity -562-4.pdf   
UNESCO. (2009a). Education and training in Indonesian Batik intangible cultural heritage for elementary, junior, senior, 
vocational school and polytechnic students, in collaboration with the Batik Museum in Pekalongan. Retrieved from  May 
26, 2020 from UNE SCO ICH website: https://ich.unesco.org/en/BSP/education -and-training -in-indonesian -batik -
intangible -cultural -heritage -for-elementary -junior -senior -vocational -school -and-polytechnic -students -in-collaboration -
with-the-batik -museum -in-pekalongan -00318 .  
UNESCO. (20 09b). Indonesian Batik. Retrieved from UNESCO ICH website: https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/indonesian -
batik -00170 .  
UNESCO. (2017). Memory of UNESCO : Borobudur conservation archives. Retriev ed May 24, 2020  from 
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communica tion-and-information/memory -of-the-world/register/full -list-of-registered -
heritage/registered -heritage -page -1/borobudur -conservation -archives/   
UNESCO. (2019). The UNESCO 2003 convention for the safeguarding of the intangible cultural heritage: opportuniti es for 
indigenous peoples . Retrieved  May 23, 2020  from http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco -liaison -office -in-new-
york/about -this-office/single -view/news/the_unesco_2003_convention_for_the_safeguarding_of_the_intan/  
Vecco, M. (2010). A definition of cultural heritage: From the tangible to the intangible. Journa l of Cultural Heritage, 11 (3), 
321–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2010.01.006  
Veltman, K. H. (2005). ICT and heritage. E-Journal of the Humanities and Philology Studies (7).  Retrieved from  
http://www.uoc.edu/digithum/7/dt/eng/dossier.pdf  
Zulkifli, A. R., & Azhari, A. R. (2018). Perlindungan objek pemajuan kebudayaan menurut undang -undang nomor 5 tahun 
2017 . [Protection of Cultural Progress Object pursuant to Law Number 5 Year 2017]. Doktrina  Journal of Law , 1(1), 
56–58. https://doi.org/10.31289/doktrina.v1i1.1611  