 
   
 
 
IMPROVING  THE  TRACKING  AND  
TRACEABILITY  OF U.S. FOOD  AID:   
 A FEASIBILITY  STUDY   
 
 
October 2020  
This publication is made possible by the support of the American People through the United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID) and was prepared by Integra Government Services International 
LLC for the Learning, Evaluation, and Analysis Project (LEAP III) Activity.  
  
 2 IMPROVING THE TRACKING AND 
TRACEABILITY OF U.S. FOOD AID: A 
FEASIBILITY STUDY  
 
FINAL REPORT  
 
 
 
 
Contract Title:   LEAP III: Learning, Evaluation, and Analysis Project  
Contract Number:   GS-10F-083CA / 7200AA18M0004  
Activity Number:   LEAP III 2020 – 1009.1037  
Submitted:    October 5, 2020  
Contractor:    Integra Government Services International LLC  
1156 15th Avenue NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20005  
Subcontractor:   Limestone Analytics  
USAID Office:   USAID/Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance   
COR:     Eric Hyman, ehyman@usaid.gov  
Prepared by:   Nathan Martinez (Limestone Analytics), Mu nish Minocha (Integra 
Government Services International), Jay Mackinnon (Limestone 
Analytics), Assefa Melese Zegeye (Integra Government Services 
International), Liesl Kim (Integra Government Services International), 
Bahman Kashi (Limestone Analytics)  
 
DISCLAIMER  
This report is made possible by the support of the American people through USAID. The authors’ views 
expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States 
Government.    
 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  3 
LIST OF TABLES  4 
LIST OF FIGURES  5 
ACRONYMS  7 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  9 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  10 
1. OVERVIEW AND BACKGROUND  18 
2. RES EARCH METHODS  20 
3. TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY  23 
4. OPERATIONAL FEASIBILITY  32 
5. ECO NOMIC FEASIBILITY  43 
6. INSTITUTIONAL, OPERATIONAL, AND ECONOMIC RISKS  51 
7. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  57 
ANNEX I: STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS  61 
ANNEX II: 2020 STUDY OF FOOD AID  62 
ANNEX III: 2020 STUDY OF FOOD AID SURVEY  67 
ANNEX IV: REFERENCES  95 
ANNEX V. COST -BENEFIT MODEL  97 
ANNEX V1. PREPO PILOT COST ESTIMATES  104 
 
 
  
 4 LIST OF TABLES  
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF COSTS AND BENEFITS BY IT SOLUTION IMPLEMENTATION 
PHASE  43 
TABLE 2: DECISION CRITER IA OUTPUT - BASE SCENARIO  44 
TABLE 3: ASSUMED INVESTMENT COSTS IN BASE SCENARIO  47 
TABLE 4: OPERATIONAL COSTS  48 
TABLE 5: ALTERNATIVE SCENARIO (HIGH PRINTING COSTS) MODEL OUTPUTS  49 
TABLE 6: ABORTED AIDC  49 
TABLE 7: SEN SITIVITY OF NPV TO LOSS REDUCTION %  53 
TABLE 8: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION COST  54 
TABLE 9: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO DISCOUNT RATE  54 
TABLE 10: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO MARGINAL PER BAG COST  55 
TABLE 11: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO TIMEFRAME  55 
TABLE 12: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO TIMEFRAME  56 
TABLE 13: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS ORGANIZATIONS INTERVIEWED  61 
  
 5 LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Existing U.S. -Sourced Food Commodity Supply Chain  10 
Figure 2: Sources of Costs and Benefits and the Investment Criteria  13 
Figure 3:  Existing U.S. -Sourced Food Commodity Supply Chain  18 
Figure 4: U.S. -Sourced Food Aid by Packaging Type and Volume  21 
Figure 5: U.S. -Sourced Food Aid by Packaging Type and Volume  22 
Figure 6: Implementing the QR Code and AIDC Solutions Across BHA’s Supply Chain  24 
Figure 7: An Example QR Code   25 
Figure 8: QR Code Test Print on Woven Polypropylene Bag  26 
Figure 9: Static and Dynamic QR Code Desig n 29 
Figure 10: Example of an Unscannable Barcode on a Woven Polypropylene Bag  30 
Figure 11: Reported Food Commodity Inventory Management and Tracking Systems by PIOs, 
PVOs, and NGOs  33 
Figure 12: USAID and Stakeholder Food Aid QR Code and AIDC Pilots  35 
Figure 13: Phased Approach for Implementing QR Codes and an AIDC System  37 
Figure 14: An Illustrative Example of Using the Agile Methodology  38 
Figure 15: Phase II QR Code Implem entation Cycles by Packaging Type (Metric Tons)  39 
Figure 16: QR Code Deliverables for Cycle I  40 
Figure 17: QR Code Deliverables for Cycle  62 
Figure 18: QR Code Familiarity  63 
Figure 19: QR  Code Opportunities – Word Cloud   63 
Figure 20:  Existing PVO/PIO/NGO Data Sharing  64 
Figure 21: QR Codes and PVO/PIO/NGO Losses  65 
Figure 22: PVO/PIO/NGO Total Recall Times  65 
Figure 23: Capacity to Print QR Codes  66  
 6 Figure 24: Potential to Print QR Code  66 
Figure 25: Food Aid Data – Reporting Intervals  66 
Figure 26: Tracking and Job Performance  66 
  
 7 ACRONYMS  
AIDC   - Automatic Identification and Data Capture  
API  - Application Programming Interface  
BHA   - Bureau of Humanitarian Assistance  
CBA   - Cost-Benefit Analysis  
CBO   - Country Backstop Officer  
EDI  - Electronic Data Interface  
EFSP   - Emergency food security program  
ERP  - Electronic Resource Planning  
FFP  - Food for Peace  
FY  - Financial Year  
GAO   - Government Accountability Office  
HIMS   - Humanitarian Inventory Management System  
ID  - One-Dimensional  
IO  - Implementing Organization  
IP  - Implementi ng Partner  
IT  - Information Technology  
KCCO   - Kansas City Commodity Office  
KG  - Kilogram  
LRP  - Local or regional purchase  
M&E   - Monitoring and Evaluation  
MIT LL  - Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory  
MT  - Metric ton  
MVP   - Minimum  Viable Product  
NGO   - Non-governmental Organization  
NPV   - Net Present Value  
OFDA   - Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance  
PIO  - Public International Organization  
PO  - Purchase Order  
PP   - Polypropylene  
PREPO  - USAID prepositioning warehouses  
PVO   - Private Volunteer Organization   
 8 QR Code  - Quick Response Code  
RFID   - Radio Frequency Identification  
RUSF   - Ready -to-Use Supplementary Food  
RUTF   - Ready -to-Use Therapeutic Food  
S&H   - Shipping and Handling  
SAP  - "Systems, Applications & Products in Data Processing" (Company)  
UN  - United Nations  
URL   - Uniform Resource Locator  
USAID  - United States Agency for International Development  
USD   - United States dollar  
USDA   - United States Department of Agriculture  
USG   - United States Gover nment  
WBSCM  - Web-based supply chain management  
WFP   - World Food Programme  
WVI   - World Vision International  
XML   - Extensible Markup Language  
 
   
 9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The members of the USAID -funded Learning, Evaluation, and Analysis Project III (LEAP III) te am would 
like to thank the numerous people and institutions who lent their time and expertise to this project.  We 
could not have completed this work without the generous contributions and insights from stakeholders 
in Washington, D.C.; Houston, Texas; Lansing, Michigan; and other locations across the globe.    
We especially want to thank the U.S. Government (USG) o fficials who generously donated their time to 
speak with the LEAP III team, identify data sources and points of contact at partner organizations, and  
refine the scope of the project in response to COVID -19.  This project would not be possible without 
the support of the following USAID officials: Greg Olson , Kevin Tutasig, Elise Bell, Lima Pallithanam, Paul 
Vicinanzo, Kim Cook, Agnes O’Hanlon, and numerous country backstops and USAID Mission staff.  
Similarly, the team would like to thank USDA officials D an Webber, Jessica Howlett, and Wendy 
Borgmeyer for their support in facilitating discussions with suppliers and information technology (IT) 
systems specialists.  
We also want to thank the many supply chain stakeholders and subject -matter experts who provi ded 
professional expertise and technical feedback that were critical to our analysis .  This included in -person 
and virtual interviews and participation in the survey that informs this analysis .  We are particularly grateful 
for the time and logistical supp ort that was given by Palmer Logistics, Stratus, and PolySac to tour their 
facilities and discuss their existing operational capacity and IT systems .  We would also like to thank 
MANA Nutrition and MIT Lincoln Laboratory for sharing information about the p ilots and research 
initiatives they are leading, which test the IT solutions discussed in this study.     
The authors of this report take full responsibility for any and all errors and omissions .  The authors’ views 
expressed in this report are not necessa rily those of USAID or the United States Government .  The 
authors of this report also have no conflicts of interest related to the food aid supply chain or the IT 
solutions discussed in this report.   
 10 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
INTRODUCTION  
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance 
(BHA) plays a lead role in efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to the world’s most vulnerable and 
hardest -to-reach people.  USAID/BHA provides food com modities grown by American farmers when 
partner country food supplies are limited or inaccessible.  In fiscal year (FY) 2019, these U.S. -sourced 
products accounted for approximately 41 percent of USAID’s $4.38 billion food assistance budget and 
over 1.7 me tric tons (MT) of food.  
The process starts when qualifying public international organizations (PIOs) and private voluntary 
organizations (PVOs) make food requests to the U.S. Government.  If approved, the commodities are sent 
from suppliers to transport p oints or warehouse facilities at various logistical nodes of the supply chain, 
including U.S. ports, foreign discharge ports, and U.S. and international USAID prepositioning warehouses 
(PREPOs).  At some point in the process, the food commodities are trans ferred to partner organizations, 
who are then responsible for distributing the food commodities using their own transport and distribution 
partner networks and their own information tracking systems.  
As U.S. -sourced commodities move along the supply chain , stakeholders use their own information 
technology (IT) systems for sending, validating, and reconciling food aid deliveries.  In many instances, data 
is shared in paper form, spreadsheet, or email.  The result is a supply chain structure in which fragmen ted 
information flows impede the full potential of effectively managing and tracking food aid commodities.  The 
use of disparate systems also presents challenges with tracing food commodities when there are recalls 
or food quality issues.  For instance, th ere can be substantial time lags when independent systems are used 
to trace the origin of a commodity.  This can result in high administrative costs and the expiration of food 
that was incorrectly included in the initial recall.    
Figure 1: Existing U.S. -Sourced Food Commodity Supply Chain   
 
Source: Author’s representation.  
 
 11 This study aimed to assess the technical and economic feasibility of introducing an integrated IT solution 
to allow for semi -automatic and easier tracking and  tracing of commodities across the supply chain.  Given 
the large scale of transportation and warehousing of food commodities, the team started with the 
assumption that even a minor efficiency gain can lead to significant savings.  Therefore, the team has picked 
a conservative methodology in which a defensible subset of benefits of transitioning to an integrated IT 
solution is compared with the upper bound estimates for its costs.  This approach helps in building a 
strong policy argument, should the lower b ound of benefits exceed the upper bound of costs when 
assessing the feasibility of transitioning into the new system.  
PROPOSED IT SOLUTIONS  
USAID/BHA aims to improve the accuracy and accountability of the U.S. food aid supply chain by reducing 
the time and potential errors associated with manual data entry.  It also wants to enhance USAID/BHA’s 
monitoring and evaluation system to improve food aid management, beneficiary targeting, and product 
traceability.  Lastly, USAID/BHA wants to address long -standing issues with commodities, such as the 
source of infestations, damages, and theft.  To achieve these goals, USAID is considering several IT 
investments that could lead to the uniform collection and sharing of food aid data, including an Automatic 
Identification and Data Capture (AIDC) system that uses Quick Respo nse (QR) codes.  
An AIDC system refers to methods used to identify objects automatically, collect data about them, and 
enter this information into a computer system.1  This system, which does  not require direct human 
involvement, makes data collection efficient and consistent and removes much of the capacity for human 
error .  USAID/BHA envisions a system of comprehensive data collection for the purposes of tracking and 
tracing food aid flows t hat heavily incorporates AIDC at key points in the supply chain.  This system will 
allow users to see if commodities are lost in transit between key nodes or determine if the commodities 
in storage are at risk of expiring.  
Created in the 1990s, QR codes a re two -dimensional barcodes that can efficiently hold data in a compact 
format and can be read instantly by scanners or mobile phones, even if partially damaged or warped.  
Based on discussions with USAID and secondary research, the team is considering the  use of QR codes 
over several other technologies due to issues of affordability, availability, and the amount of information 
that can be stored on a QR code .  Specifically, QR codes provide more information than a barcode, yet 
the implementation costs are similar.  In addition, the underlying infrastructure required to operate an 
alternative technology like radio frequency identification (RFID) is costly and unavailable in many countries.   
STUDY PURPOSE AND APPROACH  
USAID/BHA’s Office of Field and Response  Operation requested that the USAID -funded Learning, 
Evaluation, and Analysis Project (LEAP III) team conduct a feasibility study to provide decision -makers with 
a thorough understanding of the investments, procedures, and incremental costs and benefits of  
implementing the proposed IT solutions across the U.S. food aid supply chain.  The study is also supposed 
 
1 AIDC systems include a variety of technologies, such as QR codes, bar codes, radio frequency identification (RFID), and biome trics, among 
others. See Wikipedia, 2020 for a full list of technologies (available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_identification_and_data_capture ).  
 12 to give insights as to how the enhanced data visibility provided by these IT solutions could affect the 
management and governance of food aid in term s of improved accountability, planning, and reporting.  
The team has worked extensively with BHA to develop a comprehensive approach for carrying out an 
analysis that assesses the feasibility and potential impact of implementing the new IT supply chain 
mana gement solutions.  This approach is guided by three analytical components:  
● Technical Feasibility  — The feasibility of the USAID’s investment will depend on the 
functionality of available technology.  
● Operational Feasibility  — The introduction of a new IT s ystem in a large organization like 
BHA, and its rollout through a supply chain with many partner organizations is complex and 
subject to many barriers.  Therefore, the overall feasibility of this investment depends on the 
strategy and implementation plan t o roll out the IT solutions .  The team has provided 
recommendations for how USAID can use a gradual and iterative approach for implementing the 
solutions across its commodities.  
● Economic Feasibility  — An economic cost -benefit model is used to compare the estimated 
costs and benefits of changing from the status quo to the proposed IT solutions.  For the economic 
analysis to result in a strong policy argument, the team has taken a conservative approach and 
compared a defensible sunset of benefits with an upp er bound for costs.   
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS  
ECONOMIC ARGUMENT FOR INVESTING IN THE IT SOLUTIONS  
There is a strong economic argument for investment in tracking and tracing .  The team met 
with numerous stakeholders from around the world and discussed the c osts inherent in the current way 
food aid is tracked and traced .  The lack of clarity on the current volume of food lost in the supply chain 
is evident to the issues that arise when an IT solution is not in place .  Through surveys and interviews 
with diffe rent segments of the supply chain, the team has estimated that roughly 2 percent of food is lost 
in the supply chain each year .  The respondents also indicated that about 30 percent (0.58 percentage 
points) of these losses could be avoided, should an AIDC system become operational .  The potential 
saving s discounted over 15 years  is roughly equal to  13,400 MT of food, which is equivalent to 67,080 
people being fed for 12 months .  At an average landed cost of $528 dollars per ton, this translates to a  
net present  value of approximately 7.1 Million USD over the next 15 years.2    
On the cost side, the team estimates that an initial investment cost of $2 million and an annual maintenance 
cost of $350,000 should be more than sufficient to cover the scope of the project  to include the printing 
of QR codes and the establishment of an  AIDC system .  Given the uncertainties associated with setting 
up this type of  system  across the entire food aid supply chain , the team has used a highly conservative 
estimate  for the annual maintenance costs , In practice, these costs decline over time.  Even when using 
these conservative assumptions, this investment has a net present value of $7,089,563, an internal rate of 
 
2 See Section 5.2, CBA Outputs, and Annex V, Cost -Benefit Model, for calculations.     
 13 return of 32 percent, and a payback period of roughly six years .  The main sources of costs and benefits 
and the investment criteria a re summarized in the figure  below.  
Figure 2: Sources of Costs and Benefits and the Investment Criteria  
Source: Author’s representation  
There remain two sources of risk for this investment .  The first is the potential for the AIDC 
system to be delayed or fail to enter operations, which could happen for several reasons, including a lack 
of stakeholder support .  Secondly, small changes in the marginal costs of commodity packaging could be 
costly when extended to the entire supply  chain. Even a marginal cost of five cents per bag would have a 
significant impact on the economic viability of this investment.  Based on conversations with multiple 
stakeholders, the team expects any increase in the marginal cost of packaging to be  primarily  associated 
with the increased cost of getting QR codes print on woven PP bags.  
SUPPLY CHAIN STAKEHOLDERS USE DISPARATE DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS  
A significant number of stakeholders use spreadsheets and paper forms to monitor food aid 
inventories and to track U.S. food aid shipments and distributions.   According to feedback from 
the 2020 Survey of Food Aid, partner organizations primarily use spreadsheets, paper forms, and 
electronic forms to monitor food aid commodity inventories, shipments, and food aid distributions.  
Similarly, warehouse operators report using spreadsheets and commercial software to monitor food aid 
shipments and warehouse inventories, whereas the most common methods for reporting food aid flows 
to stakeholders (e.g., USAID, PVOs, P IOs, etc.) are by email and spreadsheets.  $0.3$0.3$1.7$1.3$7.7
$15.8$1.5$0.1$1.0
$7.1
$0.0$2.0$4.0$6.0$8.0$10.0$12.0$14.0$16.0$18.0$20.0
Costs Benefits Net ImpactMillionsReal QR Investment Cost Real QR - Operations Costs Real AIDC Investment Cost
Real AIDC - Operations Costs Additonal Cost of QR Codes (PP Bags) Real B1 - Reduction in Losses
Real B2 - Reduced Demurrage Real B3 - Labour Savings Real B4 - Recall Efficiency Gain
Net Impact 
 14 THERE IS A SOLID FOUNDATION FOR IMPLEMENTING THE IT SOLUTIONS  
USAID and its partners are clearly aware of the benefits of improving the data visibility of 
food commodities, which is demonstrated by completed, existing, and planned QR code and 
AIDC pilots and initiatives.3  The completed pilots have provided valuable feedback regarding the 
existing capacity and costs to print and scan QR codes.  Specifically, the pilots have demonstrated that 
suppliers have the  capacity to add QR codes, and the marginal costs are low for the piloted packaging 
types.  However, staff at the distribution points need adequate training to properly scan and use the QR 
codes.  Ongoing and planned pilots are significantly more complex a nd will provide powerful insights for 
constructing the AIDC system and processes for scaling technologies.      
Supply chain stakeholders have built strong foundations to implement pilots and coordinate 
common technical solutions .  USAID/BHA is currently i nvolved in several working groups responsible 
for coordinating pilots and establishing common procedures and protocols for adding QR codes to food 
aid packaging.  USAID/BHA is also engaged in international packaging conferences and workshops, such 
as the 2 020 Food Aid Packaging Workshop.   
PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS AND LEADERSHIP INVOLVEMENT  
Although it is possible to add QR codes on most food aid packaging types with limited 
modifications or investments, it is not yet possible to  consistently  use QR codes on the 
existing packaging design for woven polypropylene (PP) bags.   Investments and adjustments are 
needed to add and use QR codes on food aid commodities like palletized vegetable oil, ready -to-use 
supplementary food (RUSF) and ready -to-use therapeutic food  (RUTF) packages, and commodities in 
hybrid paper bags.  However, the existing material used on PP bags does not consistently  retain the QR 
code as it moves across the supply chain, meaning it is not always possible to scan PP bags once they reach 
partne r countries .  A potential alternative may be to use QR codes only at the batch or lot level .  Another 
potential solution would be to investigate the use of new packaging procedures and/or materials  
Although officials at USAID and partner organizations are actively leading the effort to 
coordinate pilots and establish the foundation for adopting the IT solutions, senior leaders 
from each stakeholder organization are not yet promoting these technologies.  With that said, 
USAID/BHA’s Office of Field and Respon se Operations is building the business case for using these 
technologies, including pilots and this feasibility study, which will be communicated to senior leaders in 
the near future.  
RECOMMENDATIONS  
The team also has several recommendations as to the next  steps for the design and implementation of 
these IT solutions.  These recommendations are motivated by USAID/BHA’s overall goal of transitioning 
 
3 USAID successfully completed a pilot to print and read QR codes on hybrid paper bags (25kg) co ntaining wheat flour. Similarly, WFP piloted 
the Last Mile Solution in Ethiopia, involving the printing of QR codes on waybills and the creation of a dedicated mobile pla tform for electronic 
scanning and receipt confirmation. The Massachusetts Institute of  Technology Lincoln Laboratory (MIT LL) has partnered with USAID to build an 
Intelligent Food Tracking System and Dashboard to add more data visibility to the supply chain, while MANA, a non -profit RUFT supplier, is 
leading a QR code pilot that provides pr oduct details, status updates, and real -time responses.    
 15 to a comprehensive system for accessing and sharing food aid data —from the time the commodity is 
packaged to t he final distribution point where commodities are given to beneficiaries.  
1. USAID and other stakeholders will need to agree on a well -coordinated, holistic 
approach for rolling out new technologies, such as common IT requirements and 
realistic timelines for adoption.   
The expectations and timelines will differ based on the actor’s role within the supply chain .  USAID and 
USDA, for instance, will need to specify the appropriate reporting systems, lead times, and packaging 
requirements for printing and using Q R codes in a common AIDC solution .  Similarly, downstream supply 
chain actors, such as PVO transport and warehouse operators, will need to have the means, lead times, 
and systems for implementing the new solutions, including the financial resources to inve st in the necessary 
IT data systems and scanning equipment.  
2. Stakeholders will need to use a gradual and iterative approach to shift from disparate 
data tracking systems to a common AIDC system .  This can be achieved by 
implementing the IT solutions over three phases .  
The team believes this goal can be achieved by implementing the IT solutions over three phases, each with 
its own objectives and iterative processes.  The first phase would involve the development of the project 
scope by a cro ss-functional team of supply chain stakeholders.  The second phase would include the 
investments and systems needed to print, collect, and store QR codes.  The final phase would involve the 
collective adoption of an AIDC system.  
3. The initiative will need th e active support of senior leaders, such as division chiefs, 
directors, and administrators, to implement the IT solutions successfully.   
This will include the approval of financial resources and personnel to assist with the design and 
implementation of the  respective IT systems.  USAID senior officials will also need to engage proactively 
with senior officials at partner organizations to champion the initial use of an online database to maintain 
the QR code data and the eventual adoption of a common AIDC sy stem.  The team recommends that 
USAID leaders start with those organizations where strong relationships exist or where solid 
informational structures are present.   
4. USAID should implement QR codes (Phase II) over three cycles to provide ample 
time for identifying the packaging requirements and printing processes for adding QR 
codes to certain commodities.  
The first cycle should be directed toward a subset of food aid commodities and shipment types with the 
greatest potential for success, such as palletized vegetable oil, RUSF and RUTF packages, and commodities 
in hybrid paper bags.  The second cycle should include the printing of QR codes on PP bags for 
prepackaged commodities.  The third cycle woul d include the printing of QR codes on PP bags that 
accompany bulk shipments to discharge ports.  It is especially important to pilot the PP woven bags, 
because they are used for the majority of the BHA food aid supply, and the success of this solution depe nds 
on figuring out how to print easily scanned QR codes at a minimal cost.   
 16 5. USAID should use custom QR codes in its initial rollout for a limited set of food 
categories without any integration requirements or complexity.   
USAID currently has the option of using static, dynamic, or custom QR codes, Static QR codes are 
immutable and can be read without an Internet connection, whereas dynamic QR codes can be updated 
periodically but would require an Internet connection for real -time updates .  Custom QR codes, which 
are a combination of these two types, would enable a quick, low -cost rollout for the initial phase .  It is 
critical that the custom QR code design have a strong foundation so that the QR code can be enhanced 
in subsequent phases when the QR code is a dded to different food commodities .  This additional 
functionality would also be critical when integrating existing IT solutions (e.g., USAID’s Humanitarian 
Inventory Management System [HIMS]).  
6. USAID will need to work collaboratively with USDA, suppliers,  and partner 
organizations to  identify a packaging solution  and process  for commodities currently 
shipped  and packaged  in PP bags .  
Based on discussions with food aid packaging suppliers, it is difficult to print a QR code on a 50 kg PP bag 
due to the shee n of the existing packaging material.  Some potential solutions include a half -laminated PP 
bag, smaller PP bags that will better hold and retain the QR code, or patching the QR code into the 
existing PP packaging type .  Other barriers will need to be cons idered .  For example, there are potential 
bagging solutions for  bulk commodities packaged at the discharge port,  but they cannot be used due to 
how the bags are sealed.        
7. USAID and partner organizations will need to develop a process for packing bulk 
commodities into PP bags containing the QR codes.   
Millions of PP bags accompany bulk shipments to the discharge ports where the commodities are matched 
and packaged in the appropriate PP bags.  Therefore, it is theoretically possible to match the bulk 
commodity to the relevant QR code bag once a new PP packaging type has been designed.  However, 
stakeholders feel that the existing processes do not always result in the proper packaging of bulk 
commodities, which would result in data integrity issues as comm odities move along the supply chain.  
8. To implement an AIDC solution, all stakeholders will need to align under common 
goals and objectives, incorporate the IT business requirements of each actor, and 
develop a minimum viable product (MVP).   
USAID and stak eholders will need to build on the lessons learned, successes, and partnerships that are 
established with the implementation of QR codes (Phase II) to align on the common goals of an AIDC 
solution.  USAID will also need to work with stakeholders to finaliz e the AIDC business requirements, 
which should specify how the AIDC solution would receive and share data with other systems like web -
based supply chain management (WBSCM), HIMS, and the World Food Programme’s (WFP’s) SAP 
solution.  USAID will also need to  develop an MVP, the most useful and logically sound system that can 
be implemented with the lowest time and resource costs.  The MVP will represent the solution that has 
the highest probability of adoption.    
 17 9. To increase the likelihood of success, USAID of ficials with strong technical and 
leadership skills will need to lead the AIDC process.   
USAID staff should have expertise in the following areas: program and project management, solution 
design and data modeling, and techno -functional skills that cover b oth international supply chain and IT 
technical expertise .  The team strongly recommends that members of the USAID/BHA team should be 
involved in leading this process.  
10. It is also critical that the AIDC solution design and implementation plan are socializ ed 
with stakeholders.  
USAID and key stakeholder organizations should hold focus group discussions, meetings, and workshops 
to give supply chain participants an opportunity to review the design and provide feedback.  This would 
give stakeholders a sense of  ownership over the solution and increase the chances that the centralized 
system meets the needs of all U.S. food aid supply chain actors .  At this point in time, the team does not 
believe there is any off -the-shelf solution that address all of USAID’s re quirements .  However, this might 
change when the overall solution requirements have been defined.   
11. Any rollout of the IT solutions should be combined with a robust training program 
customized for each stakeholder group.  
This will be particularly important for stakeholders who are further removed from a reliable IT network 
and may not have the informati on or training to scan, store, and access information tied to QR codes .  
USAID and partner organizations should set their budgets to accommodate the training and schedule 
them in accordance with the IT solution timelines .  Given the current constraints of COVID -19, this 
training should be offered for both in -person and virtual attendance.   
 18 1. OVERVIEW AND BACKGROUND  
1.1 BACKGROUND  
USAID/BHA plays a lead role in efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to the world’s most vulnerable 
and hardest -to-reach people.  Established in 2020, BHA comprises two former USAID offices —the Office 
of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) and FFP.  The Bureau continues OFDA’s work of leading and 
coordinating U.S. Government assistance for international disasters and bui lds on FFP’s work of providing 
emergency food and development assistance to alleviate hunger and improve food security.   
In FY 2019, FFP’s portfolio included a total food assistance budget of $4.38 billion, which was used to 
deliver almost 2.5 million MT of food to beneficiaries in 55 countries.  USAID/BHA food assistance is used 
for emergencies where local authorities lack the resources to address food shortages.  This food assistance 
is delivered by partner organizations using four modalities: locally or  regionally purchased food, U.S. -grown 
food, market -based food vouchers, and flexible market -based food vouchers, such as cash, mobile, or 
debit card transfers .  When making a request for food assistance, USAID’s partners recommend a modality 
based on seve ral criteria, such as market conditions, feasibility (e.g., timeliness and security), and cost.   
USAID provides food commodities grown by American farmers when local food supplies are limited or 
inaccessible .  In FY 2019, these U.S. sourced commodities ac counted for approximately 41 percent of 
FFP’s food assistance budget and more than 1.7 MT of food .  The process starts when qualifying PIOs and 
PVOs make food requests to USAID .  If approved, the requests are sent to the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USD A) for review and approval.  USDA then solicits contract bids and procures food 
commodities for approved requests, and USAID assists partner organizations with the procurement of 
ocean freight.  
Figure 3:  Existing U.S.-Sourced Food Commodity Supply Chain   
 
Source: Author’s representation  
The commodities are then sent from suppliers to transport points or warehouse facilities at different 
logistical nodes of the supply chain, including U.S. ports, foreign discharge  ports, and U.S. and international 
 
 19 USAID prepositioning warehouses (PREPO).  At some point in the process, the food commodities are 
transferred to partner organizations, who are then responsible for distributing the food commodities using 
their own transpo rt and distribution partner networks, as well as their own information tracking systems 
(see Figure 1 above).   
As U.S. -sourced commodities move along the supply chain, stakeholders use their own IT systems for 
sending, validating, and reconciling food aid  deliveries.  The result is a supply chain structure in which 
fragmented information flows impede the full potential of effectively managing and tracking food aid 
commodities.  The use of disparate systems also presents challenges with tracing food commodi ties when 
there are recalls or food quality issues .  For instance, there can be substantial time lags as stakeholders 
use their respective systems to trace the origin of a food recall, which can result in unnecessary 
administrative costs and the expiration  of food commodities that were incorrectly included in the initial 
recall.    
USAID/BHA’s aims to improve the accuracy and accountability of the U.S. food aid supply chain by 
reducing the time and potential errors associated with manual data entry; enhanci ng the monitoring and 
evaluation system to improve food aid management, beneficiary targeting, and product traceability; and by 
addressing longstanding issues with commodities, such as the source of infestations, damages, and theft.  
To achieve these objec tives, USAID/BHA is considering the investment in IT solutions that will lead to the 
uniform collection and sharing of food aid data .  These potential solutions include an end -to-end AIDC 
system and barcoding technologies like QR codes.  
1.2 FEASIBILITY ST UDY PURPOSE   
“Often, we know what was authorized in awards, but we don't have eyes on how much food has 
arrived at a specific geographic location .  Greater real -time visibility on this should help better 
identify gaps and improve coordination.”  
- USAID Staff  
 
The goal of this feasibility study is to provide decision -makers with a thorough understanding of the 
investments, procedures, and incremental costs and benefits of implementing the QR code and AIDC 
solutions across BHA’s supply chain for U.S. in -kind food assistance.  The study will also give insights as 
to how the enhanced data visibility provided by these IT solutions could potenti ally affect the management 
and governance of U.S. food aid in terms of improved accountability, planning, and reporting.  The team 
begins this study by describing the research methods that were used to conduct this analysis.  The report 
then details the as sessment of the technical, financial, and economic feasibility of implementing these IT 
solutions, including the inherent risks associated with each of these topics .  The team then concludes the 
study with a series of recommendations for USAID and stakehol ders to consider.       
 20 2. RESEARCH METHODS  
The team has worked extensively with the BHA team to develop a comprehensive approach for carrying 
out an analysis that assesses the feasibility and potential impact of implementing a new IT supply chain 
managemen t solution.  Findings from this analysis provide decision -makers with a thorough understanding 
of the requirements, procedures, and incremental costs and benefits of adopting the IT solutions across 
the supply chain.  Our approach is guided by three analyt ical components:  
1. Technical feasibility  
2. Operational feasibility  
3. Economic feasibility  
After providing a summary for each of these components, the team will describe the main qualitative and 
quantitative data that supports our study and recommendations.     
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY  
The feasibility of the USAID’s investment will depend on the functionality of available technology.  Our 
team has researched the available options and determined their suitability for improving the tracking and 
traceability of food aid.  Our research includes the required technical elements of the IT solutions to 
include barcodes, printers, scanners, and database solutions.  Based on discussions with USAID, our team 
has narrowed the scope of potential technical solutions to QR codes and an AIDC system.  
OPERATIONAL FEASIBILITY  
The operational feasibility assesses the steps USAID has taken and will need to take to implement the IT 
solutions successfully.  This assessment includes recommendations for how USAID can use a gradual and 
iterative approach for implementing the solutions across a broad spectrum of commodities.  In addition, 
the team describes the necessary institutional factors, such as effective leadership, a customized training 
strategy, and strategic partnerships that are nee ded to operationalize the IT solutions effectively.  
ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY  
The team has constructed an economic cost -benefit model that compares the estimated costs and benefits 
of changing from the status quo to the proposed IT solutions.  The model provid es multiple economic 
decision criteria, such as the economic rate of return and net present value, to determine the 
circumstances under which the proposed solutions are feasible.  The feasibility criteria have been 
calculated using a subset of benefits tha t is strongly defensible, to ensure a conservative, yet robust result.  
Our team has also analyzed the sensitivity of key model parameters to identify key risks and critical 
assumptions.   
  
 21 QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DATA SOURCES  
The team has spent a considerable amount of time learning about BHA’s operations and on the way, has 
collected several primary qualitative and quantitative data sources to support our analysis and 
recommendations.  The feasibility study uses quantitative  data from several  key sources, including BHA 
reports that provide snapshots of the scale and scope of its operations.  These resources are used to 
source the volumes of commodities  and packages  procured and shipped each year (see Figure 2) , and the 
associated prices with said procurements.  The BHA team has also shared spreadsheets that track 
commodity procurements and shipping contracts .  This information includes price and volume flow at key 
logistical nodes, which are used to estimate how much freight  is moving at a time in the system.  
Figure 4: U.S. -Sourced Food Aid by Packaging Type and Volume  
 
 
 
 
Source:  USDA Procurement Data (2011 - 2019); USAID Packaging Data (2019)  
The team originally scheduled five field visits to meet with and ask questions of individuals who play key 
roles in the food aid supply chain.  The planned U.S. field visits included Washington D.C., Houston, Texas; 
and Lansing, Michigan; and the international destinations involved site visits to the Djibo uti port and various 
transportation, warehouse, and distribution sites in Ethiopia .  After it became apparent that the COVID -
19 pandemic would make international travel impossible, the team revised its research methodology to 
account for the lack of field visits to Ethiopia and Djibouti .  Specifically, the team developed an online 
survey that was sent to food assistance supply chain stakeholders .  Annex I provides a full list of 
interviewed stakeholders, and the following content describes the field visits and survey.   
In January 2020, the team traveled to Washington D.C. to meet with USAID officials and other key 
stakeholders, to include freight forwarders, staff from the Government Accountability Office (GAO),  and 
contractors who helped develop and manag e the digital infrastructure that currently serves USDA and 
USAID.  This was followed by a trip to Houston in February 2020 to meet with PREPO management and 
tour PREPO warehouse facilities.  The team also met with packaging and commodity suppliers and tou red 
manufacturing facilities to gain a better understanding of the technical and operational changes needed to 
add QR codes to food aid packaging .  Finally, the team participated in the March 2020 Food Aid Packaging 
 
 22 Workshop at Michigan State University, w here food aid supply chain stakeholders met for three days to 
discuss potential improvements to the tracking and tracing of food aid.  The team presented initial findings 
and discussed the goals of the study with stakeholders from the BHA and USDA and stak eholders from 
the NGO and supplier communities.  The team scheduled follow -up discussions with numerous 
stakeholders from the conference to understand better the potential roadblocks and key considerations 
for the successful rollout of the QR and AIDC solu tions.  
From June 2020 to August 2020, the team remotely gathered information from the United States and 
internationally based stakeholders by deploying short surveys to the following stakeholders —shipping and 
handling contractors; USAID/BHA partners (PVOs , PIOs, and service contractors), USAID/BHA 
personnel and other U.S. government representatives, and commodity and packaging suppliers .  These 
short surveys included customized questions associated with each stakeholder’s role in the supply chain.  
Figure 3 provides some general statistics for participation in our survey, including a strong representation 
from USG officials, suppliers, and international partners.  
Figure 5: U.S. -Sourced Food Aid by Packaging Type and Volume    
 
Source: 2020 Survey of Food Aid   
 
 23 3. TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY  
The overall feasibility and success of this initiative depend on the design, functionality, and speed with 
which the technology is deployed.  The team researched various available technology opti ons and 
determined which options are suitable for designing a solution that can help overcome existing limitations 
and deliver improved data -driven insights, tracking, traceability, and improved control of the U.S. food aid 
supply chain.4  The team discus sed the technical and high -level design elements of the possible solutions 
with the MIT Lincoln lab team working on USAID/BHA’s intelligent food tracking dashboard.  The 
proposed IT solutions include different types of barcodes, printers, scanners, web -based development 
tools and database solutions.  
The LEAP III team is recommending technology options that can help operationalize QR codes and 
subsequently, an AIDC solution, with the least amount of cost, effort, and resistance from supply chain 
stakeholders .  These options also offer flexibility and scalability for future solutions and needs .  The 
technical feasibility is divided into two sub -sections, one focusing on an AIDC solution and the other 
dealing with QR codes.  
3.1 AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION AND DATA  CAPTURE (AIDC)  
“Automatic identification and data capture (AIDC) refers to the methods of automatically identifying objects, 
collecting data about them, and entering them directly into computer systems without human involvement .  
Technologies typically co nsidered as part of AIDC include QR codes, bar codes, radio frequency identification (RFID), 
biometrics (like iris and facial recognition system), magnetic stripes, optical character recognition (OCR), smart 
cards, and voice recognition.” 5 
An AIDC system  makes data collection efficient, consistent, and removes much of the capacity for human 
error.  Currently, the food aid supply chain is monitored by a variety of different data collection systems, 
each managed by a separate actor, and with distinct standa rds and analytical capacity inherent in their 
output.  Although some portions of the supply chain use modern industry standards for real -time data 
visibility (e.g., electronic data interface [EDI] for international shipping), many portions of the food aid 
supply chain remain shrouded in mystery (especially warehousing and distribution beyond the discharge 
port).  For decision -makers, obtaining a full picture of the supply chain, with clarity around bottlenecks, 
will be an invaluable asset going forward.  
Based on discussions with Agency officials, USAID envisions a system of comprehensive data collection 
for the purposes of tracking and tracing food aid flows that heavily incorporates AIDC at key points in the 
supply chains.  This system will allow users to see if commodities are lost in transit between key nodes, 
or determine if the commodities in storage are at risk of expiring .  Figure 4 provides a visual representation 
 
4 The team researched the following AIDC solutions and technologies: SAP (used by USDA and WFP); ServiceNow – the underlying solution for 
USAID’s HIMS solution; MIT Lincoln Labs Solution design that  will be deployed for USAID/BHA; Optel Group’s Traceability Solution; Microsoft 
AX / Dynamics; and, Netsuite (used by MANA Food). The team researched the following Traceability Technology Solutions: 1d Bar  codes; QR 
Codes; RFID Tags; and Block Chain.  
5 Wikipedia, “AIDC”, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_identification_and_data_capture , August 1st, 2020.   
 24 of what this system might look like as commodities move through various stages of the U .S. food aid 
supply chain.   
Figure 6: Implementing the QR Code and AIDC Solutions Across BHA’s Supply C hain   
 
Source: Adapted from USAID Commodity Management Toolkit (2018)   
3.2 QR CODES  
A QR code is a two-dimensional barcode that can efficiently hold data in a compact format .  QR codes 
can be read instantly by scanners, even if  somewhat  damaged or  warped.   The technology has been around 
since the mid -1990s and is used around the world for a wide variety  of applications .  A QR code can hold 
a substantial amount of information wh en connected to an external link , and, a lthough there are currently 
no GSI standards for Micro QR codes, there are GSI standards for QR codes.6  In addition, it is possible 
to sha re certain public information tied to QR codes, while making all other  secure  information accessible 
to certain parties.7       
 
 
 
 
6 See “ GS1 QR Code  GS1 US Guideline ” (www.gs1us.org/ ) and “ GS1 General Specifications ” (www.gs1us.org/)  for reference.  
7 See the report chapter on Institutional, Operational, and Economic Risks for an additional description of W security.  
 
 25 Figure 7: An Example QR Code 8 
 
QR codes, like any barcode, allow machines to quickly scan and identify properly labelled commodities .  
Once data is scanned, it can serve several functions, including:  
● Tracking of commodity’s status at a specific place and time  
● Tracing the origin of a commodity in the case of a recall  
● Locating the intended destinatio n of a commodity in cases where it has been found in an alternate 
location  
● Accessing instructions for how a commodity should be stored or transported in the future  
3.3 QR CODE RECOMMENDATION  
The team considered several technologies that could be used to improve the tracking and tracing of the 
U.S. food aid supply chain.  The main technologies included one -dimensional (1D) barcodes, QR codes, 
and RFID.  After speaking with stakeholders from USA ID and considering the technical aspects of each 
technology, the team decided to focus on QR codes.  This decision was made for several reasons.  First, 
the investment costs needed to add and use 1D barcodes or QR codes are about the same, but QR codes 
provide significantly more information.  This would allow USAID to add more details about the product, 
such as end -user recipes and video links.  Second, the underlying infrastructure required to operate an 
RFID system is costly and unavailable in many partne r countries or distribution points.  This means that 
the supply chain would only provide limited data visibility.  Finally , specialized devices (e.g., mobile 
scanners) are needed to read RFID data, and it is not always possible to scan densely packed commo dities.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Try scanning by orienting your smartphone camera towards the object  
 
 26 Figure 8: QR Code Test Print on Woven Polypropylene Bag 9 
 
Source: Author’s Photo  
3.4 QR CODE TYPES  
There are various QR code options that BHA could use to improve the tracking and traceability of food 
commodities in the U.S. food aid supply chain.  These options include static, dynamic, and custom QR 
codes .  Below is a brief discussion of each option.   
STATIC QR CODES  
Static QR codes are codes that redirect the user who scans the QR codes to display p redetermined 
content on their mobile device or take them to a website page.  A static QR code was used in USAID’s 
Hybrid Paper Bag Wheat Flour pilot and  is currently part of  Mana’s ongoing traceability pilot .10  However, 
static QR codes have limited fun ctionality, as they cannot be edited .  This presents limitations when there 
is a data entry mistake or when batch -level information needs to be updated, such as when there is new 
information related to the best buy date, food quality, or a recall.  
DYNAMIC QR CODES  
Dynamic QR codes are codes that can be analyzed, tracked, and edited even after being printed .  This 
means BHA would be able to track and assess the success of QR codes when they are in the destination 
country getting distributed by partners.  They can be edited or updated with correct and or new 
 
9 30° and 26° represent degrees of slip resistance  
10 Mana is piloting the us e of both static and dynamic QR codes.  
 
 27 information.  For example, it would be relatively stra ightforward to update the best -by date or product 
recall information.  
To use dynamic QR codes, a short URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is needed to redirect users to the 
desired website landing page .  This short URL also collects statistics about the numb er of scans, geographic 
location, and date/time of a scan, as well as the operating system used for each scan.  This information can 
help BHA and its supply chain partners track the location of the specific batch of food aid, and over a 
period of time, get  in-depth insights about how U.S. food aid travels through the supply chain.  Because it 
is possible to edit dynamic QR codes even after they have already been printed, this will offer BHA and 
food suppliers the flexibility to change the encoded content, w ebsite data, and even the function of a 
Dynamic QR Code at any time.  
The key limitation of the Dynamic QR code is that it needs an active internet or data connection for it to 
work.  Given that food aid is distributed in many parts of the world where acces s to live internet might 
not be available at all times, it would limit its functionality.  In other words, anyone without a working 
internet/data connection would not be able to access information stored on a  dynamic QR code  until they 
are able to connec t to the internet . 
CUSTOM QR CODES  
Custom QR codes are codes that are generated using business logic, such as information that should be 
shown on mobile devices, and data that can be read only by mobile scanners for inserting into warehouse 
management sol utions like HIMS .  It can also have both static content that can be accessed without any 
live internet data connection, and dynamic content like a short URL, which directs users to a dynamic 
website with updated information.  These QR codes offer not only key features of static and dynamic QR 
code types but also offer future scalability and integration capabilities into different warehouse 
management and inventory tracking solutions like HIMS, WBSCM, WFP’s SAP (System Applications and 
Products) solution, a potential AIDC solution, and other warehouse management and tracking solutions 
used by stakeholders across the supply chain.  
Another key benefit of using custom QR codes is that it allows complete flexibility to create a QR code 
design that has all the be nefits of various types of codes without any of their limitations.  The only 
drawback is that custom QR codes need to be developed from scratch and require additional effort to 
develop and test, compared with static and dynamic QR codes  
QR CODE TYPE RECOMM ENDATION  
The team recommends that US AID BHA use custom QR codes in its initial rollout for a limited set of 
food categories without any integration requirements or complexity .   This would enable a quick, low -
cost rollout of the QR code solution for the  initial phase.  It is critical that the custom QR code design 
have a strong foundation so that it can be enhanced in subsequent phases when the QR code is added to 
different food commodities (e.g., food aid in 50kg bags).  This additional functionality wo uld also be critical 
when constructing USAID’s HIMS solution and USAID/BHA’s intelligent food tracking dashboard in 
partnership with MIT Lincoln Labs.  The QR codes will help reduce redundant data entry into HIMS and 
will provide invaluable real -time data insights for USAID’s new intelligent food tracking dashboard.   
 28 3.5 INTEGRATING QR CODES  
For QR codes to be integrated into various systems, the key stakeholder needs to agree on:  
● Data elements (potential data elements shared below),  
● QR code format, so tha t everyone knows how to use the stored data for importing into their 
respective systems  
● Rules for addition, update, and deletion of data elements in the QR code, so everyone is aware of 
all the information that QR code has and potential changes that occur to QR code data during 
the course of the food aid’s journey through the supply chain.  
Once an agreement has been made regarding the basic QR code design, data elements, and rules, the 
various stakeholder systems (e.g., USAID HIMS, the BHA intelligent food tracking dashboard, USDA’s 
WBSCM, and WFP’s SAP) would need to establish data input and output file format options.  To start 
with, the integration, basic Excel -based upload, and download functionality can be deployed using simple 
flat fil es.  Subsequently, the QR code application would need to publish XML files and or API standards 
for importing and exporting the QR code data elements.  This would allow various stakeholders to decide 
how they would like to integrate with the new solution a nd continue to use the QR codes throughout 
the supply chain even when the food aid is getting distributed by various PVO’s in partner countries.  
Once these integration options and standards are finalized, it will allow stakeholders like USDA, food 
supplier s, PVOs, and warehouses to use the same QR codes with their own systems to reduce additional 
development effort for their tracking and traceability efforts and redundant data entry into their respective 
solutions.  This would also improve visibility, track ing, and traceability across the supply chain and their 
reporting invaluable data insights to USAID.  Key data fields that should be recorded and maintained in 
the initial QR code design include the information described in Figure 6 on the following page.  
   
 29 Figure 9: Static and Dynamic QR Code Design  
 
Source: Author’s representation  
3.6 REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE  
To increase the data visibility associated with QR codes, USAID will need a web -based repository where 
all QR codes will be  generated and provided to suppliers.  The QR codes will be based on the agreed -
upon specifications (potential data elements listed above), standards (size, shape, color, and the like), and 
functionality.  The web -based server would house all input data fr om USAID, USDA, WBSCM and 
suppliers for every QR code that will be generated and maintained.  
Because this web -based data repository will house sensitive transactional data, the repository would need 
adequate access controls to ensure that only authorized u sers can access and view appropriate data.  The 
access rules and permissions (ability to add, change or view data) should be based on each stakeholder’s 
role in the U.S. food aid supply chain.  For example, only authorized USDA users would be allowed to ad d 
or update PO numbers and awarded contract information.  Similarly, only suppliers would be able to 
update their batch and quality information for the lot awarded to them .  In addition, only suppliers with a 
required user profile would be able to view cer tain QR code data fields.  
Once the data gets updated in the website, the QR code generation program would generate the QR 
code, which would be downloaded by the suppliers in a predetermined file format.  The file format would 
be printer or electronic resou rce planning (ERP) compliant, so that suppliers can upload that file either 
 
 30 directly into their QR code printers or into the ERP (which would then send the QR code data to 
printers).  After the QR code is generated, the web server should have the ability t o create the “short 
URL” dynamic web page that would be viewed when the relevant QR code is scanned along the supply 
chain.  This would ensure all the web pages would have a consistent design and be able to capture scanning 
data on the same web server.  
For the QR codes to be printed properly, all USAID suppliers would need to ensure that their production 
line printers are capable of printing QR codes on the packaging material.  As per our interviews and survey 
response, the team does not expect any major hu rdles to print QR codes on cartons, oil cans, sachets, 
paper bags, and hybrid bags.  Most of the suppliers either have QR code -compliant printers or can add 
them without too much additional cost.  However, USAID would need to work with woven PP bag 
manufac turers to ensure the printed QR code quality is good enough for the QR codes to last the multiple 
loading and unloading handling along the long supply chain journey and still retain at least 90 percent level 
of scanning ability by aid recipients or warehou se scanners in destination countries.  
Figure 10: Example of an Unscannable Barcode on a Woven Polypropylene  Bag 
Source: Author’s Photo  
Below is a checklist of the key infrastructure required for key stakeholders:  
USAID:   
1) To create the QR code web -based application, it would need Web -based QR code front -end 
server(s), application server(s), and database server(s).  
2) Accessibility: Desktop, laptops, mobile devices to access the QR code application, and QR code 
scanning device s in PREPO warehouse to scan QR code data into HIMS.  
 
 31 USDA:   
1) If not already available, middleware tool to export and import required QR code data fields in and 
out of WBSCM.  
2) Accessibility: Desktop, laptops, mobile devices to access the QR code application.  
Warehouses (PREPO and Regional):  
1) Accessibility: Desktop, laptops, mobile devices to access the QR code application.  
2) QR code scanning devices in the warehouse to scan QR code data into HIMS and or their 
proprietary warehouse management system.  
Food Supplier s: 
1) Production line printers that can print QR codes on the packaging material they use.  
2) If not already available, middleware tools to export and import required QR code data fields in 
and out of their ERP solution.  
3) Accessibility: Desktop, laptops, mobile devices to access the QR code application.  
4) QR code scanning devices in their warehouse to scan QR code data into their proprietary 
ERP/warehouse management system.  
 PVO’s:  
1) If not already available, middleware tools to export and import required QR c ode data fields in 
and out of their ERP solution.  
2) Accessibility: Desktop, laptops, mobile devices to access the QR code application.  
3) QR code scanning devices in warehouses managed by them to scan QR code data into their 
proprietary ERP/warehouse management system.   
 32 4. OPERATIONAL FEASIBILITY  
4.1 OVERVIEW  
Management and coordination of the U.S. food aid supply chain will be augmented when the data 
associated with moving food aid is uniformly collected, stored, and accessible.  To make  this transition 
successfully, stakeholders will need to use a gradual, iterative approach to shift from disparate data tracking 
systems to a common IT system.  The team believes this goal can be achieved by implementing the 
proposed IT solutions over thre e phases, each with its own objectives and iterative processes.  The first 
phase would require the development of the IT project scope by a cross -functional team of stakeholders.  
The second phase would include the investments and systems to print, collect , and store QR codes in a 
data repository .  The final phase would involve the collective adoption of an AIDC system.  
The team begins this section with a general description of the key stakeholders who make up the U.S. 
food aid supply chain and the systems  they use to capture, store, and share information.  The team then 
describes the institutional factors, such as effective leadership, a comprehensive training plan, and strategic 
partnerships needed to operationalize the IT solutions effectively .  This wil l be followed with a summary 
of all past, ongoing, and planned QR codes and AIDC pilots to assess lessons learned and progress to 
date.  The team then discusses the potential path for operationalizing QR codes and an AIDC solution .  
The section will conclu de with a summary list of the key prerequisites for transitioning to a common data 
tracking system.     
4.2 EXISTING SUPPLY CHAIN STAKEHOLDERS AND IT SYSTEMS  
The U.S. food aid supply chain consists of many stakeholder organizations, ranging from suppliers and USG 
agencies to freight forwarders, transport and warehouse operators, PIOs and PVOs, and consumers.  
Below is a general overview of the key stakeholders grouped by their involvement in the supply chain, 
including the processes and IT systems they use to manage food aid and the existing capacity of these 
organizations to add and use QR codes.   
● Commodities and Packaging:  This group of U.S. companies consists of product, ingredient 
and premix, and packaging suppliers.  In addition to their own IT systems , these companies enter 
commodity data into USDA WBSCM, an integrated, web -based commodity acquisition, 
distribution, and tracking system.  Apart from PP bag suppliers, many of these companies have the 
capacity to print QR codes or would need to make minor  investments or upgrades, as described 
in the Technical Feasibility section.    
● Procurement and International Shipping:  USAID, USDA, suppliers, and partner 
organizations are involved in this stage of the supply chain.  In addition to their own IT systems, 
stakeholders enter commodity data and shipping information into USDA WBSCM.  In the 
commodity solicitation, USAID and USDA set the container specifications and packaging materials 
requirements to comply with federal food safety regulations and food packagi ng quality .  USAID 
and USDA would need to update the packaging specifications and requirements to add QR codes 
to food aid packaging.  The required IT investments are described in the previous section.           
 33 ● Transport and Shipping: In addition to USAID,  USDA, and partner organizations, this stage of 
the supply chain consists of freight forwarders, shipping carriers and transport operators, and port 
authorities.  Commodity data is tracked in WBSCM until ownership of the commodity is 
transferred from the U SG to the partner organization.  From that point forward, the commodity 
is tracked through the IT systems used by partner organizations.  Partner organizations using 
proprietary software, such as SAP, could easily integrate QR codes for portions of the sup ply 
chain where this common system is used.  Although freight forwarders, shipping companies, and 
transport companies could potentially benefit from the data visibility provided by QR codes, the 
team does not expect they would use them directly.  
● Product S torage, Handling, and Distribution:  This stage of the supply chain is made up of 
warehouse operators at various points along the supply chain .  Many of these operators have their 
own IT systems and processes for monitoring food aid shipments and inventorie s.  The 
investments needed to integrate these existing systems into a common QR code repository or 
AIDC system are described in the Technical Feasibility section.       
The IT systems currently used by stakeholders suggest significant efficiency gains coul d be realized by 
increasing data visibility.  Many stakeholders use spreadsheets and paper forms to monitor food aid 
inventories and track commodity shipments and distributions.  According to feedback from the 2020 
Survey of Food Aid, PIOs, PVOS, and NGOs primarily use spreadsheets, paper forms, and electronic 
forms to monitor food aid commodity inventories, shipments, and food aid distributions (see Figure 8).  
Similarly, warehouse operators report using spreadsheets and commercial software to monitor food  aid 
shipments and warehouse inventories, and the most common methods for reporting food aid flows to 
stakeholders (e.g., USAID, PVOs, PIOs, and the like) is by email and spreadsheets.  
Figure 11: Reported Food Commodity Inventory Management and Tracking Systems by 
PIOs, PVOs, and NGOs  
 
 
Source: Survey of Food Aid   
 
 34 4.3 LEADERSHIP  
In 2012, the GAO performed an assessment of USG IT acquisitions to identify successful investments and 
the common critical success factors that led to these acquisitions (GAO, 2012).  Officials from six out of 
the seven IT investments identified support from senior department and agency executives as a critical 
success factor.  Given the scale and complexity of the U.S. food aid supply chain, USAI D and key partner 
organizations will need to exhibit the same type of leadership for the successful implementation of QR 
codes and an AIDC solution.  
Several key officials at USAID, in particular, personnel in USAID/BHA’s Office of Field and Response 
Operat ions, and a select number of representatives from partner organizations are leading the effort to 
coordinate pilots and establish the foundation for adopting the new technologies.  To be successful, 
however, the initiative will need the active support of s enior leaders, such as division chiefs, directors, and 
administrators.  The team believes this support will need to be directed toward four areas, to include:  
● Financial and Human Resources:  USAID leaders will include the approval of financial 
resources an d personnel to assist with the design and implementation of the respective IT systems.  
This support will be particularly helpful for BHA actions or investments that need to go through 
USAID’s procurement process, which can take some time to navigate.  
● Collaboration with USDA: USAID leaders will need to support collaborative efforts with 
USDA to ensure that QR code printing and packaging requirements are specified in solicitations 
and technical documents.  Moreover, USAID leaders will need to support the in tegration of 
existing IT systems into a common QR code data repository.  This will be critical for the 
establishment of a web -based server to house all QR code data from WBSCM.    
● Collaboration with Partner Organizations for a QR Code Repository:  USAID lea ders 
will need to engage with senior officials at partner organizations to champion the use of the online 
QR code repository.  USAID leaders should start with organizations where strong relationships 
exist or solid informational structures are present.  Wo rld Vision’s Last Mile Mobile Solutions 
(LMMS) is an example of a partner with a strong informational structure.  
● Collaboration with Partner Organizations for an AIDC System:  USAID leaders will need 
to be proactively engaged in efforts to get stakeholders on board with a common AIDC solution.  
This support should include consistent communication protocols and guidance, as stakeholders 
move to common scanning, storage, and repo rting procedures.  Once again, USAID may want to 
form strategic partnerships to start rolling out the use of a common system .  This does not 
necessarily need to be the largest partner, but one with a strong potential for success.  
4.4 TRAINING  
Although ther e is enormous potential to enhance data visibility, the proposed IT solutions will work only 
if users have the knowledge and skills to use them.  Therefore, any rollout of the IT solutions should be 
combined with a robust training program customized for ea ch stakeholder group.  Based on our 
stakeholder interviews and feedback from the 2020 Survey of Food Aid, most stakeholders based in the  
 35 United States and discharge ports are aware of QR codes, or their organizations have the operational 
capacity to use th e technology.  However, stakeholders who are further removed from a reliable IT 
network do not appear to have the same training or equipment to scan, store, and access information tied 
to QR codes.    
For new systems, such as AIDC, relevant users will need  initial and recurring training to ensure that all 
employees have the knowledge to scan, store, and access data.  USAID is currently deploying a similar 
type of training plan for the integration of HIMS into USAID PREPO warehouses.  A similar training plan  
would need to be developed and deployed across the supply chain.   
USAID and partner organizations should set their budgets to accommodate the training and schedule 
them in accordance with the IT solution timelines.  Given the current constraints of COVID -19, this 
training should be offered both in person and virtually.  If possible, stakeholders should coordinate their 
training plans when implementing the common end -to-end AIDC solution.             
4.5 QR CODE PILOTS AND WORKING GROUPS  
USAID and its part ners are clearly aware of the benefits of improving data visibility throughout the supply 
chain, which is demonstrated by completed, existing, and planned QR code and AIDC pilots and initiatives 
(see Figure 9).  Although the completed pilots have provided valuable feedback on the existing capacity to 
print and scan QR codes, ongoing and planned pilots and initiatives are significantly more complex and will 
provide powerful insights for constructing the AIDC system and processes for scaling technologies.       
Figure 12: USAID and Stakeholder Food Aid QR Code and AIDC Pilots  
 
Source: Author’s representation  
In 2019, USAID completed a pilot to test whether stakeholders would be able to print and read QR codes 
on hybrid paper bags (25kg) containing wheat flour.  The bag supplier successfully printed the QR codes, 
and the commodities were scanned at the distribu tion point in Djibouti without any major issues.  The 
 
 36 pilot demonstrated the low up -front costs needed to print QR codes.  For example, the bag supplier’s 
only equipment cost was a black ink print card, and the estimated incremental cost of adding QR codes  
was around 5 percent of existing per unit packaging expenses.  Although the bag supplier has the capacity 
to scale up the printing of QR codes, the commodity supplier may be better positioned to add information 
to the QR code (e.g., batch number, lot numb er, and the like).  At the time of drafting this report, USAID 
is in the process of developing a similar pilot for packaged commodities destined for USAID PREPO 
warehouses in Djibouti, Durban, and Houston.    
In 2020, WFP implemented the Last Mile Solution  in Ethiopia, a pilot involving the printing of QR codes 
on waybills and the creation of a dedicated mobile platform for electronic scanning and receipt 
confirmation.  The pilot reduced the time it takes to confirm the receipt of food aid from 2 -4 weeks, u sing 
existing paper -based practices, to less than 48 hours with QR codes.  Although results from the Last Mile 
Solution in Ethiopia were positive, the pilot initially encountered challenges related to the limited number 
of staff able to scan and use QR cod es properly.  There were also some issues related to the continuous 
monitoring of devices and the mobile platform.  WFP addressed these challenges by training staff and 
establishing a standby team ready to address any technical issues.  
USAID recently partn ered with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory (MIT LL) 
to build an Intelligent Food Tracking System and Dashboard to add more flexibility and data visibility to 
the supply chain.  Results from this initiative will be critical to in forming the selection and design of an 
end-to-end AIDC system, as it will construct a common food tracking system using existing information 
systems and reporting platforms.  This will provide a first -hand example of what it will take to move 
stakeholders to a common information -sharing platform.  The end results will also demonstrate how 
increased data visibility can increase operational efficiencies (e.g., alerts for delays, ordering, expiration 
dates, shortages, contamination, and the like) .  The pilot i s currently in the design phase with plans to 
carry out the pilot in Winter 2021.  
MANA, a non -profit RUFT supplier, is leading a QR code pilot that provides product details, status 
updates, and enables real -time responses when an incident occurs.  Althoug h MANA is currently using its 
ERP to host the platform, the goal is to create an Open Traceability platform that is available to all 
suppliers.  Although the QR code currently has batch status and incident responses, the QR code will 
expand into other feat ures as users gain more experience.  The pilot will also provide information as to 
the level of packaging to which the QR code should be added.  Overall, the pilot’s aim is to demonstrate 
the effectiveness of dynamic URL QR codes in tracking (i.e., scannin g cases), and tracing as it relates to 
food incidences and reporting of food quality issues.  
Supply chain stakeholders have also built strong foundations to implement pilots and coordinate common 
technical solutions.  USAID/BHA is currently involved in sev eral working groups responsible for 
coordinating pilots and establishing common procedures and protocols for adding QR codes to food aid 
packaging.  For example, USAID/BHA has coordinated working group meetings with freight forwarders, 
suppliers, partner o rganizations, and other USG officials to identify potential QR Code Data fields to track 
and trace throughout the supply chain.  USAID/BHA is also engaged in international packaging conferences 
and workshops, such as the 2020 Food Aid Packaging Workshop.    
 37 4.6 PHASED IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY  
To implement the proposed IT solutions, USAID will need to select a project development methodology 
that accounts for the complexity of the U.S. food aid supply chain and the existing systems used to track 
food commo dities.  One potential option is the waterfall methodology, a linear, sequential approach in 
which progress flows in one direction  — like water cascading down a mountain .  This approach works best 
in stable environments when all the requirements are known and highly interlinked.   USAID could use 
this approach by first developing the technological requirements for the entire supply chain.  The project 
would then be implemented in a series of linear phases, with each phase dependent on the previous one.  
Although this methodology has potential, developing a solution that is applicable to all food categories, 
geographic regions, and stakeholders would require significant time and resources.   
Another approach is the Agile methodology, which was created as a mo re flexible alternative to the 
Waterfall approach.  Agile is best suited for projects requiring iterative and incremental processes in which 
requirements and solutions evolve through the collaborative effort of cross -functional teams and key 
stakeholders.  This approach is best suited for projects that require flexibility and have a high level of 
complexity or uncertainty.  Based on the structure of the Title II supply chain and conversations with 
multiple stakeholders, the team recommends using a phased ap proach for implementing the IT solutions, 
with Agile serving as the primary methodology within each phase (see Figure 10).  
Figure 13: Phased Approach for Implementing QR Codes and an AIDC System  
    
Source: Author’s representation  
The team primarily recommends using the Agile methodology for several reasons.  First, this approach 
enables USAID to start printing, using, and benefiting from QR codes as soon as it is feasible.   Second, 
the Agile methodology presents the  least resistance to change and helps build consensus and common 
experience towards shared development assistance goals.  Finally, this approach will give USAID the 
opportunity to receive and incorporate feedback before finalizing the solutions.  This info rmation will be 
used to refine the printing, capture, and storage of QR codes, as well as the development of a QR code 
repository and a common AIDC system .  Figure 11 provides a visual representation of the gradual and 
 
 38 iterative approach utilized by the Ag ile methodology.  The first cycle includes the testing of the IT solution 
over an initial subset of commodities and packaging types .  The IT requirements and design are then 
refined over subsequent cycles until the IT solution is finalized.    
Figure 14: An Illustrative Example of Using the Agile Methodology  
 
Source: Author’s representation  
4.7 PROJECT SCOPE (PHASE 1)  
Introducing new technologies can be a long and complex process, especially when the technology is 
expected to affect supply chain operations and information flows across the globe.   One of the first steps 
is to determine the scope of the project —a collection of inputs, deliverables, and partnerships that must 
be achieved for successful implementation .  The scope should be developed by a cross -functional team of 
USG officials, stakeholder representatives, and technical development teams .  Some factors that need to 
be included in the scope include:  
● A commonly accepted list of product requirements to improve the trac king and traceability of 
food commodities.  
● The resources stakeholders will need to implement the solution, such as capital costs and training.   
● The identification of stakeholders who will likely benefit or be negatively affected by the adoption 
of the new  solution.  
● The size and complexity of the change, and the impact this will likely have on IT adoption and 
change management needs.  
USAID already has or will have much of the information needed to construct the project scope, including 
results from several QR code pilots; an agreement from many stakeholders for a commonly accepted set 
of information to be included on QR codes; and, related analyses, such as this feasibility study.  USAID 
will need to bring this information together to construct the project s cope, identify strategic partnerships, 
 
 39 and mitigate risk.  USAID may also need to partner with an IT provider to design the QR code 
requirements, the QR code repository, and the AIDC system.   
4.8 QR CODE IMPLEMENTATION (PHASE II)  
The guiding principle for implementing QR codes should be based on starting small, initially focusing on 
the “low -hanging fruit,” and then refining the approach as more information is acquired.  Specifically, the 
team recommends USAID implement QR codes over three cyc les to align with the Agile development 
methodology and provide ample time for identifying the packaging requirements and printing processes 
for adding QR codes to certain commodities (see Figure 12).11 
Figure 15: Phase II QR Code Implementation Cycles by Packaging Type (Metric Tons)  
 
Source:  USDA Procurement Data (2011 - 2019); USAID Packaging Data (2019)  
The team suggests that the first cycle should be directed toward a subset of food aid commodities and 
shipment types with the greatest potential for success, such as palletized vegetable oil, RUSF and RUTF 
packages, and commodities in hybrid paper bags.  These goods, which account for approximately 12 
percent of U.S. food aid volumes (MT), should be prioritized, because they are supported by motivated 
suppliers who can quickly add QR codes to their operations.  Moreover, this would provide an excellent 
opportunity for USAID to test a QR code repository design and fine -tune the data integrity, governance, 
and visibility issues that  are paramount to this initiative.  This would include the technical design and 
specifications for the IT solution.  Figure 13 on the next page provides a summary of the deliverables 
associated with the QR code design for these initial products.   
 
 
 
11 USAID food aid volumes (MT) are not commonly reported by packaging type because the actual quantity of packaging types varies  (see Figure 
2) by commodity. However, Figure 12 represents this information by packaging type to show how many MT of food could be covered by QR 
codes using the recommended incremental approach.   
 
 40 Figure  16: QR Code Deliverables for Cycle I    
    
Source: Author’s representation  
Lessons learned through this initial phase of printing, capturing, storing, and accessing QR codes will be 
used to guide all future implementation.  The second cycle should include the printing of QR codes on 
woven PP bags for prepackaged commodities, which accounts for more than 11 percent of U.S. food aid 
volumes.  This should occur after the first cycle, because it will take time fo r stakeholders to design a PP 
bag that can hold the QR codes while retaining the aeration and flexibility of the existing packaging.  The 
third cycle would include the printing of QR codes on PP bags that accompany bulk shipments to discharge 
ports, which accounts for almost 77 percent of U.S. food aid volumes.  This should be the final cycle, due 
to the complexity of successfully matching bulk commodities to the appropriate QR -coded PP bags at 
discharge ports.  
4.9 AIDC SOLUTION (PHASE III)  
Although it will  take several years to develop an AIDC solution, a common IT solution for monitoring 
food aid data, the following steps should be followed when eventually developing this system:  
● AIDC Alignment:  The most important step in developing an AIDC solution is th e need to align 
all the key stakeholders on the goals and objectives of the AIDC solution.  This will require 
support from every level of the stakeholder organizations, including USAID, USDA, suppliers, 
PIOs, and PVOs.  Stakeholders should be able to build  on the lessons learned, successes, and 
strategic partnerships that are established with the implementation of QR codes (Phase II).  
Without this alignment, it will be extremely difficult for the solution to be adopted across the U.S. 
food aid supply chain .   
● Business Requirements:  The second step requires USAID to finalize the business requirements 
for the AIDC solution with input from all key stakeholders.  The finalized business requirements 
should be comprehensive, as they will represent the IT system n eeds for each stakeholder 
 
 41 organization.  The business requirements should specify how the AIDC solution would receive 
and share data with other stakeholder solutions like WBSCM, HIMS,  and WFP’s SAP solution.   
● Minimum Viable Product (MVP):  Once the busine ss requirements have been finalized, USAID 
and stakeholders should use this information to define the MVP .  The MVP is the most useful and 
logically sound system that can be implemented with the lowest time and resource costs.  The 
MVP represents the IT so lution that has the highest probability of adoption across the U.S. food 
aid supply chain.  
● System Socialization:  To increase the likelihood of success, it is critical that the AIDC solution 
design and implementation plan be socialized with stakeholders.  USAID and key stakeholder 
organizations should hold focus -group discussions, meetings, and workshops to give supply chain 
participants an opportunity to review the design and provide feedback.  This would give 
stakeholders a sense of ownership over the sol ution and increase the chances that the centralized 
system meets the needs of all U.S. food aid supply chain actors.  
● Human Capital:  The process will need to be led by USAID officials with strong professional and 
leadership skills in the following areas: pr ogram and project management expertise, solution design 
and data modeling, and techno -functional skills that cover both international supply chain and IT 
technical expertise.  The team strongly recommends that members of the USAID/BHA team 
should be heavil y involved in leading this process.  
4.10 PREREQUISITES FOR SUCCESS  
The team has described some necessary factors for the successful implementation of QR codes and an 
AIDC solution.  Many of these technical specifications and coordination requirements shou ld be rolled 
out using an iterative Agile development methodology, in which systems and procedures are constantly 
tested and refined.  With this in mind, the team created a summary list of operational and institutional 
prerequisites that are needed to reac h the full potential of the IT solutions.  These prerequisites include:   
● USAID leadership approval and support for the IT solutions to include budgetary resources, 
personnel, and collaboration with senior leaders at USDA and partner organizations to align  
resources under a common QR code data repository and AIDC solution.   
● The creation of a cross -functional team (core team) responsible for coordinating efforts and 
delivering the scope and design for implementing the IT solutions.   
● A finalized solution de sign and technology platform for implementing QR codes and an AIDC 
system to include integration into existing IT systems like USAID HIMS, USDA WBSCM, and WFP 
SAP.  
● A finalized scope for the initial rollout of QR codes, to include targeted food commodities  and a 
consortium of partners who will champion QR codes at each logistical node.  This scope will need 
to factor in any lead times that are needed for stakeholders to start using QR codes.   
 42 ● A robust communication plan developed with stakeholder input to i nclude the scope and purpose 
of the QR code and AIDC solution design and implementation.  
● The construction of an MVP solution and the socialization of the MVP with key identified 
stakeholders for their review and approval.  
● A comprehensive training plan to d eliver initial and recurring training for the QR codes and AIDC 
system.  
● A working process for adapting to technical and procedural findings across each of the 
development phases and cycles, including any adjustments to the solution design and packaging 
materials.   
 43 5. ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY  
In this section, the team estimates and analyzes the economic impacts of the proposed AIDC and QR 
code solutions.  The team assesses whether the solutions can be considered economically feasible under 
a variety of differe nt assumptions, meaning whether the quantifiable benefits exceed the costs of the 
solution.  The feasibility criteria have been calculated using a subset of benefits that are defensible.  The 
use of conservative assumptions throughout the analysis adds wei ght to the overall recommendation.   
The team has constructed an economic model that allows the calculation of costs and benefits associated 
with the new QR and AIDC systems.  This model is a flexible set of mathematical equations that allow us 
to calculat e the effects of the program using different assumptions for key inputs, therefore allowing us to 
explore how the feasibility is affected by changes in the value of inputs and outputs, changes in the timing 
of the solution rollout, and forecasts about para meters such as the shipping volumes or the discount rate.  
In the following sections, the team discusses the assumptions guiding our calculations before briefly 
discussing our findings related to economic feasibility obtained using the model .  For a more t horough 
explanation of the model’s equations and structure, see Annex IV, or view the accompanying spreadsheet.  
5.1 MODEL ASSUMPTIONS  
The following section describes the rationale behind some of our modelling decisions.  For a complete 
description of the s ources of all parameters, as well as the mathematical equations used in the model, see 
Annex IV.  
QR CODE AND AIDC ROLLOUT STRUCTURE  
The team assumes that the USG QR code specification will happen first, with its own associated 
investment costs, and that the AIDC system will follow, with a separate set of associated investment and 
recurring operational and management costs.  As a result , a subset of benefits will begin once the QR 
codes are included on commodities (those related to tracing) and the majority of benefits related to 
commodity tracking will begin after a common AIDC system is implemented.  
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF COSTS AND BENEFITS BY IT SOLUTION IMPLEMENTATION PHASE  
 ACTIVITIES  COSTS  BENEFITS  
QR QR codes printed on 
commodities  1 Year of investment costs for 
design, training, etc.  Tracing benefits after the investment is 
complete  
AIDC  AIDC system 
implemented  4 Years of investment for 
design, build, rollout, etc.  Improved data leads to reduced losses, 
demurrage, etc.  
Source: Author’s representation   
 44 OPERATIONAL TIME HORIZON (15 YEARS)  
The team chose a 15 -year CBA time horizon in our base scenario.  The first five years are primarily 
construction and design work periods, followed by 10 years of operation .  Whereas typically computer 
software is depreciated fairly quickly, the team expects that a system designed for government and NGO 
use at  this scale will be designed to function for at least a decade.  The team considers this to be a 
conservative time frame for measuring accumulated benefits and believes longer -term benefits are very 
possible.  
THE DISCOUNT RATE (12 PERCENT)  
The discount rat e for the base scenario is chosen to conform with USAID's CBA Guidelines of an 
economic discount of 12 percent .  The sensitivity of this rate is considered as part of our analysis.  
5.2 CBA OUTPUTS  
This model can calculate decision criteria like net presen t value (NPV), breakeven point, and the like .  
Based on input from USAID/BHA and USAID’s CBA Guidelines, a select number of decision criteria will 
be used to determine under which circumstances the proposed solution is feasible .  The findings for these 
decision criteria are summarized in Table 2.  
TABLE 2: DECISION CRITERIA OUTPUT - BASE SCENARIO  
Net Present Value (USD)  $7,089,563  
Full Investment Breakeven 12 (Year)  6 
Equivalent Food Saved (MT)                          13,415.95  
Equivalent People Fed (for 1 Year)  67,079.75  
Internal Rate of Return  32.05%  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
 
The model output supports the economic feasibility of the activities.  Although there are numerous 
uncertainties related to the successful rollout of the solution, the team believes that the model has been 
coded with relatively conservative assumptions, and the large benefits generated in a relatively short time 
span suggest that this project has high p otential to succeed.  
5.3 COSTS AND BENEFITS ESTIMATED  
In the following section, the team provides a brief overview of how the costs and benefits in our model 
were estimated.  Note that the costs and benefits described here are only the subset of potential benefits 
quantified for the purposes of our model (see section 5.6 for further details).  The full description of the 
 
12 Both QR Standards and AIDC System   
 45 equations used, parameter estimates and sources, and methodological concerns applicable to each 
estimate may be found in Annex IV.  
BENEFIT  1 - REDUCTION IN COMMODITIES LOST  
Improved tracking data could help increase the average volume of food reaching hungry people each year, 
by detecting and eliminating sources of commodity loss in the BHA logistics chain.  Preventable losses like 
packagin g damage, water damage, pest infestations, theft, misplacement, expiration, and other issues occur 
at various points between procurement and delivery to beneficiaries.  With a supply chain as massive as 
BHAs, reducing or recovering even a small percentage of food losses translates to a significant amount of 
additional food going to people who need it .  Improved commodity tracking could reduce some subset of 
the preventable losses in the future, under the assumption that improving the quality of data availab le to 
the organization would, in turn, allow BHA to address some of the newly identified “pain points” (points 
where losses occur consistently) in the supply chain.  
The quantity of reduction in food losses would be the difference between food lost in the status quo and 
in the scenario with the intervention, measured in metric tons (MT).  Ironically, the reason this benefit is 
calculated is the existing lack of end to end data visibility, but this, therefore, means that we will need to 
make some assumpt ions about the potential change in losses for this analysis .  As an upper bound, the 
value cannot exceed the total losses in the current system .  The team estimated total losses in the current 
system as a starting point and applied an estimated loss reduct ion factor based on observable 
improvements in comparable interventions.  
The base scenario took the weighted average of total losses estimated by stakeholders at different parts 
of the supply chain, which resulted in an average estimated loss amount of 1. 86 percent.  The team also 
took the weighted average estimates of what amount of that would be reducible with the proper IT 
solution, which came to approximately 31 percent.  Given the size of BHA’s operations, this reduction 
translates into a lot more foo d delivered.  If even a small reduction in losses can be potentially achieved 
via improved data visibility, the benefits are enough to justify investments into such a system.  
The model uses a value for food shipped of $528 dollars per ton .  This is based o n the 2018 USAID 
Packaging Data and is calculated by dividing the total spent on food into the total volume of food.  These 
numbers are from BHAs procurement data.  The model uses the 2018 numbers for BHA commodity 
shipping.  
BENEFIT 2 - REDUCED DEMURRAGE FEES 
When food at a port is not promptly unloaded and moved to its next storage facility, demurrage fees may 
be charged to the responsible party.  These charges are based on the volume of the unmoved cargo and 
the length of the delay.  BHA reported more th an a million dollars in demurrage charges in 2014/15 that 
resulted from commodity logistics inefficiencies.  
The AIDC/QR codes could help reduce these costs by improving the quality of data available to relevant 
stakeholders and improve their ability to opt imize logistical procedures at warehouses, ports, and the like.  
Smart systems could be designed that would make it easier to see where in the supply chain shipments  
 46 are being held up and adding demurrage costs so that such issues can be addressed.  Alerts  could be sent 
to the responsible parties indicating when they are at risk of incurring demurrage charges.  
The reduction in demurrage charges is estimated by multiplying the value of the demurrage charges in the 
current scenario, with an estimated change in demurrage charges in possible future scenarios.  The initial 
demurrage costs come from historical BHA data, while the expected future demurrage costs are an 
estimate based on the authors' conversations with stakeholders regarding which portion of costs is 
preventable.  
The annual demurrage fees are an average of the 2014 -2016 numbers provided to us by BHA.13  These 
numbers are based on more than $2 million in demurrage costs incurred by WFP over those years, and 
therefore could be a lower bound .  The model, therefore, assumes $700,000 in demurrage charges 
annually and applies a loss reduction factor of 50 perce nt.  
BENEFIT 3 - REDUCED TRACING COSTS  
If commodities have information -rich QR codes printed of them, it should be easier to manage recalls, 
since the relevant data points (such as batch #, packaging date, and the like) will be accessible to any 
warehouse worker who scans a package with their phone.  The recall process will be even easier if a fully 
integrated AIDC system is implemented.  If commodity locations are recorded into a central database, 
the recall process could be as easy as simply updating the status of a subset of commodities to "recalled," 
and the system could send updates to the party in possession of the relevant commodity.  The value of 
this benefit will depend on both the expected cost of recalling food in the absence of the solution over 
the timeframe analyzed and the impact of QR codes or AIDC systems on these costs.  
The team builds on a 2010 paper of traceability benefits in the beef industry, which found that the cost of 
recalls was equal to the total value of the commodity recalled, p lus approximately 10 percent for logistical 
management and 4 percent for communications.14  Because the logistical costs and communication costs 
are the components that would be affected by the solution, the team assumes that 14 percent of the 
underlying c ommodity value can be addressed by improved traceability. Fourteen percent is the upper 
bound for our benefit in the model, and then, we apply the reduction factor that corresponds to the 
overall effectiveness of the new system.  
The team was able to acces s loss and damage reports from BHA for 2019, in which approximately 8,000 
MT of food was recalled.  This value is used as a basic estimate of the annual average volume of food 
recalled.  We then consider the impacts of a 25 percent reduction in these extra  costs because of the first 
and second phase solution (QR codes) being rolled out.  QR codes alone should make tracing commodities 
much easier, as they can allow anyone with a phone to learn where, when, and how a commodity was 
created and packaged, removi ng significant ambiguity from the existing recall processes.  
 
13 Original AIDC white paper, and follow -up emails with Budget and Finance Division for USAID's Bureau for Human itarian Assistance (BHA).  
14 "Economics of traceability for mitigation of food recall costs", Resende -Filho, Moises and Buhr, Brian, 27 December 2010   
 47 Although not included in the model, there are potentially more benefits from a more granular marking of 
commodities, as a smaller subset of production can be recalled, and overall fewer commoditi es will be 
recalled unnecessarily due to the inability to differentiate them from others in their PO.  
COST 1 - FIXED UPFRONT INVESTMENTS COSTS15 
TABLE 3: ASSUMED INVESTMENT COSTS IN BASE SCENARIO  
INVESTMENT ITEM  QR CODE  AIDC  
Training  $100,000  $100,000  
Design Finalization  $50,000  - 
Printing Capability Subsidy  $100,000  - 
HIMS Integration  $50,000  - 
System Design and Build  - $1,800,000  
Promotion  - $100,000  
TOTAL  $300,000  $2,000,000  
Source:  QR-CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
The model includes the immediate costs of the proposed solutions that must be paid before any benefits 
can be actualized, including designing the upgrading equipment to ensure QR labels can be output, adding 
scanning capacities to wa rehouses or ports, installing secure servers to host the relevant platforms, and 
the like .  The team believes these estimates are conservative, and that with competitive procurement, the 
true cost could be lower.  
 
15 See Annex VI for an illustrative budget of adding and using QR codes at one USAID PREPO warehouse.    
  COST 2 - OPERATIONAL COSTS  
TABLE 4: OPERATIONAL COSTS  
ANNUAL  QR CODE  AIDC  
Ongoing Training/Refreshers  - $150,000  
Staff - $100,000  
IT Operations and Maintenance  $20,000  $50,000  
TOTAL  $20,000  $300,000  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
The model also includes the operational cost of maintaining and running the web server that hosts the 
QR code standards and the AIDC system.  All suppliers and partners would be able to visit this to check 
and maintain the Q R codes for various food commodities/products.  These cost estimates are based on 
this team’s experience of managing similar cloud -based solutions in the past for large international food 
companies involved in the supply chain and distribution sector for a gricultural commodities.  
COST 3 – INCREMENTAL PRINTING COSTS  
In our model, we consider the additional cost that may be incurred by adding QR codes to woven PP 
bags.  This extra cost could be associated with changes to the design or material specification of bags or 
could represent additional processes, such as stitching a label onto the bag.  Because the woven bags 
comprise the majority of packaging in the supply chain, the marginal costs of changing specifications are 
significant and will need to be furth er investigated before proceeding to the full AIDC rollout.  
We use the survey data to estimate an additional cost of 59 cents per bag, though there are many suppliers 
who responded that they didn’t know what the marginal cost of QR printing would be, and therefore, we 
consider alternate values for our scenario analysis.  Based on our conversation with bag suppliers, we 
learned that in a worst -case scenario, if printing is impossible on the woven bags, tags could be sewn on 
for an estimated 11.5 cents per b ag.  We use this value as an upper estimate in our additional scenarios.  
5.4 SCENARIO ANALYSIS  
Given the significant uncertainty in estimating future impacts related to the proposed solutions, our team 
has decided to analyze the outputs of the model under  different scenarios.  For more in -depth 
consideration of how different inputs affect the model, see section 6.   
 49 ALTERNATE SCENARIO —HIGH PRINTING COSTS PER BAG WITH FULL AIDC 
IMPLEMENTED  
In the base scenario, we have used the weighted average cost estimate from suppliers (0.059 USD) .  
However, the true cost of printing QR could conceivably exceed this, especially if there are issues with 
printing on the PP bags that require some costly alteration to the stitching or printing process.  We assume 
that for the worst -case scenario, the printing cost for bags will be as high as 11.5 cents per bag.  This was 
the estimate one supplier gave us for sewing an additional printed tag onto bags, and thus we believe this 
is a reasonable upper bound for costs .  In this scen ario, the outputs of the model are less attractive.  
TABLE 5: ALTERNATIVE SCENARIO (HIGH PRINTING COSTS) MODEL OUTPUTS  
Net Present Value (USD)  -$272,382  
Full Investment Breakeven 16 (Year)  >10 Years  
Equivalent Food Saved (MT)                          NA  
Internal Rate of Return  11.31%  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
ALTERNATE SCENARIO —HIGH PRINTING COSTS PER BAG WITH AIDC ABORTED  
In this scenario, we consider the possibility that the AIDC system is unable to materialize, perhaps due to 
an inability to reach consensus among key stakeholders .  The investment costs are incurred for two years, 
but the cancellation of the contract allows some costs to be averted.  The results are below.  
TABLE 6: ABORTED AIDC  
Net Present Value (USD)  -$597,107  
Full Investment Breakeven 17 (Year)  >10 Years  
Equivalent Food Saved (MT)                          NA  
Internal Rate of Return  0.76%  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
 
16 Both QR Standards and AIDC System  
17 Both QR Standards and AIDC System    
 50 5.5 NON -QUANTIFIED BENEFITS  
In our model, the team is able to quantify the value of only some of the improvements that result from 
the improved tracking and tracing of food commodities.  Some benefits are more difficult to forecast and 
estimate accurately but may be just as relevant motivations for implementing the solutions .  Some of these 
include:  
IMPROVED ACCOUNTABILITY AND REPORTING  
The improvements to data collection would improve the overall accountability of title II food aid .  In 
recent years, the Government Accountab ility Office (GAO) has found the existing food aid tracking 
systems lacking and determined that updates to processes are needed.  The new solutions could improve 
the trust that politicians and taxpayers have in the program, ensuring its long -term sustainab ility. 
BETTER BENEFICIARY EXPERIENCE  
One potential use for QR codes is the delivery of instructions or messages to beneficiaries.  The codes 
could contain nutritional information or have instructions for storage and preparation.  This could improve 
nutriti onal outcomes and user experience.  It could also help effectively communicate the USAID branding 
to beneficiaries.  
BETTER TRACING OUTCOMES  
The model currently values the tracing benefits as a reduction in costs to staff .  There are other potential 
benefi ts, however, that we are not able to estimate, such as the potential to avoid adverse health outcomes 
through quicker location and removal of dangerous commodities .  The benefits here include the better 
outcomes themselves, as well as the avoided damage to  the USAID/BHA reputation and public relations 
outfall.  
REAL -TIME DATA AVAILABILITY FOR DECISION MAKERS  
The availability of data is a benefit that is partially captured through the benefits of the model.  However, 
the ability to see where commodities are, in real -time, could be valuable beyond the loss detection and 
improved logistical management already in the model.  In a crisis, the availability of data could help decision -
makers dispatch food to the needy more efficiently or detect brea kages in the supply chain in time to fix 
bottlenecks.   
 51 6. INSTITUTIONAL, OPERATIONAL, AND 
ECONOMIC RISKS  
6.1 OVERVIEW  
The team has identified several risks and challenges related to the technical, operational, institutional, and 
economic aspects of implem enting the IT solution.  In the context of the U.S. food aid supply chain, the 
team considers an institution as any U.S. Government agency or partner organization that is responsible 
for supplying, transporting, storing, or delivering food aid commodities to beneficiaries.  Using this premise 
and the research findings presented in the feasibility analysis sections, the team has identified several key 
challenges and risks that are outlined below.      
FAILURE TO CREATE A COLLABORATIVE AND HOLISTIC PLAN FOR I MPLEMENTING THE 
IT SOLUTIONS  
The U.S. food aid supply chain is a complex system consisting of multiple stakeholders and geographically 
dispersed logistical nodes .  If USAID and other stakeholders cannot agree on a well -coordinated, holistic 
approach for ro lling out the new technologies, such as common IT requirements and realistic timelines, 
then the potential benefits of adopting these solutions will not be realized.  The expectations and adoption 
of timelines will differ based on the stakeholder’s role wi thin the supply chain.  USAID and USDA, for 
instance, will need to specify the appropriate reporting systems, lead times, and packaging requirements 
for printing QR codes and reading this information into a common AIDC system.  Similarly, downstream 
supply  chain actors, such as partner country transporters and warehouse operators, will need to have the 
means, lead times, and systems for implementing the new solutions, including the financial resources to 
invest in scanning equipment and the necessary IT dat a systems to store and access information.  
LIMITED ADOPTION OF QR CODES OR THE AIDC SOLUTION  
Even if USAID creates a holistic plan for implementing QR codes and an AIDC solution, there is no 
guarantee that stakeholders will adopt the IT solutions.  This risk is greater for international organizations 
with large bureaucracies and complex existing IT systems for tracking and tracing food commodities .  
There might also be some hesitancy from stakeholders to share information that they think might reflect 
poorly on their operations.  If this happens, stakeholders may develop their own QR code standards or 
tracking systems that will be disconnected from the proposed IT solutions.  This would limit the potential 
benefits of tracking food commodi ties under a common supply chain management information system.  
LIMITED BUY -IN FROM SENIOR LEADERS AND STAFF TURNOVER  
Although bar scanning technologies have existed for more than 45 years, they have not been added to 
food aid packaging, despite the modest  investment requirements .  This implies that any effort to implement 
QR codes and an AIDC system will need the active support of senior leaders and “champions” from each 
stakeholder organization.  Without this support, there is a significant risk that QR c odes will not be  
 52 scanned and reported as commodities move along the supply chain.  Moreover, the adoption of a common 
AIDC system would be virtually impossible without support from senior leadership.  
A handful of officials in several key organizations hav e been instrumental in coordinating stakeholder 
groups, developing pilots, and coordinating evaluations such as this feasibility study .  If these “champion” 
officials were to leave their current posts, the momentum for modernizing the food aid supply chain  could 
be seriously delayed or stopped.         
INADEQUATE TRAINING AND INFORMATION SHARING  
The successful implementation of technologies depends on the ability of staff to use and support the new 
systems.  If staff do not have the proper training to captu re, access, and update the commodity data using 
the new systems, there will be limited improvements to food commodity tracking and tracing.  The 
support staff will also need to have the proper training and user documentation to assist with the 
deployment a nd recurring use of the IT solutions.  The level of support would vary by the supply chain 
role and existing technical capacity of the stakeholder organization.  
In addition to possessing the necessary capacity to use the new technology, stakeholders will need to 
share this information with other supply chain actors to truly benefit from the IT solutions.  Initially, there 
may be some reluctance to share this information as errors arise, trust is gained, and procedures for 
collecting information are updated .  Any slowdown in the sharing of information will also reduce the 
iterative process of learning and adapting to the AIDC and QR code solutions.           
DATA SECURITY CONCERNS  
As stakeholders work through the design and specification of the IT solutions,  the decision -making process 
may be hindered by each organization’s security concerns.  This could be especially problematic as 
stakeholders consider the integration of the new IT solutions with their own legacy systems.  For example, 
there may be concerns  for how information is shared between USDA’s WEBSCM system, USAID HIMS, 
and proprietary systems (e.g., WFP SAP) at different stages of the supply chain .  Data security issues may 
also slow the rollout of the new IT solutions if USAID decides to procure th e design and implementation 
of the technologies using traditional government procurement processes.          
MANAGING EXPECTATIONS AND RISKS  
Senior officials and other stakeholders will need to be cognizant of the internal and external risks 
associated wit h each phase of the IT solution rollout.  They must also be willing to accept a certain level 
of risk.  If stakeholders are unsure of the risks or are unable to accept a certain level of risk, then 
momentum could be slowed when issues arise.  This would re sult in actors not having the information 
they need to adapt their processes and refine the technologies.  The problem could start when senior 
officials have unrealistic expectations for what the technologies can deliver or how soon stakeholders will 
adopt  a common AIDC system.   
 53 TECHNICAL STANDARDS  
The implementation team should publish and align on the QR code data standards and AIDC solution 
APIs with all stakeholders.  As much as possible, a cloud -based technology platform should be used for 
developing the AIDC solution to avoid connectivity issues from different parts of the world.  
6.2 ECONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES  
As part of the modelling process, the CBA team has examined how deviations in our assumptions affect 
the overall impact of the solution.  If the t rue value of key parameters is significantly different from our 
estimates, the outputs of our model will differ as well.  
REDUCTION IN LOSSES  
The amount that an AIDC system will be able to reduce losses successfully has a very large bearing on the 
total im pact of these solutions .  The discounted net benefits increase by more than $1 million USD for 
each 5 percent reduction in estimated losses.  
TABLE 7: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO LOSS REDUCTION %  
LOSS REDUCTION (PERCENTAGE)  DISCOUNTED NPV  
0.00%  -$               8,684,230.24  
10.00%  -$               3,554,541.51  
25.00%   $               4,139,991.59  
30.75%*   $               7,089,562.61  
50.00%   $             16,964,213.42  
100.00%   $             42,612,657.08  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
As the table above shows, the reduction in losses has a large impact on the net benefits of the program.  
However, even if the loss reduction factor is zero, the solutions will still generate net positive benefits, 
because of the benefits like reduced demurrage fees, improved recall efficiency, and the like.  
SYSTEM DESIGN COSTS  
The amount of money required to fully design and construct the technical solution facilitating AIDC could 
fall within a fairly wide range.  We consider the potential impacts of cost overruns on the net benefits of 
the intervention in the table below.  The base scenario would see positive benefits for systems much more 
expensive than the million dollars we have as sumed in the base model.   
 54 TABLE 8: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION COST  
AIDC SYSTEM COST (USD)  DISCOUNTED NPV  
 $      500,000.00   $               8,365,249.34  
 $   1,000,000.00   $               7,940,020.43  
 $   1,500,000.00   $               7,514,791.52  
 $   2,000,000.00   $               7,089,562.61  
 $   3,000,000.00   $               6,239,104.80  
 $   5,000,000.00   $               4,538,189.16  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
As observed in the table above, the NPV of the model still remains positive, even with costs in the multi -
millions.  The team does not necessarily believe that such costs overruns are expected  or reasonable, but 
believe that this further reinforces the likelihood of success.  
DISCOUNT RATE  
The discount rate is a percentage reduction factor applied to future costs and benefits that compounds 
with time .  The team used 12 percent as a base discount factor, as is standard practice for USAID models.  
TABLE 9: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO DISCOUNT RATE  
DISCOUNT RATE  DISCOUNTED NPV  
0%  $             24,813,267.77  
2%  $             20,098,146.17  
5%  $             14,710,673.35  
10%  $               8,756,818.00  
12%  $               7,089,562.61  
15%  $               5,112,311.17  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
The NPV is especially sensitive to changes in the discounting rate because of the 15-year time frame of 
the model and the relatively long investment period for the AIDC system.  The 12 percent we have used 
in the base scenario is relatively high compared to what is used in most models, and we do not believe 
that higher values are releva nt.  
 55 MARGINAL COST OF QR CODES ON PP BAGS  
Given some potential difficulties with the scanning of QR codes printed on woven PP bags, product 
specifications may need to be modified in terms of design (for example, to have one side laminated).  As 
a result, there could be an increase in the procureme nt cost of woven PP bags.  The following table shows 
that as we add marginal cost to the PP bags, the NPV of the project as it is currently modeled dips 
significantly, because woven PP bags are used for more than three -quarters of BHA food aid, meaning tha t 
even if the cost is only a few cents per bag, the total is significant.  
TABLE 10: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO MARGINAL PER BAG COST  
ADDITIONAL COST PER BAG (USD)  DISCOUNTED NPV  
 $                      -     $             14,778,704.34  
 $                0.020   $             12,161,124.18  
 $                0.059*   $               7,089,562.61  
 $                0.080   $               4,308,383.69  
 $                0.100   $               1,690,803.53  
 $                0.150  -$               4,853,146.88  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
The marginal cost of adding QR codes is acknowledged by the study team as a significant impact on the 
success of the project, and we th erefore recommend that before the rollout of the program, BHA work 
with USDA to pilot the procurement of commodities with the new specifications and determine if there 
is a significant change in price.  If so, this may be a reason to cancel or rework the l ater phases of the 
solution.  
TIMEFRAME OF ANALYSIS  
TABLE 11: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO TIMEFRAME  
# OF YEARS ANALYSED  DISCOUNTED NPV  
10 Years   $               3,508,927.01  
15 Years   $               7,089,562.61  
20 Years   $               9,121,311.41  
25 Years   $             10,274,180.25  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx   
 56 CHANGING TRENDS IN FOOD PROCUREMENT VOLUME  
TABLE 12: SENSITIVITY OF NPV TO TIMEFRAME  
% CHANGE ANNUALLY IN ANNUAL FOOD AID PROCURED  DISCOUNTED NPV  
-10%  $               1,285,399.35  
-5%  $               3,579,525.30  
0%*  $               7,089,562.61  
5%  $             12,441,534.76  
10%  $             20,578,748.25  
Source:  QR -CODE -CBA-MODEL.xlsx  
   
 57 7. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
This final section summarizes the main conclusions from the technical, operational, and economic 
feasibility analyses of the IT solutions that could be uti lized by stakeholders in the U.S. food aid supply 
chain.  It also provides recommendations as to the next steps for the design and implementation of these 
IT solutions .  These recommendations are motivated by USAID/BHA’s overall goal of transitioning to a 
comprehensive system for accessing and sharing food aid data —from the time the commodity is packaged 
to the final distribution point where commodities are given to beneficiaries.   
7.1 CONCLUSIONS  
As U.S. -sourced commodities move along the supply chain, s takeholders use their own IT 
systems for sending, validating, and reconciling food aid deliveries .  The result is a supply chain 
structure where fragmented information flows impede the full potential of effectively managing and 
tracking food aid commoditie s.  The use of disparate systems also presents challenges with tracing food 
commodities when there are recalls or food quality issues.  
A significant number of stakeholders use spreadsheets and paper forms to monitor food aid 
inventories, and to track U.S. food aid shipments and distributions .  According to feedback from 
the 2020 Survey of Food Aid, partner organizations primarily use spreadsheets, paper forms, and 
electronic forms to monitor food aid commodity inventories, shipments, and food aid distr ibutions.  
Similarly, warehouse operators report using spreadsheets and commercial software to monitor food aid 
shipments and warehouse inventories, while the most common methods for reporting food aid flows to 
stakeholders (e.g., USAID, PVOs, PIOs, etc.) is by email and spreadsheets.  
USAID is considering the use of QR codes over several other technologies due to issues of 
affordability, availability, and the amount of information that can be added to a QR code.  
Specifically, QR codes provide more informa tion than a 1D barcode, yet the implementation costs are 
similar.  In addition, the underlying infrastructure required to operate an alternative technology like RFID 
is costly and unavailable in many partner countries or distribution points.  Moreover, the re may be 
technical issues with properly scanning and updating food aid commodities using RFID in partner country 
warehouses.  
USAID and its partners are clearly aware of the benefits of improving the data visibility of 
food commodities, which is demonstrat ed by completed, existing, and planned QR code and 
AIDC pilots and initiatives.   The completed pilots have provided valuable feedback regarding the 
existing capacity and costs to print and scan QR codes.  Specifically, they have demonstrated that suppliers  
have the capacity to add QR codes, and the marginal costs are low for the piloted packaging types.  
However, the staff at the distribution points need adequate training to properly scan and use the QR 
codes.  Ongoing and planned pilots are significantly m ore complex and will provide powerful insights for 
constructing the AIDC system and processes for scaling technologies.      
Supply chain stakeholders have built strong foundations to implement pilots and coordinate 
common technical solutions .  USAID/BHA i s currently involved in several working groups responsible  
 58 for coordinating pilots and establishing common procedures and protocols for adding QR codes to food 
aid packaging.  USAID/BHA is also engaged in international packaging conferences and workshops, such 
as the 2020 Food Aid Packaging Workshop.   
Although it is possible to add QR codes on most food aid packaging types with limited 
modifications or investments, it is not yet possible to use QR codes on the existing packaging 
design for woven polypropyl ene (PP) bags.   Investments and adjustments are needed to add and use 
QR codes on food aid commodities like palletized vegetable oil, RUSF and RUTF packages, and 
commodities in hybrid paper bags.  However, the existing material used on PP bags does not retain the 
QR cod e as it moves across the supply chain, meaning that it is impossible to scan PP bags once they reach 
partner countries.  
Although officials at USAID and partner organizations are actively leading the effort to 
coordinate pilots and establish the foundation for adopting the IT solutions, senior leaders 
from each stakeholder organization are not yet promoting these technologies.   With that said, 
USAID/BHA’s Office of Field and Response Operations is building the business case for using these 
technologies, incl uding pilots and this feasibility study, which will be communicated to senior leaders in 
the near future.  
There is a solid economic argument for investment in tracking and tracing .  The team met 
with numerous stakeholders from around the world and discusse d the costs inherent in the current way 
food aid is tracked and traced.  The team modeled the estimated long -term impact of reduced losses, 
reduced demurrage charges, and increased recall efficiency.  The results were optimistic and suggested 
that the bene fits of better data visibility can be large.  The sheer scale of the food aid supply chain means 
that even marginal improvements are high value and warrant significant upfront investment in long -term 
solutions.  
However, small changes in the marginal costs  of commodity packaging would be costly when 
extended to the entire supply chain.  The team is not certain whether there would need to be 
changes to the specifications for packaging, such as woven PP bags, which are used for the majority of 
BHA’s supply.  Even a marginal cost of five cents per bag would make the net present value of the solution 
negative (as modeled in the base scenario).  If BHA finds that the cost of procurement for commodities 
increases by more than a cent per 50 KG bag (20 cents per MT) , the economic argument needs to include 
larger benefits (via larger loss reduction, for example), or it will no longer be viable.  
7.2 RECOMMENDATIONS  
USAID and other stakeholders will need to agree on a well -coordinated, holistic approach 
for rolling out  new technologies, such as common IT business requirements and realistic 
timelines for adoption.  The expectations and timelines will differ based on the actor's role within the 
supply chain .  USAID and USDA, for instance, will need to specify the appropri ate reporting systems, lead 
times, and packaging requirements for printing and using QR codes in a common AIDC solution.  Similarly, 
downstream supply chain actors, such as PVO transport and warehouse operators, will need to have the 
means, lead times, and  systems for implementing the new solutions, including the financial resources to 
invest in the necessary IT data systems and scanning equipment.   
 59 End-to-end data visibility for USAID is completely dependent on the cooperation of partner 
organizations .  The team has considered a number of ways that data visibility can be improved; however, 
the common factor was always the need for data sharing .  USAID can attempt to make this process as 
easy as possible for partners, by adding easily scanned QR codes and cre ating an easy to access AIDC 
system .  However, they will need their partners to buy into the overall objective of increasing transparency 
and data sharing if results are to emerge.  
Stakeholders will need to use a gradual and iterative approach to shift fr om disparate data 
tracking systems to a common AIDC system.  The team believes this goal can be achieved by 
implementing the IT solutions over three phases, each with its own objectives and iterative processes.  
The first phase involves the development of the project scope by a cross -functional team of supply chain 
stakeholders.  The second phase would include the investments and systems needed to print, collect, and 
store QR codes.  The final phase would involve the collective adoption of an AIDC system.  
The initiative will need the active support of senior leaders, such as division chiefs, directors, 
and administrators, to successfully implement the IT solutions.   This will include the approval of 
financial resources and personnel to assist with the design  and implementation of the respective IT 
systems.  USAID senior officials will also need to engage proactively with senior officials at partner 
organizations to champion the initial use of an online database to maintain the QR codes data and the 
eventual a doption of a common AIDC system.  The team recommends that USAID leaders start with 
those organizations where strong relationships exist or where solid informational structures are present.   
USAID should implement QR codes (Phase II) over three cycles to provide ample time for 
identifying the packaging requirements and printing processes for adding QR codes to 
certain commodities.  The first cycle should be directed toward a subset of food aid commodities and 
shipment types with the greatest potential for success, such as palletized vegetable oil, RUSF and RUTF 
packages, and commodities in hybrid paper bags.  The second cycle should include the printing of QR 
codes on PP bags for prepackaged commodities.  The third cycle would include the printing of QR cod es 
on PP bags that accompany bulk shipments to discharge ports.  It is especially important to pilot the PP 
woven bags that, given they are used for the majority of the BHA food aid supply, and given that the 
success of this solution depends on figuring ou t how to print easily scanned QR codes at a minimal cost.  
USAID should use custom QR codes in its initial rollout for a limited set of food categories 
without any integration requirements or complexity.   This would enable a quick and low -cost 
rollout of th e QR code solution for the initial phase.  It is critical that the custom QR code design has a 
strong foundation so that the QR code can be enhanced in subsequent phases when it is added to different 
food commodities .  This additional functionality would a lso be critical when integrating existing IT 
solutions (e.g., USAID’s HIMS solution).   
USAID will need to work collaboratively with USDA, suppliers, and partner organizations 
to design PP bags that can hold the QR codes while retaining the aeration and fl exibility of 
the existing packaging.  Based on discussions with several food aid packaging suppliers, it is not possible 
to print a QR code on a 50 kg PP bag due to the sheen of the existing packaging material.  Some potential 
solutions include a half -laminated PP bag, smaller PP bags that will better hold and retain the QR code, 
and patching the QR code into the existing PP packaging type.       
 60 USAID and partner organizations will need to develop a process for packing bulk 
commodities into PP bags containi ng the QR codes.   Millions of PP bags accompany bulk shipments 
to the discharge ports where the commodities are matched and packaged in the appropriate PP bags.  
Therefore, it is theoretically possible to match the bulk commodity to the relevant QR code ba g once a 
new PP packaging type has been designed.  However, stakeholders feel that the existing processes do not 
always result in the proper packaging of bulk commodities, which would result in data integrity issues as 
commodities move along the supply cha in.         
To implement an AIDC solution, all stakeholders will need to align under common goals and 
objectives, incorporate the IT business requirements of each actor, and develop a minimum 
viable product (MVP).  USAID and stakeholders will need to build  on the lessons learned, successes, 
and partnerships that are established with the implementation of QR codes (Phase II) to align on the 
common goals of an AIDC solution.  USAID will also need to work with stakeholders to finalize the AIDC 
business require ments, which should specify how the AIDC solution would receive and share data with 
other systems like WBSCM, HIMS, and WFP’s SAP solution.  USAID will also need to develop an MVP, 
the most useful and logically sound system that can be implemented with the  lowest time and resource 
costs.  The MVP will represent the solution that has the highest probability of adoption.   
To increase the likelihood of success, the AIDC process will need to be led by USAID officials 
with strong technical and leadership skills.    USAID staff should have expertise in the following areas: 
program and project management, solution design and data modeling, and techno -functional skills that 
cover both international supply chain and IT technical expertise.  The team strongly recommend s that 
members of the USAID/BHA team should be involved in leading this process.  
It is also critical that the AIDC solution design and implementation plan are socialized with 
stakeholders.  USAID and key stakeholder organizations should hold focus -group di scussions, meetings, 
and workshops to give supply chain participants an opportunity to review the design and provide feedback.  
This would give stakeholders a sense of ownership over the solution and increase the chances that the 
centralized system meets t he needs of all U.S. food aid supply chain actors.  
Any rollout of the IT solutions should be combined with a robust training program 
customized for each stakeholder group.  This will be particularly important for stakeholders who 
are further removed from a  reliable IT network, who may not have the information or training to scan, 
store, and access information tied to QR codes.  USAID and partner organizations should set their budgets 
to accommodate the training and schedule them in accordance with the IT so lution timelines.  Given the 
current constraints of COVID -19, this training should be offered for both in -person and virtual attendance.  
 
 
 
  
 61 ANNEX I: STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS  
TABLE 13: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS ORGANIZATIONS INTERVIEWED  
ORGANIZATION  DATE  
UFFP  2020-01-28 
BKA Logistics  2020-01-29 
BHA - IT 2020-01-30 
USAID  2020-01-30 
USAID/M/OAA/Transportation  2020-01-30 
CACI (for USDA)  2020-01-30 
USAID - M&E 2020-01-30 
Missionary Expediters  2020-01-31 
Fetig and Donally  2020-01-31 
USAID/M/OAA/Transportation  2020-01-31 
LifeLink Logistics  2020-01-31 
Polysac (Bag Manufacturer)  2020-02-04 
GAO  2020-02-04 
Palmer Logistics  2020-02-05 
Stratas (Food Supplier - Veg Oil)  2020-02-05 
USDA/ AMS/ KCCO  2020-02-06 
WFP 2020-02-10 
Geodis  2020-02-10 
USDA  2020-02-11 
World Vision  2020-02-12 
USAID  2020-02-12 
Mana Nutrition  2020-02-12 
USDA  2020-02-12 
Intertek  2020-02-19 
USDA  2020-02-19 
Agribag  2020-02-19 
Itech 2020-02-25 
JohnPac  2020-03-13  
 62 ANNEX II: 2020 STUDY OF FOOD AID                                     
From June 2020 to August 2020, the team remotely gathered information from U .S. and internationally 
based stakeholders by deploying short surveys to the following stakeholders —shipping and handling 
contractors; USAID/BHA partners (PVOs, PIOs, and service contractors), USAID/BHA personnel , and 
other U SG representatives, and commodity and packaging suppliers .  These surveys included customized 
questions associated with each stakeholder’s role in the supply chain .  In total, there were 67 survey 
responses.   Twenty -seven responses came from the USG, representing over 40 percent of respond ents.  
This was followed by commodity suppliers (18 percent), international PVO/PIO/NGOs (15 percent), and 
transportation/shipping organizations (6 percent) including freight forwarders (Figure 15).  Local 
PVO/NGOs and warehouse operations accounted for th e smallest share of responses at 3 percent and 6 
percent, respectively.  
Figure 17: QR Code Deliverables for Cycle  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“We operate in areas of minimal internet connectivity so if we use this then there should be a 
way to upload data with minimal need to get online .”  
- International PVO/PIO/NGO Representative  
 
Although most respondents had some familiarity with QR codes, local representatives from 
PVO/PIO/NGOs were not too familiar with the QR code technology (Figure 16) .  When asked about the 
potential challenges of  integrat ing the QR code technology into the food aid supply chain , the most 
common responses were related to Internet connectivity, consistent IT standards and use across the 
supply chain, and the lead times and costs associated with adding QR codes to commodity packaging .  In 
terms of the potential benefits, many respondents mentioned the benefits of increased data visibility and 
coordination, as well as improved commodity tracking and traceability.      
 
 63 Figure 18: QR Code Familiarity  
 
Figure 19: QR  Code Opportunities – Word Cloud  
 
“My organization is engaging in the implementation of an ERP; as such QR code is unique 
opportunity to integrate high le vel technology and complement innovations in the supply chain 
management. ” 
- International PVO/PIO/NGO Representative  
 
 
 64 Figure 20:  Existing PVO/PIO/NGO Data Sharing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When asked w hat systems are used to keep track of food aid inventory in warehouses , most respondents 
said they used spreadsheets, paper forms, email, and proprietary software.   Figure 18, for example, shows 
how PVOs, PIOs, and NGOs reported how they tracked food aid inventories .  Simila r responses were 
provided for food aid data tracking when commodities are shipped or distributed to beneficiaries .  A little 
over half of PVO, PIO, and NGO respondents said their organizations currently have the capability to use 
QR codes, while the other half either said they did not have the capability or did not know if they had the 
capability.  Nine out of 12 (75 percent) international and local representatives from PVOs, PIOs, and 
NGOs said they completely agreed or somewhat agreed when asked whether Q R codes would help 
reduce total food aid losses (Figure 19).  Approximately 42 percent of respondents did not know what 
the total estimated time is for recalling food aid, while 25 percent said it was more than 4 weeks and the 
remaining respondents said it  was either less than 24 hours or between 3 and 7 days.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Figure 21: QR Codes and PVO/PIO/NGO 
Losses  
 
 Figure 22: PVO/PIO/NGO Total Recall 
Times  
 
 
Nine out of 12 (75 percent) of suppliers said they did not currently have the capacity to print QR codes 
or did not know if they had the capacity to print QR codes (Figure 21) .  This compares to only 2 out 12 
suppliers who said they are currently capable of printing QR codes .  At the same time, eight out of 12 (66 
percent) of suppliers said that it was possible to print QR codes (Figure 22) .  In interviews with many non -
PP bag suppli ers, the incremental investments needed to print QR codes includes printers, print cartridges, 
and small adjustments to existing procedures and processes .  Suppliers using PP bags all said there would 
need to be adjustments to the existing packaging materi al to add QR codes.    
“Printing QR codes on food packaging is critical for USAID to maintain traceability, and we fully 
support this initiative .  It would allow us to have quicker access to problems in the field and be 
able to respond in a more timely manner .  The level of investment (namely in printers) will depend 
on the solution that USAID chooses and the level of detail the QR code can include .”  
- Supplier  
“The type of packaging typically used isn't well suited for printing as or after filling.  A change 
in packaging material may be required, increasing unit pricing and possibly lead times. ” 
- Supplier   
  Figure 23: Capacity to Print QR Codes  Figure 24: Potential to Print QR Code
 
A majority (50 percent) of USG officials reported that they receive food aid data reports on monthly or 
quarterly basis (Figure 23).  This compares to around 27 percent of USG respondents who receive food 
aid data updates on a weekly basis.  Sixteen out of  25 respondents (64 percent) of USG officials said they 
did not have the right level of data to ‘excel’ at their jobs, compared to 5 out of 25 respondents (20 
percent) who said they had the appropriate amount of information (Figure 24).     
 
Figure 25: Food Aid Data – Reporting 
Intervals
 Figure 26: Tracking and Job Performance 
 
 
  ANNEX III: 2020 STUDY OF FOOD AID SURVEY  
 
 
 68  
 
 
 69  
 
 
 70  
 
 
 71  
 
 
 72  
 
 
 73  
 
 
 74  
 
 
 75  
 
 
 76  
 
 
 77  
 
 
 78  
 
 
 79  
 
 
 80  
 
 
 81  
 
 
 82  
 
 
 83  
 
 
 84  
 
 
 85  
 
 
 86  
 
 
 87  
 
 
 88  
 
 
 89  
 
 
 90  
 
 
 91  
 
 
 92  
 
 
 93  
 
 
 94  
 
 
 95 ANNEX I V: REFERENCES  
AIM North America. “EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION AND DATA 
CAPTURE (AIDC),” n.d.  
Casey, Alyssa R. “U.S. International Food Assistance: An Overview,” n.d., 22.  
David, Jacques. “UNITED NATIONS HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE DEPOT,” 2019, 2.  
Ebel, Thomas, Katy George, Erik Larsen, Everett Neal, Ketan Shah, and David Shi. “Strength in Unity: The 
Promise of Global Standards in Healthcare,” n.d.  
FFP. “FISCAL YEAR 2019 ANNUAL REPORT,” n.d.  
——— . “FOOD ASSISTAN CE Fiscal Year 2019 Fact Sheet,” n.d.  
——— . “Food for Peace Fiscal Year 2017 Shipment Report,” n.d.  
——— . “Food for Peace Fiscal Year 2018 Shipment Report,” 2018.  
——— . “FOOD FOR PEACE TITLE II COMMODITY REPORT FISCAL YEAR 2018,” 2018.  
FFP Operations Team. “T he Future of the Food for Peace Supply Chain: Automatic Identification and Data 
Capture (AIDC),” n.d.  
Food for Peace Act, Pub. L. No. P.L. 113 –79 (n.d.).  
GAO. “GAO Report 14 -22,” n.d.  
——— . “GAO Report 14 -277,” March 2014.  
——— . “GAO Report 15 -666,” August 2 015. 
Greg Olson, and Kevin Tutasig. “The Future of the Food for Peace Supply Chain: Automatic Identification 
and Data Capture (AIDC).” n.d.  
Hamilton, Booz Allen. “Implementing a Pharmaceutical Serialization and Traceability System in the United 
States: Sta keholder Perspectives and Investments,” n.d., 108.  
Logistics Item Unique Identification Task Force. “IMPLEMENTATION OF ITEM UNIQUE 
IDENTIFICATION IN DOD LOGISTICS PROCESSES,” June 8, 2010.  
Maviglia, Saverio M. “Cost -Benefit Analysis of a Hospital Pharmacy Bar Code Solution.” Archives of 
Internal Medicine 167, no. 8 (April 23, 2007): 788. https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.167.8.788.   
 96 McEachran, Rich. “Could QR Codes Revolutionize Transparency in Food Supply Chains?” The Guardian, 
September 9, 2013, sec. Guardi an Sustainable Business. https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable -
business/qr -codes -transparency -supply -chains -food.  
McFarlane, Duncan, and Yossi Sheffi. “The Impact of Automatic Identification on Supply Chain 
Operations.” The International Journal of Logis tics Management 14, no. 1 (January 2003): 1 –17. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/09574090310806503.  
O’Connor, Alan C., Saira N. Haque, Christine M. Layton, and Ross J. Loomis. “Impact of a Two -
Dimensional Barcode for Vaccine Production, Clinical Documentation, and Public Health Reporting and 
Tracking.” National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, July 2012.  
Rachel Vas. “USAID In -Kind Food Aid Prepositioning,” n.d.  
Shih, Gerry C. “Game Changer in Retailing, Bar Code Is 35.” The New York Times, n.d., 4.  
The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition Technology & Logistics. “Cost -Benefit 
Analysis of Unique Identification (UID).” The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
Technology & Logistics, March 2005.  
Tufts University. “DELIVERING IMPROVED NUTRITION: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGES TO 
U.S. FOOD AID PRODUCTS AND PROGRAMS,” n.d.  
USAID. “FFP Indicators Handbook Part III: Indicators for Emergency Activities,” January 2020.  
——— . “FOOD AID PRODUCT INFORMATION GUIDE DESCRIPTIONS OF  COMMODITIES IN 
FOOD AID BASKET,” n.d.  
——— . “Food Assistance Overview,” 2019. 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1866/USAID_Food_Assistance_Overview_2019.09.1
3_508_compliant_v2.pdf.  
——— . “HOW TITLE II FOOD AID WORKS,” February 10, 2020.  
World Food Programme. “DBASE (LOGISTICS DATA, BUDGETS AND SYSTEMS EXECUTION),” 
November 2019.  
——— . “LAST MILE AND BAG MARKING INITIATIVES – OVERVIEW & UPDATE.” September 2019.  
——— . “SUPPLY CHAIN,” November 2019.  
——— . “SUPPLY CHAIN PLANNING,” November  2019.  
——— . “WFP SUPPLY CHAIN ANNUAL REPORT 2018 in Review,” April 2019.   
 97 ANNEX V. COST -BENEFIT MODEL  
To understand if the proposed QR implementation is economically feasible, the team has constructed an 
economic model that allows the comparison of costs and benefits in the current system and the proposed 
future system.  
This CBA is applied to two major it ems that would be part of a potential solution. The first is the actual 
printing of QR codes on food commodities, which would allow for the rapid identification of items in 
overseas warehouses via scanners, tablets, or mobile phones.  This would require re latively minor 
investments in designing a specification and may add small marginal costs to the cost of packaging for 
commodities procured.  The result of this small change would be an improved ability to trace commodities 
in the supply chain, such as when  a recall is underway.  QR codes could hold more information than is 
currently available from packaging, such as the manufacturer, the batch number, the status of the 
commodity, etc.  However, simply printing QR codes alone will not achieve the greater goa l of real -time 
end-to-end data visibility.  They would, however, create a foundation on which our send item can be built.  
The second item we are considering is a data collection system that is implemented throughout the food 
aid supply chain to allow for t he tracking of commodities from procurement, through shipping and 
warehousing, and finally to the site where commodities are delivered to beneficiaries.  This system would 
be complex to implement and require the coordination of numerous actors around the w orld.  The system 
would require significant investment in information technology, and would add ongoing costs for system 
upkeep, and may add costs to the actors in the supply chain who would be expected to use it, such as 
warehouses, shipping companies, an d PVOs.  Despite these costs, the benefits of this system (primarily 
end-to-end visibility) have the potential to offset them.  If the billions of dollars in aid that flows through 
the supply chain can now be tracked and traced effectively, small issues ca n be addressed.  When dealing 
with billions of dollars in aid, even a minor improvement to overall efficiency rates can be worth the 
investment in data collection many times over.  
BENEFIT 1 - REDUCTION IN COMMODITIES LOST  
The proposed AIDC/QR code solution  could help reduce commodity loss in the BHA logistics chain.  
Losses occur at multiple points between when an order is procured and when it is delivered to 
beneficiaries.  Losses could result from damage, spoilage, theft, and other preventable (or unpreve ntable) 
issues.  
A QR Code solution could reduce some subset of the preventable losses in the future, under the 
assumption that improving the quality of data available to the organization would, in turn, allow BHA to 
address some of the newly identified “pa in points” (consistent points where losses occur) in the supply 
chain.  
The quantity of reduction in food losses would be the difference between food lost in the status quo and 
in the scenario with the intervention, measured in metric tons.  The quantity of  food lost in the current 
status quo can be estimated from administrative data and discussions from relevant stakeholders.   
 98 The amount of food that would be lost after the solution is implemented will be difficult to forecast 
accurately, in part, because th e data on losses is not collected systematically (ironic, and a strong argument 
on the side of implementing AIDC systems).  However, as an upper bound, we know the value cannot 
exceed the total losses in the current system.  We can estimate total losses in  the current system as a 
starting point and apply an estimated loss reduction factor that is based on observable improvements in 
comparable interventions.  Because this parameter will be highly speculative, we will need to consider 
extremely conservative v alues (as low as 0 percent) as part of the model sensitivity analysis.  
The economic value of the reduction in total food losses would be calculated using a willingness -to-pay 
(WTP) estimation in an ideal world where we have access to a significant amount o f data or could directly 
study the beneficiaries of the program.  However, estimating this benefit in such a fashion is currently 
impossible, due to data and resource constraints.  Instead, a more conservative estimation strategy can 
be used that assumes t he value of each MT of food lost is equal to the average cost of procurement and 
delivery for that commodity.  
CALCULATION  
 𝐵1𝑡 = (𝐶×(1+𝑔𝑐)𝑡) × (𝑃×(1+𝑔𝑝)𝑡)× (𝐿𝑊/𝑂 − 𝐿𝑊) 
Where:  
𝐶 is the total cost of procurement for commodities in the base year  
𝑔𝑐is the annual growth rate (%) of commodity tonnage procured  
𝑡 is the time (in years) since the program began  
𝑃 is the total weight (in MT) of commodity procured in the base year  
𝑔𝑝 is the annual growth rate (%) of commodity prices  
𝐿𝑊/𝑂 is the p ercentage of losses without the QR code solution  
𝐿𝑊 is the percentage of losses with the QR code solution  
PARAMETERS  
PER MT VALUES OF FOOD (BHA RECORDS)  
The model uses a value for food shipped equal to $528 dollars per ton.  This is based on the 2018 USAID 
Packaging Data and is calculated by dividing the total spent on food into the total volume of food.  
These numbers are from BHA’s procurement data. 18 
 
18 USUM PO Line Report 2011 -2019.xlsx, Shared by BHA Staff in 2020   
 99 GROWTH RATES (2019 BHA DATA AND HISTORICAL INFLATION)  
The model currently assumes that the growth rate for the volume of commodities shipped is 0 percent.  
This is based on recent trends in the annual average volume of in -kind title II food aid.  
The growth rate for the price is 2 percent. This is based on average inflation rates over the last decade.  
19 
VOLUMES SHIPPED (2018 DATA)  
The model uses the 2018 numbers for BHA commodity shipping as the starting point for analysis.  These 
numbers will change over time as a function of the growth rates.  
The total weight of commodities shipped to the Prepo warehouses is 176,580 MT.  
The total weight of commodities shipped to partne rs is 1,096,311 MT.  
REDUCED LOSSES PERCENTAGE (SURVEY)  
In our model, we consider the additional cost that may be incurred by adding QR codes to woven PP 
bags.  This extra cost could be associated with changes to the design or material specification of bags  or 
could represent additional processes, such as stitching a label onto the bag.  Because the woven bags 
comprise most of the packaging in the supply chain, the marginal costs of changing specifications are 
significant and will need to be further investig ated before proceeding to the full AIDC rollout.  
We use the survey data to estimate an additional cost of 59 cents a bag, though there are many suppliers 
who responded that they don’t know what the marginal cost of QR printing would be, and therefore, we 
consider alternate values for our scenario analysis.  Based on our conversation with bag suppliers, we 
learned that in a worst case scenario, if printing is impossible on the woven bags, tags could be sewn on 
for an estimated 11.5 cents per bag.  We use th is value as an upper estimate in our additional scenarios.  
BENEFIT 2 - REDUCED DEMURRAGE FEES  
When food at a port is not promptly unloaded and moved to its next storage facility, demurrage fees may 
be charged to the responsible party.  These charges are b ased on the volume of the unmoved cargo and 
the length of the delay.  
The AIDC/QR codes could help reduce these costs by improving the quality of data available to relevant 
stakeholders and their ability to optimize logistical procedures at warehouses, port s, and the like. Smart 
systems could be designed that would make it easier to see where in the supply chain shipments are being 
 
19 Inflation, consumer prices for the United States, June 24th, 2020, St Louis Federal Reserve,  
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FPCPITOTLZGUSA  
  
 100 held up and adding demurrage costs so that such issues can be addressed. Alerts could be sent to the 
responsible parties indicat ing when they are at risk of incurring a demurrage charge.  
The reduction in demurrage charges will be estimated by multiplying the value of the demurrage charges 
in the current scenario, with an estimated change in demurrage charges in possible future scen arios.  The 
initial demurrage costs come from historical BHA data, while the expected future demurrage costs would 
be an estimate based on stakeholder estimates regarding which portion of costs is preventable.  
CALCULATION  
𝐵2𝑡=𝛥𝐷%×𝐷𝑡×(1+𝑔𝑐)𝑡 
Where:  
𝛥𝐷% is the percentage reduction in demurrage costs as a result of the new QR codes.  
𝐷𝑡 is the average annual cost of demurrage in the base period.  
𝑔𝑐 is the growth rate of commodities delivered annually  
𝑡 is the number of years elapsed.  
PARAMETERS  
ANNUAL DEMURRAGE FEES  (BHA RECORDS)  
The annual demurrage fees are an average of the 2014 -2016 numbers provided to us by BHA. 20  These 
numbers are based on $1.4 million in demurrage costs incurred by WFP over those years, and therefore 
could be a lower bo und for all partners. The model, therefore, is currently using an estimate of $700,000 
annually.  
CHANGE IN DEMURRAGE FEES (AUTHORS ASSUMPTION)  
Anything between zero (no change) and the total value (a full elimination of demurrage fees) seems 
reasonable. The model currently assumes 50 percent.  
RESULTS  
If the model’s assumptions hold, this is a fairly significant benefit stream.  If these demurrage fees really 
are an annual occurrence in a similar magnitude to the 2014 -16 years, this could easil y justify a large 
investment if they can be reduced through enhanced tracking and data visibility.  Demurrage fees are an 
example of a cost that an actor with good planning and full data visibility should not have to pay very often, 
 
20 The Future of the Food for Peace Supply Chain: Automatic Identification and Data Capture (AIDC), November 17, 2017, Prepared by BHA’s 
Operations Team   
 101 and therefore it does n ot seem unreasonable to assume that at least half of this cost could be eliminated 
with the AIDC system.  
BENEFIT 3 - REDUCED TRACING COSTS  
If commodities have information -rich QR codes printed of them, it should be easier to manage recalls, 
since the relev ant data points (such as batch number, packaging date, and the like) will be accessible to 
any warehouse worker who scans a package with their phone.  
The recall process will be even easier if a fully integrated AIDC system is implemented.  If commodity 
locations are recorded into a central database, the recall process could be as easy as simply updating the 
status of a subset of commodities to “Recalled,” and the system could send updates to the party in 
possession of the relevant commodity.  
The value of th is benefit will depend on both the expected cost of recalling food in the absence of the 
solution over the time -frame analyzed and the impact of QR codes or AIDC systems on these costs.  
CALCULATION  
In our model, we estimate the cost of reduced recalls via tracking and tracing as:  
𝐵3𝑡=(𝑅𝑝×𝑅𝑞)×0.14×𝑇𝑅×(1+𝑔𝑝)𝑡 
Where:  
𝑅𝑝 is the price (in USD per MT) of recalled food.  
𝑅𝑞 is the average quantity (in MT/year) of recalled food.  
𝑇𝑅 is the percentage reduction in recall costs associated with improved  traceability.  
𝑔𝑝 is the annual growth rate (%) of commodity prices  
𝑡 is the number of years that have elapsed  
We use a methodology similar to that is found in a 2010 paper of traceability benefits in the beef industry, 
which found that the cost of reca lls was equal to the total value of the commodity recalled, plus 
approximately 10 percent for logistical management and 4 percent for communications. 21 Because the 
logistical costs and communication costs are the components that would reasonably be affect ed by the 
solution, we assume that 14 percent of the underlying commodity value can be addressed by improved 
traceability. Fourteen percent is the absolute upper bound for our benefit in the mode, and we then apply 
a reduction factor that corresponds to th e overall effectiveness of the new system.  
 
21 “Economics of traceability for mitigation of food recall costs”, Resende -Filho, Moises and Buhr, Brian, 27 December 2010   
 102 PARAMETERS  
RECALL QUANTITY (BHA DOCUMENTATION)  
The team was able to access the recall scheduled for 2019, in which a total of approximately 8,000 MT of 
food was recalled for reasons such as pests, water damage, fi res, and the like.  
VALUE OF FOOD (2018 DATA)  
This estimate is the same as that used in the food loss section.  
REDUCTION FACTOR (AUTHORS ASSUMPTION)  
The model assumes a reduction in recall logistics costs of 25 percent, though higher or lower values are 
conceivable. The true value will depend on the efficiency with which data is used.  
COST 1 - FIXED UPFRONT INVESTMENTS COSTS  
The immediate costs of the proposed solution that must be paid before any benefits can be actualized 
include designing the upgrading  equipment to ensure QR labels can be output, adding scanning capacities 
to warehouses or ports, installing secure servers to host the relevant platforms, etc.  
CALCULATION  
𝐶1𝑡=∑
𝑖=1  𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸 𝑋𝑖
𝑇𝑖×(1+𝑔𝑝)𝑡 
Where:  
𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸 𝑋𝑖 is the fixed investment cost (in USD) of investment item i  
𝑇𝑖 is the length (in years) of the investment period for investment item i  
𝑔𝑝 is the annual growth rate (%) of commodity tonnage procured  
𝑡 is the time (in years) since the program began  
COST 2 - ANNUALIZED COSTS  
New costs may be incurred for labor as part of the new solution.  The introduction of QR codes to 
packaging may require additional steps to be taken during printing and additional quality control.  For 
those involved with shipping and handling, the n ew solution may add to their workload, especially if the 
new solution requires significant scanning to occur.  
  
 103 Calculation  
𝐶2𝑡=∑
𝑖=1𝑂&𝑀𝑖,𝑡 
 
Where:  
𝑂&𝑀𝑖,𝑡 is the annual operational cost of type i in period t  
COST 3 – INCREMENTAL PRINTING COSTS  
The model calculates additional costs that may be required to add QR codes to the woven PP bags.  This 
solution might be a change to the current bag design to facilitate scannable printing, such as an additional 
laminated face or an addition like weaving a tag  on that is easily printed on.  
Calculation  
𝐶3𝑡=(𝑃×(1+𝑔𝑝)𝑡)×20×𝑃𝑃𝐵%×𝐶𝑃𝑃𝐵 
Where:  
𝑡 is the time (in years) since the program began  
𝑃 is the total weight (in MT) of commodity procured in the base year  
𝑔𝑝 is the annual growth rate (%) of commodity prices  
𝑃𝑃𝐵% is the percentage of all commodities (by weight) shipped in polypropylene woven bags  
𝐶𝑃𝑃𝐵 is the average per bag cost of printing QR codes  
   
 104 ANNEX  V1. PREPO  PILOT  COST  ESTIMATES  
At the request of BHA staff, the team has budgeted the potential cost of piloting QR codes for a single 
PREPO warehouse (Houston or Djibouti  for example ). The primary costs will be the underlying application 
and IT infrastructure, with some additional resources  budgeted for printers , scanners, and excess 
packaging costs. These costs are illustrative estimates only and will need to be reviewed during 
procurement and implementations.   
Cost Item  Value  Value  Unit 
Common QR Code Repository Application Design22 $150,000  51% USD  
QR Code Operational Cost - Web Server  $12,000  4% USD  
QR Code Setup & Integration into HIMS  $10,000  3% USD  
QR PREPO Printers & Possible Additional Pilot Costs  $75,000  25% USD  
Procurement costs  for adding QR Codes  $48,312  16% USD  
Total  $295,312  100%  USD  
 
 
22 This is a one time fixed cost that can be carried into any expansion in the future.  