Article
News Organizations in Colombia Building Consensus through
Social Media: A Case of Digital-Native La Silla Vac ía
Vanessa de Macedo Higgins Joyce
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Higgins Joyce, Vanessa de
Macedo. 2021. News Organizations
in Colombia Building Consensus
through Social Media: A Case of
Digital-Native La Silla Vac ía.
Journalism and Media 2: 62–76.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
journalmedia2010005
Academic Editor:
Andreu Casero-Ripoll és
Received: 10 November 2020
Accepted: 3 March 2021
Published: 7 March 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).School of Journalism and Mass Communication, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA;
vhjoyce1@txstate.edu
Abstract: Correlation of different segments of society is a major function of mass media and works by
broadening individual’s perspectives and creating common ground between these different segments
Little is known about how consensus building works in the networked, digital environment or how it
works in Latin America. This study explores the premise on a social media page from a digital-native
news organization in Colombia, La Silla Vac ía, on the salient issue of Venezuela. It found that the
news organization did provide a common ground within its comments, bringing men and women
closer together in consensus ( rs= 0.76, n= 10, p< 0.05) of the priorities of topics relating to Venezuela
(substantive attributes). The study did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant correlation between the topics prioritized
by the posts and the topics prioritized by the comments. Audiences focus on Venezuela in relation
to the local Colombian presidential election while the news organization focused on the country in
relation to refugees and the political transition happening in Venezuela.
Keywords: digital-native news; consensus building; social media; Colombian journalism; gender
divide; diversity in news; agenda setting; content analysis; immigration
Digital-native news organizations in Latin America are emerging at a steady-pace,
growing their audiences and inﬂuence. The digital environment in Latin America cre-
ated an opportunity for renewal and innovation in journalism, including the potential
for new media organizations to address original topics to the news agenda once ignored
by traditional mainstream media (Higgins Joyce 2018) and new opportunities for inves-
tigative journalism (Palau-Sampio 2020). In Colombia, a study showed that about 80%
of news organizations online are digital natives, having emerged in the online environ-
ment ( Consejo de Redacci ón 2018 ). Digital-native news organizations are bringing a major
shift in news ownership concentration, accessibility to a wider range of audiences, and a
change in how journalism is produced and presented. Given high concentration of media
in Colombia and traditional ties with business and political elites (Forero et al. 2009;
García-Perdomo and Magaña 2020; Montoya-Londoño 2014), digital-native news media,
by necessity and by opportunity, were able to break away from the business models that
allowed for alternative funding. According to a study by the Reporters Without Borders
and the Federaci ón Colombiana de Periodistas, almost 4 out of 5 Colombians access infor-
mation provided by the eight largest media groups, who concentrate 78% of cross-media
audiences in the country (Reporters without Borders 2021). Advertising online still lags,
and digital natives such as La Silla Vac ía opted for diversifying funding such as those
originating from workshops and conferences, consulting and international organizations
and awards, crowdfunding in addition to advertising (Zuluaga et al. 2020).
This same process that has permitted for the emergence of many digital-native news
organizations, allowing for greater diversity of voices and perspectives (Garc ía-Perdomo
and Magaña 2020; Higgins Joyce 2018), has contributed to audience fragmentation and
greater social polarization (Trilling et al. 2017). A recent study shows that almost half of
Colombians perceive their country to be in heightened political polarization than twenty
years ago (IPSOS/BBC 2018). While many studies have focused on the divisions that are
emphasized in the digital media environment, as we go from an era of “mass” media to one
Journal. Media 2021 ,2, 62–76. https://doi.org/10.3390/journalmedia2010005 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/journalmediaJournal. Media 2021 ,2 63
of “niche” media, little attention is given to how digital media can bring diverse groups
closer together in the public sphere. This study seeks to explore the role of digital-native
news organizations in providing a common ground within this polarized environment,
building consensus.
Correlation is a function of news media that, by connecting different groups of so-
ciety together, or building consensus, could aid mobilization and prevent social threats
(Lasswell 1960 ). Consensus building studies infer differences within diverse demographic
groups and look for instances when news media use reduces them; as individuals in-
crease news media exposure, differences in attitudes and opinions between divergent
groups, such as men and women for example, diminishes and agenda agreement increases
(Higgins Joyce and Khani 2019 ; McCombs 2004). We know that television, newspaper, and
radio are all able to bring opposing demographic subgroups closer together in what issues
they thought were most important, and how they thought about issues and communities
(Higgins 2009) , but less is known about how news organizations on social media could
bring demographic groups closer together into consensus. Given the prominence of news
media access through social media and the interplay of social media preference algo-
rithms that tend to re-emphasize like-mindedness and echo chambers (Geiß et al. 2018) ,
understanding how consensus building can work in a networked digital news media
environment is important. Consensus building has been tested in the US, Europe, and Asia,
but the theory lacks testing in Latin America. While the context and media operate quite
differently in Latin America, providing a common ground for deliberation of important
issues is especially relevant in the young democracies of the region. This study explores
the consensus building potential of a digital-native news organization on social media
in Colombia.
Speciﬁcally, this study explores the assumption that digital-native news organizations
from Colombia can create a common ground between men and women in their perception
of Venezuela, in how they think about it (substantive dimension) and in how they feel about
Venezuela as a news topic (affective dimension). The timeframe of this study, 2018 to 2019,
marks a period of economic and political crisis intensiﬁcation in Venezuela. According to
the Council on Foreign Relations, by 2019 there were an estimated 4 million Venezuelan
refugees, with the neighboring Colombia being the host country receiving the largest
segment of those migrants, 1.3 million (Council on Foreign Relations 2019). According to
the Colombian Ministry of Foreign Relations, in addition to the 1.3 million Venezuelans
migrating in 2018, a little over 1 million migrated to Colombia in 2019 (Migraci ón 2021).
While traditional media had the potential of creating common ground by expanding
personal agendas of different socio-demographic groups (Shaw and Martin 1992), mass
media lacked the diversity that we ﬁnd currently with the advent of the internet, including
gender diversity. Yet, while the internet has allowed for greater access and potential for
diversity, a recent study found that, in Latin America, national audiences for digital-native
news organizations were more likely to be male (71%) (Higgins Joyce and Harlow 2020),
and that gender gap exists in online political discussion (Van Duyn et al. 2019). This study
seeks to explore the potential of digital-native news in creating common grounds between
men and women in online political discussion.
This study then explores how this salient issue/topic of Venezuela is presented by a
digital-native news organization’s social media in Colombia and if this news organization
can bring diverse audiences closer together in deliberation of this issue.
1. Digital-Native News in Latin America
Digital-native news organizations in Latin America are increasingly relevant in terms of
numbers, scope, innovations, and independence (Higgins Joyce 2018; Salaverr ía et al. 2019 ).
In Colombia, they have challenged the local news industry by bringing up topics previously
not covered (Trujillo and Montero 2019), provided alternative voices to mainstream media
(Garc ía-Perdomo and Magaña 2020) and developing new business models (Harlow 2020).
They are also becoming a more popular phenomenon in Latin American journalism, growingJournal. Media 2021 ,2 64
its audience, and being recognized for the quality of their work and independent stance
(SembraMedia 2017) . While the establishment of digital-native news organizations in the past
decade is not an exclusive Latin American phenomenon, the extent of news media ownership
concentration with close ties with powerful elites in the region influenced how these news
organizations developed (Trujillo and Montero 2019).
Digital-native news organizations emerge without previous connection with print
or broadcast news media, although many of its founders and journalists have previously
worked in legacy media in the region (Trujillo and Montero 2019). With lower barriers
to test new ideas, as costs are lowered and expectations not molded into the audience
collectives, these organizations in Latin America innovate in many ways. With new
platforms, journalists create journalism that is still tied to many of the traditional norms,
while bringing in changes to how journalism is produced, who it is produced for, and the
relationship with audiences (Trujillo and Montero 2019). A study comparing journalistic
role performance of print and digital native news organization in Chile found that media
affordances signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced how journalists work, but that audiences and beat
had a greater impact (Mellado et al. 2018). The Chilean study found a higher presence of
watchdog role for digital-native news organization and loyal-facilitator for print media,
which the authors link to differences in ownerships, given market concentration of print
media and economic ties to covered news in that time-period (Mellado et al. 2018).
These digital-native news organizations also innovate with their storytelling formats,
how they relate to their audiences and distribution channels (M éndez et al. 2019). A study
of audiences for digital-native news sites in Latin America found both national and transna-
tional audiences seek these outlets for community engagement, the technology included
and the type of content they produced, in addition, transnational audiences sought commu-
nity engagement through them (Higgins Joyce and Harlow 2020). Social media remains an
important channel for distribution and audience engagement for digital native news orga-
nizations in Latin America, with roughly four in ten Latin Americans reporting preferring
to view news on social media ﬁrst (Newman et al. 2019).
Colombia is one of the top 20 countries in the world in terms of social media use, with
69% of the population actively using it (Statista 2020a). Latinobar ómetro’s 2018 survey
indicated that 77% of Colombians used some type of social media, with 66% of Colombians
using Facebook (Latinobar ómetro 2018). The high use of social media, alongside the
growth of internet access in the last decade came with the relative political and economic
stabilization: between 2001 and 2011 the country almost doubled the size of the middle
and upper middle classes (Straubhaar et al. 2015). That increased availability of internet,
via computers or via cell phones, as is often the case, has allowed for an expansion of
digital-native news organizations in Colombia. This has permitted that a plurality of news
outlets and perspectives to be available throughout the national territory, a particular
innovation in Colombia, where traditional media had been limited by “the country’s
topography, large distances, economic and political interests and technical limitations,”
(Consejo de Redacci ón 2018, p. 68 ). In Colombia, a country whose print media emerged as
family controlled with intrinsic ties to politics, dominating both Liberal and Conservative
parties (Hallin and Papathanassopoulos 2002), the advent of the internet has allowed for
new organizations, voices, and perspectives. Montoya-Londoño (2014) calls the current
media system in Colombia a captured liberal model, where the interests of media owners,
political groups and inﬂuential actors are still present in a commercial system. The author
also mentions the importance of the internet in allowing for new media projects to emerge
and increasing journalistic supplies nationally (Montoya-Londoño 2014). While not all
digital-native news projects offer new voices and perspective, some the emergent and
important independent news have surfaced in the past 20 years .
In a study of digital-native news organizations in Colombia, Garc ía-Perdomo and
Magaña (2020) analyzed the implementation of digital technologies and innovations in
newsrooms and found that they are ‘creative laboratories’, using “digital technology
to produce editorial innovations, engage audiences, and rescue traditional journalisticJournal. Media 2021 ,2 65
values that are jeopardized by traditional news media’s structures and practices.” (p. 3089).
Such is the case of La Silla Vac ía, the news organization that this study analyzes. In a
study comparing immigration coverage from Latin America between 2014 and 2018,
Severino (2020) found that in Colombia, news organizations placed more focus on a Political
Responsibility- Policy Solutions frame. Contrasting digital-native news organizations with
traditional news organizations, the author found that digital natives emphasized the
Political Responsibility frames to a greater extent and the Victim—Political and Economic
frame to a lesser extent, focusing instead on the coverage of immigrants once in Colombia,
rather than the push factors causing the ﬂow of immigration (Severino 2020).
The Colombian La Silla Vac ía, founded in 2009 by Juanita Le ón with ﬁnancial support
from foreign foundations such as the Open Society, is one of the country’s most accessed
web portals with over 1.3 million unique users. It is also deemed one of the most inﬂuential
news organizations in the country (Alba 2019; Trujillo and Montero 2019). Harlow and
Chadha explored how social identities of digital-native founders shape their news ventures
and identiﬁed the Guardian category when founders emphasized the production of quality
journalism (Harlow and Chadha 2019). Although that study focused on digital-native
entrepreneurial journalism in India, that category seems to ﬁt well La Silla’s goals. Having
a woman as founder and owner of a news organization is highly unusual in Colombia and
opens the possibility that this founder identity may also inﬂuence that news organization’s
news production. La Silla Vac ía is an independent, digital-native news organization with a
focus on politics, and people in power (Consejo de Redacci ón 2018). The news organization
states that it “investigates and accurately describes how political power is exercised in
Colombia,” (Garc ía-Perdomo and Magaña 2020, p. 3083). Its strategy is constant innovation,
close contact with audiences, and binging in new sources and perspectives in the coverage
of politics (Trujillo and Montero 2019). The news organization runs a for proﬁt operation
and innovates in its diverse funding strategy which still counts on grant funding, but more
heavily counts on workshops, crowdfunding and also advertising (Rosique-Cedillo and
Barranquero-Carretero 2015; Zuluaga et al. 2020).
While the internet has enabled the emergence of independent news media, with the
potential of bringing much needed diversity of topics and perspectives, it has also allowed
for audiences to self-select into news outlets more congruent with their own perspectives.
In Colombia, the 2018 presidential election re-enforced polarization of earlier peace debates
(Carothers and O’Donohue 2019, p. 153), while the Venezuelan immigration crisis emerged
as a salient issue in the region.
It is then, within this polarized climate that this study addresses Colombian digital-
native news presentation of the issue of Venezuela. It seeks to explore the assumption that
digital-native news organizations may have the potential building common ground among
men and women. In earlier decades, mass media provided news and information with few
alternative and marginalized voices. In Colombia, high levels of media concentration also
meant that news and information was brought through the perspective of a few powerful
groups. While limited in perspectives, mass media was able to bring divergent groups
of society closer together into deliberation. The consensus building assumption has been
tested and support found in the United States, Europe and Asia (Shaw and Martin 1992;
Chiang 1995 ; López-Escobar et al. 1998; Higgins 2009). This study expands on the literature
by testing the assumption in a polarized environment, in Latin America, and within a
changing news media landscape. It tests for the consensus building potential of a digital-
native news organization within its social media platform in Colombia.
2. Consensus Building in a Digital Environment
Communication scholar Harold Lasswell (1960) identiﬁed correlation as one of the
basic functions of mass media. Correlation works by connecting different groups of society
in response to a mediated environment, such as that presented by news media, building
consensus and providing social stability. Individuals broaden their perspectives through
exposure of issues and attributes of those issues brought by news media, gaining a moreJournal. Media 2021 ,2 66
inclusive understanding of society, which then enables sharing of common ground with
different groups of society (Palmgreen et al. 1980). Consensus building occurs with the
prioritization, selection and presentation of a limited set of issues and attributes of those
issues, a consequence of agenda-setting effects (Higgins 2009). It infers differences in
attitudes and opinions between diverse demographic groups such as women and men,
for example, and look for instances when news media use reduces such differences and
agenda agreement increases (McCombs 2004). Achieving a basic common ground on
important topics that need to be addressed is necessary for a functioning democratic
political community (Geiß et al. 2018).
Previous research on consensus building found that television, newspaper and radio,
to some extent, were all able to bring opposing demographic subgroups, such as gender,
race, education and location (rural/urban), closer together in what issues they thought
were most important (ﬁrst level of agenda setting), and how they thought about issues
and communities (second level of agenda setting) (Shaw and Martin 1992; Chiang 1995 ;
López-Escobar et al. 1998 ; Higgins 2009). These studies found support for consensus build-
ing within a mass media environment. Much less is known, however, about how consensus
building works within a digital, networked environment. A German study found evi-
dence of consensus building within a digital environment, and that the effect was more
prominent with those with more extreme political positioning than for moderates, where ex-
posure to news media broadened their horizon of issues and facilitated a common ground
(Geiß et al. 2018 ). That study also pointed to a minority of population who are opposed
to the news media and abstain from its use, which in case social media and interpersonal
discussion seemed to further the divide and impede a common ground (Geiß et al. 2018).
Studies of consensus building have tested the assumption in the United States, Europe and
Asia, but it lacks testing in Latin America.
Scholars have questioned if the consensus building consequence of agenda setting in-
creases public’s focus on issues that need to be addressed if they are broadening personal agen-
das (Edy and Meirick 2018). In the seminal consensus-building study , Shaw and Martin (1992)
demonstrated that it was not that the process was bringing both segments of opposing de-
mographics (such as men and women) closer to the media’s agenda, although that happens
in some cases, but that the increased exposure to the news media decreases differences in
prioritization of issues between the opposing demographic groups. With that, considering,
for example, that men and women may have differences in what they think are important
issues that need to be addressed, by being exposed to a wide range of issues presented by
news media, men might broaden their personal agendas by sharing some prioritization of
issues made by women, who might in turn be broadening their personal agendas. This ex-
change might provide enough common ground between those two demographic subgroups
necessary for democracy .
While women are active consumers of Facebook in Colombia, 51% of Facebook
users in that country are women (Statista 2020b), studies suggest that there is a gen-
der gap in online political discussion (Van Duyn et al. 2019). Scholars have indicated
that national audiences for digital-native news organizations were more likely to be male
(Higgins Joyce and Harlow 2020) . In a study conducted in the United States, scholars
found women were less likely than men to engage in state, national or international politi-
cal topics online (Van Duyn et al. 2019). Scholars have also found links between gender and
perceptions of immigrants in Europe and the United States (Fetzer 2000) and have theorized
that women may feel more afﬁnity with immigrants. Luedtke (2005) found that women
were more likely to support harmonization of immigration policy in Europe. A secondary
data-analysis of the World Values Survey 2018 found that Colombians presented signiﬁcant
gender differences both in terms of political values and opinion towards immigration poli-
cies (EVS/WVS 2021). A one-way between subjects ANOVA was conducted and there was
a signiﬁcant effect of gender on valuing a democratic political system, with men ( M= 1.75 )
placing more value on democracy than women ( M= 1.88) [F(1, 1519) = 5.890, p= 0.015];
and also on valuing a system governed by religious law, with women ( M= 2.65) placingJournal. Media 2021 ,2 67
more value on religious law than men ( M= 2.82) [F(1, 1519) = 7.512, p= 0.006]. There was
also a signiﬁcant effect of gender and perception of essential elements of democracy with
men ( M= 7.00) more likely than women ( M= 6.42) to state that it is essential to choose
their leaders in free elections [F(1, 1519) = 10.874, p= 0.001]; and also with men ( M= 6.04)
more likely than women ( M= 5.29) to state that it is essential to have civil rights to protect
people’s liberty against oppression [F(1, 1519) = 18.817, p< 0.001], A chi-square test of
independence was performed to examine the relation between gender and immigration
policy preference among Colombians. The relation between these variables was signiﬁcant,
2(3,n= 1520) = 9.236, p= 0.026. Women were more likely than men to prefer policies that
restrict immigration, for example “prohibit people coming from other countries”, where
16% of men stated that preference and 20% of women stated that preference. World Values
Survey point to differences of political values and immigration opinions between men and
women in Colombia but unlike the European and studies from the United States, women
were less likely to support immigration. This study then looks for instances where news
media use, through a digital-native news organization’s social media platform, would
diminish such differences and bring men and women closer together in a common ground.
Given the gender gap in political discussion and digital-native news use, and the
differences in political values and perception of immigration between men and women, it
is relevant to analyze, for those who do access digital-native news and engage in political
discussion about immigration, if they are able to achieve more common ground.
A case study of older adults in Texas found that digital media and online news brought
education, location and income groups closer together in a shared common ground in their
perception of government (Higgins Joyce and Khani 2019), demonstrating that consensus
building can work within a digital environment. That study, however, did not focus on the
access of news through social media, which is an increasingly common way of accessing
news, and the main way of accessing digital news in Colombia. A study analyzing how
agenda setting occurs within a networked, social media environment in Spain found that
consuming news through Facebook inﬂuence individual in how they prioritize issues, but
that those individual’s perception of important issues was different than what the general
public deemed important (Cardenal et al. 2019). Similarly, Tremayne (2017) tested for the
competing theories of agendas in a networked environment, that of fragmentation versus
homogeneity and found support for homogeneity between traditional news media agenda
and news media agenda shared on Facebook. However, the author found support for frag-
mentation between traditional news media and Facebook media agenda (Tremayne 2017) .
This study adds to the literature by assessing the transference of salience on social media,
more speciﬁcally on Facebook.
Second level agenda-setting studies assert that media’s emphasis, selection and pre-
sentation of an issue/topic’s attribute affects how people think about that issue/topic, in
other words, it is the transfer of salience of attributes from the media agenda to the public
agenda of attributes (Ghanem 1997). Attributes can be categorized within two distinct
dimensions: substantive and affective. The substantive dimension can be categorized
as descriptive categories (how people think about issues) and affective dimensions as
an appraisal, reﬂecting tone (how people feel about issues) (L ópez-Escobar et al. 1998).
In a study of news presentation of presidential candidates, L ópez-Escobar et al. found
greater support for consensus building within the second level of agenda-setting for the
affective dimension, although both affective and substantive provided support for the
hypothesis (L ópez-Escobar et al. 1998). This study seeks to address the substantive dimen-
sion, operationalized as topics within the issue of Venezuela, and affective dimensions,
operationalized as tone, of agenda setting within a networked digital environment. It
seeks to address the transference the two dimensions within the context of Venezuela, as
an issue, presented by La Silla Vac ía’s social media, a digital native news organization
in Colombia, and its transference to its social media audience. This study then poses the
following questions:Journal. Media 2021 ,2 68
RQ1: Was there a correlation between the substantive attributes emphasized
by the social media posts about Venezuela by Colombian digital-native news
organizations and the substantive attributes emphasized in the comments of
these posts by the audience?
RQ2: Was there a correlation between the affective attributes by the social media
posts about Venezuela by Colombian digital-native news organizations and the
affective attributes of the comments of these posts by the audience?
This study seeks to expand on the consensus building literature by exploring its appli-
cation within a social media environment, an environment of networked communication.
It seeks to investigate consensus building on how Colombians think about the issue/topic
of Venezuela, or consensus building as a consequence of the second level agenda setting,
with a case of La Silla Vac ía’s Facebook audience. It poses the following question:
RQ3: Does the use of digital-native news media through social media in Colombia
build consensus among men and women on their perception towards Venezuela?
3. Method
This study used NodeXL to import Facebook data from La Silla Vacia’s Facebook
page. Facebook remains one the most widely accessed social media sites in Colombia, with
61% of the population using it in 2018 (Statista 2020a). This study imported all available
posts and comments for a year: 15 February 2018 to 2019. The timeframe marks a period
of economic and political crisis intensiﬁcation in Venezuela: from hyperinﬂation, food
shortages and protests in February 2018 to the controversial re-election and inauguration
of Maduro in January of 2019, Juan Guaid óswearing himself as the interim president. This
timeframe yielded a total of 1100 posts and 29,284 comments from La Silla Vac ía. This
study analyzed the text of the posts from La Silla, and the comments made available. It
selected the posts and comments from that timeframe that included the words Venezuela or
Venezuelans, the unit of analysis. La Silla Vac ía had 36 posts, with a total of 731 comments
to those posts. While these posts had to have either of the keywords, all of the comments to
these posts were included in the analysis, regardless of whether it included the keywords.
These posts and comments were analyzed to answer RQ1 and RQ3. In addition, to answer
RQ2 on affective attributes, this study analyzed, through the LIWC software, all posts
(1100) and all comments (29,284) published within that timeframe and contrasted it with
posts that included the keywords Venezuela and Venezuelans (36) and all of the comments
that included the keywords Venezuela and Venezuelans published within that timeframe,
regardless of the topic of the post the comments referred to (485). The coding units analyzed
here are the texts of the posts, representing the news organization coverage, on social media,
of the topic of Venezuela, and texts of all comments, representing the engaged audience
of that news organization. This study recognizes that many more audience members will
have accessed these posts, and that only a particular segment of the audience chooses
to engage with the posts. The comments stand, thus, as a proxy for engaged audience
members. Many posts, as well as comments, included other visual elements such as emojis,
videos, photos, and hashtags, but those are excluded from this analysis in all of the research
questions. While the number of posts by La Silla Vac ía about Venezuela is rather small in
the year of analysis, it is congruent with the sample from Severino (2020), who concluded
that La Silla Vac ía’s focus on national power and politics de-emphasized the coverage of
immigration in his four year of analysis, 2014 to 2018. In addition, the engagement of those
posts, as seen in the comments analyzed here, are substantial for this content analysis.
This study conducts a quantitative content analysis, using both computerized and
human coding. Content analysis is a useful method for examining communication mes-
sages and attributes of those messages and has been widely used for determining topics of
news coverage,—what the news is writing/talking about—and determining what aspects
of the topics are being emphasized and de-emphasized both in terms of substance and
affective dimensions, and is a common methodology in a variety of theoretical frameworksJournal. Media 2021 ,2 69
such as agenda-setting studies (McCombs 2004) and framing analysis (D’Angelo 2018).
Scholars have argued that blending computational and manual methods of content analysis
can “preserve the strengths of traditional content analysis, with its systematic rigor and
contextual sensitivity, while also maximizing the large-scale capacity,” (Lewis et al. 2013,
p. 34). It utilized human coders to answer RQ1 and RQ3, assessing the potential of the
Colombian digital native news organization La Silla Vac ía of bringing men and women
closer together in consensus and transference of substantive attributes. An emergent coding
system was used, where posts and comment topics were noted and deﬁned as encoun-
tered to determine the coding categories, as opposed to an a priori coding, where codes
are determined before the analysis (Stemler 2001). The study found a total of 10 topics,
and remaining topics were collapsed into “others”. For RQ3, audience members (those
who comment on the post), were coded for their gender (male or female) either by their
presented name in Facebook’s proﬁle, or the gender they chose to identify as when creating
their Facebook account. A second coder was hired and trained to perform an inter-coder
reliability test on 15% ( n= 114) of randomly selected posts and comments. Intercoder
reliability was measured with Krippendorff’s alpha and, after training and three sessions,
the study achieved a reliable 0.90 for gender and an acceptable reliability of 0.75 for topic
(Krippendorff 2004).
To answer RQ1 and RQ3, this study performed a spearman rho correlation. For RQ1,
this was a correlation between the prominence of attributes in the news media agenda on
the topic of Venezuela (operationalized as Facebook posts from La Silla Vac ía), in other
words, what topics in relation to Venezuela were posted more frequently by the news
organization, to the audience’s prominence of attributes (operationalized as the comments
to those Facebook posts from La Silla Vac ía), in other words, what topics were included
more often by the audiences replying to those posts. To answer RQ3, this study performed
a Spearman Rho correlation of attribute salience of men and women (operationalized as
comments from men and from women to the La Silla Vac ía’s posts related to Venezuela),
and contrasted that with those media (operationalized as posts from La Silla Vac ía related
to Venezuela) and men and also media and women.
To answer RQ2, on the transference of affective salience from posts to audiences,
this study employed a computerized content analysis, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count text analysis application, available for Spanish, which runs sentiment scores for
the posts and comment texts. The program categorizes the text as positive or negative
and has been widely used in mass communication research (Lachlan et al. 2019). The
program calculates a positive and a negative score, which is the percentage of words within
your unit of analysis (in this case, Facebook posts and comments) categorized as either
positive or negative by the total number of words in the text (in this case, Facebook posts
and comments). The program was used to categorize all posts from that timeframe, all
posts mentioning Venezuela, all comments and all comments mentioning Venezuela. The
scores are then averaged by the number of posts and the number of comments. This study
then performed a time series cross-correlation in SPSS to see if the affective attributes of
comments on Venezuela did indeed follow the affective attributes of post on Venezuela.
4. Findings
Out of the 36 posts that La Silla Vac ía posted on its Facebook page about Venezuela in
that timeframe, over one quarter mentioned the topic of migrants and immigration into
Colombia and almost one quarter dealt with the topic of the political transition going on in
Venezuela. The remaining half of the posts talked about the USA, in relation to Venezuela,
and then, more locally, how local Presidential election candidates (Gustavo Petro and Iv án
Duque) reﬂected over current events in Venezuela. The comments, however, ﬂipped the
emphasis, with a quarter of comments relating to the Presidential candidate Iv án Duque
and 22% on the candidate Gustavo Petro. Comments also brought up other topics, such as
socialism/communism (11%), Peace process (8%), Corruption (8%), Ideology (7%) and oil
(3%), and only 6% dealt with the issue of immigration and 2% on the political transition.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 70
Answering RQ1, which asked if the topics/issues posted by the Colombian digital-
native news organization in relation to Venezuela were congruent with the topics/issues
mentioned by the audience in the comments to these posts, this study ﬁnds a non-
signiﬁcant, weak, negative correlation ( rs= 0.25, n= 10, p= 0.489) between attributes of
Venezuela presented by posts and those presented by audience members in comments.
Men were more likely to comment on those posts than women. Out of the 731 com-
ments, 70% of those engaging in comments were male and 24% were females, the remaining
comments did not have an identiﬁable gender. Figure 1 shows that the correlation between
the topics surrounding Venezuela emphasized by the news organization’s posts (substan-
tive attributes) and the topics emphasized by the comments made by men to those posts.
These correlations were non-signiﬁcant, negative, and weak ( rs= 0.30, n= 10, p= 0.407),
indicating that the topics mentioned by men in the comments had little to do with the
topics emphasized by the news organization’s posts. There was no correlation between the
topic surrounding Venezuela emphasized by the posts and the topics emphasized by the
comments made by women to those posts, ( rs= 0.03, n=10, p= 0.944). To test consensus
building, following the seminal study by Shaw and Martin (1992), we look at the bottom of
the triadic relationship, in the case of this study the correlation between men and women
commenting on the La Silla Vac ía posts about Venezuela.
Journal. Media 2021, 2 , 9 
Col
ombia and almost one quarter dealt with the topic of the political transition going on 
in Venezuela. The remaining half of the posts talked about the USA, in relation to Vene-
zuela, and then, more locally, how local Presi dential election candidates (Gustavo Petro 
and Iván Duque) reflected over current events in Venezuela. The comments, however, 
flipped the emphasis, with a quarter of comment s relating to the Presidential candidate 
Iván Duque and 22% on the candidate Gustav o Petro. Comments also brought up other 
topics, such as socialism/communism (11%), Peace process (8%), Corruption (8%), Ideol-
ogy (7%) and oil (3%), and only 6% dealt with the issue of immigration and 2% on the political transition. 
Answering RQ1, which asked if the topics/issues posted by the Colombian digital-
native news organization in relation to Ve nezuela were congruent with the topics/issues 
mentioned by the audience in the comments to these posts, this study finds a non-signifi-
cant, weak, negative correlation ( r
s = −0.25, n = 10, p  = 0.489) between attributes of Vene-
zuela presented by posts and those presen ted by audience members in comments. 
Men were more likely to comment on those posts than women. Out of the 731 com-
ments, 70% of those engaging in comments were male and 24% were females, the remain-ing comments did not have an identifiable ge nder. Figure 1 shows that the correlation 
between the topics surrounding Venezuela em phasized by the news organization’s posts 
(substantive attributes) and the topics emphas ized by the comments made by men to those 
posts. These correlations were non-significant, negative, and weak ( r
s = −0.30, n = 10, p = 0.407), 
indicating that the topics mentioned by men in the comments had little to do with the topics emphasized by the news  organization’s posts. There was no correlation between 
the topic surrounding Venezuela emphasized by  the posts and the topics emphasized by 
the comments made by women to those posts, ( r
s = 0.03, n =10, p = 0.944). To test consensus 
building, following the seminal study by Shaw and Martin (1992), we look at the bottom of the triadic relationship, in the case of this study the correlation between men and women commenting on the La Sill a Vacía posts about Venezuela. 
Figure 1. Spearman rho correlation on substantive attributes of Venezuela between comments by 
men, comments by women and La Silla Vacía’s Facebook posts. 
Answering RQ3, this study finds a sign ificant, strong, positive correlation ( rs = 0.76, 
n = 10, p  < 0.05) between men and women on substa ntive attributes of the issue of Vene-
zuela. Although both men and women do not seem to agree with the news organization’s 
posts in terms of the emphasis of the substant ive attributes of Venezuela, they presented 
a strong agreement with each other. As Figure  2 shows, while the posts from La Silla Vacía 
were more likely to mention topics such as refugees (28%) and political transition (22%) in posts about Venezuela, audiences were more likely to emphasize the political candi-
dates Gustavo Petro (21% male, 25% female) and Iván Duque (24% male, 31% female). 
While there were some differences in how men and women emphasized different topics 
in relation to Venezuela, for example, men were more likely to mention ideology (9%) 
than women were (3%), and women were more likely to mention the candidate Iván Du-
que than men were, they do show a strong and significant correlation. 
News Or ganization ’s Posts 
−0.30
 0.03 
Men Women 0.76 
Figure 1. Spearman rho correlation on substantive attributes of Venezuela between comments by
men, comments by women and La Silla Vac ía’s Facebook posts.
Answering RQ3, this study ﬁnds a signiﬁcant, strong, positive correlation ( rs= 0.76 ,
n= 10,p< 0.05) between men and women on substantive attributes of the issue of
Venezuela. Although both men and women do not seem to agree with the news or-
ganization’s posts in terms of the emphasis of the substantive attributes of Venezuela, they
presented a strong agreement with each other. As Figure 2 shows, while the posts from La
Silla Vac ía were more likely to mention topics such as refugees (28%) and political transition
(22%) in posts about Venezuela, audiences were more likely to emphasize the political
candidates Gustavo Petro (21% male, 25% female) and Iv án Duque (24% male, 31% female).
While there were some differences in how men and women emphasized different topics in
relation to Venezuela, for example, men were more likely to mention ideology (9%) than
women were (3%), and women were more likely to mention the candidate Iv án Duque
than men were, they do show a strong and signiﬁcant correlation.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 71
Journal. Media 2021 , 2, 10 
 
  
Figure 2. Attribute Salience, operationalized as topic, of posts on  the issue of Venezuela and comments to these posts from 
La Silla Vacía. 
To answer RQ2, on the transference of affe ctive salience from posts to audiences, this 
study employed a computerized content analys is, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
text analysis application, available for Spanis h, which runs sentiment scores for the posts 
and comment texts. Figure 3 shows the average positive and negative tones of posts and com-
ments. Considering the posts about Venezuela, this study found that most of the news organ-
ization’s posts were neutral, whil e also finding an average of 0.43 positive posts (SD = 1.02) by 
the news organization and an average of 0.18 negative posts (SD = 0.65) by the news organi-
zation. Considering the comments mentioning Ve nezuela from all posts, there was an average 
0.55 positive comments (SD = 1.32) and 0.60 negative comments (SD = 1.35). 
 
Figure 3. Average tone (positive and negative) by posts and comments from La Silla Vacía. 
An example of a neutral post, defined as having a 0 score for positive and a 0 score 
for negative words, is a post from 10 February 2019. The post is a quote from an interview 0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%
Posts Male Comments Female Comments
0.510.69
0.430.55
0.310.66
0.180.60
All Posts All Comments Venezue la Posts Venezuela Comments
Positive Negative
Figure 2. Attribute Salience, operationalized as topic, of posts on the issue of Venezuela and comments to these posts from
La Silla Vac ía.
To answer RQ2, on the transference of affective salience from posts to audiences, this
study employed a computerized content analysis, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
text analysis application, available for Spanish, which runs sentiment scores for the posts and
comment texts. Figure 3 shows the average positive and negative tones of posts and comments.
Considering the posts about V enezuela, this study found that most of the news organization’s
posts were neutral, while also finding an average of 0.43 positive posts ( SD = 1.02 ) by the
news organization and an average of 0.18 negative posts (SD = 0.65) by the news organization.
Considering the comments mentioning V enezuela from all posts, there was an average 0.55
positive comments (SD = 1.32) and 0.60 negative comments (SD = 1.35).
Journal. Media 2021 , 2, 10 
 
  
Figure 2. Attribute Salience, operationalized as topic, of posts on  the issue of Venezuela and comments to these posts from 
La Silla Vacía. 
To answer RQ2, on the transference of affe ctive salience from posts to audiences, this 
study employed a computerized content analys is, the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count 
text analysis application, available for Spanis h, which runs sentiment scores for the posts 
and comment texts. Figure 3 shows the average positive and negative tones of posts and com-
ments. Considering the posts about Venezuela, this study found that most of the news organ-
ization’s posts were neutral, whil e also finding an average of 0.43 positive posts (SD = 1.02) by 
the news organization and an average of 0.18 negative posts (SD = 0.65) by the news organi-
zation. Considering the comments mentioning Ve nezuela from all posts, there was an average 
0.55 positive comments (SD = 1.32) and 0.60 negative comments (SD = 1.35). 
 
Figure 3. Average tone (positive and negative) by posts and comments from La Silla Vacía. 
An example of a neutral post, defined as having a 0 score for positive and a 0 score 
for negative words, is a post from 10 February 2019. The post is a quote from an interview 0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%
Posts Male Comments Female Comments
0.510.69
0.430.55
0.310.66
0.180.60
All Posts All Comments Venezue la Posts Venezuela Comments
Positive Negative
Figure 3. Average tone (positive and negative) by posts and comments from La Silla Vac ía.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 72
An example of a neutral post, deﬁned as having a 0 score for positive and a 0 score
for negative words, is a post from 10 February 2019. The post is a quote from an interview
with Political Science professor Victor Mijares, published in the digital-native news site.
The quote states “For me, the short term for Venezuelan transition is of one year” (author
translation). While the news story may have a positive or a negative tone, the quote selected
for the Facebook post was coded as not having negative nor positive words. A post coded
as negative (with average negative words of 3.33) stated “More opportunity than from
his own agenda. Even with the breathing room of the ELN attack and the situation in
Venezuela, Iv án Duque’s non-uribista ﬂags still don’t take off” (author translation). The
post linked to a story from La Silla Vac ía on 7 February about President Duque’s initial
6 months in government. A positive post coded was “Although @petrogustavo maintains
an admiration to Ch ávez and his work, and in addition having similar leadership styles,
the Colombian context is very different than the Venezuelan one,” from 9 June, 2018. The
post included an old photo of the presidential candidate Gustavo Petro with the former
Venezuelan President Hugo Ch ávez and linked to an article on the matter. The post was
coded as having an average of 3.45 positive words and 0 negative.
To better understand if these affective attributes reﬂect the topic itself or not, this study
also performed the analysis for all posts and all comments within that timeframe. It found
that the average posts followed a similar pattern, with an average of 0.51 ( SD = 1.46 ) of
posts being positive and an average of 0.31 (SD = 1.05) posts being negative. However, when
considering all posts and all comments, the comments are more likely to be positive. For all
comments, an average of 0.69 (SD = 4.61) comments were positive and 0.66 ( SD = 3.67 ) were
negative. This indicates that the tone of comments in relation to the posts on Venezuela
steered away from the norm in that year.
5. Discussion
Digital-native news organizations in Latin America in general, and Colombia in
particular, are innovating within the news media environment in many ways. Many are
engaging in closer contact with their audiences, with social media, events, chats, and other
avenues. Some, as is the case of La Silla Vac ía, the focus of this study, are demonstrating
they can be successful in this new environment, growing audiences and providing quality
journalism. La Silla Vac ía’s focus on politics and power aims at bringing new angles and
covering actors not usually covered in mainstream media.
Digital-native news organizations emerge within an online environment that is in-
creasingly polarized in Latin America. In Colombia, the peace accord was marked by
disagreement (Carothers and O’Donohue 2019) that has continued in other areas of society.
One of the main functions of media in society is to correlate different groups, building
consensus (Lasswell 1960). This study sought to understand the potential of a Colombian
digital-native news organization to provide common ground among its audience within
a social media environment. It explored the transference of salience of substantive and
affective dimensions of the issue Venezuela from the news organization’s social media
posts to its audience’s comments.
It found that, on the substantive attributes, La Silla Vac ía’s Facebook posts prioritized
migration and the political transition in Venezuela ﬁrst, and then a focus on the local
presidential candidates perceived the current issues in Venezuela, followed by other at-
tributes. The comments on the Facebook page did not follow this prioritization. Comments
overwhelmingly dealt with the front-runners of the presidential election: Iv án Duque and
Gustavo Petro. This study does not ﬁnd a direct agenda-setting effect between posts to
comments. Considering that La Silla Vac ía’s focus is on local politics and power issues
within Colombia, audiences may be carrying emphasis from other posts into the discussion
of posts about Venezuela—in other words, considering that the news organization focuses
quite extensively on local politics, once presented news posts about Venezuela, audience
continue the discussion within a macro frame of the news organization.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 73
In analyzing if La Silla Vac ía was able to build consensus between men and women,
this study found a positive, strong, and signiﬁcant correlation between men and women
on the topics they emphasized in the comments to the posts about Venezuela. While
men’s comments had a slight negative correlation with the news organization’s posts and
women had no correlation with the news organizations posts, men and women had a
strong correlation between their comments. This ﬁnding suggests that the context provided
by the news organization in general and the space provided for an opened discussion
allowed men and women to ﬁnd some common ground for deliberation of the issue
of Venezuela. This ﬁnding expands on the consensus building assumption, originally
proposed by Shaw and Martin (1992) and replicated in Europe (L ópez-Escobar et al. 1998;
Higgins 2009) and Asia (Chiang 1995) by empirically testing the assumption in Latin
America, within a Colombian digital-native news organization.
While we have gone from an era of mass media, with only a few dominant news
organizations providing a common ground for a less diverse audience than we have
today, to an era of media proliferation, which includes more diverse news producers
and audiences, this study found that women were much less likely to actively engage in
the discussions about Venezuela than men were. Less than one quarter of all comments
were posted by women. While men have traditionally made the bulk of print audience
composition in Latin America, especially in topics such as politics and foreign relations,
women make up large segments of social media use (Statista 2020b) and are increasingly
accessing digital-native news organizations in Latin America. With more women as news
producers and founders of digital-native news organizations (SembraMedia 2017) and with
La Silla Vac ía having strong presence of women in the newsroom and leadership, the gap
seems all that more relevant. Given the gender inequalities occurring in Latin America
and the opportunities emerging from new women leaders in journalism organizations
in the region, the gender gap in audience engagement through comments should be
further analyzed.
However, for those women who did engage in political discussion, this study found
that consensus building is possible within a social media platform of a digital-native
news organization in Latin America. This study is limited by assessing only one news
organization’s social media platform, and in one particular context (the issues faced by
Venezuela at the time and the local, Colombian presidential elections), and replication is
necessary. The study also has a limited scope, which limits some analyses. However, this
study ﬁnds that the social media platform offers just enough common ground for men and
women to deliberate on the substantive attributes of the issue of Venezuela that they deem
important. In this case, men and women prioritized the local presidential election and
debated on the issue of Venezuela with how they perceived the candidates to align or plan
to deal with issues such as migration, its political regime, poverty and others. Facebook, as
the social media platform used by the Colombian digital-native news organization, was a
space where men and women could be exposed to and share attributes of an important
topic, in this case Venezuela. While it is encouraging and beneﬁcial to the health of a
democracy that men and women do, indeed, ﬁnd a space for deliberation and share some
common ground for the discussion of political issues, it is important that more is done
to understand the gender gap in political discussion and to further encourage women to
engage in it. While this study points to the possibility of common ground for deliberation
on a digital, networked environment, the environment for discussion is not encouraging
women to participate at the same rate as it does men.
This study also analyzed the transference of affective attribute of Venezuela from the
Colombian La Silla Vac ía’s Facebook posts to their audience’s comments. It did not ﬁnd sup-
port for the affective dimension. It found that posts by La Silla Vac ía were overwhelmingly
neutral. It found, however, that the news organization was more likely to present positive
tones about Venezuela/Venezuelans than negative tones about Venezuela/Venezuelans.
This is in alignment with the tone that the news organization’s Facebook posts were pre-
sented in other topics in that year. The audience, however, had comments to the posts aboutJournal. Media 2021 ,2 74
Venezuela with more negative tone than positive, and that was not the case in the overall
commenting for other topics. This ﬁnding suggests that how audiences express themselves,
in terms of tone, might be primed by how the posts are presented. Alternatively, given the
differences in framing from digital-media, including La Silla Vac ía, and traditional media
on the topic of immigration (Severino 2020), it is possible that audience’s negative tone
may reﬂect legacy media’s coverage of Venezuela, while primed by the positive tone of
the digital-native news organization. Given the implications for engagement and online
environment, and the limitations of this study, this ﬁnding should be further analyzed
within other contexts.
This study found evidence of consensus building between men and women in a social
media platform of a digital-native news organizations in Latin America, La Silla Vac ía,
implying that digital media, much like mass media, may function to correlate different
segments of society into enough agreement for deliberation. It does not ﬁnd that the
audiences necessarily follow the news organization in the affective nor the substantive
dimension, but that the news organization provides audience space and some orientation
for deliberation of an issue, in this case, Venezuela. By doing so, it has the potential of
bringing opposing segments of society closer together, providing some common ground
for deliberation. To do that, digital-native news organizations must accomplish an intricate
feat: attract a diverse audience in an age of niche media and ensure that minority voices
feel comfortable to participate and engage in the discussion. This study is, however, limited
in its scope. Future studies should expand the news organizations, topics and demographic
analyzed to have a better understanding of how consensus building works in a digital,
networked environment in Latin America.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Please contact the author (vhjoyce1@txstate.edu) for access to the dataset.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
Alba, Jos éAntonio Gonz ález. 2019. Los emergentes nativos digitales en Am érica Latina: Control al poder, veriﬁcaci ón, derechos
humanos y diversiﬁcaci ón del negocio. Cuadernos de periodistas: Revista de la Asociaci ón de la Prensa de Madrid 39: 62–73.
Cardenal, Ana S., Carol Galais, and Silvia Maj ó-Vázquez. 2019. Is Facebook eroding the public agenda? Evidence from survey and
web-tracking data. International Journal of Public Opinion Research 31: 589–608. [CrossRef]
Carothers, Thomas, and Andrew O’Donohue, eds. 2019. Democracies Divided: The Global Challenge of Political Polarization . Washington,
DC: District of Columbia, Brookings Institution Press.
Chiang, Ching-Yi. 1995. Bridging and Closing the Gap of Our Society: Social Function of Media Agenda-Setting. A Case Study in
Taiwan. Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. Unpublished Worked.
Consejo de Redacci ón. 2018. La Babel Digital: Pistas Para un Periodismo Emprendedor. Available online: https://consejoderedaccion.
org/webs/lababeldigital/ (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Council on Foreign Relations. 2019. The Venezuelan Exodus. Available online: https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/venezuelan-exodus
(accessed on 1 February 2021).
D’Angelo, Paul, ed. 2018. Doing News Framing Analysis II: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives . London: Routledge.
Edy, Jill, and Patrick Meirick. 2018. Does Agenda Setting Promote Public Consensus? Paper Presented at 50 Years in Agenda Setting
Research: Past and Future Perspectives Conference, Boulder, CO, USA, July 18.
EVS/WVS. 2021. European Values Study and World Values Survey: Joint EVS/WVS 2017–21 Dataset (Joint EVS/WVS) . Dataset Version 1.1.0.
Madrid: JD Systems Institute and WVSA. [CrossRef]
Fetzer, Joel. 2000. Public Attitudes toward Immigration in the United States, France and Germany . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forero, Germ án Arango, Liliana Guti érrez Coba, Alfonso Forero Guti érrez, Jairo Valderrama Valderrama, Rodolfo Prada Penagos, Luz
Carmen Barrera Avellaneda, and Adriana Guzm án De Reyes. 2009. The media in Colombia, 63–76. In The Handbook of Spanish
Language Media . Edited by Alan Albarran. London: Routledge.
García-Perdomo, V íctor, and Mar ía Isabel Magaña. 2020. The Adoption of Technology and Innovation Among Native Online News
Media in Colombia. International Journal of Communication 14: 20.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 75
Geiß, Stefan, Melanie Magin, Birgit Stark, and Pascal Jürgens. 2018. “Common Meeting Ground” in Gefahr? Selektionslogiken
Politischer Informationsquellen und ihr Einﬂuss auf die Fragmentierung Individueller Themenhorizonte. MandK Medien and
Kommunikationswissenschaft 66: 502–25. [CrossRef]
Ghanem, Salma. 1997. Filling in the Tapestry: The Second Level of Agenda Setting. In Communication and Democracy: Exploring the
Intellectual Frontiers in Agenda-Setting Theory . Edited by Maxwell McCombs, Donald Lewis Shaw and David Weaver. Mahwah:
Erlbaum Associates, pp. 3–14.
Hallin, Daniel C., and Stylianos Papathanassopoulos. 2002. Political clientelism and the media: Southern Europe and Latin America in
comparative perspective. Media, Culture and Society 24: 175–95. [CrossRef]
Harlow, Summer. 2020. Entrepreneurial News Sites as Worthy Causes? Exploring Readers’ Motivations Behind Donating to Latin
American Journalism. Digital Journalism , 1–20. [CrossRef]
Harlow, Summer, and Monica Chadha. 2019. Indian Entrepreneurial Journalism: Building a typology of how founders’ social identity
shapes innovation and sustainability. Journalism Studies 20: 891–910. [CrossRef]
Higgins, Vanessa de Macedo. 2009. News Media Roles in Bridging Communities: Consensus Function of Agenda-Setting. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA.
Higgins Joyce, Vanessa de Macedo. 2018. Independent Voices of Entrepreneurial News: Setting a New Agenda in Latin America.
Palabra Clave 21: 710–39. [CrossRef]
Higgins Joyce, Vanessa de Macedo, and Summer Harlow. 2020. Seeking transnational, digital-native news from Latin America: An
audience analysis through the lens of social capital. Journalism Studies 21: 1200–19. [CrossRef]
Higgins Joyce, Vanessa, and Zara Khani. 2019. Consensus building on trust in government: Contrasting media and neighborhood
effects in a case study of older Texans. The Agenda Setting Journal 3: 165–85. [CrossRef]
IPSOS/BBC. 2018. Worlds Apart. IPSOS-BBC. Available online: https://www.ipsos.com/en/worlds-apart (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Krippendorff, Klaus. 2004. Reliability in content analysis: Some common misconceptions and recommendations. Human Communication
Research 30: 411–33. [CrossRef]
Lachlan, Kenneth A., Zhan Xu, Emily E. Hutter, Rainear Adam, and Patric R. Spence. 2019. A little goes a long way: Serial transmission
of Twitter content associated with Hurricane Irma and implications for crisis communication. Journal of Strategic Innovation and
Sustainability 14: 16–26.
Lasswell, Harold. 1960. The Structure and Function of Communication in Society. In Mass Communications , 2nd ed. Edited by Wilbur
Schramm. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, pp. 117–30.
Latinobar ómetro. 2018. Online An álisis: Social Media, Colombia. Available online: https://www.latinobarometro.org/latOnline.jsp
(accessed on 15 February 2021).
Lewis, Seth C., Rodrigo Zamith, and Alfred Hermida. 2013. Content analysis in an era of big data: A hybrid approach to computational
and manual methods. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media 57: 34–52. [CrossRef]
López-Escobar, Esteban, Juan Pablo Llamas, and Maxwell McCombs. 1998. Agenda setting and community consensus: First and
second level effects. International Journal of Public Opinion Research 10: 335–46. [CrossRef]
Luedtke, Adam. 2005. European integration, public opinion and immigration policy: Testing the impact of national identity. European
Union Politics 6: 83–112. [CrossRef]
McCombs, Maxwell. 2004. Setting the Agenda: The Mass Media and Public Opinion . Malden: Blackwell Publishing Inc.
Mellado, Claudia, Maria Luiza Humanes, Andr és Scherman, and Auska Ovando. 2018. Do digital platforms really make a difference
in content? Mapping journalistic role performance in Chilean print and online news. Journalism 22: 358–377. [CrossRef]
Méndez, Marga Cabrera, Llu ís Codina, and Ram ón Salaverr ía. 2019. Qu éson y qu éno son los nuevos medios. 70 visiones de expertos
hispanos. Revista Latina de Comunicaci ón Social 74: 1506–20.
Migraci ón. 2021. Transparencia y Acceso a la Informaci ón, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores. Available online: https://www.datos.gov .
co/Estad-sticas-Nacionales/Entrada-de-V enezolanos-a-Colombia-por-a-o-2012-201/p7hq-8vsm (accessed on 15 February 2021).
Montoya-Londoño, Catalina. 2014. In Search of a Model for the Colombian Media System Today. In Media Systems and Communication
Policies in Latin America . London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 66–81.
Newman, Nic, Richard Fletcher, Antonis Kalogeropoulos, and Rasmus Nielsen. 2019. Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2019 . Oxford:
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.
Palau-Sampio, Dolors. 2020. Shaping Regional Synergies: Digital Media, Investigative Reporting, and Collaboration for Improving
Democracy and Accountability in Latin America. International Journal of Communication 14: 23.
Palmgreen, Philip, Lawrence A. Wenner, and Jay D. Rayburn. 1980. Relations between gratiﬁcations sought and obtained: A study of
television news. Communication Research 7: 161–92. [CrossRef]
Reporters without Borders. 2021. Concentration Throughout the Sectors. In Reporters Without Borders and Federaci ón Colombiana de
Periodistas, Media Ownership Monitor in Colombia. Available online: http://colombia.mom-rsf.org/en/ﬁndings/audience-
concentration/ (accessed on 15 February 2021).
Rosique-Cedillo, Gloria, and Alejandro Barranquero-Carretero. 2015. Periodismo Lento (Slow Journalism) En La Era De La Inmediatez.
Experiencias En Iberoam érica. El Profesional de la Informaci ón24: 451–62. [CrossRef]
Salaverr ía, Ram ón, Charo S ádaba, James G. Breiner, and Janine C. Warner. 2019. A brave new digital journalism in Latin America. In
Communication: Innovation and Quality . Cham: Springer, pp. 229–47.Journal. Media 2021 ,2 76
SembraMedia. 2017. Inﬂection Point: Impact, Threats, and Sustainability, a Study of Latin American Digital Media Entrepreneurs.
Available online: http://data.sembramedia.org/download-the-study/ (accessed on 15 February 2021).
Severino, Fernando. 2020. Immigration News in the Global South: A Comparative Analysis of Media Content and Journalistic
Decisions and Practices in Latin America. Doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Shaw, Donald, and Shannon E. Martin. 1992. The function of mass media agenda setting. Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly
69: 902–20. [CrossRef]
Statista. 2020a. Most Popular Social Networks Based on Share of Users in Colombia in 2018. Available online: https://www.statista.
com/statistics/754482/colombia-penetration-social-networks/ (accessed on 1 November 2020).
Statista. 2020b. Distribution of Social Media Users in Colombia as of January 2020, by Age Group and Gender. Available online:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/998968/distribution-users-social-media-colombia-age-gender/ (accessed on 1 November 2020).
Stemler, Steve. 2001. An overview of content analysis. Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation 7: 137–46.
Straubhaar, Josetph D., Jeremiah Spence, Vanessa Higgins Joyce, Vinicio Sinta, Adolfo Mora, Garc ía Víctor, and Luiz Guilherme Duarte.
2015. The Evolution of Television: An Analysis of 10 Years of TGI Latin America (2004–2014) . Austin: University of Texas at Austin, vol. 1.
Tremayne, Mark. 2017. The Facebook Agenda: Global social media news characteristics. American Communication Journal 19: 25–35.
Trilling, Damian, Marijn Van Klingeren, and Yariv Tsfati. 2017. Selective exposure, political polarization, and possible mediators:
Evidence from the Netherlands. International Journal of Public Opinion Research 29: 189–213. [CrossRef]
Trujillo, Jimena Zuluaga, and Silvia Marcela G ómez Montero. 2019. Medios nativos digitales en Am érica Latina: Agenda, sostenimiento
e inﬂuencia. Chasqui: Revista Latinoamericana de Comunicaci ón141: 301–16. [CrossRef]
Van Duyn, Emily, Cynthia Peacock, and Natalie Jomini Stroud. 2019. The gender gap in online news comment sections. Social Science
Computer Review 39: 181–196. [CrossRef]
Zuluaga, Jimena, Mar ía Paula Mart ínez, Marius Dragomir, Mark Thompson, Fernando Bermejo, Yuen-Ying Chan, Christian S. Nissen,
Dusan Reljic, Russell Southwood, Michael Starks, and et al. 2020. Mapping Digital Media: Colombia. Open Society Foundations .
Available online: https://www.issuelab.org/resources/36329/36329.pdf (accessed on 15 February 2021).