Peer eﬀects and externalities in technology adoption: Evidence
from community reporting in Uganda∗
Romain Ferrali†Guy Grossman‡Melina Platas§Jonathan Rodden¶
January 23, 2018
Abstract
Do social networks matter for the adoption of new political communication technologies?
We collect complete social network data for sixteen Ugandan villages where an innovative re-
porting mobile platform was recently introduced, and show robust evidence of peer eﬀects on
technology adoption. However, peer eﬀects were not observed in all networks. We develop a
formal model showing that while peer eﬀects facilitate adoption of technologies with minimal
externalities (like agricultural practices), it can be more diﬃcult for innovations with signiﬁcant
positive externalities to spread through a network. Early adopters might exaggerate beneﬁts,
leading others to discount information about the technology’s value. Thus, peer eﬀects are
likely to emerge only where informal institutions support truthful communication. We show
that the observable implications of our model are borne out in the data. These impediments to
social diﬀusion might help explain the slow and varied uptake of new political communication
technologies around the world.
∗We gratefully acknowledge the support and cooperation of members of the Arua district local government, as
well as RTI, GAPP, UNICEF Uganda, USAID/Uganda, and the USAID Center of Excellence on Democracy, Human
Rights, and Governance, without whom this study would not have been possible. We thank Innovations for Poverty
Action Uganda for excellent research assistance and data collection. Jon Helfers, Maximillian Seunik, Areum Han
and Zachary Tausanovich provided valuable research assistance at various stages of the project. We received helpful
feedback from USAID Uganda, DFID Uganda, GAPP, and district oﬃcials at a stakeholder meeting in Arua in late
2016, as well as from participants at seminars in Brigham Young University, the University of Pennsylvania and
Princeton University. We are thankful to SEED at the Stanford GSB for ﬁnancial support. Finally, we are grateful to
the thousands of Arua residents who so generously shared their time with us over multiple periods of data collection.
We hope our ﬁndings can serve to make programs such as U-Bridge successful in improving communication and
ultimately service delivery in Arua and beyond.
†Department of Political Science, Princeton University. ferrali@princeton.edu
‡Department of Political Science, University of Pennsylvania & EGAP. ggros@sas.upenn.edu
§Division of Social Science, New York University Abu Dhabi. mplatas@nyu.edu
¶Department of Political Science, Stanford University. jrodden@stanford.edu1 Introduction
Novel political communication technologies (PCTs) are facilitating new forms of political partic-
ipation around the world. From New York City’s NYC311 platform1to community monitoring
text-messaging systems in Africa (Grossman, Platas and Rodden, 2017), new technologies are al-
lowing for more frequent and cheaper forms of participation than traditional means of political
engagement. These technologies have the potential to transform the relationship between citizens
and their governments, oﬀering opportunities to address some of the most intractable governance
challenges. The potential beneﬁts of PCTs are especially large when it comes to acute service
delivery failures in the developing world. New programs allow citizens to report problems, such as
teacher absenteeism, in a way that is immediate, inexpensive, and potentially anonymous (Peixoto
and Sifry, 2017). However, recent studies have demonstrated that adoption of these promising new
technologies has been variable from one context to another, and relatively disappointing overall in
the developing world (Grossman, Humphreys and Sacramone-Lutz, 2016). These new technologies
will not aﬀect governance, or will only beneﬁt a narrow group of users, if they are not broadly
adopted. This paper asks a question of growing importance: what explains variation in the uptake
of new political communication technologies?
We examine the role social factors, speciﬁcally peer eﬀects , play in inﬂuencing the adoption of
a new community reporting PCT platform in Uganda. Our starting point is past work on social
diﬀusion, which explores how and why social learning from peers facilitates the adoption of new
technologies (Golub and Sadler, 2017). In short, under conditions of uncertainty over the costs and
beneﬁts of the usage of new technologies, information is crucial to adoption decisions. Network ties
are generally consequential because friends, family, neighbors and colleagues are often viewed as
convenient and trustworthy sources of information.
Existing studies focus on the adoption of technologies that increase, for example, agriculture
productivity (Bandiera and Rasul, 2006; Conley and Udry, 2010; Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995),
health status (Kremer and Miguel, 2007; Dupas, 2014; Oster and Thornton, 2012), or access to
ﬁnancial services (Banerjee et al., 2013). Unlike past work, we explore the impact of social ties
on the adoption of a (political communication) technological innovation that involves substantial
1http://www1.nyc.gov/311/index.page
1positiveexternalities, andisthusmorelikelytoinvolvestrategicconsiderations. Existingtheoretical
and empirical studies are generally silent about whether and how peer eﬀects might work in the
presence of such externalities. An important concern is that diﬀusion of adoption of PCTs via peer
eﬀects might be undermined because of these externalities.
Exploring the eﬀects of peers on politicalbehavior is notoriously diﬃcult (Jackson and Yariv,
2010). First, the set of neighbors that inﬂuence an individual’s political actions is hard to de-
ﬁne (Pietryka and DeBats, 2017). Second, even when networks are well-deﬁned, data on inter-
subject connectivity is typically unavailable to social scientists, causing them to rely heavily on
simulation in social diﬀusion studies (Cranmer et al., 2017). We address these challenges by col-
lecting original and complete social network data from sixteen Ugandan villages where a new po-
litical communication technology, U-Bridge, was introduced to facilitate the anonymous reporting
of service delivery problems to local government oﬃcials.
We ﬁnd that, on average, peer eﬀects inﬂuence individuals’ adoption of this PCT. A villager’s
decision to report a service delivery problem via U-Bridge is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the adoption
choices of social ties within the community’s social network. Speciﬁcally, every additional neighbor
that uses U-Bridge increases the likelihood of adoption of an individual by about 2.7 percentage
points—a 61 percent increase relative to the base adoption rate. We demonstrate that this result
is not likely a simple reﬂection of homophily, and is robust to other possible inferential threats we
document below.
However, we also ﬁnd considerable variation in the extent of peer eﬀects across villages where
the new political communication technology was introduced. While there is strong evidence of peer
eﬀects in some villages, others show little signs of such inﬂuence. Why do social networks sometimes
fail to support the adoption of a new PCT? Moving from the individual to the network (i.e., village)
level, inthesecondpartofthepaperweturntoadjudicatebetweenseveralalternativeexplanations.
We ﬁrst explore and reject the possibility that the variation in the uptake of U-Bridge is due to
(a) diﬀerences in network structure (Centola, 2015), or to (b) diﬀerences in the characteristics
(personal and relational) of the initial seeders of the information that is to be diﬀused across the
social network (Banerjee et al., 2013; Larson, Lewis and Rodrıguez, 2017).
We then turn to explain the puzzle of widely varying peer eﬀects by introducing a simple
formal model, demonstrating that whether or not networks support technology diﬀusion depends
2on the nature of the technology itself . Our model takes into account two features of PCTs. First,
as with most new technologies, there is uncertainty about the costs and beneﬁts of adoption.
For example, “whistle-blowers” may face signiﬁcant social costs if their identity is revealed, while
potential beneﬁts – teachers showing up to class, for example – depend on the responsiveness of
public oﬃcials, which is not guaranteed in the many low-income countries (Kosack and Fung, 2014).
Second, the beneﬁts of this particular type of technology, like many crowdsourcing applications,
are subjected to positive externalities –its eﬀectiveness is increasing with the number of people who
use it. In other words, PCTs belong to a class of goods for which the payoﬀs of one agent depends
on the actions of other agents.
The model shows that while networks foster the diﬀusion of goods with minimal externalities,
such as many consumer goods, they may play no role for goods that have signiﬁcant positive
externalities. We argue that under these conditions, early adopters of the new technology have
strong incentives to exaggerate the beneﬁts of adoption, in order to convince others to adopt.
Recognizing this incentive, their neighbors have reason to discount information they receive from
early adopters. Not all networks overcome the challenge of truthful communication about the new
technology, without which social diﬀusion does not take place. Peer eﬀects only support diﬀusion
of new technologies with large positive externalities in networks where truthful communication is
supported. We test the observable implications of the theory using network data, survey data and
behavioral experiments, and ﬁnd evidence consistent with the model’s propositions.
Highlighting the importance of truthful communication for social learning situates our pa-
per within a nascent literature that studies strategic communication in networks (Hagenbach and
Koessler, 2010; Galeotti, Ghiglino and Squintani, 2013; Gieczewski, 2017). This literature considers
situations where agents would like others to take an action that is close to the state of the world,
but disagree on which action is optimal in a given state. Past studies focus on how these conﬂicts
of interest hinder truthful communication. We consider situations that are somewhat diﬀerent, and
more speciﬁcally relevant for technology adoption with externalities. Namely, we consider instances
in which all agents agree on the action that needs to be taken in “high” states, where the technology
is useful, and are indiﬀerent about the actions of other agents in low states, where the technology
is useless. We show that such situations also hinder truthful communication.
Our study also contributes to a growing body of work on political communication technolo-
3gies. Existing work has examined the eﬃcacy of these technologies in improving service delivery
(Grossman,PlatasandRodden,2017),accountability(Grossman,HumphreysandSacramone-Lutz,
2016), the accuracy of granular conﬂict data (Van der Windt and Humphreys, 2016), and corrup-
tion (Blair, Littman and Paluck, 2017). Recent work has also investigated determinants of PCT
uptake. This work has focused on individual attributes (Grossman, Michelitch and Santamaria,
2016), neighborhood characteristics (Feigenbaum and Hall, 2016), and perceptions of government
responsiveness (Sjoberg, Mellon and Peixoto, 2017). We expand this work by focusing on the role
social networks play in adoption decisions.
Finally, we contribute to a literature exploring the eﬀects of social networks on political be-
havior. Existing work focuses on traditional forms of political engagement (Rolfe, 2012). We
investigate instead the role of social networks in the adoption of newforms of political engagement,
where there is higher uncertainty over costs and beneﬁts of participation and thus peer eﬀects are
potentially even more important. Further, with a few exceptions (Eubank et al., 2017), existing
work on social networks and political behavior has relied almost exclusively on egocentric network
data–reports by survey respondents on their friends, with no linking across respondents to create
a full network (Abrams, Iversen and Soskice, 2011; Klofstad, Sokhey and McClurg, 2013). Though
improving our understanding of the role social ties play in shaping political behavior, egocentric
networks operate with incomplete network information, and are generally unable to correct for
biases arising from homophily (Sinclair, 2012; Siegel, 2011). We address these concerns by con-
structing a relatively large number of independent whole networks and by implementing a set of
robustness checks designed to minimize bias stemming from homophily. By situating our study in
a low-income country, we also move beyond a narrow focus on peer eﬀects on political behavior in
a small number of industrial democracies.2
2 Context
Thecommunityreportingplatformwestudy, U-Bridge, wasimplementedinacollaborationbetween
the local government in Arua, a relatively poor district located in North-Western Uganda, and the
Governance, Accountability, Participation, andPerformance(GAPP)project, fundedbytheUnited
2See also Larson and Lewis (2017) that undertake a full network census in two Ugandan villages to study variation
in the spread of information (rumors) as a function of ethnic diversity.
4States Agency for International Development (USAID). The demand for mobile-based political
communication technologies such as U-Bridge stems from their potential for tackling persistent
public service problems (Jahan et al., 2015), such as alarmingly high levels of absenteeism among
government healthcare workers and teachers (Chaudhury et al., 2006). U-Bridge is one of many
recent PCTs that are based on the simple idea that participatory grassroots programs need not
circumvent government actors (Buntaine, Nielson and Skaggs, 2017). Instead, communities can be
harnessed to better inform government oﬃcials of service delivery deﬁciencies (Grossman, Platas
and Rodden, 2017).
Through U-Bridge, anyone can contact district oﬃcials by sending a text-message to a short-
code number (8500). Messages sent through the U-Bridge platform are both freeandanonymous ,
lowering the monetary and social costs for bottom-up reporting about service delivery problems.
The back-end is an open-source software package that runs on a variety of mobile devices, including
tablets and smartphones. The program provided district oﬃcials in both technical and political
positions with 3G tablets and free Internet access that enabled them to access and respond to
incoming messages.
U-Bridge was implemented using a ﬁeld experimental research design, encouraging usage in
131 randomly selected villages across Arua district organized around 24 clusters.3Residents in
treatment villages were invited to attend periodic community meetings, implemented and orga-
nized by GAPP. In these meetings, attendees received information about national service delivery
standards, and were informed about ways to communicate with local oﬃcials. In addition, public
oﬃcials provided attendees with an overview of government eﬀorts in service delivery, especially in
response to previous text messages. The ﬁrst round of community meetings was held by GAPP in
the last quarter of 2014 as part of the launch of the U-Bridge service. Subsequent meetings were
held quarterly.
Usage of the new communication technology was further facilitated by registering a phone
number, which involved texting “Join” to 8500, after which the sender would be asked to share
basic demographic information, such as gender, age, and village of residence. Registration took
3We constructed 48 village-clusters in Arua district, deﬁned as the group of nearby villages that are serviced by the
same public health center. Half of Arua’s 48 clusters were randomly assigned to treatment (U-Bridge encouragement)
and half to control. Villages within a cluster were all assigned to the same treatment. We study the eﬀects of
encouraging the usage of the new platform on service delivery outcomes in a companion paper.
5place at community inception meetings, in a door-to-door registration drive, and by individuals
who heard about the service by word of mouth. Registration did not compromise the anonymity of
incoming text-messages, which are assigned a unique case ID such that phone numbers are never
displayed on the U-Bridge dashboard.
Figure 1 shows the cumulative number of relevant and actionable incoming-messages between
August 2014 and November 2015, demonstrating a relatively strong demand for a platform like
U-Bridge, consistent with ﬁndings reported by Grossman, Humphreys and Sacramone-Lutz (2014).
Nevertheless, it is evident that the vast majority of villagers have not used the platform, even
as the quality of social services in Arua district is low compared to national benchmarks. Since
the eﬀectiveness of PCT platforms hinges critically on grassroots participation, and since platform
adoption reﬂects whose voices (i.e., interests and priorities) are heard, it is imperative to further
explore the determinants of diﬀerential uptake.
MonthlyCumulative
Aug. 14 Oct. 14 Dec. 14 Feb. 15 Apr. 15 Jun. 15 Aug. 15 Oct. 150100020003000
50100150200Number of messages
Type of message Actionable Relevant
Figure 1: Message intensity over time. The monthly (bottom-panel) and cumulative (top-
panel) number of relevant and actionable messages over time. Lines are derived from locally
weighted regression (lowess).
63 Research design
We ﬁrst discuss the process by which we selected villages to be included in the network survey,
followed by a short description of how we constructed the social network data.
Village Selection
We collected complete network data in 16 villages—the number of villages determined by budget
constraints. Half of the villages had a relatively high level of U-Bridge adoption given village
characteristics, and half of which had low levels of adoption. In Table A.1 we report a set of OLS
regressions in which two measures of adoption—the number of unique message senders and the
number of messages sent via U-Bridge (normalized by village adult population)—are regressed on
village predictors, derived from the 2014 census and from information assembled by the U-Bridge
program. Using the regression model shown in column 6, we generate predicted values for the
dependent variable ( ˆy). We then calculated the diﬀerence between the predicted value and the
actual value of the dependent variable; i.e., ˆ/epsilon1= ˆy−y. Using these residuals, we selected the 8
highest performing (largest positive ˆ/epsilon1) and the 8 lowest performing villages (largest negative ˆ/epsilon1).
Figure A.1 maps the villages selected for data collection.
This design selects on the dependent variable, which is advantageous for a research agenda in
its early stages. We construct a sample whose outcome is least explained by standard models of
political participation, and thus more likely to be explained by potential network factors. Since
half of our villages are high-performers and half are low-performers, our design also increases the
likelihood of ﬁnding heterogeneous eﬀects, allowing us to say more about when and why networks
matter. Our design was also informed by the study’s sample size, which was limited by the high
cost of collecting complete real-world network data.
Data Collection
Data collection took place in April and May, 2016. Prior to enumeration, research team represen-
tatives met with the village chairperson to receive permission to undertake our activities and to
conduct a listing exercise of all village households. On enumeration day, a short survey was con-
ducted with every household in the village in which at least one adult was present, and with every
7available individual present in the household. The survey included a set of questions about basic
demographics, respondents’ social ties, and U-Bridge knowledge and usage. In total, we interviewed
3,184 individuals, covering about 75 percent of the adults residing in the surveyed villages.4
Network construction
We measured individuals’ social networks using a standard name generator (Kolaczyk, 2009). We
asked respondents to report four kinds of relationships in their village: (1) familyties, (2)friendship
ties, (3) lenders: whom they would go to if they had to borrow money, and (4) problem solvers :
whom they would go to in order to solve a problem regarding public services in the village. For
each kind of relationship, respondents were asked to name up to ﬁve individuals. A common
problem with network surveys is missing data. Since we were unable to interview every individual
in the village, there are villagers for whom we only observe a fraction of their network: they were
mentioned as ties by other respondents, but not interviewed in-person. About 30% of named
individuals fall in this category. Following standard practice (e.g. Larson and Lewis, 2017), we
exclude those nodes from the analysis.
Using survey responses, we ﬁrst construct four diﬀerent “undirected” village networks for the
four diﬀerent types of ties, by collapsing directed ties into undirected ones.5We further construct
the union of those networks, by deﬁning a tie between iandjif there is at least one tie between
them in any of the above four networks. Respondents who were knowledgeable about the U-Bridge
platform were further asked to name the individuals from whom they heard about the platform.
This allows tracking the diﬀusion process of knowledge about the new political communication
system. Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the union network of two of the 16 villages:
one high uptake (village P), and one low uptake (village G).
4In the Supplementary Information (SI), Table 1 we report the number of individuals we surveyed in each village,
the number of individuals mentioned by at least one person (henceforth, “alters”), and the number of adults living
in each village, according to 2014 census data. This information allows calculating the number of missing nodes.
5In other words, we say that iis friends with jifimentioned jas a friend orjmentioned ias a friend. Our
results are robust to treating constructing the family and friendship networks using reciprocated ties; that is, by
saying that iis friends with jifimentioned jas a friend andjmentioned ias a friend. All network concepts are
deﬁned informally in the main text. Formal deﬁnitions are available in the SI.
8Figure 2: Graphical representation of the union network of two villages in the study area.
Variable description
Our core outcome measure is the adoption of U-Bridge, the new political communication platform.
Adoptis a self-reported, binary variable that equals 1 if the respondent has used the platform at
least once in the past 12 months. Similarly, hearis an indicator that gets the value of 1 if the
respondent has heard about the U-Bridge service. By deﬁnition, U-Bridge adopters have a positive
value for hear, but not vice versa. For those reporting that they have contacted Arua district local
government via U-Bridge (i.e., “adopters”) we also measure satisfaction : a rescaled binary variable
that equals 1 if the respondent is at least somewhat satisﬁed with the platform (derived from a
ﬁve-point Likert scale).
Our key explanatory variables are network characteristics that support diﬀusion. The empirical
literature on social diﬀusion is large, and for tractability, we focus on two classes of diﬀusion models:
(a)fractional threshold model, where an individual adopts a technological innovation if more than
someshareof her neighbors have adopted it (e.g., Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Yildiz, 2011), and (b)
absolute threshold model, where an individual adopts if more than some numberof her neighbors
have adopted (e.g., Centola and Macy, 2007). When examining absolute contagion processes, our
key independent variable, # adopting neighbors counts, for each individual i, the number of social
ties (‘neighbors’) in the union network that report using U-Bridge to contact district oﬃcials in
9the past 12 months. In some speciﬁcations, we also consider the variable # hearing neighbors that
counts instead the number neighbors that have heard about U-Bridge. We also construct equivalent
count measures for the four network types that make up the union network (‘friends’, ‘family’,
‘lenders’ and ‘problem solvers’). When examining fractional threshold models, these variables are
measured as the share of hearing / adopting neighbors among i’s social ties.
While network ties account for socialinﬂuence, we also account for spatialinﬂuence by using
GIS information we collected on the location of each household. Speciﬁcally, the variable geography
is a spatial lag that counts the number adopters within the village besides node i, and assigns less
weight to those who reside farther away from that node.6
We collect a set of individual-level control variables that likely aﬀect the usage of U-Bridge.
These include the continuous measure of age; afemaleindicator variable; secondary education ,
which is a binary variable that equals 1 if the respondent attained at least secondary education;
andincome, a subjective wealth measure ranging from 1 (low) to 5 (high). The variable use
phoneis a binary variable that equals 1 if the respondent has used a mobile phone in the past 12
months to make a call or send a text message. Leaderis a binary variable that equals 1 if the
respondent occupies one of several formal public leadership positions within the village. Political
participation is a summary index aggregating across recent political actions.7Pro-sociality is a
behavioral proxy-measure of care for the community; it is measured as the level of contribution
(i.e., number of monetary units) in a standard dictator game. Finally, attend meeting indicates
whether the respondent attended any of GAPP’s community meetings, in which the U-Bridge
platform has been introduced or discussed.8
At the village level, we report network measures associated with social diﬀusion process—such
as density, mean path length and clustering—in addition to several other standard predictors of
political participation derived from the Ugandan 2014 census. Table 1 shows selected descriptive
statistics for our 16 villages, split between high- and low-uptake.
6Letyi= 1ifiadopted, and yi= 0otherwise. Let dijthe distance between iandj. The spatial inﬂuence
(geography ) is then calculated as geoi=/summationtext
j/negationslash=iyj
logdij.
7Weconsiderattendingavillagemeeting, contributingmoneytoavillageprojectoravillagemember, contributing
labor to a village project, reporting a problem to a village leader, and reporting a problem to the local government,
in the past 12 months. The summary index is constructed following the method proposed by Anderson (2008), which
gives more weight to more separating components of the index.
8All villagers attending GAPP meetings have heard of U-Bridge; thus we use this variable only when modeling
adoption conditional on hearing about the platform.
10A. Individuals
Variable Sample High uptake Low uptake ∆min max
Outcome % adopters 0.04 0.07 0.02 0.05∗∗∗0.00 1.00
% heard 0.31 0.38 0.23 0.14∗∗∗0.00 1.00
% satisﬁed 0.39 0.44 0.22 0.22∗∗0.00 1.00
Individual age 37.39 37.55 37.22 0.33 18.00 101.00
% females 0.58 0.56 0.59 -0.03∗∗0.00 1.00
income 2.55 2.64 2.46 0.19∗1.00 5.00
secondary education 0.23 0.28 0.18 0.09∗∗0.00 1.00
% use phone 0.62 0.66 0.58 0.08∗0.00 1.00
% leaders 0.14 0.16 0.12 0.04∗∗0.00 1.00
political participation index -0.00 0.06 -0.06 0.12∗∗∗-0.88 1.49
% attend meeting 0.08 0.11 0.05 0.06∗∗∗0.00 1.00
pro-sociality 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.01 0.00 1.00
Network degree 16.07 16.77 15.36 1.42 1.00 227.00
betweenness 143.86 150.79 136.91 13.89 0.00 16385.53
clustering coeﬃcient 0.39 0.38 0.40 -0.02 0.00 1.00
N 3184 1595 1589 6
B. Villages
Variable Sample High uptake Low uptake ∆min max
Network density 0.10 0.12 0.08 0.04 0.05 0.40
path length 2.12 2.08 2.16 -0.08 1.60 2.33
global clustering 0.25 0.27 0.24 0.03 0.17 0.55
Village adult population 269.38 274.50 264.25 10.25 32.00 429.00
ethnic fractionalization 0.04 0.07 0.02 0.05 0.00 0.41
% employed 0.86 0.84 0.89 -0.05 0.68 1.00
% non-agriculture 0.22 0.25 0.19 0.06 0.00 0.57
poverty score -0.07 -0.05 -0.09 0.03 -0.48 0.47
N 16 8 8 0
Table 1: Descriptive statistics. The table reports mean values for the full-sample, as well as for
low- and high-uptake villages. Network characteristics are calculated from the union network. In
panel A, diﬀerence in means are tested using a t-test, with standard errors clustered at the village
level;∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01.
We ﬁnd that villagers in high-uptake villages had somewhat higher socioeconomic status com-
pared to individuals in low-uptake villages: they are slightly richer, more educated, more likely to
use a phone, more likely to hold leadership positions, and more likely to attend GAPP meetings
introducing U-Bridge. By contrast, small diﬀerences in individual-level networks characteristics –
betweenness and degree centrality as well as clustering coeﬃcient – fall below conventional signif-
icance levels. Similarly, high and low-uptake villages do not seem to diﬀer in terms of network
structure or community-level characteristics as culled from the 2014 census, including mean assets-
based poverty score, share employed, ethnic diversity, distance to Arua town, and population size.
Altogether, Table 1 suggests that variation in technology adoption at the individual level may
be better explained by diﬀerences in villagers’ characteristics and processes of social inﬂuence
(i.e., peer eﬀects) than by diﬀerences in village characteristics commonly used in political economy
11studies. Our empirical strategy is designed to estimate the relative importance of these plausible
determinants of the adoption of political communication technologies.
Estimation
We estimate peer eﬀects using a standard Spatial Auto-Regressive (SAR) model, where the proba-
bility of adoption depends on some function of the adoption of one’s neighbors. Consider individual
ion network g, and letNi(g)be the set of her neighbors on g. Letyibei’s outcome, equal to 1 if
iadopts, and 0 otherwise, yNi(g)be the vector of outcomes of her neighbors, xia vector of control
variables, and /epsilon1igan error term. We estimate the following linear probability SAR model:
yig=β0+f(yNi(g))β1+xT
iβ2+/epsilon1ig
In particular, we examine both absolute, and fractional threshold models with and without
controls. In the ﬁrst case, f(yNi(g)) =/summationtext
j∈Ni(g)yjis the number of adopting neighbors. In the
second case, f(yNi(g)) =1
|Ni(g)|/summationtext
j∈Ni(g)yjis the percentage of adopting neighbors.9
We use the most conservative approach: we account for village-level heterogeneity by adding
village indicators, and use heteroskedastic robust standard errors. This is a conservative approach
as we lumped into a village-level eﬀect all factors that could not be explained by any other channel.
4 Results: Peer eﬀects
In this section, we present our main results with respect to the role of peer eﬀects on the adoption of
U-Bridge, followed by a set of robustness checks, including an instrumental variable approach. We
ﬁnd that, whether using the numberof adopting neighbors (absolute threshold, Table 2, columns
1-2), or the shareof adopting neighbors (fractional threshold, Table 2, columns 4-5), adoption
of the U-Bridge platform increases with the adoption decisions of one’s social ties. Speciﬁcally,
according to the baseline absolute threshold model (column 2), the likelihood of using U-Bridge
increases by 2.7 percentage points for every adopting neighbor. Moving to the baseline ‘fractional’
threshold (column 5), we note that 32% of respondents have no ties to an adopter, and among
those connected to at least one adopting neighbor, the mean shareof adopting peers is 15%.
9Our results are robust to using a logistic regression instead.
12Since the model ﬁt for a absolute threshold contagion process (column 2) slightly outperforms
modeling fractional threshold contagion (column 5)—using R2or the Akaike Information Criteria
when ﬁtting a logistic regression—we use the absolute threshold model when calculating marginal
eﬀects, reported below (Figure 3).
Robustness Checks
We report a host of robustness checks for our core ﬁnding on peer eﬀects, reported in Table 2. We
ﬁrst test whether our results are sensitive to dropping village A, which has a smaller number of
respondents (30) than other villages (mean number of respondents is 210). Results, reported in the
SI, Table 5, show again a strong positive relationship between the number (or share) of adopting
neighbors and one’s adoption choice.
We next probe into mediating behavior: one can only adopt the innovation if she has heard
about it. Building on recent work by Larson, Lewis and Rodrıguez (2017), we show that our results
are robust to running a two-stage (logistic) selection model in which we model separately the social
process of hearing about an innovation and that of adopting the new technology conditional on
hearing about it. We ﬁnd that peers aﬀect both stages of the diﬀusion process (SI, Table 6).
Figure 3 shows that the (total) average marginal eﬀect of an adopting peer estimated using our
two-stage model is comparable in magnitude to our baseline, reduced-form speciﬁcation (Table 2,
column 2) reestimated using a logistic regression.10
10The controls in Table 6 in the SI also reveal an important insight: if women are less likely to be U-Bridge users,
this is only because they are less likely to hear about the existence of the program; they are not less likely to adopt,
conditional on hearing. This ﬁnding on a traditionally politically marginalized category of individuals suggests that
the role of social ties in the process of hearing about a new technology may be diﬀerent than their role in the adoption
phase (conditional on hearing).
13Dependent variable: adopt
Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
# adopting neighbors 0.035∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗0.019∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.005) (0.006)
% adopting neighbors 0.325∗∗∗0.218∗∗∗0.157∗∗∗
(0.052) (0.048) (0.057)
degree 0.002∗∗∗0.001∗0.0002 0.004∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
# neighbors who told me 0.062∗∗∗
(0.012)
% neighbors who told me 0.871∗∗∗
(0.198)
1+ satisﬁed neighbors 0.012 0.024∗∗
(0.012) (0.011)
Constant 0.061 0.125∗0.124∗0.052 0.109 0.093
(0.073) (0.076) (0.075) (0.073) (0.075) (0.075)
Controls _ X X _ X X
Observations 3,184 3,019 3,019 3,184 3,019 3,019
R20.139 0.247 0.273 0.116 0.233 0.251
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 2:Adoption of U-Bridge. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroskedastic standard errors in parentheses. Absolute threshold
models (models 1-3) have weakly better ﬁt than fractional threshold models (models 4-6). 1+ satisﬁed neighbors is an indicator variable that equals
1 if at least one neighbor is satisﬁed. Model 2 is our preferred speciﬁcation.
14●
●
●
● Adopt (reduced form)Adopt (total effect)Adopt (conditional on hearing)Hear
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
Average Marginal Effect of an additional adopting neighborEffectFigure 3: Selection model with hearing. Average marginal eﬀect (AME) of an adopting neighbor on
hearing (ﬁrst stage) and of adopting conditional on hearing (second stage). The total eﬀect of the selection
model matches the estimate from a reduced form logistic regression. Bars represent heteroskedastic 95
percent conﬁdence intervals.
Causally identifying peer eﬀects
As with all social diﬀusion studies, the key empirical challenge we face is identifying peer eﬀects;
that is, the impact of an exogenous shock to the outcome of an agent on the outcome of one of her
neighbors. We face two main endogeneity problems that we address with a variety of robustness
checks. First, the initial encouragements to adopt the technology might be endogenous. Even in
the absence of social learning and inﬂuence, two connected individuals may adopt similar behavior
as a result of similar characteristics, due to homophily (Jackson, 2008), or because they are subject
to related unobservable shocks (Conley and Udry, 2010). Second, exposure to peer inﬂuence is
endogenous to one’s network position (Aronow and Samii, n.d.). Indeed, individuals with more
central network positions are more likely to be exposed to peer inﬂuence, since they have more
neighbors, or neighbors who are themselves more central. In the limit, agents with no neighbors
cannot be exposed to any inﬂuence.
To address the issue of endogenous encouragements, we use a generalization of An (2016) in-
strumental variable (IV) approach. To instrument for j’s inﬂuence on i, the approach leverages
covariates that directly aﬀect j’s outcome, and only aﬀect ithroughj’s inﬂuence. Our instrument
is the distance from one’s household to the location of the meeting introducing U-Bridge. Since
meeting location was chosen as if randomly, being closer to the meeting represents an exogenous en-
couragement to adopt the technology. Indeed, the shorter the distance to the venue, the more likely
a villager is to adopt U-Bridge, simply by increasing the likelihood that she attends the meeting
and learns about the new technology. For the instrument to be valid, the exclusion restriction must
15be satisﬁed; i.e., we must assume that j’s distance to the location of the meeting does not aﬀect i’s
adoption via alternative channels than j’s inﬂuence on i. This would be the case if contacts tended
to cluster around locations that were more or less exposed to the meeting. Encouragingly, we ﬁnd
little (-.04) correlation between physical distance and having a social tie.11The results of our IV
models, reported in SI, Table 7, conﬁrms our basic adoption model.
We address the issue of endogenous exposure to peer inﬂuence owing to one’s network position
bycomparingindividualswhosharesimilarnetworkpositions. Whileourmainspeciﬁcationalready
did so by controlling for one’s degree, we push such comparisons further by controlling for degree
more ﬂexibly, and for other attributes of network position. Our results are robust to controlling
for degree non-parametrically with generalized additive modeling, as well as using a large number
(10) of degree strata (SI, Table 10).
We further check the robustness of our core ﬁndings to endogenous exposure to peer inﬂuence
by controlling for a host of other network centrality scores (SI, Table 11). Following recent contri-
butions (Banerjee et al., 2013; Alatas et al., 2016), for each node i, we compute betweenness (the
extent to which a node in the network needs to go through node iin order to reach some other
network member), closeness (the mean distance between node iand any other node), eigenvector
centrality (a measure that gives more weight to high degree nodes connected to other high degree
nodes),Bonacich centrality (a measure that gives more weight to high degree nodes connected to
low degree nodes), and clustering (the share of i’s friends that are also friends with each other).
We bin the continuous centrality measures into three equally sized bins (low, medium and high-
centrality), and run separate model for each centrality measure. While conﬁrming our main result,
this robustness check also yields an insight that echoes previous ﬁndings from contagion studies:
individuals in highly clustered neighborhoods are less likely to adopt (Centola and Macy, 2007).12
Finally, we use matching to address both problems simultaneously. Building on Aral, Muchnik
and Sundararajan (2009) who show that matching allows eliminating most of the bias common in
observational studies of peer eﬀects, we match villagers that share similar individual and network
11We conduct additional checks for potential violations of the exclusion restriction by conducting several placebo
tests (SI, Table 9). As expected, mean peer distance to the meeting location positively correlates with adoption. It
doesnotcorrelatewithothertheoreticallymeaningfulpredictorsofadoption, suchaspoliticalparticipation, leadership
status, or phone ownership.
12This is because nodes with lower clustering have ties to a more diverse set of contacts, and potentially exposed
to more sources of contagion.
16characteristics. Our matched sample alleviates the problem of endogenous encouragements to
adopt the technology by comparing observations that are equally likely to be exposed to treatment,
based on observable characteristics. We construct our matched sample using political participation,
phone use, secondary education, and meeting attendance (individual-level covariates), as well as
degree and eigenvector centrality (network covariates). Using network covariates alleviates the
concern of endogenous exposure to treatment owing to network positions by explicitly matching
on selected network covariates. Since centrality scores tend to be highly correlated, matching on
those two network covariates constructs treatment and control groups that are also more likely to
be comparable with respect to other centrality scores. We compared three matching procedures:
nearest neighbor, coarsened exact, and full matching. We chose the latter matching because it
achieved the highest distance reduction. We then estimated our main speciﬁcation on the matched
sample. Table 12 in the SI shows that our main result on peer eﬀects is robust to such matching
estimates.
5 Village-level variation in peer eﬀects
Thus far, we have focused on the adoption choices of individuals pooling data from our sixteen
villages. However, Table 2 above and Figure A.2 in the appendix suggest that there is likely
important heterogeneity across villages with respect to the size (and signiﬁcance) of peer eﬀects.
Exploring this more systematically, we reestimate our preferred regression model (Table 2, column
2) separately for each community. As shown in Figure 4, in about half of the villages in our sample,
individuals’ choice of U-Bridge adoption is notpositively correlated with those of network peers.
This ﬁnding suggests that the role that networks play in social diﬀusion processes is more nuanced
than previously assumed.
What explains variation in the magnitude of peer eﬀects across villages? Why are peer eﬀects
not universal in the adoption of a new PCT? To answer this question, one approach is to compare
villages with large peer eﬀects to villages with small peer eﬀects. We will compare instead high-
and low-uptake villages for two reasons. First, our estimates of peer eﬀects come with uncertainty,
which makes the makeup of high- and low-peer-eﬀect groups uncertain. Second, ﬁgure 4 shows that
save for one pair of villages (M and F), high-peer eﬀect villages are also high-uptake villages.
17●
●
●●
●●●
−0.050.000.050.10
B
(236)H
(102)C
(159)E
(263)M
(195)D
(282)G
(163)K
(204)L
(228)O
(187)P
(191)I
(168)F
(205)N
(223)J
(185)
VillageAverage Marginal EffectUptake
●High
LowFigure 4: Average marginal eﬀect of one adopting neighbor on adoption by village. Estimates
from our main speciﬁcation when run separately for each village; sample sizes in parenthesis. High uptake
villageshavelarge, generallysigniﬁcantpeereﬀects. Lowuptakevillageshavesmall, statisticallyinsigniﬁcant
peer eﬀects. Village A is omitted because its sample size is too small. Bars represent heteroskedastic 90 and
95 percent conﬁdence intervals.
Past work points toward two possible network-level explanations for which we ﬁnd little support
in our data. First, it might be that some networks do not facilitate processes of social diﬀusion due
to “inadequate” structure. For example, Centola (2015) argues that social diﬀusion processes are
highly dependent of network properties—clustering, path length and bridge width.13Comparing
core network-level properties, such as density, clustering, path length and size, we ﬁnd minuscule
diﬀerences between high and low-uptake villages (Table 1).
Second, past work has highlighted the importance – for diﬀusion of information across networks
–oftheidentity(Banerjeeetal.,2013)andnetworkposition(Larson, LewisandRodrıguez,2017)of
initial ‘seeders’. In Table 3, we compare the individual attributes as well as network characteristics
of the those attending GAPP’s inception meetings and ﬁnd small and insigniﬁcant diﬀerences in
seeders’ characteristics in high- and low-uptake villages.14
Next, in order to better account for the observed variability in peer eﬀects, we present a new
theory that is grounded in an intuition gleaned from focus group discussions and open-ended inter-
views with villagers in the study area.
13Similarly, network density is thought to support public goods provision in ethnically homogenous communities
by allowing information on defectors’ behavior to spread fast and wide (Miguel and Gugerty, 2005).
14Those villages diﬀer, however, in the number of seeders. While this may account for diﬀerences in uptake, it
cannot explain diﬀerences in the magnitude of peer eﬀects, especially since our main speciﬁcation controls for meeting
attendance.
18Variable Sample High uptake Low uptake ∆min max
Outcome % adopters 0.29 0.33 0.21 0.12*** 0.00 1.00
% heard 1.00 1.00 1.00 0 1.00 1.00
% satisﬁed 0.36 0.40 0.26 0.13 0.00 1.00
Individual age 40.06 39.99 40.21 -0.22 18.00 88.00
% females 0.28 0.30 0.24 0.06 0.00 1.00
income 2.79 2.81 2.74 0.07 1.00 5.00
secondary education 0.47 0.49 0.42 0.07 0.00 1.00
% use phone 0.81 0.82 0.78 0.04 0.00 1.00
% leaders 0.28 0.29 0.27 0.02 0.00 1.00
political participation index 0.36 0.36 0.36 0 -0.88 1.49
pro-sociality 0.20 0.19 0.21 -0.02 0.00 1.00
Network degree 29.43 27.66 33.11 -5.44 3.00 227.00
betweenness 666.04 596.48 810.88 -214.4 0.00 16385.53
clustering coeﬃcient 0.33 0.34 0.32 0.02 0.05 0.84
N 262.00 177.00 85.00 92
Table 3: Descriptive statistics meeting of attendees in the 16 villages sampled. The table reports
mean values for the sample, as well as for low- and high-uptake villages. Network characteristics
are calculated from the union network. Diﬀerence in means are tested using a t-test, with standard
errors clustered at the village level;∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01.
6 Model: networks and (political) technology adoption
In this section, we present a model of social networks and technology adoption. The starting
point of our theory is a simple intuition: that the importance of peers (network ties) in supporting
social learning and facilitating technology adoption depends crucially on the extent to which the
newly introduced good produces positive externalities. Unlike new technologies examined by recent
studies of diﬀusion, political communication technologies have signiﬁcant positive externalities.
These externalities may aﬀect the extent to which communication, particularly by early adopters,
conveys accurate information.
In classic models of technology adoption, innovations spread through social ties (Coleman et al.,
1966). Adopting an innovation is risky due to uncertainty over perceived costs and beneﬁts. Social
ties facilitate diﬀusion because they allow agents to learn about the new innovation not only from
their own experience, but also from the experience of their peers (Rogers, 1962). As such, agents
with more neighbors (i.e. larger number of social ties) learn faster, because they beneﬁt from the
experiences of a greater number of people. The adoption outcomes of neighbors also tend to be
more correlated, as peers update their priors from the same events.
Yet to date, models of social learning primarily consider goods that produce minimal external-
ities; that is, goods for the payoﬀ derived from adoption does not depend on the adoption decision
19of other agents. For example, the beneﬁts of adopting a new fertilizer depend almost exclusively
on an individual farmer’s actions. A farmer can learn from her neighbor about how eﬀective a new
fertilizer is, but the neighbor’s use of fertilizer on his crop does not aﬀect the farmer’s own crop
yield.15Importantly, this leads past theories to implicitly assume that neighbors will share accurate
information about their experience with the good. The assumption of truthful communication may
be warranted for a good with no externalities, where the payoﬀ of an agent does not depend on the
payoﬀ of other agents.
New (political communication) technologies that feature positive externalities–i.e., goods for
which the beneﬁts from adoption increase with the number of adopters—may hinder truthful com-
munication which, in turn, may annihilate peer eﬀects. With positive externalities, early adopters
must convince others to adopt, and therefore have an incentive to exaggerate beneﬁts. Their
neighbors, recognizing this incentive, may discount information they receive from early adopters.
Communities can address the problem of truthful communication by employing a variety of infor-
mal institutions. For example, early adopters who are embedded in communities with high levels
of social cohesion, or where local leaders can coordinate social sanctions for sharing inaccurate
information, may be more likely to provide an honest assessment about the program’s eﬃcacy. In
these cases, communication about the new technology is truthful. Being truthful, communication
is most useful, and displays the same beneﬁts as for goods with no externalities. However, com-
munities may vary in their ability to enforce truthful communication. Thus, compared to goods
without externalities, goods with externalities will exhibit greater variation in the extent to which
social networks facilitate adoption of the good. Some communities, perhaps due to pre-existing but
largely unobservable informal institutions and norms, are able to enforce truthful communication
while others are not. The role of peer eﬀects on adoption will be lower in communities where
truthful communication is not enforced.
Thus, we introduce a model to highlight the key role that externalities play in social learning
processes, and especially how externalities condition the role social networks play in technology
adoption. In our setting, agents decide whether to adopt a new technology (also referred to as a
good). Adoption is costly, and their decision depends on an unobserved state of the world that
15In practice, allgoods feature a minimalamount ofexternalities, for if noother agentinvests in thenew technology,
then the company producing it may go bust, thereby aﬀecting the focal agent’s ability to invest in it. Yet, this sort
of externality is negligible, compared to goods characterized by joint production and diﬀuse beneﬁts.
20conditions how useful the technology is. Agents are connected on a network, and learn about the
state of the world from their neighbor’s experience with the good.
We depart from standard models (eg. DeGroot, 1974; Bala and Goyal, 1998) in two ways. First,
we consider not only goods without externalities, but also goods that feature positive externalities.
Second, we make communication strategic; instead of simply observing their neighbors, agents hear
reports about their experience with the good. Using this simple setup, we show that the standard
result that networks foster learning and adoption hinges on whether agents maintain truthful com-
munication ; that is, they convey accurate information to their neighbors about their experience.
We then show that goods without externalities support truthful communication, reproducing the
main comparative statics of the canonical models. However, goods with externalities do not nec-
essarily support truthful communication and thus do not necessarily enjoy the beneﬁts of social
learning.
Formally, consider a society of Nagents connected by the undirected graph g= (G,N ), where
Gis a set of ties. Agents decide whether to adopt a technological innovation or not. There is an
unobserved, binary state of the world: θ∈{H,L}. In the high state H, the technology is useful,
while it is not in the low state L. Thinking of a good with positive externalities, this captures, for
example, whether the government is responsive to or ignores incoming messages from constituents.
Att= 0, nature randomly draws the state of the world θ. Agents have a prior belief πi= Pr(θ=H)
of being in the high state, and each gets an independent signal about the state, si∈{H,L}.
The signal is informative: it matches the true state with probability pi= Pr(si=θ)>1/2. The
probability pidiﬀers across agents, to capture varying degrees of expertise : agents with a higher
pihave more expertise in the sense that they observe correct signals more often. At t= 1, each
agentisends a message mij∈{H,L}to each of their neighbors j∈Ni(g)to inform them about
the signal they observed.16Att= 2, each agent decides whether to adopt the innovation ( yi= 1)
or not (yi= 0) and her payoﬀ ui(.,θ)accrues.
Using diﬀerent payoﬀ functions, we consider a good without externalities, and a good with
externalities. In both cases, adopting incurs cost ci∈(0,1). In the high state, adopting generates a
beneﬁtB(normalized to 1) with some probability. It generates a beneﬁt of 0 in the low state. The
cases diﬀer in that without externalities, one’s payoﬀ depends only on her action; ui=ui(yi,θ).
16Recall that Ni(g)is the set of neighbors of agent ion graphg.
21Speciﬁcally:
ui(yi,θ) =qθ(yi)−yici (1)
whereqθ:{0,1}→[0,1]is the probability of reaping beneﬁt B= 1in stateθ. We assume that
irrespective of the state, not adopting gives a beneﬁt of 0: qθ(0) = 0. Adopting allows reaping
beneﬁtB= 1with positive probability in the high state, but with probability 0 in the low state:
qH(1)>qL(1) = 0. If the technology is a good with signiﬁcant externalities, as is the case with
political communication technologies, i’s payoﬀ crucially depends on the actions of other agents:
ui=ui(yi,y−i,θ), wherey−i= (yj)j/negationslash=ithe vector of actions taken by all other agents. We use:
ui(yi,y−i,θ) =qθ
yi+/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iyj
−yici (2)
With positive externalities, the probability of reaping the beneﬁt also depends on the actions
of others, with qθ:{0,...,N}→[0,1]. As is the case without externalities, if no one adopts there
is a beneﬁt of 0 in all states, with qθ(0) = 0. In the high state, the probability of reaping beneﬁt
Bincreases with the number of adoptions: qH(n)<qH(n+ 1). In the low state, adoption gives no
beneﬁts:qL(n) = 0for anyn.
The beneﬁts of truthful communication
We start by examining what drives the adoption decision both with and without externalities, and
then examine behavior under the assumption that agents enforce truthful communication, to show
that our model reproduces a set of standard results.
We ﬁrst show that in equilibrium, agents have threshold strategies: they adopt the new tech-
nology if they are suﬃciently certain that they are in the high state. In equilibrium, agent i
chooses the action that maximizes her expected payoﬀ, using her available information Sig∈Iig
to update her prior about the state. This information is a vector containing her signal and mes-
sages she received from her neighbors on network g; that is,Sig= (si,(mji)j∈Ni(g)). The set
Iig={0,1}|Ni(g)|+1contains all possible realizations of such vector. In equilibrium, i’s action
y∗
ig(Sig)solves maxyiEθ[ui(yi,.,θ)|Sig]. She adopts and sets y∗
ig(Sig) = 1ifSicontains enough evi-
dence favoring the high state against the low state, as captured by a higher (log) likelihood ratio
22l(Sig) = logPr(θ=H|Sig)
Pr(θ=L|Sig). How much evidence is necessary depends on an individual threshold ai.
Agents that have a higher cost of adoption, or were originally too pessimistic about the state have
a higher threshold. Formally:
Proposition 1 (Threshold strategy) In any perfect Bayesian equilibrium, agents have a thresh-
old strategy such that y∗
ig(Sig) = 1⇐⇒l(Sig)≥ai.
Undertruthfulcommunication, agentssendmessagesthatmatchtheirobservedsignal: mij=si.
Truthful communication is important, because this is when messages are most informative. The
valueVigofi’s information on graph gunder truthful communication is her expected payoﬀ from all
potential information she could receive Iig, given that neighbors communicate truthfully and that
sherespondsoptimallytothatinformation. Formally, Vig=/summationtext
Si∈IiEθ[ui(y∗
i(Si),.,θ)|Si]Pr(Si). Ina
perfect Bayesian equilibrium where communication is not truthful, agents lie with some probability
about their signal. Intuitively, i’s information is most valuable under truthful communication, be-
cause lies introduce additional noise that make her inferences about the state less precise. Formally:
Proposition 2 (Truthful communication is most valuable) Let˜Vigbe the value of informa-
tion in an equilibrium proﬁle where some j∈Ni(g)misrepresents her signal to iwith some proba-
bility. We have
˜Vig≤Vig
Truthful communication has three important implications. First, agents with larger neighbor-
hoods learn at a faster rate, because they observe more signals, allowing them to make better
inferences about the state of the world. In other words, the value of i’s information increases with
the size of her neighborhood. We show that i’s information is more valuable when she has an
additional neighbor:
Proposition 3 (Larger neighborhoods are conducive to better learning) Consider graphs
gandg/prime, constructed by adding a tie between iandjong. We have
Vig≤Vig/prime
23Because neighbors share their experiences, they learn from the same sources of information and
make more similar inferences. Note that such peer eﬀect gets stronger the more neighbors a dyad
has in common, because the two neighbors acquire more similar information. Formally, this means
that connecting two agents increases the correlation of their (log) likelihood ratios:
Proposition 4 (With peer inﬂuence, the posteriors of neighbors are more correlated)
Consider graphs gandg/prime, constructed by adding a tie between iandjtog. Letρ(x,y)the correlation
coeﬃcient between xandy. Under truthful communication, we have
ρ[l(Sig),l(Sjg)]≤ρ/bracketleftbigl(Sig/prime),l(Sjg/prime)/bracketrightbig
Expertsare morelikely toobserve correctsignals.17As such, agents placea higherweighton the
messages of experts when making inferences about the state. By the same reasoning, experts are
less susceptible to peer inﬂuence, because they place a higher weight on their own signal. Formally,
we show that the impact of jobserving the high versus low signal on i’s posterior grows with j’s
expertise.
Proposition 5 (Experts have more inﬂuence) Consider the vectors of messages SH
igandSL
ig
that diﬀer only in that one message mki=HinSH
igandmki=LinSH
ig. Under truthful communi-
cation, we have
∂
∂pj/bracketleftBig
l(SH
ig)−l(SL
ig)/bracketrightBig
>0.
When communication is not truthful, agents put less weight on the messages sent by their
neighbors to make their inferences about the state of the world. In the limit, the messages they
receive are uninformative, and agents only use their own signal when deriving their posterior:
Ii={si}. When this is the case, propositions 3, 4 and 5 do not hold anymore: agents with larger
neighborhoods do not necessarily learn faster, the posteriors of neighbors are not more correlated
than those that are not connected, and expert neighbors do not wield more inﬂuence.
17By deﬁnition, expertise is having a higher pi, which is probability of observing correct signals.
24Comparing goods with and without externalities
While goods without externalities always support truthful communication, goods with externalities
may not. To shed more light onto this, we introduce a cost of lying. This may represent a moral
cost, or a reduced form for social sanctions enforced by the community to foster cooperation.
Speciﬁcally, we assume that agent iincurs a cost κ≥0for every message mijdiﬀerent from the
signalsishe observed. Payoﬀ functions become:18
ui(yi,mi,θ) =qθ(yi)−yici−κ/summationdisplay
j∈Ni(g)1{mij/negationslash=si}
ui(yi,y−i,mi,θ) =qθ
yi+/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iyj
−yici−κ/summationdisplay
j∈Ni(g)1{mij/negationslash=si},
with 1{.}the indicator function.
Without externalities, agents have no incentive to lie: lying brings no beneﬁts, and creates
costs. In such case, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 6 Without externalities, truthful communication is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium for
anyκ≥0. It is the unique equilibrium for any κ>0.
With externalities, however, truthful communication may not be an equilibrium, because ihas
an incentive to announce state H, increasej’s posterior, to encourage jto adopt. A high enough
cost of lying deters such behavior and establishes truthful communication. Formally:
Proposition 7 With externalities, there are thresholds ¯κ1,¯κ2with0≤¯κ1≤¯κ2≤1such that truthful
communication is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium if and only if κ≥¯κ1and is the unique perfect
Bayseian equilibrium for any κ>¯κ2.
7 Empirical implications of the model
Our theoretical ﬁndings qualify the range of goods for which social networks facilitate diﬀusion.
Speciﬁcally, for goods with no (or minimal) externalities, agents with larger neighborhoods learn
18Note that under truthful communication, the cost κis never incurred, and payoﬀ functions reduce to the expres-
sions in 1 and 2.
25faster, and outcomes of neighbors are more highly correlated because such technological innova-
tions are compatible with truthful communication. However, for goods with signiﬁcant externali-
ties, truthful communication can break down, in which case social ties do not provide additional
advantage.
Yet, truthful communication need not always break down within communities. Truthful com-
munication increases the more that agents are concerned about possible social costs of ‘defection’,
κ(Habyarimana et al., 2009). Should a community manage to impose truthful communication
(κ≥¯κ1), the diﬀusion process of goods with positive externalities with respect to peer eﬀects will
behave as goods without externalities.
There are several observable implications of the model.
1.Variation across networks in the support of diﬀusion of goods with externalities, above and
beyond what can be explained by variation in hearing rates.
2.Discounting of positive signals (peers’ recommendations) when truthful communication is not
enforced.
3.Strong ties will be more eﬀective than weak ties in supporting truthful communication, and
therefore, in supporting diﬀusion.
4.Expertswill have a stronger peer eﬀect than novices when a network supports diﬀusion, as
their signal carries greater weight.
We test these implications in turn. First, as shown above, there is variation in our core result
on peer eﬀects: these eﬀects do not necessarily hold when running the model separately for each
community (Figure 4). The model shows why not all communities necessarily solve the problem
of truthful communication (proposition 7). For goods that have large externalities, social networks
may not support the process of technology diﬀusion if nodes do not trust the signal that their
neighbors emit.
Villages diﬀer in the extent to which peer eﬀects foster adoption above and beyond what can be
explained by diﬀusion of information about the existence of the platform. The model emphasizes
that diﬀerential eﬀects owe to agents processing diﬀerently the information they obtain from their
peers about the technology. An important alternative explanation would be that agents simply
vary in the extent to which they communicate about the technology, for which we ﬁnd little sup-
port. First, our explanation and the alternative are not completely distinct, since hearing may
be endogenous to the enforcement of truthful communication: seeds in low-uptake villages may
26choose not to discuss the platform with neighbors, internalizing the fact that their input is likely
to be down-weighted. Second, although high-uptake villages hear about and adopt the platform
at higher rates, the magnitudes are very diﬀerent (Table 1). High-uptake villages hear about the
U-Bridge platform 65% more than low-uptake villages, but adopt it 250% more, suggesting that
other factors are at play.
Since the dimensions explaining diﬀerences in hearing and uptake need not be related to so-
cial inﬂuence (Larson, Lewis and Rodrıguez, 2017), we investigate inﬂuence more speciﬁcally by
comparing peer eﬀects in adoption and peer eﬀects in hearing across villages. We estimate peer
eﬀects in hearing for each village using the same procedure as for peer eﬀects in adoption: for each
village, we regress hearing on the number of hearing neighbors, using a similar set of controls. We
then compare high- and low-uptake villages. The eﬀect of a peer adopting is 3.2 percentage points
higher in high-uptake villages than in low-uptake ones. The eﬀect of a peer hearing is only 1.0
percentage point higher in high-uptake villages than in low-uptake ones.19
Second, we ﬁnd evidence of discounting signals about the technology from peers. In villages that
do not support the diﬀusion of technologies with externalities, agents should not trust the messages
sent by their neighbors. We test this by decomposing peer eﬀects into three components: (1)
whetheri’s neighbors adopted the technology, (2) whether they discussed the technology with agent
i, and (3) whether at least one of them reports being satisﬁed with the technology (Table 2, columns
3 and 6). Our theoretical expectation is that while neighbors’ satisfaction should signiﬁcantly
increase the likelihood of adoption in high-uptake villages, it should have no discernible eﬀect in
low-uptake villages.
Figure 5 conﬁrms the model’s prediction. Reestimating the model reported in Table 2 (column
3) separately for high- and low-uptake villages reveals that the marginal eﬀect of having at least
one satisﬁed neighbor is 1.9 percentage points in high-uptake villages, it is eﬀectively zero in low-
uptake villages. Figure 5 also underscores another important ﬁnding: social diﬀusion processes
are a function of the nature of the information being communicated, above and beyond the mere
existence of a social tie (Larson and Lewis, 2017). While the eﬀect of communication in high uptake
19Regressing estimates from a model in an auxiliary model introduces heteroscedasticity (Lewis and Linzer, 2005).
WethusfollowShalizi(2018),andestimateweightedleastsquareregressions,wherebytheweightsarecalculatedasthe
inverse variance of the dependent variable. We account for any remaining heteroscedasticity by using heteroscedastic-
robust standard errors. The diﬀerence in peer eﬀects on adoption is signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level (p-value =
.053). The diﬀerence in peer eﬀects on hearing is not statistically signiﬁcant (p-value = .37).
27High uptake
villageLow uptake
village
0.00 0.03 0.06 0.09
Average marginal effect of one adopting neighbor on adoptionEffect
satisfaction
communication
contagionFigure 5: Components of social inﬂuence in high and low uptake villages. Marginal eﬀect of one
adopting neighbor (contagion) on the probability of adoption, with the additional eﬀects of interpersonal
communication with the neighbor (communication), and of that neighbor being satisﬁed (satisfaction). Com-
munication most fosters adoption. High-uptake villages have larger eﬀect sizes. Satisfaction has almost no
eﬀect in low uptake villages.
villages is 7.1 percentage points, in low-uptake villages it is 3.2 percentage points.
A third implication is that some types of networks are more likely to facilitate truthful com-
munication than others. We have argued that strong ties are better positioned to enforce truthful
communication, given the higher social cost of mischaracterizing the costs and beneﬁts of the new
technology. To test this argument, we disaggregate all network relations into simple ties ( ishares a
single type of relationship with j), and complex ties ( i’s relationship with jis based on more than
one of four types of ties). We then reestimate our absolute threshold model, ﬁrst comparing the
eﬀect of a complex tie to that of any simple tie, then to that of each kind of simple tie. Consistent
with our expectation, we ﬁnd that peer eﬀects are stronger for complex ties than for simple ties
(Table 4, column 1), and that, among simple ties, friendship and family ties are most inﬂuential
(column 2).
Finally, in our model, agents learn from their neighbors’ signal about the state of the world:
θ∈{H,L}. Proposition 5 predicts that agents put more weight on the signals emitted from political
experts(e.g., community leaders) who are knowledgeable abut the responsiveness of district oﬃcials
ascomparedtotheaveragenon-elitevillager. Thisyieldsasimpletestableimplication: themarginal
eﬀect of a neighboring leader on adoption should be higher than that of an “ordinary” neighbor.20
To test this proposition, we modify our main speciﬁcation by disaggregating our core explanatory
variable – the number of adopting neighbors – into two separate variables measuring the number
20Being a leader is a binary variable that equals 1 for respondents who self-reported that they occupy one of several
formal leadership positions within the village.
28Dependent variable: adopt
Simple vs. complex ties Types of relationships
(1) (2)
# adopting simple ties, βs 0.024∗∗∗
(0.005)
# adopting simple family 0.015∗
(0.008)
# adopting simple friends 0.032∗∗∗
(0.011)
# adopting simple lender 0.018
(0.011)
# adopting simple solver 0.010
(0.010)
# adopting complex ties, βc 0.039∗∗∗0.038∗∗∗
(0.010) (0.010)
degree 0.001∗0.001∗
(0.001) (0.001)
Constant 0.119 0.114
(0.077) (0.079)
βc−βs/negationslash= 0, F statistic 2.21 _
Controls X X
Observations 3,019 3,019
R20.248 0.254
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 4: Network types. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroskedastic standard errors
in parentheses. Model 1 reports the eﬀect of one adopting neighbor with whom ishares a single type of
relationship (simple tie) and more than one type of relationship (complex tie). Models 2 breaks down simple
ties into family, friends, leader, and solver. Complex ties are weakly more inﬂuential than simple ties (F-test
not signiﬁcant). Friendship and family ties are the most inﬂuential simple ties.
of adopting peersand the number of adopting leaders, and estimate this model on the set of
peers. Results, reported in Table 5 suggest that the probability of adoption is somewhat higher
for connections to leaders as compared to peers, whether using the entire pooled sample (column
1), or subsetting to only high-uptake villages where networks support social diﬀusion (column 2).
Note, however, that these diﬀerences are not statistically signiﬁcant.
29Dependent variable: adopt
Leader: all Leader: high Leader: low
(1) (2) (3)
# adopting peers, βp0.021∗∗∗0.020∗∗0.008
(0.007) (0.009) (0.008)
# adopting leaders, βl0.032∗∗∗0.029∗∗∗0.012
(0.008) (0.010) (0.008)
degree (peers) 0.003∗∗0.004∗∗0.003∗
(0.001) (0.002) (0.002)
degree (leaders) 0.002 0.003 0.002
(0.003) (0.004) (0.004)
Constant 0.094 0.076 0.152∗∗∗
(0.081) (0.085) (0.047)
βp−βl/negationslash= 0, F statistic 0.97 0.42 0.1
Controls X X X
Observations 2,585 1,202 1,383
R20.233 0.251 0.180
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 5:Leader vs. peer eﬀects. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroskedastic standard
errors in parentheses. Models 1-3 are estimated on the sample of citizens for all villages (model 1), then
separately for high and low-uptake villages (models 2 and 3). Leader and peer eﬀects are signiﬁcant on
average and in high-uptake villages. Leaders’ inﬂuence is weakly higher than peer’s inﬂuence (F statistic not
signiﬁcant). Models 4: although not signiﬁcant, leaders are less sensitive to peer inﬂuence.
30What kind of communities support peer eﬀects?
Our model suggests that networks that support peer eﬀects do so because some (informal or formal)
institutions manage to enforce truthful communication. While we are unable to identify what these
institutions may be, we test three classes of explanations that past research has advanced as means
to overcome collective action problems arising from externalities: (a) pro-sociality; (b) leadership
structure, and especially leadership concentration; (c) and ethnic (and religious) homogeneity. In
practice, we run separate models in which we regress our estimates of village-level peer eﬀects
(Figure 4) on a range of proxy variables:21
Pro-sociality : is measure as village mean contributions in two lab-in-ﬁeld experiments: (a) public
goodgame and (b) dictator game . While dictator games measure the extent to which nodes in-
ternalize the payoﬀs of other co-villagers, public goods game measure how villagers balance their
private interests against the interests of their group. Both measures—which have been shown to be
correlated with communities’ outcomes outside the laboratory setting (Grossman and Baldassarri,
2012)—should support an equilibrium of truthful communication.22
Leadership structure : is proxied by Leadership concentration , calculated as a Herﬁndahl con-
centration index of ties to informal leaders in a village network.23Concentrated leadership allows
coordinating communities around shared goals (Rojo, Jha and Wibbels, 2014), as well as coordinat-
ingpunishmentof(potential)defectors(GrossmanandBaldassarri,2012)inthefaceofexternalities.
Homogeneity : is measured using Herﬁndahl concentration indices for both (a) Ethnicity and (b)
Religion derived from the 2014 Ugandan census. Homogeneity helps overcoming externalities due
to potential defectors’ fear that information on their behavior would be transmitted widely (Hab-
yarimana et al., 2009).
Figure6showstheeﬀectofvillage-levelfeaturesonthevillage-levelpeereﬀect.24Bothmeasures
21See footnote 19 for details about estimation.
22A detailed description of the games can be found in the SI.
23Survey respondents were asked to report whom they considered to be the most eﬀective leader in their community.
We deﬁned as an informal leader any such individual that was named by at least ﬁve respondents.
24Figure 3 in the SI shows scatter plots of the data used to construct this ﬁgure.
31of pro-sociality have a large positive and signiﬁcant association with peer eﬀect. This ﬁnding
is consistent with the idea that the more individuals care about the utility of their neighbors,
the more likely it is that communication of information about new technology is accurate and
truthful communication an equilibrium. In addition, we ﬁnd evidence that leadership concentration
supports truthful communication in the face of externalities. These ﬁndings are consistent with
our theoretical framework.
●●
●●
●
Ethnic concentration (12)Religious concentration (15)Pro−sociality − dictator (15)Pro−sociality − public good (15)Leadership concentration (14)
−5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5
Standardized effect sizeVariable
Figure 6: Determinants of village-level peer eﬀects . Each row reports separate weighted least square
estimatesofvillage-levelpeereﬀect(ﬁgure4)ontherowcovariatecontrollingforvillagesatisfaction, weighted
by inverse variance of the DV. Bars represent heteroskedastic 90 and 95 percent conﬁdence intervals. Outliers
with high leverage excluded (sample sizes in parenthesis).
8 Conclusion
What explains variation in the uptake of new political communication technologies? In this paper,
we have shown that the adoption of political communication technologies—an increasingly common
form of political participation—is powerfully inﬂuenced by peer eﬀects. Across the sixteen Ugandan
villages we studied, the likelihood of an individual adopting the new technology is a function of the
number of her neighbors who had adopted the technology. This ﬁnding contributes to a growing
body of work examining the determinants of uptake for PCT, looking beyond the role of individual
attributes, neighborhood characteristics, and perceptions of government responsiveness to investi-
gate the role of social networks in adoption choices. As such, it contributes to a literature that
investigates the adoption of new technologies, particularly in the context of low income countries.
However, while we ﬁnd robust evidence of peer eﬀects on technology adoption in the aggregate,
this ﬁnding masks variation in the role of peer eﬀects across villages. Indeed, peer eﬀects were only
observed in a subset of villages, suggesting that diﬀusion processes of PCT may diﬀer importantly
from those of more commonly studied agricultural technologies. We develop a model motivated
32by the intuition that the information sharing process within a network may diﬀer for goods that
have minimal externalities, as in the case of a good like a fertilizer, or positive externalities, as in
the case of PCT. The model serves to highlight diﬀerences in the diﬀusion process across these two
types of technologies.
There are several features of political communication technologies that are relevant to under-
standing processes of diﬀusion. First, adoption of PCTs can involve personal risks and public
beneﬁts. Second, the newness of the technology means that there is uncertainty about the extent
and natures of the costs and beneﬁts of adoption. Third, there are externalities in adoption—the
technology is only eﬀective if a substantial number of people use it. These factors give us reason to
believe that peer eﬀects are likely to aﬀect adoption, but also that early adopters have incentives to
exaggerate the beneﬁts of adoption. It then follows that individuals may discount the information
they receive from initial adopters. When a community is able to enforce truthful communication—
for example through informal institutions—the diﬀusion of innovations with externalities looks
similar to the diﬀusion process of goods without externalities: individuals with larger networks
learn faster and are more likely to adopt, and the adoption choices of network ‘neighbors’ are more
correlated than the adoption choices of unconnected nodes. However, if a community is unable to
enforce truthful communication, individuals do not learn from their neighbors and adoption rates
of the new technology remain low.
Our study qualiﬁes the long-standing argument that peer eﬀects are ubiquitous in the process
of technology adoption. We show that while peer eﬀects do facilitate the adoption of goods where
the beneﬁt one derives from using the good does not depend on others’ adoption, peer eﬀects may
not facilitate adoption for goods where production of beneﬁts is joint. To understand whether
and when peer eﬀects will facilitate adoption we must assess both whether or not externalities
exist as well as whether communities have mechanisms for enforcing truthful information about
the costs and beneﬁts of the good. The adoption of new forms of political participation follows a
diﬀerent trajectory than the adoption of many agricultural practices, because political participation
is subject to externalities. This insight may go a long way in explaining low rates of adoption of
PCTs, but also the considerable variation in rates of adoption we observe across communities.
We further ﬁnd that when villagers enforce truthful information sharing, adoption rates are
signiﬁcantly higher as networks support a process of ‘social contagion.’ Our ﬁnding that peer
33eﬀects, under certain conditions, supports technology diﬀusion is quite robust, and likely not simply
a reﬂection of homophily. Speciﬁcally, our estimated peer eﬀects are robust to various matching
estimators, to ﬂexibly controlling for the size of one’s network (degree), and to an innovative
instrumental variable approach for dealing with endogenous treatment exposure.
Though we are able to demonstrate that not all villages solve the problem of truthful com-
munication, our sample size at the community level is too small to explore rigorously when and
how villages overcome the incentive to misrepresent the state of the world to their neighbors. In
addition, our model does not consider the case of signiﬁcant negative externalities. We leave these
important questions for future work.
34References
Abrams, Samuel, Torben Iversen and David Soskice. 2011. “Informal social networks and rational
voting.”British Journal of Political Science 41(02):229–257.
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar and Ercan Yildiz. 2011. Diﬀusion of innovations in social
networks. In Decision and control and European control conference (CDC-ECC), 2011 50th IEEE
conference on . IEEE pp. 2329–2334.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G Chandrasekhar, Rema Hanna and Benjamin A Olken. 2016.
“Network structure and the aggregation of information: Theory and evidence from Indonesia.”
The American Economic Review 106(7):1663–1704.
An, Weihua. 2016. “On the Directionality Test of Peer Eﬀects in Social Networks.” Sociological
Methods & Research 45(4):635–650.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Diﬀerences in the Eﬀects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 103(484):1481–1495.
Aral, Sinan, Lev Muchnik and Arun Sundararajan. 2009. “Distinguishing inﬂuence-based contagion
from homophily-driven diﬀusion in dynamic networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106(51):21544–21549.
Aronow, Peter M and Cyrus Samii. n.d. “Estimating Average Causal Eﬀects under General Inter-
ference, with Application to a Social Network Experiment.” Annals of Applied Statistics .
Bala, Venkatesh and Sanjeev Goyal. 1998. “Learning from neighbours.” The review of economic
studies65(3):595–621.
Bandiera, Oriana and Imran Rasul. 2006. “Social networks and technology adoption in northern
Mozambique.” The Economic Journal 116(514):869–902.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G Chandrasekhar, Esther Duﬂo and Matthew O Jackson. 2013. “The
Diﬀusion of Microﬁnance.” Science341(6144):1236498.
35Blackwell, David et al. 1951. Comparison of Experiments. In Proceedings of the second Berkeley
symposium on mathematical statistics and probability . TheRegentsoftheUniversityofCalifornia.
Blair, Graeme, Rebecca Littman and Elizabeth Levy Paluck. 2017. “Motivating the adoption of
new community-minded behaviors: An empirical test in Nigeria.” Unpublished manuscript .
Buntaine, Mark T, Daniel L Nielson and Jacob T Skaggs. 2017. “Escaping the Valley of Disengage-
ment: Two Field Experiments on Motivating Citizens to Monitor Public Goods.” Unpublished
manuscript .
Centola, Damon. 2015. “The Social Origins of Networks and Diﬀusion.” American Journal of
Sociology 120(5):1295–1338.
Centola, Damon and Michael Macy. 2007. “Complex contagions and the weakness of long ties.”
American journal of Sociology 113(3):702–734.
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeﬀrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan and F Halsey
Rogers. 2006. “Missing in action: teacher and health worker absence in developing countries.”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1):91–116.
Coleman, James Samuel, Elihu Katz, Herbert Menzel et al. 1966. Medical innovation: A diﬀusion
study. Bobbs-Merrill Indianapolis.
Conley, Timothy G and Christopher R Udry. 2010. “Learning about a new technology: Pineapple
in Ghana.” The American Economic Review 100(1):35–69.
Cranmer, Skyler J, Philip Leifeld, Scott D McClurg and Meredith Rolfe. 2017. “Navigating the
range of statistical tools for inferential network analysis.” American Journal of Political Science
61(1):237–251.
DeGroot, Morris H. 1974. “Reaching a consensus.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
69(345):118–121.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2014. “Short-run subsidies and long-run adoption of new health products: Evi-
dence from a ﬁeld experiment.” Econometrica 82(1):197–228.
36Eubank, Nicholas, Guy Grossman, Melina Platas and Jonathan Rodden. 2017. “Social Networks,
Word of Mouth, and Turnout in Low Salience Elections.” Unpublished manuscript .
Feigenbaum, James and Andrew B Hall. 2016. “How High-Income Areas Receive More Service from
Municipal Government: Evidence from City Administrative Data.” Unpublished manuscript .
Foster, Andrew D and Mark R Rosenzweig. 1995. “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of political Economy 103(6):1176–
1209.
Galeotti, Andrea, Christian Ghiglino and Francesco Squintani. 2013. “Strategic information trans-
mission networks.” Journal of Economic Theory 148(5):1751–1769.
Gieczewski, Germán. 2017. “Lying by Omission: Veriﬁable Communication on Networks.” Unpub-
lished manuscript .
Golub, Benjamin and Evan D Sadler. 2017. Learning in social networks. In The Oxford Handbook
of the Economics of Networks . Oxford Handbooks Online.
Grossman, Guy and Delia Baldassarri. 2012. “The impact of elections on cooperation: Evidence
from a lab-in-the-ﬁeld experiment in Uganda.” American Journal of Political Science 56(4):964–
985.
Grossman,Guy,KristinMichelitchandMartaSantamaria.2016. “TextingComplaintstoPoliticians
Name Personalization and Politicians’ Encouragement in Citizen Mobilization.” Comparative Po-
litical Studies .
Grossman, Guy, MacartanHumphreysandGabriellaSacramone-Lutz.2014. ““IwldlikeuWMPto
extendelectricity2ourvillage”: OnInformationTechnologyandInterestArticulation.” American
Political Science Review 108(03):688–705.
Grossman, Guy, Macartan Humphreys and Gabriella Sacramone-Lutz. 2016. “Information tech-
nology and political engagement: Mixed evidence from Uganda.” Unpublished manuscript .
Grossman, Guy, Melina Platas and Jonathan Rodden. 2017. “Crowdsourcing Accountability: ICT
for Service Delivery.” Unpublished manuscript .
37Habyarimana, James, Macartan Humphreys, Daniel N Posner and Jeremy M Weinstein. 2009.
Coethnicity: diversity and the dilemmas of collective action . New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hagenbach, Jeanne and Frédéric Koessler. 2010. “Strategic Communication Networks.” The Review
of Economic Studies 77(3):1072–1099.
Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Jackson, Matthew O. and Leeat Yariv. 2010. Diﬀusion, Strategic Interaction, and Social Structure.
InHandbook of Social Economics , ed. Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew O. Jackson.
Elsevier.
Jahan, Selim, E Jespersen, S Mukherjee, M Kovacevic, A Bonini, C Calderon, C Cazabat, YC
Hsu, C Lengfelder, S Lucic et al. 2015. Human Development Report 2015: Work for Human
Development . New York, NY: UNDP.
Klofstad, Casey A, Anand Edward Sokhey and Scott D McClurg. 2013. “Disagreeing about Dis-
agreement: How Conﬂict in Social Networks aﬀects Political Behavior.” American Journal of
Political Science 57(1):120–134.
Kolaczyk, Eric D. 2009. Statistical Analysis of Network Data . Springer.
Kosack, Stephen and Archon Fung. 2014. “Does Transparency Improve Governance?” Annual
Review of Political Science 17:65–87.
Kremer, Michael and Edward Miguel. 2007. “The illusion of sustainability.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 122(3):1007–1065.
Larson, Jennifer M and Janet I Lewis. 2017. “Ethnic networks.” American Journal of Political
Science61(2):350–364.
Larson, Jennifer M, Janet I Lewis and Pedro Rodrıguez. 2017. “From Chatter to Action: How
Social Networks Inform and Motivate in Rural Uganda.” Unpublished manuscript .
Lewis, Jeﬀrey B and Drew A Linzer. 2005. “Estimating regression models in which the dependent
variable is based on estimates.” Political analysis 13(4):345–364.
38Miguel, Edward and Mary Kay Gugerty. 2005. “Ethnic diversity, social sanctions, and public goods
in Kenya.” Journal of public Economics 89(11):2325–2368.
Oster, Emily and Rebecca Thornton. 2012. “Determinants Of Technology Adoption: Peer Eﬀects
In Menstrual Cup Take-Up.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(6):1263–1293.
Peixoto, Tiago and Micah L Sifry, eds. 2017. Civic Tech in the Global South: Assessing Technology
for the Public Good . The World Bank.
Pietryka, Matthew T and Donald A DeBats. 2017. “It’s Not Just What You Have, but Who You
Know: Networks, Social Proximity to Elites, and Voting in State and Local Elections.” American
Political Science Review 111(2):360–378.
Rogers, Everett M. 1962. Diﬀusion of Innovations . New York, NY: The Free Press.
Rojo, Guadalupe, SubhashJhaandErikWibbels.2014. “PoliticalNetworks, ClientelismandPublic
Goods: Evidence from Slums in Udaipur, India.” Working paper.
Rolfe, Meredith. 2012. Voter turnout: A social theory of political participation . Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Shalizi, Cosma Rohilla. 2018. The Statistical Analysis of Complex Systems Models . Cambridge
University Press.
Siegel, David A. 2011. “Social networks in comparative perspective.” PS: Political Science &amp;
Politics44(01):51–54.
Sinclair, Betsy. 2012. The social citizen: Peer networks and political behavior . University of Chicago
Press.
Sjoberg, Fredrik M, Jonathan Mellon and Tiago Peixoto. 2017. “The Eﬀect of Bureaucratic Re-
sponsiveness on Citizen Participation.” Public Administration Review .
VanderWindt, PeterandMacartanHumphreys.2016. “CrowdseedinginEasternCongo: Usingcell
phones to collect conﬂict events data in real time.” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 60(4):748–781.
39Data Appendix
Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap
contributors, and the GIS user communityJ
IP
OK
NLFED
G
HA
B
CARUA DISTRICT
Red:     High uptake villagesArua 
Municipality
Black:  Low uptake villagesM
Figure A.1: High and low-uptake villages selected for complete network data collection
40Figure A.2: Relevant message senders by village
Proofs
Proof of proposition 1. Consider a consistent strategy proﬁle σ. I show that if σis a perfect
Bayesian equilibrium, then any agent ihas a threshold strategy. Let ˆπi(Sig) = Pr(θ=H|Sig)bei’s
posterior on the state. Using Baye’s theorem,
ˆπi(Sig) =Pr(Sig|θ=H)πi
Pr(Sig|θ=H)πi+ Pr(Sig|θ=L)(1−πi)
Sequential rationality implies that y∗(Sig) = 1⇐⇒Eθ[ui(1,.,θ)|Sig]−Eθ[ui(0,.,θ)|Sig]≥0.
Consider ﬁrst the case without externalities. In this case, Eθ[ui(1,θ)|Sig]−Eθ[ui(0,θ)|Sig] =
41ˆπi(Sig)qH(1)−ci. As such, the condition Eθ[ui(1,θ)|Sig]−Eθ[ui(0,θ)|Sig]≥0is equivalent to the
following condition on ˆπi(Sig):
ˆπi(Sig)≥ci
qH(1)(3)
Suppose thatci
qH(1)<1. Then condition 3 is equivalent to l(Sig)≥log/bracketleftbigg ci
qH(1)
1−ci
qH(1)1−πi
πi/bracketrightbigg
≡ai.
Suppose thatci
qH(1)≥1. Then condition 3 is equivalent to
/parenleftbigg
1−ci
qH(1)/parenrightbigg
L(Sig)≥ci
qH(1)1−πi
πi,
withL(Sig) =Pr(Sig|θ=H)
Pr(Sig|θ=L)the likelihood ratio. Since Li>0, condition 3 is never met, and we deﬁne
ai≡maxSig∈Iigl(Sig) + 1.
Consider now the case with externalities. In this case, we have:
Eθ[ui(1,y−i,θ)|Sig]−Eθ[ui(0,y−i,θ)|Sig] = ˆπi
Eθ
qH
1 +/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iyj
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleSig
−Eθ
qH
/summationdisplay
j/negationslash=iyj
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleSig

−ci
BecauseqHis strictly increasing, we have Eθ/parenleftBig
qH/parenleftBig
1 +/summationtext
j/negationslash=iyj/parenrightBig
|Sig/parenrightBig
>Eθ/parenleftBig
qH/parenleftBig/summationtext
j/negationslash=iyj/parenrightBig
|Sig/parenrightBig
. As
such, the condition Eθ[ui(1,y−i,θ)|Sig]−Eθ[ui(0,y−i,θ)|Sig]≥0is equivalent to the following con-
dition on ˆπi:
ˆπi(Sig)≥t=ci
Eθ/parenleftBig
qH/parenleftBig
1 +/summationtext
j/negationslash=iyj/parenrightBig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleSig/parenrightBig
−Eθ/parenleftBig
qH/parenleftBig/summationtext
j/negationslash=iyj/parenrightBig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleSig/parenrightBig
The rest of the proposition proves as in the case without externalities, with the exception that
we consider the cases where t<1andt≥1.
Proof of proposition 2. This is an immediate application of Blackwell et al. (1951) theorem. For
any strategy proﬁle to satisfy sequential rationality, agent jsends the message mjithat maximizes
her payoﬀ. When indiﬀerent, she may randomize. One may garblethe conditional distribution of
mijunder truthful communication to recover the conditional distribution of mjiunder untruthful
communication. Therefore, by Blackwell’s information theorem, ˜Vig≤Vig.
Proof of proposition 3. Deﬁneϕ:Iig/prime→Iigthat associates to each Sig/prime∈Iig/primethe same
Sig/primewithout its last message, which is an element of Iig. Deﬁney0
ig/prime(Sig/prime) =y∗
ig(ϕ(Sig/prime)). Re-
42call thaty∗
ig/primesolves maxyiEθ[ui(yi,.,θ)|Sig/prime]. As such, it must be that Eθ[ui(y∗
ig/prime(Sig/prime),.,θ)|Sig/prime]≥
Eθ[ui(y0
ig/prime(Sig/prime),.,θ)|Sig/prime]. This implies
Vig/prime=/summationdisplay
Sig/prime∈Iig/primeEθ[ui(y∗
ig/prime(Sig/prime),.,θ)|Sig/prime]≥/summationdisplay
Sig/prime∈Iig/primeEθ[ui(y0
ig/prime(Sig/prime),.,θ)|Sig/prime] =Vig
Proof of proposition 4. Recall that ρ(x,y) =Cov(x,y)√
V(x)V(y), with Cov (x,y) =E(xy)−E(x)E(y)the
covariance of xandy. Supposeireceivesni=|Ii|signals ong. Analogously, jreceivesnjsignals.
Note thatiandjhavenij=|Ii∩Ij|signals in common. On g/prime,iandjeach receive one additional
signal:I/prime
i=Ii∪{sj}andI/prime
j=Ij∪{si}.
The proof ﬁrst shows that the proposition holds given θ=H. Note that
logli(g) =/summationdisplay
k∈Ni(g)(2sk−1)logpk
1−pk
E[l(Sig)|H] =/summationdisplay
k∈Ni(g)(2pk−1)logpk
1−pk
V[l(Sig)|H] =/summationdisplay
k∈Ni(g)pk(1−pk)/parenleftbigg
2logpk
1−pk/parenrightbigg2
Cov[l(Sig),l(Sjg)|H] =pk(1−pk)/summationdisplay
k∈Ni(g)∩Nj(g)/parenleftbigg
2logpk
1−pk/parenrightbigg2
Letλi=/parenleftBig
2logpi
1−pi/parenrightBig2pi(1−pi). We have
V[l(Sig/prime)|H] =V[l(Sig)|H] +λj
Cov[l(Sig/prime),l(Sjg/prime)|H] =Cov[l(Sig),l(Sjg)|H] +λi+λj
For notational simplicity, let
Vi=V[l(Sig)|H]
C=Cov[l(Sig),l(Sjg)|H]
C/prime=Cov[l(Sig/prime),l(Sjg/prime)|H]
43These identities imply:
C/prime−C=C+λi+λj/radicalBig
(Vi+λj)(Vj+λi)−C/radicalbigViVj
∝(C+λi+λj)/radicalBig
ViVj−C/radicalBig
(Vi+λj)(Vj+λi)
∝(C+λi+λj)2ViVj−C2(Vi+λj)(Vj+λi)
=C[Viλi(2Vj−C) +Vjλj(2Vi−C)] + 2λiλj[ViVj−C2] +ViVj[λ2
i+λ2
j]
Note that Vi=Vi\j+C, with Vi\j=/summationtext
k∈Ni(g)\Nj(g)/parenleftBig
2logpk
1−pk/parenrightBig2pk(1−pk). As such, we have
2Vi−C≥0,2Vj−C≥0, andViVj−C2=Vi\jVj\i+C[Vi\j+Vj\i]≥0. Together, this shows that
C/prime−C≥0.
Consider the case where θ=L. We have E[l(Sig)|L] =/summationtext
k∈Ni(g)logpk
1−pk[2(1−pk)−1], which
implies V[l(Sig)|L] =V[l(Sig)|H]and Cov [l(Sig),l(Sjg)|L] =Cov[l(Sig),l(Sjg)|H]. We show as when
θ=Hthatρ/bracketleftbigl(Sig/prime),l(Sjg/prime)/vextendsingle/vextendsingleL]−ρ[l(Sig),l(Sjg)|L]≥0.
Proof of proposition 5. Note that logli(g,sj=H)−logli(g,sj=L) = logpj
1−pj. As such,
∂logli(g,sj=H)−logli(g,sj=L)
∂pj=1−pj
pj>0
Proof of proposition 6. Consider a strategy proﬁle σ, and compare i’s expected payoﬀ at t= 1
when sending a vector of messages mn
icontainingn≥1lies,EUi(mn
i,si)to that of telling no lies,
EUi(m0
i,si), after having observed her signal si. We have
EUi(mn
i,si)−EUi(m0
i,si) =−nκ
Whenκ= 0,iis indiﬀerent between lying and telling the truth, so truthful communication is an
equilibrium. When κ>0, telling the truth strictly dominates lying, so truthful communication is
the unique equilibrium.
Proof of proposition 7. Letˆπi(si) = Pr(θ=H|si)bei’s posterior on the state at t= 1. Consider
a consistent strategy proﬁle σ, and compare i’s expected payoﬀ when sending a vector of messages
mn
icontaining n>0lies,EUi(mn
i,si)to that of telling no lies, EUi(m0
i,si)after having observed
44her signalsi. We have
EUi(mn
i,si)−EUi(m0
i,si) = ˆπi(si)∆Eσ−nκ,
with ∆Eσ=E/bracketleftBig
qH(/summationtext
jyj)|si,mn
i/bracketrightBig
−E/bracketleftBig
qH(/summationtext
jyj)|si,m0
i/bracketrightBig
the diﬀerence in the expected reward be-
tween telling those nlies and telling no lies in proﬁle σ.
Note that truthful communication is an equilibrium if and only if EUi(mn
i)−EUi(m0
i)≤0
for alli, which requires ∆Etruthful≥0. Under truthful communication, we have ∆Etruthful≥
0⇐⇒si=L. Suppose this is true. Then for truthful communication to be an equilibrium,
it must be that κ≥ˆπi(si)∆Etruthful
nfor anyiand anynlies. LetMig={0,1}|Ni(g)|be the
set of vectors of messages that ican send. Truthful communication is an equilibrium for any
κ≥¯κ1≡maxi∈N,mn
i∈Mi,si∈{H,L}ˆπi(si)∆Etruthful
n.
Consider a strategy proﬁle σwhere there is some lying, with Σthe set of such proﬁles.
This proﬁle is not a PBE if EUi(mn
i)−EUi(m0
i)<0for alliand allmn
i∈Mi. Deﬁne ¯κσ≡
maxi∈N,mn
i∈Mi,si∈{H,L}ˆπi(si)∆E
n,andnotethat ¯κσ≤1. Ifthemaximumexists,deﬁne ¯κ2≡maxσ∈Σ¯κσ.
Otherwise, deﬁne κ2≡1.
45Table A.1: Determinants of Uptake at the Village-level
Senders/adult pop Messages/adult pop
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
GAPP activities
Registration drive 2.357*** 2.327*** 10.296*** 9.768***
(0.223) (0.362) (1.909) (2.398)
Community meeting venue 0.572 0.436 0.521 3.851 3.307 3.638
(0.496) (0.369) (0.409) (3.216) (2.838) (3.426)
Service points (binary)
Primary school 0.306 0.465 0.410 1.269 1.661 1.622
(0.336) (0.295) (0.433) (2.321) (2.119) (3.309)
Health center -0.622 -1.091** -1.046* -3.478 -6.095* -6.243
(0.365) (0.428) (0.556) (2.417) (3.058) (3.975)
Distance to district capital 0.511*** 0.538** 2.845*** 3.126**
(0.162) (0.221) (0.909) (1.294)
Distance to Health Center -0.384** -0.093 -2.013 -0.869
(0.176) (0.197) (1.272) (1.213)
Census data
ELF 0.751 0.583 2.027 0.954
(0.644) (0.502) (3.378) (3.208)
% Secondary education 0.726* 1.336*** 3.861* 6.714***
(0.408) (0.275) (1.949) (1.920)
Village pop (log) -0.778** -1.122*** -2.892 -4.176**
(0.354) (0.289) (1.883) (1.765)
Constant 0.036 0.386 2.600*** -0.086 1.651 10.852***
(0.213) (0.294) (0.246) (1.123) (1.404) (2.282)
N 120 120 91 120 120 91
R20.217 0.520 0.580 0.147 0.332 0.342
Sample All villages All villages Registration villages All villages All villages Registration villages
- Robust standard errors in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
46Peer eﬀects and externalities in technology adoption: Evidence
from community reporting in Uganda
Supplementary Information
January 23, 2018
1Contents
1 Glossary of network concepts 3
2 Descriptive statistics 4
3 Full regression models 6
4 Robustness checks 10
4.1 Exclude village A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2 Two-stage selection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3 Instrumental variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4 Degree and other network characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.5 Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5 Heterogeneous eﬀects by village 23
6 Lab-in-the-ﬁeld games 24
List of Tables
1 Network sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2 Main speciﬁcations, controls included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 Network types, controls included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4 Leader vs. peer eﬀects, controls included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
5 Main speciﬁcations, village A excluded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
6 Two-stage selection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
7 Instrumental variable approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
8 Instrumental variable approach, ﬁrst stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
9 Placebo tests for IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
10 Flexible controls for degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
11 Network covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
12 Matching estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
List of Figures
1 Degree distribution by network type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Matching, balance diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3 Determinants of village-level peer eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
21 Glossary of network concepts
A network, often called a graph, is a collection of nodes and of ties between these nodes. We
write the graph g= (G,N), whereNis the set of nodes, and Gis the set of ties, and a tie is a
pair(i,j),i,j∈N. Networks can also be represented by an (N×N)adjacency matrixm, where
mij= 1if there is a tie from itoj, andmij= 0otherwise. The size ofgis its amount of nodes.
A graph can be directed or undirected. In the former case, there is a distinction between a
tie fromitojand a tie from jtoi. That is, we do not require that mis symmetric. In the
latter case, there is no distinction, and we require that mis symmetric. In what follows, we
deﬁne the network concepts used in the paper in the case of an undirected network.
•Neighbor:jis a neighbor of iif they are connected; that is, if (i,j)∈G. The neighborhood
ofiis the set of i’s neighbors.
•Degree: the degree diofiis the number of neighbors ihas. That is, di=/summationtext
j/negationslash=imij.
•Isolate:iis an isolate if it has a degree of 0.
•Density: captures the amount of ties in g, relative to its size. A network of size nhas
Tg=n(n−1)/2ties. Lettg=/summationtext
i<jmijbe the amount of ties in g. The density of gis
Dg=tg/Tg.
•Clustering coeﬃcient: the extent to which the friends of iare friends with each other.
Formally, it is the amount of triangles in i’s neighborhood normalized by the amount
of triangles in i’s neighborhood. It writes ci=/summationtext
j/summationtext
kmijmikmjk//summationtext
j/summationtext
kmijmik, with
i/negationslash=j,i/negationslash=k,j<k.
•Path: apathbetween iandjisaroutefrom itojonthegraph g. Formally,itisasequence
of ties (i1,i2),(i2,i3),...,(iK−1,iK)such that (ik,ik+1)∈Gfor eachk∈{1,...,K−1}, with
i1=i,iK=j, and each node in the sequence i1,...,i Kis distinct.
•Connected graph: a graph is connected if there is a path between any i,j∈N
•Pathlength: the number of steps it takes to get from itojon some path. Formally, the
length of path p= (i1,i2),(i2,i3),...,(iK−1,iK)isK−1.
•Distance: the distance lijbetweeniandjis the length of the shortest path between iand
j.
•Closeness centrality: how close is node ifrom the rest of the graph? The closeness
centrality of iis the mean distance between iand all other nodes of the graphs. It writes
Li=/summationtext
j/negationslash=ilij/(N−1). The concept is not well-deﬁned when the graph gis not connected.
•Betweenness centrality: how much do people have to go through node i? Betweenness
centrality is, for any j,k/negationslash=i, the amount of shortest paths that go through i. The concept
is not well-deﬁned when the graph gis not connected.
32 Descriptive statistics
In this section, we discuss the construction of network ties (e.g., survey question verbatim; how
we deal with missingness), and provide additional information on the distribution of ties across
network types.
First, we provide verbatim excerpt from our in-person survey used to construct adjacency
matrices capturing within-village network ties.
“In each of the following questions, we will ask you to think about people in your community
and their relationships to you.”
•Family: “Think about up to ﬁve family members in this village not living in your house-
hold with whom you most frequently spend time. For instance, you might visit one
another, eat meals together, or attend events together.”
•Friends: “Think about up to ﬁve of your best friends in this village. By friends I mean
someone who will help you when you have a problem or who spends much of his or her
free time with you. If there are less than ﬁve, that is okay too.”
•Lender: “Think about up to ﬁve people in this village that you would ask to borrow a
signiﬁcant amount of money if you had a personal emergency.”
•Problem solver : “Imagine there is a problem with public services in this village. For
example, you might imagine that a teacher has not come to school for several days or
that a borehole in your village needs to be repaired. Think about up to ﬁve people in this
village whom you would be most likely to approach to help solve these kinds of problems.”
Second, we report in Figure 1 the degree distribution across the four types of networks, as
well as in the union network:
0.00.10.20.3
0 10 20 30 40
DegreedensityNetwork
Friend
Family
Lender
Solver
Union
Figure 1: Degree distribution by network type.
4Understandably, we were unable to interview every individual in the village. This means
there are villagers for whom we only observe a fraction of their network: they were mentioned as
ties by other respondents, but were not interviewed in-person. About 25% of named individuals
fall in this category. Following standard practice, we exclude those nodes from the analysis.
Table 1 reports the number of individuals we surveyed in each village, the number of individuals
mentioned by at least one person (“alters”), and the number of adults living in each village,
accordingto2014censusdata. Thisinformationallowscalculatingthenumberofmissingnodes.
Village N respondents N alters Adult Pct. non-interviewed Pct. non-interviewed
population alters population
A 30 42 32 0.29 0.06
B 237 335 320 0.29 0.26
C 160 218 180 0.27 0.11
D 283 374 355 0.24 0.20
E 263 382 429 0.31 0.39
F 205 298 292 0.31 0.30
G 163 212 230 0.23 0.29
H 254 322 358 0.21 0.29
I 168 309 251 0.46 0.33
J 185 267 313 0.31 0.41
K 204 283 296 0.28 0.31
L 229 308 269 0.26 0.15
M 197 281 303 0.30 0.35
N 225 291 226 0.23 0.00
O 189 265 198 0.29 0.05
P 192 276 258 0.30 0.26
Total 3184 4463 4310 0.29 0.26
Table 1:Network sampling. N alters reports the number of individuals mentioned as alters
in the network survey. Adult population from 2014 census data.
53 Full regression models
This section reproduces the regression models in the main text, including control variables.
6Dependent variable: adopt
Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
# adopting neighbors 0.035∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗0.019∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.005) (0.006)
% adopting neighbors 0.325∗∗∗0.218∗∗∗0.157∗∗∗
(0.052) (0.048) (0.057)
degree 0.002∗∗∗0.001∗0.0002 0.004∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
# neighbors who told me 0.062∗∗∗
(0.012)
% neighbors who told me 0.871∗∗∗
(0.198)
1+ satisﬁed neighbors 0.012 0.024∗∗
(0.012) (0.011)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
female 0.006 0.007 0.002 0.005
(0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)
income −0.002−0.002 −0.002−0.002
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
secondary education 0.072∗∗∗0.068∗∗∗0.078∗∗∗0.071∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
use phone 0.004 0.002 0.004 0.002
(0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
leader −0.008−0.006 −0.007−0.007
(0.013) (0.012) (0.013) (0.012)
political participation 0.025∗∗∗0.025∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗
(0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
meeting attendance 0.178∗∗∗0.163∗∗∗0.187∗∗∗0.175∗∗∗
(0.026) (0.026) (0.027) (0.026)
pro-sociality −0.056∗∗∗−0.056∗∗∗−0.059∗∗∗−0.062∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.017) (0.018) (0.017)
geography −0.118∗∗∗−0.123∗∗∗−0.103∗∗∗−0.114∗∗∗
(0.023) (0.022) (0.023) (0.023)
Constant 0.061 0.125∗0.124∗0.052 0.109 0.093
(0.073) (0.076) (0.075) (0.073) (0.075) (0.075)
Observations 3,184 3,019 3,019 3,184 3,019 3,019
R20.139 0.247 0.273 0.116 0.233 0.251
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 2:Main speciﬁcations, controls included. This table reproduces Table ??in the main text, and reports control variables.
7Dependent variable: adopt
Simple vs. complex ties Types of relationships
(1) (2)
# adopting simple ties, βs 0.024∗∗∗
(0.005)
# adopting simple family 0.015∗
(0.008)
# adopting simple friends 0.032∗∗∗
(0.011)
# adopting simple lender 0.018
(0.011)
# adopting simple solver 0.010
(0.010)
# adopting complex ties, βc 0.039∗∗∗0.038∗∗∗
(0.010) (0.010)
degree 0.001∗0.001∗
(0.001) (0.001)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.0002)
female 0.006 0.010
(0.007) (0.007)
income −0.002 −0.002
(0.003) (0.003)
secondary education 0.072∗∗∗0.071∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.012)
use phone 0.004 0.002
(0.005) (0.005)
leader −0.009 −0.008
(0.013) (0.013)
political participation 0.025∗∗∗0.026∗∗∗
(0.008) (0.008)
meeting attendance 0.177∗∗∗0.173∗∗∗
(0.026) (0.026)
pro-sociality −0.056∗∗∗−0.054∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.018)
geography −0.118∗∗∗−0.116∗∗∗
(0.023) (0.023)
Constant 0.119 0.114
(0.077) (0.079)
βc−βs/negationslash= 0, F statistic 2.21 _
Observations 3,019 3,019
R20.248 0.254
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 3:Network types, controls included. This table reproduces Table ??in the main
text, and reports control variables.
8Dependent variable: adopt
Leader: all Leader: high Leader: low
(1) (2) (3)
# adopting peers, βp0.021∗∗∗0.020∗∗0.008
(0.007) (0.009) (0.008)
# adopting leaders, βl0.032∗∗∗0.029∗∗∗0.012
(0.008) (0.010) (0.008)
degree (peers) 0.003∗∗0.004∗∗0.003∗
(0.001) (0.002) (0.002)
degree (leaders) 0.002 0.003 0.002
(0.003) (0.004) (0.004)
age −0.0005∗∗−0.001∗∗−0.0002
(0.0002) (0.0004) (0.0003)
female 0.012∗0.007 0.014∗∗
(0.007) (0.014) (0.007)
income −0.002−0.002−0.001
(0.003) (0.005) (0.003)
secondary education 0.067∗∗∗0.089∗∗∗0.046∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.020) (0.014)
use phone 0.003 0.010 −0.001
(0.005) (0.009) (0.005)
political participation 0.024∗∗∗0.029∗∗0.017∗∗
(0.008) (0.015) (0.007)
meeting attendance 0.184∗∗∗0.196∗∗∗0.153∗∗∗
(0.030) (0.040) (0.048)
pro-sociality −0.060∗∗∗−0.106∗∗∗−0.024
(0.018) (0.035) (0.018)
geography −0.097∗∗∗−0.086∗∗∗−0.157∗∗∗
(0.023) (0.026) (0.041)
Constant 0.094 0.076 0.152∗∗∗
(0.081) (0.085) (0.047)
βp−βl/negationslash= 0, F statistic 0.97 0.42 0.1
Observations 2,585 1,202 1,383
R20.233 0.251 0.180
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 4:Leader vs. peer eﬀects, controls included. This table reproduces Table ??in
the main text, and reports control variables.
94 Robustness checks
4.1 Exclude village A
We ﬁrst test whether our main results are sensitive to dropping village A, which has a sig-
niﬁcantly smaller number of respondents (30) compared to the other villages (mean number
of respondents is 210). Table 5 shows that results are virtually unchanged. We ﬁnd a strong
positive relationship between the number (or share) of adopting neighbors and one’s adoption
choice, with magnitudes almost identical to the main speciﬁcation.
10Dependent variable: adopt
Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition Parsimonious Baseline Decomposition
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
# adopting neighbors 0.036∗∗∗0.028∗∗∗0.021∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.005) (0.006)
% adopting neighbors 0.342∗∗∗0.235∗∗∗0.173∗∗∗
(0.052) (0.048) (0.057)
degree 0.002∗∗∗0.001∗0.0002 0.004∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
# neighbors who told me 0.062∗∗∗
(0.012)
% neighbors who told me 0.870∗∗∗
(0.199)
1+ satisﬁed neighbors 0.011 0.024∗∗
(0.012) (0.011)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
female 0.007 0.008 0.002 0.006
(0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)
income −0.002−0.002 −0.002−0.002
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
secondary education 0.072∗∗∗0.068∗∗∗0.078∗∗∗0.071∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
use phone 0.004 0.002 0.004 0.002
(0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
leader −0.008−0.006 −0.007−0.008
(0.012) (0.012) (0.013) (0.012)
political participation 0.025∗∗∗0.025∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗
(0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
meeting attendance 0.174∗∗∗0.159∗∗∗0.183∗∗∗0.171∗∗∗
(0.026) (0.026) (0.027) (0.026)
pro-sociality −0.061∗∗∗−0.061∗∗∗−0.063∗∗∗−0.067∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.017) (0.018) (0.017)
geography −0.118∗∗∗−0.123∗∗∗−0.103∗∗∗−0.114∗∗∗
(0.023) (0.022) (0.023) (0.022)
Constant 0.008 0.439∗∗∗0.467∗∗∗−0.008 0.379∗∗∗0.414∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.087) (0.083) (0.017) (0.087) (0.084)
Observations 3,154 2,991 2,991 3,154 2,991 2,991
R20.141 0.248 0.274 0.117 0.232 0.250
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 5:Main speciﬁcations, village A excluded. This table reproduces Table ??in the main text but excludes village A from the sample.
114.2 Two-stage selection model
We probe into the mechanism underlying neighbors’ inﬂuence. Do neighbors foster adoption by
spreading news about the existence of the technology, or by pushing individuals who already
know of the innovation to adopt it? We answer this question by estimating a type-2 Tobit
model for binary outcomes (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005). This selection model separates the
fact of having heard about the platform from the decision to adopt it. Our outcomes are:
y1i=/braceleftBigg
1,ifihears about the platform
0,otherwise
y2i=

1,ifiadopts the platform and y1i= 1
0,ifidoes not adopt the platform and y1i= 1
_,ify1i= 0
That is, deciding whether to adopt the platform ( y2i) is deﬁned if and only if one heard about it
(y1i= 1). Letx1iandx2ibe column vectors of individual-level predictors for hearing about the
platform and adopting it, respectively. We consider the following binary type-2 Tobit model:
p(y2i|x1i,x2i)/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
adopting=p(y2i|x2i,y1i)/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
adopting conditional on hearingp(y1i|x1i)/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
hearing(1)
We estimate the model using logistic regression, and account for village-level eﬀects by adding
village indicators. This model can easily be estimated using two logistic regressions: the ﬁrst
regressesy1onX1forthewholesample, andthesecondregresses y2onX2forthoseobservations
wherey1i= 1. In the ﬁrst stage, we regress hearing about the technology on the number of
hearing neighbors. In the second stage, we regress adopting the technology on the number of
adopting neighbors. We use the same set of controls as in the main text, with the exception
that we exclude meeting attendance from the ﬁrst stage, because it perfectly predicts hearing
about the platform. We also estimate a reduced-form speciﬁcation identical to our baseline
speciﬁcation using logistic regression (Table ??, model 2) to compare eﬀect sizes in the second
stage to a corresponding reduced-form speciﬁcation.
Table 6 reports the results. Neighbors inﬂuence both hearing about the technology and
adopting it. Controls reveal an additional interesting pattern: if females are less likely to adopt,
it is only because they are less likely to hear about the technology, not because they are less
likely to adopt it, conditional on having heard about it.
12Dependent variable:
heard adopt
First stage Second stage Reduced form
(1) (2) (3)
# adopting neighbors 0.339∗∗∗0.364∗∗∗
(0.096) (0.091)
# hearing neighbors 0.150∗∗∗
(0.021)
degree −0.001 0.005 0.008
(0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
age −0.014∗∗∗−0.027∗∗−0.030∗∗∗
(0.003) (0.012) (0.011)
female −0.323∗∗∗−0.041−0.211
(0.098) (0.303) (0.289)
income 0.027 −0.084−0.064
(0.039) (0.113) (0.106)
secondary education 0.611∗∗∗1.386∗∗∗1.616∗∗∗
(0.112) (0.281) (0.282)
use phone 0.548∗∗∗1.296∗∗1.617∗∗∗
(0.111) (0.530) (0.536)
leader 0.190 −0.186−0.110
(0.138) (0.348) (0.361)
political participation 0.527∗∗∗0.733∗∗∗0.841∗∗∗
(0.092) (0.217) (0.205)
meeting attendance 1.112∗∗∗1.966∗∗∗
(0.263) (0.266)
pro-sociality −0.240−1.060−1.271∗
(0.237) (0.691) (0.663)
geography 0.097 −2.580∗∗∗−2.084∗∗∗
(0.208) (0.636) (0.544)
Constant −1.518∗∗∗−1.829−3.834∗∗∗
(0.547) (1.373) (1.292)
Observations 3,019 938 3,019
Akaike Inf. Crit. 3,000.939 570.499 664.305
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 6: Two-stage selection model. Logistic regression estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects.
Coeﬃcients are log-odds ratios. Heteroskedastic robust standard errors in parentheses. Model (1) reports
the ﬁrst stage (hearing about the platform), model (2) reports the second stage (adopting the platform
conditional on hearing), and model (3) reports the corresponding reduced-form model.
134.3 Instrumental variable
As discussed in the main text, initial encouragements to adopt the technology might be en-
dogenous. Patterns of social inﬂuence may be confounded by other eﬀects: two peers may
adopt the technology due to similar unobservable characteristics, or because they have been
exposed to related unobservable shocks. We address this issue using a generalization of An
(2016) instrumental variable (IV) approach. Consider the following linear model of adoption:
y=Xβ+λMy +/epsilon1 (2)
withya vector of outcomes of length N, withyi= 1ifiadopts the platform, and 0 otherwise,
XanN×Kmatrix of individual covariates, ManN×Nadjacency matrix, with diagonal
entries set to 0, and /epsilon1an error term. Formally, the problem is that the autoregressive term My
is quite possibly correlated with the error term /epsilon1.
To address the issue of endogeneity, An (2016) recommends using an instrument zthat is
correlated with y, but not with /epsilon1. Using the two stages least squares (2SLS) procedure, we
estimate the following models with OLS:
y=Xβ 0+λ0z+/epsilon10
y=Xβ+λz+γMˆy+/epsilon1,
with ˆy=Xˆβ0+ˆλ0z.1
Our instrument is the distance from one’s household to the location of the venue that GAPP
used to hold its U-Bridge inception meeting. The idea is that the shorter the distance to the
meetingvenue,themorelikelyavillageristoadoptU-Bridge,simplybyincreasingthelikelihood
that she attends the meeting and learns about the new political communication technology. For
the instrument to be valid, the exclusion restriction must be satisﬁed; i.e., we must assume
thatj’s distance to the location of GAPP’s inception meeting does not aﬀect i’s adoption
via alternative channels than j’s inﬂuence on i. This would be the case if contacts tended
to cluster around locations that were more or less exposed to the meeting. Encouragingly,
we ﬁnd little (.15) correlation between physical distance and having a social tie. We also
conduct several placebo tests to further explore potential violations of the exclusion restriction
by conducting several placebo tests. If the exclusion restriction holds, mean peer distance from
1Letˆθ2SLS= (ˆβ,ˆλ,ˆγ),H= (X,z,Wy ), and ˆH= (X,z,W ˆy). Thevariancecovariancematrixwrites V(ˆθ2SLS) =
ˆσ2(ˆH|H)−1with ˆσ2=e|e/Nande=y−Hˆθ2SLS.
14the meeting should aﬀect one’s adoption decision, but should not aﬀect other theoretically
meaningful predictors of adoption, such as political participation, leadership status, or phone
ownership. Table 9 shows that this is indeed the case.
Note, furthermore, that our IV speciﬁcation matches imperfectly our main speciﬁcation
(main text, Table ??). In particular, we omit our geographic control and meeting attendance.
Indeed, because the instrument is the random choice of a meeting location, these controls are
post-treatment covariates in this approach, and should therefore be excluded from the model.
TheresultsofourIVmodels, reportedinTable7, conﬁrmsourbasicadoptionmodel. Again,
results suggest a better model for for absolute threshold model (column 1) as compared to the
fractional model (column 2). F-tests suggest, however, that our instrument is rather weak, with
F statistics below 10. Note, furthermore, that our IV estimates are larger than comparable OLS
estimates. We believe that using distance to the meeting as an instrument magniﬁes the eﬀect
of meeting attendance, because it compounds the eﬀect of all neighbors attending the meeting,
which is a very important predictor of adoption. Furthermore, given that our instrument is
weak, results should be interpreted with care.
15Dependent variable: adopt
Parsimonious IV IV OLS Parsimonious IV IV OLS
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
# adopting neighbors 0.043∗∗∗0.045∗∗∗0.029∗∗∗
(0.014) (0.013) (0.006)
% adopting neighbors 0.107 0.106 0.149∗∗∗
(0.072) (0.070) (0.047)
degree 0.002∗∗0.001 0.002∗∗∗0.004∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
distance to meeting (km) −0.004−0.008∗∗−0.007∗−0.005−0.010∗∗−0.009∗∗
(0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗−0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
female −0.003−0.007 −0.012−0.012
(0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
income −0.001−0.001 −0.001−0.0005
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
secondary education 0.094∗∗∗0.092∗∗∗0.103∗∗∗0.100∗∗∗
(0.014) (0.014) (0.014) (0.014)
use phone 0.004 0.005 0.007 0.006
(0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
leader −0.001−0.003 −0.002−0.002
(0.013) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013)
political participation 0.030∗∗∗0.029∗∗∗0.033∗∗∗0.032∗∗∗
(0.009) (0.009) (0.009) (0.009)
pro-sociality −0.050∗∗−0.047∗∗−0.050∗∗−0.050∗∗
(0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020)
Constant 0.104 0.066 0.083 0.145∗0.106 0.092
(0.084) (0.084) (0.085) (0.085) (0.085) (0.086)
F statistic 1.28 5.92∗∗_ 1.28 5.92∗∗_
Observations 2,832 2,832 2,832 2,832 2,832 2,832
R20.103 0.174 0.182 0.092 0.160 0.164
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 7:Instrumental variable estimates. 2SLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects (models 1,
2, 4, 5), and corresponding OLS estimates (models 3, 6). We report F-statistics for instrument strength.
Although the instrument is weak, there is evidence of peer eﬀects.
16Dependent variable: adopt
Parsimonious IV IV
(1) (2)
distance to meeting (km) −0.005−0.011∗∗
(0.004) (0.004)
degree 0.004∗∗∗0.003∗∗∗
(0.001) (0.001)
age −0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002)
female −0.013∗
(0.008)
income −0.001
(0.003)
secondary education 0.105∗∗∗
(0.014)
use phone 0.007
(0.005)
leader −0.002
(0.013)
political participation 0.034∗∗∗
(0.009)
pro-sociality −0.050∗∗
(0.020)
Constant 0.169∗∗0.131
(0.083) (0.082)
Observations 2,832 2,832
R20.092 0.160
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 8:Instrumental variable approach, ﬁrst stage. OLS estimates of ﬁrst stage of 2SLS
models in table 7 with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. The instrument is weak.
Dependent variable:
adopt pol. participation leader phone
(1) (2) (3) (4)
mean peer distance to meeting (km) −0.021∗∗∗−0.015−0.007 0.009
(0.008) (0.026) (0.013) (0.021)
age 0.0001 0.004∗∗∗0.006∗∗∗−0.004∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.001) (0.0005) (0.001)
female −0.041∗∗∗−0.231∗∗∗−0.094∗∗∗−0.132∗∗∗
(0.008) (0.022) (0.013) (0.018)
income 0.003 0.046∗∗∗0.016∗∗∗0.045∗∗∗
(0.003) (0.009) (0.005) (0.007)
secondary education 0.122∗∗∗0.174∗∗∗0.002 0.270∗∗∗
(0.015) (0.028) (0.017) (0.018)
pro-sociality −0.058∗∗∗0.042 −0.016 0.032
(0.021) (0.058) (0.032) (0.043)
Constant 0.154∗−0.014−0.089 0.784∗∗∗
(0.082) (0.134) (0.067) (0.068)
Observations 2,832 2,832 2,832 2,832
R20.105 0.123 0.099 0.167
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 9:Placebo tests for IV. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroskedastic
standard errors in parentheses. Mean peer distance to meeting location aﬀects adoption (model
1), but does not aﬀect political participation (model 2), being a leader (model 3), or using a
phone (model 4).
174.4 Degree and other network characteristics
As Aronow and Samii (n.d.) argue, exposure to peer inﬂuence is endogenous to one’s network
position. If the technology diﬀuses through patterns of social inﬂuence, then individuals with
more central network positions are more likely to be exposed to such inﬂuence. In the limit,
agents with no neighbors cannot be exposed to any inﬂuence, while agents with many neighbors
are subjected to much inﬂuence.
To address this issue, we compare between individuals with similar network positions. Yet,
network positions can only be described partially, using centrality scores that each capture
diﬀerent aspects of one’s network position.
We reestimate our baseline speciﬁcation but control very ﬂexibly for one major centrality
score: degree centrality. Table 10 reports the results from two speciﬁcations. One uses degree
strata that split the population into degree deciles. The second controls from degree non-
parametrically using generalized additive modelling, with thin-plate splines. Peer inﬂuence is
robust to such controls.
Second, we reestimate our baseline by controlling for a host of standard centrality scores:
degree, betweenness, closeness, eigenvector, Bonacich centralities, and clustering. Eigenvector
and Bonacich centralities are recursive metrics where a node is more central to the extent that
it is connected to more central node. Other concepts are deﬁned in section 1 of this SI. We
estimate one model per centrality score, and divide the population in three strata based on
which tercile they belong to. Again, peer inﬂuence is robust to such controls.
18Dependent variable: adopt
OLS GAM
(continuous)
degree strata GAM
(1) (2)
# adopting neighbors 0.029∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.003)
degre∈[8,9] −0.001
(0.010)
degree = 10 −0.006
(0.011)
degre∈[11,12]−0.017∗
(0.009)
degree = 13 −0.021∗∗
(0.010)
degre∈[14,15]−0.013
(0.011)
degre∈[16,17]−0.022∗∗
(0.011)
degre∈[18,20]−0.001
(0.014)
degre∈[21,25]−0.006
(0.015)
degree > 25 0.049∗∗
(0.022)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗∗
(0.0002) (0.0002)
female 0.008 0.008
(0.007) (0.007)
income −0.002−0.002
(0.003) (0.003)
secondary education 0.072∗∗∗0.073∗∗∗
(0.012) (0.009)
use phone 0.003 0.002
(0.005) (0.007)
leader −0.007−0.008
(0.013) (0.010)
political participation 0.028∗∗∗0.027∗∗∗
(0.008) (0.006)
meeting attendance 0.178∗∗∗0.177∗∗∗
(0.026) (0.013)
pro-sociality −0.057∗∗∗−0.058∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.017)
geography −0.120∗∗∗−0.113∗∗∗
(0.023) (0.015)
Constant 0.140∗0.138∗∗∗
(0.076) (0.041)
Observations 3,019 3,019
R20.250
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 10: Flexible controls for degree. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Het-
eroskedastic standard errors in parentheses. Model 1 controls for degree using degree strata
based on sample deciles. Degree < 8 is the reference category. Model 2 uses a generalized
additive model, and controls for degree using thin-plate regression splines. Peer inﬂuence is
robust to such controls.
19Dependent variable: adopt
Degree Betweenness Closeness Eigenvector Bonacich Clustering
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
# adopting neighbors 0.032∗∗∗0.033∗∗∗0.034∗∗∗0.032∗∗∗0.032∗∗∗0.032∗∗∗
(0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)
medium degree −0.013∗
(0.007)
high degree 0.005
(0.009)
medium betweenness −0.017∗∗
(0.007)
high betweenness −0.003
(0.009)
medium closeness −0.003
(0.007)
high closeness −0.015
(0.010)
medium eigenvector −0.002
(0.007)
high eigenvector 0.011
(0.009)
medium bonacich 0.006
(0.008)
high bonacich 0.001
(0.008)
medium clustering −0.021∗∗
(0.009)
high clustering −0.014∗
(0.008)
Constant 0.127∗0.126∗0.131∗0.117 0.121 0.141∗
(0.076) (0.076) (0.076) (0.076) (0.077) (0.077)
Observations 3,019 3,019 3,019 3,019 3,019 3,019
R20.244 0.244 0.244 0.244 0.243 0.245
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 11: Network covariates. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects. Heteroskedastic stan-
dard errors in parentheses. Network controls use tercile strata, with the lowest tercile as the reference
category. Peer eﬀects are robust to these network controls. Consistently with simple contagion, low
clustering individuals adopt more. Controls not shown.
204.5 Matching
Following Aral, Muchnik and Sundararajan (2009), we use matching to address simultaneously
the problems of endogenous initial encouragements to adopt the technology, and endogenous
exposure to peer inﬂuence due to network position. Our matched sample matches both on indi-
vidual and network characteristics. We selected individual characteristics that are substantially
and theoretically meaningful predictors of uptake: phone ownership, secondary education, po-
litical participation, and meeting attendance. Our network characteristics are degree and eigen-
vector centrality. Matching alleviates bias by constructing a treatment and a control group that
more are comparable on such observable characteristics. It has the additional beneﬁt of con-
structing groups that are also presumably more comparable on other network characteristics,
since centrality scores tend to be highly correlated.
Matching requires using a binary treatment. As in Aral, Muchnik and Sundararajan (2009),
we make our treatment binary by deﬁning cutoﬀs in the number of adopting neighbors above
which we consider that an observation is treated. Speciﬁcally, we use cutoﬀs of one, two, and
three neighbors. Having deﬁned these cutoﬀs, we compared, for each cutoﬀ, three diﬀerent
matching procedures: neighbor, coarsened exact, and full matching. We chose full matching
because it is the procedure that achieved the highest distance reduction for all three cutoﬀs.
Figure 2 shows the results of our matching procedure for a cutoﬀ of one neighbor. Our
matched sample is balanced on degree, eigenvector centrality, and political participation. It is
not balanced on the other characteristics.
We then reestimate our baseline speciﬁcation on each matched sample. Table 12 shows that
our results are largely robust to using a matched sample. The magnitude of the treatment eﬀect
increases with the strength of the treatment. While having at least one adopting neighbor does
not signiﬁcantly foster adoption, having at least two, and at least three adopting neighbors
signiﬁcantly fosters adoption.
21Dependent variable: adopt
Matched sample, t= 1Matched sample, t= 2Matched sample, t= 3
(1) (2) (3)
# adopting neighbors ≥t 0.027∗0.054∗∗∗0.091∗∗∗
(0.017) (0.017) (0.026)
degree 0.003∗∗∗0.004∗∗0.002
(0.001) (0.002) (0.002)
age −0.001∗∗∗−0.001∗∗−0.002∗
(0.0003) (0.001) (0.001)
female −0.004 0.003 0.002
(0.008) (0.013) (0.018)
income −0.005 −0.008 −0.015
(0.003) (0.008) (0.010)
secondary education 0.081∗∗∗0.091∗∗∗0.093∗∗∗
(0.014) (0.026) (0.031)
use phone 0.005 0.009 0.019
(0.006) (0.011) (0.016)
leader −0.010 −0.022 −0.030
(0.018) (0.041) (0.041)
political participation 0.026∗∗0.032 0.047∗∗
(0.010) (0.024) (0.021)
meeting attendance 0.179∗∗∗0.208∗∗∗0.163∗∗∗
(0.029) (0.054) (0.045)
pro-sociality −0.084∗∗∗−0.090∗∗−0.121∗∗
(0.024) (0.043) (0.061)
geography −0.114∗∗∗−0.156∗∗∗−0.241∗∗∗
(0.028) (0.045) (0.065)
Constant 0.277 0.187 0.498∗∗∗
(0.170) (0.123) (0.190)
Observations 3,019 3,019 3,019
R20.231 0.306 0.221
Note:∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Table 12: Matching estimates. OLS estimates with village-level ﬁxed eﬀects on a matched sample using full matching (see ﬁgure 2 for details
on matching procedure). Heteroskedastic standard errors in parentheses. Additional robustness checks. Standard errors in parentheses. Treatment
is an indicator variable that equals 1 if ihas at least tadopting adopting neighbors. Peer inﬂuence is robust to using a matched sample.
22●●
●
●
●●
degreeeigenvector centralitymeeting attendancepolitical participationsecondary educationuse phone
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
p value of difference (treatment − control)variable●
●
●
●p < .01
p < .05
p < .10
p > .10
Sample
●all
matchedFigure 2: Covariate balance on dimensions used for matching, t= 1.We report the
p-value of the diﬀerence in means in the treatment and control group in the full and matched
sample, using full matching. Matching achieves balance in degree, eigenvector centrality, and
political participation. It does not achieve balance in the remaining dimensions.
5 Heterogeneous eﬀects by village
Figure 3 shows scatter plots of the data used to construct ﬁgure ??in the main text.
23●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●Pro−sociality − public good Religious concentration SatisfactionEthnic concentration Leadership concentration Pro−sociality − dictator
−2 −1 0 1 2 −1 0 1 −1 0 1 2−0.6−0.5−0.4−0.3−0.2−0.1−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 −2 −1 0 1−3−2−1012
−3−2−10123−202
−2−1012−2−101
−2024
Scaled independent variableScaled network effect
Uptake ●High LowFigure 3:Determinants of village-level peer eﬀect. Scatter plots of selected scaled village-
level characteristics and village level peer eﬀect. We report the linear trend line (red) and a
loess ﬁt (blue).
6 Lab-in-the-ﬁeld games
Upon conclusion of the survey, each respondent was given 2,000 Ugandan Shillings (about 60
cents in US dollars), half of which was used for a dictator game, and half of which was used in a
public goods game. While 60 cents may seem like a trivial amount of money, it is a meaningful
about to respondents in this context, where GDP per capita is just over US$600, and where
24the district in question is among the poorest regions in the country, according to recent poverty
estimates.
In the dictator game the respondent decides how to divide the money between herself and
another player. In practice, this second player was an anonymous individual who resided in the
same district, but not in the same village. The respondent keeps whatever she has decided to
allocate to herself, and the remainder stays with the enumerator who then gives it to the second
player. Both players are anonymous; the respondent does not know the name of the recipient
and the recipient does not know the name of the respondent.
In the public goods game, respondents were asked to divide Ushs1000 between private and
public accounts. The share of respondents’ initial endowment that they placed in the private
account remained theirs and what they donated to the public account was doubled by the
research team and delivered to local leaders to invest in a community project. By construction,
the most proﬁtable outcome for the community occurs when all members contribute their entire
endowment to the village project. However, the most proﬁtable strategy for each individual is
to keep the entire endowment and beneﬁt from what everyone else contributes to the public
account.
Herein, we average across experimental conditions, analyzing the eﬀect of treatment assign-
ment on contribution levels in a companion paper.
25References
An, Weihua. 2016. “On the Directionality Test of Peer Eﬀects in Social Networks.” Sociological
Methods &Research 45(4):635–650.
Aral, Sinan, Lev Muchnik and Arun Sundararajan. 2009. “Distinguishing inﬂuence-based con-
tagion from homophily-driven diﬀusion in dynamic networks.” Proceedings oftheNational
Academy ofSciences 106(51):21544–21549.
Aronow, Peter M and Cyrus Samii. n.d. “Estimating Average Causal Eﬀects under General
Interference, with Application to a Social Network Experiment.” AnnalsofAppliedStatistics
.
Cameron, Adrian Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2005.
Microeconometrics - Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press.
26
View publication statsView publication stats