Key facts
Target group
The intervention targets smallholder 
farmers and vulnerable households 
in Pakistan, primarily among remote 
agricultural populations.
The COVID-19 Global 
Humanitarian Appeal
The intervention addresses 
component IV of FAO’s emergency 
response, ensuring food supply 
chain actors are not at risk of virus 
transmission.Context 
In Pakistan, 60 percent of the population relies on agricultural livelihoods 
and resides outside of urban centers. The agriculture sector contributes  
18.5 percent of the country’s gross domestic product (GDP), but natural 
hazards, including earthquakes, flooding, and drought, have presented 
persistent challenges to rural communities. Outbreaks of conflict, 
internal displacements and desert locust swarms have caused additional 
disruptions.
Even prior to the spread of COVID-19, a fifth of the population –  
40 million people – remained food insecure. According to the 2020 Global 
Report Against Food Crises, approximately 3.1 million people within 
drought-affected areas in Balochistan and Sindh are identified as being 
in Phase 3 or 4 of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), 
Crisis and Emergency. Rural poverty rates in these two provinces hover at 
close to 50 percent.
The global pandemic and its related containments deepened these pre-
existing fault lines, highlighting the need for swift and inclusive messaging 
around good practices for managing and mitigating the COVID-19 virus. 
Forty percent of Pakistan’s population is unable to read or write, primarily 
within rural districts, which have the country’s highest illiteracy rates. This 
has created an added difficulty in communicating remotely with many of 
Pakistan’s hardest-to-reach farming communities.Protecting agricultural workers 
through remote COVID-19 
awareness campaigns in Pakistan
Using digital media and distanced messaging to promote virus 
mitigation and combat misinformation
Partnerships
The Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) partners with the Government 
of Pakistan, the World Health 
Organization (WHO), the World 
Food Programme (WFP), the United 
Nations Children’s Fund, International 
Labor Organization (ILO), other 
United Nations (UN) agencies and 
implementing partners.
EMERGING PR ACTICE
Exploring emer ging op/g415ons to addr ess the impacts of CO VID-19 along the food supply chai nImpacts of COVID-19 and re-programming
The continuing COVID-19 pandemic—and related lockdowns—triggered a 
massive cash crisis around the world for families who depend on informal 
earnings, including daily wage workers. In Pakistan, a nationwide lockdown 
was imposed on 21 March 2020. This had major reverberations on the food 
supply chain and agriculture sector, where restrictive measures threatened 
the livelihoods of workers and smallholder farmers. In total, as of 12 July 2020, 
there were 248 872 confirmed cases throughout Pakistan.
Lockdown-related challenges have created new threats to public health, 
with communities struggling to adhere to restrictions while still securing 
food for their families. Overall, society’s most vulnerable and food insecure 
segments have been disproportionately affected by the immediate impacts 
of lockdown measures, which include sudden unemployment, food price 
shocks, disruptions in marketing and food trade, logistics and production, and 
upended labor migration patterns.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in Pakistan, 
together with partners, delivered both physical and remote sensitization 
messages: field-based resources—including close to 80 000 materials printed 
and distributed by over 300 000 frontline workers—were complemented with 
remote communication technologies, ranging from social media posts, local 
radio broadcasts, and newly modified online components to the farmer field 
school (FFS) platform.
FAO-produced messages, 
designed to raise awareness and 
fight misinformation around 
COVID-19, are translated into 
multiple languages and shared 
on digital platforms.
FAO-produced messages, 
designed to raise awareness and 
fight misinformation around 
COVID-19, are translated into 
multiple languages and shared 
on digital platforms.
Pakistan is prone to multiple natural hazards, including floods, droughts, earthquakes, landslides, heavy 
precipitation, avalanches and cyclones. In January 2020, unprecedented snowfall and rain combined with 
avalanches and flash floods created major livelihood disruptions in many districts within Balochistan, 
Gilgit Baltistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, less than several months before lockdown measures began. 
This came after in 2018 and 2019 most of the same areas suffered from a severe drought.
Pakistan is also an important frontline country for desert locust invasions because it lies on the migratory 
route of locust swarms, which have engulfed Pakistan, Iran and India, as well as the Horn of Africa and 
Red Sea area. The eastern provinces of Sindh and Punjab serve as summer breeding grounds, and the 
southwestern province of Balochistan as the spring and winter breeding area.
The current desert locust invasion has been deemed the worst in 25 years by the FAO Desert Locust 
Information Service and represents an unprecedented threat to food security and the livelihoods of 
smallholder farmers.Multi-risk challenges
©FAO/ Abdullah LongMethodological approach
FAO’s COVID-19 response options in Pakistan are focusing on targeted, 
preventative health messaging within an initial 8-12-week timeframe 
and across a range of both digital media and broadcast platforms. These 
are being supplemented by physically distanced field-based trainings, all 
designed with accessing hard-to-reach rural communities in mind, as well as a 
broad range of food supply chain workers, politicians and community leaders, 
and vulnerable groups, including religious or ethnic minorities, refugee and 
indigenous communities, and the chronically ill or disabled. Key features of 
the intervention include:
 •The development and distribution of over 80 000 information, education 
and communication (IEC) materials (e.g. posters and brochures), 
translated into local languages and displayed in supermarkets, local 
food shops, and other public places. Health and physical distancing 
guidelines are also being shared remotely via radio broadcast, WhatsApp, 
and FAO Pakistan social media channels, including Urdu messages and 
infographics developed by FAO’s Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific.
 •The mobilization of at least eight digital influencers to create educational 
social media posts that both highlight information around COVID-19 and 
combat misinformation.
 •Local radio broadcast slots featuring FAO’s technical expert recorded 
messages targeting FAO intervention districts within remote areas of Sindh 
province, Balochistan, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where television and 
digital media are not available.
 •The planned production and dissemination of short animations dubbed 
into local languages that will emphasize COVID-19 mitigation practices, 
including handwashing and physical distancing. These will be shared via 
social media and WhatsApp, as well as via television broadcast slots.
 •Online awareness sessions conducted by FAO field staff now working 
from home, as well as the harnessing of FAO’s farmer field school (FFS) 
network to raise further awareness through hands-on, participatory 
demonstrations at the field level. This includes a module on hygiene, 
nutrition and safety adapted to emphasize key learning around COVID-19 
prevention good practices. Methodological approach“FAO team conducted awareness 
sessions to help prevent the 
spread of COVID-19.  We learned 
important precautions to protect 
ourselves from the infection such 
as not touching our face or mouth, 
the need to cover our mouth while 
coughing, maintaining 6-feet 
distance from each other and 
keeping our children at home to 
keep them safe. ”
Sakina, Amal Kot, Kurram, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
 ©FAO/ PakistanReplicability and upscaling
Confirmed cases of COVID-19 have risen exponentially in Pakistan, affecting 
many rural populations within FAO intervention areas. As businesses begin to 
reopen, there is increased urgency to mitigate the risk of a resurgence of the 
virus among food supply chain workers, including farmers, suppliers, vendors, 
rural communities and other stakeholders.
Interventions initially piloted within a single intervention district have 
since been replicated and are now operational throughout every province 
in Pakistan, as well as carried out by partner agencies. The intervention, 
designed with illiterate rural populations in mind, can be replicated in areas 
with similar demographics and in communities facing similar challenges.
The FAO model for the targeted messaging of rural populations has been 
included in the National Risk Communication and Community Engagement 
Strategy, currently being implemented by the Ministry of Health, with 
rural populations and smallholder farmers identified as priority groups for 
information dissemination.
Additional programming for radio is currently being planned, including 
18 radio programmes in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa over a nine-week interval. 
Five further radio spots, along with public service announcements (PSAs) 
translated into local languages and recorded for television broadcast, will play 
over the coming weeks in each of Pakistan’s five provinces and be shared by 
FAO’s digital channels. In addition to the 80 000 posters already distributed 
throughout public spaces, 11 000 new copies of the IEC posters will be 
disseminated within the remotest districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
As the harvest season nears, the intervention is also currently being upscaled 
to include standard operating procedure (SOP) infographics, translated 
into local languages and made using easy-to-understand visuals, that will be 
linked to food safety and safe harvesting. These will be shared through digital 
media platforms and on WhatsApp. Further interventions will also target 
youth, small business owners and women for information dissemination on 
COVID-19 safe practices.
As interventions scale up, 
an additional 11 000 printed 
posters are being developed and 
distributed throughout remote 
districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.Along with hygiene and 
sanitation messages, 
instructional posters highlight 
the enhanced vulnerability of 
food workers.
©FAO/ Pakistan
In remote parts of Colombia, Haiti, Kenya and South Sudan, where affected populations do not typically 
have internet connectivity or, many times, access to mobile phones, radio programs have been harnessed to 
disseminate crucial information on managing and mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic. In areas where communities 
have smartphone access, social media platforms have been used to communicate training and sensitization 
messages. In each case, country offices built upon existing remote platforms to convey key messaging.
In Colombia:
 •Radio programs have reached 250 000 listeners throughout the country’s rural areas.
 •WhatsApp campaigns with tailored technical messaging (“Information Kits”) have reached 5 000 farmers 
linked to FAO projects.
 •A Twitter campaign, #ElCampoSigue (“Farming doesn’t stop”) launched with a potential reach of 4 million 
people. Web forums and webinars reached an additional audience of 83 944 people.
In Haiti:
 •Original programming, disseminated via rural radio channels, is part of a social mobilization campaign aimed 
at preventing the spread of the virus and abuse toward contaminated patients.
 •Targeting rural populations, two ongoing series will be produced: one featuring roundtable debates and 
discussions with featured experts, the other reported pieces, drawing on first-hand experiences, ranging from 
COVID-19 prevention strategies to the path to recovery. 
In Kenya:
 •Support through a SFERA fund is being provided to pastoralist and agro-pastoralists within four rural 
counties.
 •Tailored messages are being developed to raise awareness around COVID-19 and food safety, as well as 
easy-to-understand health guidelines.
 •They are being recorded in local languages and disseminated via radio broadcast.
In South Sudan:
 •FAO is working to ensure uninterrupted agricultural production through a message-based awareness 
campaign, designed to be able to reach remote pastoralist communities.
 •Messages on both farming practices and COVID-19 mitigation strategies will be disseminated via phone and 
radio, including solar-powered radio for off-grid access.
 •IEC material (posters, banners, leaflets, etc.) will also be translated locally and distributed.
 •Additionally, the Pastoralist Livelihood Education Field School (PLEFS), a field-based learning curriculum for 
nomadic herders, is being upscaled to include information on COVID-19.                Remote messaging in Colombia, Haiti, Kenya and South SudanKey learning 
Since the beginning of the campaign, extensive research within communities 
has been conducted regularly to ensure that the interventions being carried 
out are in line with evolving issues and that the messaging has been tailored 
to be effective in curbing the spread of the virus.
Adapt to evolving needs with tailored, up-to-date messaging
With this in mind, and since the priority issues that have been identified in 
both rural areas are constantly in flux, it is recommended to closely monitor 
changing needs and behaviors within each province and to adapt each 
message accordingly for maximum effectiveness.
“FAO advised us on measures we need to take to protect ourselves 
against COVID-19. Now when I leave the house, I use a face mask. 
When I return, I wash my hands first before doing anything else.  
I also cover my mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing. ”
Handri, Dharsi Bagat village, Abdulabad, Sindh province
“During the COVID-19 pandemic, I am closely coordinating with 
farmers (active members of farmer field schools) and government 
department officials (line departments). As a facilitator it is my 
duty to facilitate the farmers – I regularly conduct telephonic 
sessions with them on wheat and other crop harvesting procedures, 
threshing, storing techniques and marketing during the current 
COVID 19 situation. I also sensitize the farmers about some 
important safety protocols and the measures that they need to take 
while working in the fields. ”
Ibrar Hussain Abbasi, District Ghotki
©FAO/ Pakistan
 ©FAO/ PakistanFood and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations
Pakistan
FAO-PK@fao.org
Office of Emergencies and Resilience
KORE – Knowledge Sharing Platform on 
Resilience
KORE@fao.org
www.fao.org/in-action/kore/Contact
This publication is made possible by the support pro -
vided by the European Union, under the Partnership 
Programme contributing to the Global Network Against 
Food Crises, and the American People through the U.S. 
Agency for International Development. The contents of 
this publication are the sole responsibility of the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and 
do not necessarily reflect the views of the European 
Union, USAID, or the United States Government.
CB0514EN/1/11.20Some rights reserved. This work is available
under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licenceRECOMMENDED CITATION
FAO . 2020. Protecting agricultural workers through remote COVID-19 awareness 
campaigns in Pakistan: Using digital media and distanced messaging to promote virus 
mitigation and combat misinformation. Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/cb0514en
©FAO, 2020This product was developed with the support 
of FAO’s Knowledge Sharing Platform on 
Resilience (KORE) and is available on its 
online portal. FAO’s knowledge management 
and normative work, through KORE, aims 
at generating learning and disseminating 
evidence-based knowledge to support decision-
making, resource allocation and programming 
processes. This work falls under the Global 
Network Against Food Crises, an alliance taking 
concerted steps and promoting sustainable 
solutions to food crises.Bibliography
FAO . 2020. Building resilient livelihoods for smallholder farmers in Pakistan amid 
the COVID-19 crisis. Islamabad, Pakistan. (also available at www.twitter.com/i/
status/1274706553610919937)
FAO . 2020. Empowering women farmers in a remote village. Rome, Italy. (also 
available at www.fao.org/pakistan/programmes-and-projects/success-stories/
project-success-stories/empowering-women-farmers-in-a-remote-village/
en/#c724171)
FAO . 2020. FAO steps up efforts to revive livelihoods and food security in 
Pakistan’s Sindh Province amid COVID-19 outbreak. Rome, Italy. (also 
available at www.fao.org/emergencies/fao-in-action/stories/stories-detail/
en/c/1272311/)
FAO . 2020. Helping Pakistan’s smallholder farmers through the COVID-19 crisis 
[video]. [Cited 7 May 2020]. https://youtu.be/6lDmrpISyso
FAO . 2020. Promoting inclusive and sustainable development for small-holder 
farmers in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. Rome, Italy. (also available at www.
fao.org/pakistan/programmes-and-projects/success-stories/project-success-
stories/promoting-inclusive-and-sustainable-development-for-small-holder-
farmers-in-khyber-pakhtunkhwa-province/en/)
FAO . 2020. Responding creatively to crises with non-traditional farming. Rome, 
Italy. (also available at www.fao.org/fao-stories/article/en/c/1276274/)
FAO . 2020. Skills and seeds acquired before have new importance for rural 
communities in Pakistan. Rome, Italy. (also available at www.fao.org/fao-
stories/article/en/c/1273891/)
FSIN. 2020. Global Report on Food Crises. Rome, Italy. 240 pp. (also available 
at www.fsinplatform.org/sites/default/files/resources/files/GRFC_2020_
ONLINE_200420.pdf)
