Information and Learning Science
Providing digital reference services: a Namibian case study
Wilhelm Uutoni,
Article information:
To cite this document:
Wilhelm Uutoni, (2018) "Providing digital reference services: a Namibian case study", Information and
Learning Science, https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-11-2017-0122
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-11-2017-0122
Downloaded on: 19 June 2018, At: 08:28 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 27 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 21 times since 2018*
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-
srm:277515 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald
for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission
guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company
manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as
well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and
services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the
Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for
digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Providing digital reference
services: a Namibian case study
Wilhelm Uutoni
Department of Information and Communication Studies, University of Namibia,
Windhoek, Namibia
Abstract
Purpose –The purpose of this study was to evaluate digital reference services at the Namibia University of
Science and Technology (NUST) and the University of Namibia (UNAM) library. Two aspects were evaluated,namely, “resources ”and “elements of the general digital reference model ”.
Design/methodology/approach –This study adopted a descriptive case study approach and used
qualitative research methods, which comprised interviews and an observation checklist. The populationconsisted of librarians working at NUST and UNAM Library.
Findings –The research ﬁndings showed that these libraries used the general digital reference model in
providing responses to the library users. The study established that the two libraries did not follow the
International Federation of Library Associations and Reference and User Services Association standards of
stafﬁng and training of librarians working with digital reference services. The study further found that a lack
of ability to fully demonstrate to users how to access various library services was one of the major problemsthat the librarians experienced.
Research limitations/implications –The study was limited to two academic libraries: UNAM and NUST.
Originality/value –The study could contribute to a better understa nding of digital reference services provided
by NUST and the UNAM libraries and contribute to the body of knowledge on the subject of digital referenceservices, especially in an African context, where few studi es have been conducted on this subject. The two libraries
could use the ﬁndings to improve digital reference services, p lan for intervention an d develop the services.
Keywords Library services, Service evaluation, Digital reference, Digital reference services,
Reference services, Reference service evaluation
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
Digital reference services are de ﬁned as “Internet-based question-and-answer services that
connect users with individuals who possess specialised subject or skills expertise ”(Lankes
and Kasowitz, 1998 , p. 8). These services are also known as Ask a librarian services and use
human intermediaries or a librarian to clarify information needed by a library user, as wellas provide answers to the users ( Wasik, 1999 ).
Digital reference services are fast becoming part of today ’s core library services,
especially academic libraries. These services were necessitated mainly by two factors:
(1) library users using the internet for their information needs; and
(2) the growing sense among librarians that they need to reach out to their users and
bring them back to the library ( Francoeur, 2001 ; Coffman and Mcglamery as cited
inKasowitz, 2001 ).
These factors resulted in the introduction of “remote communication ”between librarians
and library users, which mainly used electronic mail (e-mail) as a mode of communication(Kasowitz, 2001 ).Digital
reference
services
Received 29 November 2017
Revised 17 January 2018
8 March 2018
Accepted 13 March 2018
Information and Learning Science
© Emerald Publishing Limited
2398-5348
DOI 10.1108/ILS-11-2017-0122The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/2398-5348.htm
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
However, digital reference services need to be evaluated regularly. Evaluation is an
important tool of giving feedback to libraries. Such feedback helps improve service to users,
improve the process of delivering services and justify the bene ﬁts of the service to
decisionmakers ( Lankes and Kasowitz, 1998 ).Kuruppu (2007) explains that the evaluation of
digital reference services needs to be an on-going process and an integral part of the serviceto understand how the service is used. Maharana and Panda (2005) note that if a digital
reference service is to evolve successfully, librarians need to engage in ongoing evaluation ofthese services. Evaluation is vital for the planning and development of the services, as theevaluation results give feedback on the status of the services. Also, should there be problemsin the delivery of services, the results from the evaluation can be used to intervene or as a
means for planning and improving the service. Digital reference services also need to be
evaluated to learn about their performance, trends, features, etc. ( Pinto and Manso, 2012 ).
Whitlatch (2001) proposes that before evaluating reference services, libraries need to
determine why reference services should be evaluated and what the library plans to do with
the study outcome. Libraries can base their reference evaluation on the following:
/C15Economics : It is the cost or productivity of services.
/C15The process : It is the aspects of librarian/reference system and user interaction.
/C15Resources : These are books, indexes, databases, staf ﬁng levels, equipment and
design of physical or electronic environment.
/C15Product/outcomes : It is information or knowledge that the users obtain ( Whitlatch,
2001, p. 20).
At the time of the study, the University of Namibia (UNAM) library was providing the
following digital reference services: e-mail services, online library feedback forms, chat boxandBook a librarian service. The Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST)
library was providing the following digital reference services: Ask a librarian service, a blog
and frequently asked questions (FAQs) platform on the library ’s website.
UNAM and NUST libraries were chosen because they were the only libraries in Namibia
with signi ﬁcant electronic resources in the country and the only ones providing digital
reference services in the country (Management, Development and Research in theInformation Society [MDR], 2010). These libraries are “currently the main license holders for
international electronic resources in Namibia and can in future be expected to play a leadingrole in the establishment of national consortium-purchasing arrangements, bene ﬁting and
improving the resources available to students, researchers, teachers and professionals
throughout the country ”(MDR, 2010 , p. 36).
Problem statement
The International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) digital reference guidelines
(IFLA, 2008 ) stipulate that libraries introducing digital reference services should conduct
user surveys of both patrons and staff to monitor concerns, problems and questions fromstaff and patrons and should implement changes to digital reference services based onstatistical analysis and librarians ’and patrons ’feedback. The evaluation of digital reference
services should be equivalent to and be part of a library ’s regular evaluation of all its
reference services. The evaluation results should be used to improve the service, as needed,
through the adjustment of staf ﬁng, training and any other improvements indicated by the
evaluation results (Reference and User Services Association [RUSA], 2004).
IFLA (2008) andRUSA (2004) have developed internationally accepted standards for
creating and maintaining digital reference services. IFLA and RUSA guidelines forILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
implementing and maintaining digital reference services have several sections. One of the
sections in each (IFLA and RUSA) guideline deals with the aspect of staf ﬁng and training.
Among others, it stipulates that “initial and on-going training should be offered to help
staff learn and retain these effective online behaviors ”; management should “determine
which staff member(s) will be responsible for making sure that reference standards aremaintained ”; and “staff should be provided time and resources for training and continuing
education to ensure effective service ”. The above-mentioned aspects were examined to
determine whether these libraries had adhered to the IFLA and RUSA guidelines.
As digital reference services were introduced at the UNAM and NUST libraries, no
evaluation study had been done on these services, making it dif ﬁcult for these libraries to
know whether they had achieved what they have set out to achieve with these services; howwell these services were working; and the challenges encountered by librarians and users of
these services.
Research questions
The study was guided by the following research questions:
RQ1. To what extent does the digital reference service process followed by Namibian
academic libraries follows the general digital reference model?
RQ2. To what extent do these libraries follow the international standards of providing
resources, especially staf ﬁng and training for librarians working with digital
reference services?
RQ3. What barriers do academic libraries encounter in providing digital reference
services?
The purpose and signi ﬁcance of the study
The purpose of this study was to evaluate digital reference services at the UNAM and NUST
libraries. Two aspects were evaluated, namely, “resources ”and “elements of the general
digital reference model ”. The focus of this evaluation was the library-focused perspective,
and librarians were used as the unit of analysis.
The study evaluated the aspect of “resources ”. A resource in this study refers to
librarians ’skills and training. The study aimed at evaluating aspects of resources in terms
of librarians ’competencies (skills) to work with digital reference services and the support
(training) they got from their libraries to be able to work comfortably with such services.The researcher also wanted to ﬁnd out whether these two libraries complied with IFLA and
RUSA digital reference service guidelines for choosing a librarian to be responsible for
digital reference services and the training of these librarians.
The study also evaluated three elements of the general digital reference model. These
elements are: question acquisition, answer formulation and tracking. The researcher wanted
to determine the following: the process of providing feedback or answers to library users;the channels followed; why the librarians used or consulted these sources to provide
feedback to users; and the duration it took to give an answer. To a lesser extent, the
researcher wanted to ﬁnd out the challenges or dif ﬁculties experienced by librarians in the
process of providing answers to users of digital reference services.
Theﬁndings of this study could contribute to a better understanding of digital reference
services provided by NUST and UNAM libraries and contribute to the body of knowledgeon the subject of digital reference services, especially in an African context, where fewDigital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
studies have been conducted on this subject. The two libraries could use the ﬁndings to
improve digital reference services, plan for intervention and develop the services.
Methodology
This study adopted a descriptive case study approach and used qualitative researchmethods, which comprised interviews and an observation checklist. The study wasconducted at NUST and UNAM libraries, and the population consisted of librarians workingat the two libraries. Sampling was purposive for librarians working with digital referenceservices in the two libraries comprising reference librarians, subject librarians, IT librarians,circulation librarians and their supervisors (senior librarians). The number of participantsfrom the two institutions was 16.
Two separate interview guides were designed to assess the implementation and
maintenance of digital reference services, particularly staf ﬁng and training, in line with the
IFLA and RUSA guidelines. One interview guide was for librarians working with digital
reference services and the other for representatives of the library management (supervisors).An observation checklist was also used to observe the process by which questions fromusers were received through digital reference services, how they were assigned to experts inthe library, how answers were formulated and what sources were used by librarians toprovide answers to library users.
Literature review
Digital reference services and their types
The term “digital reference service ”is commonly used interchangeably with the term
“virtual reference services ”. The two terms are used in libraries to refer to the question and
answer services provided by libraries.
Berube (2003) points out that digital reference services generally comprise the following
elements:
/C15The user of the service : It is a library user who has a question to ask, etc.
/C15The interface : It is e-mail, Web form, chat, videoconference, etc.
/C15The information professional : It is a librarian or information agent who will ﬁnd and
provide answers to the users.
/C15Electronic resources (including CD-based resources, Web resources, local digitisedmaterial and print resources) : These are sources of information where a librarian
would get an answer.
There are two types of digital reference services, namely, asynchronous and synchronous
digital reference services.
An asynchronous digital reference service is a service characterised by communication
in one direction at a time. A library user may use a web-based e-mail, Web form or Ask a
librarian service to enquire about his or her information needs from a librarian. Librarians
use FAQs, e-mail and e-resources, which comprise subject guides, lists, journals and othercontent to provide answers to library users ( Berube, 2003 ;Dollah and Singh, 2002 ;Nicholas,
2011).
A synchronous service is described as real-time, with an immediate response to the
query. It is a two-way communication between a library user and a librarian over theInternet. The tools used for this communication are, among others, chat, instant messaging,voice-over internet protocol and web cam services ( Berube, 2003 ;Dollah and Singh, 2002 ;
Nicholas, 2011 ).ILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Conceptual framework
General digital reference model. The study used the general process model of asynchronous
digital reference services. This process is generally applicable to all different asynchronous
digital reference services such as email, Web form and Ask a librarian (Pomerantz et al. ,
2004). The general digital reference model focuses on how “Ask a ”(Ask a librarian ) services
work in a highly complex online environment. The model was developed to help
organisations in the creation and operation of digital reference services ( Lankes and
Kasowitz, 1998 ).
According to the general digital reference model, there are ﬁve fundamental components
that exist in the methods used by digital reference services:
(1) Question acquisition : This includes all issues related to the process of obtaining
information from a user. This includes not only the user ’s question but also
question categorisation and user identi ﬁcation information, via e-mail, Web forms
and chat services.
(2) Triage : The question progresses to a pool of possible responses. Questions are
queued according to some criteria such as date received. The questions are
attended to by a reference librarian or subject expert. This step may be automatedor conducted through human-decision support.
(3) Answer formulation : This includes all actions taken by the subject expert to
generate a response to a question, including sending the response to a reviewer or
directly to the user.
(4) Tracking : This includes identifying popular subjects based on topics mostly
inquired by the library users. Tracking allows librarians to identify the common or
frequent questions or issues arising from users (hot topics). Tracking can also bereferred to as FAQs.
(5) Resource creation : This involves the use of tracking data to build or expand
collections to better meet users ’information needs (
Pomerantz et al., 2004 , p. 348).
The general digital reference model has ﬁve components. However, the researcher selected
three components on which the evaluation was based. The three components were selected
because the researcher thought they are key components of the model, and because therewere no studies done before on the digital reference services, the researcher wanted todetermine how NUST and UNAM libraries are handling and dealing with library users on a
digital space. The three components of the general reference model studied are described
below.
Question acquisition. The study evaluated the process followed by the two libraries to
acquire queries, the platform they used, types of questions asked and how the questions
were prioritised. Digital reference service question acquisition, also known as reference
service transaction, is a process of communication between a library user using or askingquestions through digital reference services and a librarian, who then receives the questions,consults information sources at his disposal and then provides an answer ( Berube, 2003 ).
Answer formulation. The researcher wanted to determine the librarians responsible for
attending to queries and providing answers to the users, the time they took to give aresponse, sources they consulted and how the answers were provided.
Librarians working with digital reference services receive questions from library users,
be it through e-mail or through an Ask a librarian service. Librarians then evaluate incoming
questions and decide on an appropriate way to respond. The librarians check in the
previously asked questions in the archive for answers. If no suitable answer is found, theDigital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
question is referred to an expert for an answer. The expert then provides the required
answer, which might be an actual answer or a referral to other sources of information orboth. These answers are then sent to the user via e-mail or on the website ( Wasik, 1999 ). A
library user asks a question, and the librarian searches for the information requested by theuser, depending on the type of question. If the answer is readily available, the librarian willprovide the answer right away. However, if a question is not clear, the librarian follows up
on the user ’s question with a telephone call, fax, in person or through regular mail
interactions ( RUSA, 2004 ).
For the above process to be successful, “it must be delivered by a knowledgeable and a
well-trained staff that provides accurate, comprehensive information to customers ”(Strong,
2006, p. 337). There are a number of factors that contribute to an unsuccessful digital
reference service transaction. For instance, a librarian might be technologically pro ﬁcient,
but might supply an inaccurate answer to a user; or a librarian might have very good
software but might take a long time to respond with a “comprehensive ”answer. A
successful digital reference transaction goes beyond mastering the mechanics and technicalaspects of the software ( Kawakami and Swartz, 2003 ).
The success of digital reference service transactions is determined by the
following indicators: the quality of the answ er provided by the librarians, reference
interview and broken chat sessions. The qua lity of the answer refers to completeness,
i.e. how completely a user ’s questions are answered in a chat reference session, and
correctness, i.e. the level of accuracy of the answer provided by chat reference
librarians ( Luo, 2008 ).
Tracking. The study evaluated whether the two libraries had a tracing system that
records popular questions or FAQs, if they had a FAQs platform or an archive of previouslyasked questions, and if the archive is frequently updated. FAQs are the simplest forms ofinteracting and communicating with users in a digital environment ( Malik and Mahmood,
2013).
According to Pomerantz et al. (2004) , this model is applicable to all asynchronous
digital reference services and might use varia tions of process. For example, the process
of assigning questions to librarians might be done automatically. Experts in the librarycan be linked to the e-mail system and receive queries when they are posted on thesystem, or a person can be assigned to direct queries to individuals concerned with the
questions. The process model might even skip one or two steps in the process. For
example, when a question comes in, it might skip a triage centre and go directly to theexpert (librarian), and the process might e ven skip the question and answer (Q&A)
archive stage. Figure 1 illustrates the question/answer process of the general digital
reference model.
A conceptual framework reveals a level of convergence in the unpredictable online
environment. By identifying a set of common methods in the question/answer process, an
organisation may develop a series of planning documents to assist in the creation and on-going maintenance of digital reference services ( Lankes and Kasowitz, 1998 ).
International Federation of Library Associations and Reference and User Services
Association guidelines used to evaluate digital reference services
IFLA and RUSA, in their pursuit to promote digital reference services best practices on an
international level, set guidelines to regulate digital reference services. In this study, IFLAand RUSA guidelines were used as theoretical framework because these guidelines serve asstandards that need to be followed by libraries providing digital reference services to ensurethe uniformity of digital reference services provided by libraries worldwide. TheseILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
guidelines were used in this study to determine whether NUST and UNAM libraries have
followed them in implementing and maintaining digital reference services, especiallyregarding staf ﬁng and training.
The IFLA and RUSA guidelines, in relation to librarians working with digital reference
services, stipulate that the following:
/C15Digital reference service responsibilities should be shared among staff to ensurecontinuity of service.
/C15Where possible, staff should be trained for all reference services (face-to-face anddigital) to provide greater depth of knowledge and ﬂexibility for staf ﬁng.
/C15Library staff providing digital reference services should be selected on the basis of
ability, interest, availability and skills to use the supporting technology.
/C15Staff should be provided time and resources for training and continuing educationto ensure effective service (
RUSA, 2004 ).
/C15Key skills a digital reference librarian should have include multi-tasking, clear
communication skills, especially in writing, database and online searching skills,interviewing skills to compensate for lack of visual and auditory cues andknowledge of references sources.
/C15Update training is necessary and encourages and enables staff members to meetregularly to discuss their experiences and new developments in the ﬁeld of digital
reference services (
IFLA, 2008 ).
IFLA and RUSA guidelines suggest that digital reference service evaluation should be
equivalent and part of a library ’s regular evaluation of all its reference services. Libraries
should conduct user surveys of patrons and staff and monitor concerns, problems andquestions from staff and patrons. This evaluation should be used to improve the service asneeded through adjustment of staf ﬁng, levels of staf ﬁng, service parameters, training or
other improvements as indicated by the evaluation results. It is against this background that
this study was conducted.Figure 1.
General digital
reference model
Digital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Staﬃng of libraries providing digital reference services
Stafﬁng for digital reference services should be considered right from the time a library
starts planning for such services ( Francoeur, 2001 ). This is crucial to the library because the
introduction of new services such as digital reference services requires additional staff. Newstaff members could be employed for the digital reference services or existing library staffmembers could be asked to take on the additional responsibility.
Librarians working with digital reference services need to be selected based on the
following criteria: librarians ’interest to work with digital reference services; their
availability; their enthusiasm towards digital reference services; good customer serviceskills; and comfort with technology and electronic resources ( Luo, 2007 ).
Nicholas (2011) notes that ﬁnding staff for digital reference services is a challenge. Many
librarians already working in libraries resist working with digital reference services as itadds to their responsibilities. Moyo (2006) states that synchronous digital reference services
are labour-intensive, as helping a library user requires a lot of time.
Training of librarians working with digital reference services
According to Lankes and Kasowitz (1998) , in a digital reference setting, training refers to a
planned preparation of individuals involved in the creation, maintenance and operation of aparticular digital reference service. This training is important because digital referenceservices are associated with innovative use of technology that calls for speci ﬁc skills.
Lankes and Kasowitz further stress that a library should develop and integrate a training
programme for its staff working with digital reference services at the time ofimplementation and throughout the period of offering the services.
Ronan (as cited in Luo, 2009 ) identi ﬁes the following training needs for librarians
working with digital reference service: software training, training on chat referencetransactions, mentoring and on-going training. These are explained below:
/C15Software training : This refers to the training of librarians to understand the features
and functions of the software used to support digital reference services before theytake on the job.
/C15Training on chat reference transactions : Because digital reference services are
conducted in a digital environment, librarians are required to have skills andknowledge that will enable them to work in such an environment. Therefore,librarians working with digital reference services need training on onlinecommunication skills, reference interview skills, Web searching skills, knowledge ofelectronic resources and knowledge of digital reference policies and procedures.
/C15Mentoring : Mentoring is concerned with guiding and giving personal assistance to
librarians who do not have enough experience and exposure to digital referenceservices by more experienced librarians. Mentoring helps to reduce their fear oflearning new technologies.
/C15On-going training : Librarians working with digital reference services need on-going
training or refresher sessions on a regular basis so that they can stay abreast withthe updates on digital reference services. These refresher sessions will also helplibrarians to increase their level of comfort working with digital reference services.Librarians responsible for responding to questions via digital reference servicesshould be given enough training on how to use such services to be competent andwork comfortably at the digital reference desk (
Nicholas, 2011 ). This training should
include responding to e-mails, conducting reference interviews and other relatedtasks.ILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Only through up-to-date training can librarians expand their knowledge and re ﬁne their
skills in response to the changes brought by social and technological development ( Luo,
2009).Lankes and Kosowitz (1998) reinforce that although librarians assigned to work with
digital reference services are competent in physical (face-to-face) reference services, they
should be trained on providing digital reference services to raise their competency, skillsand comfort levels in working with such services.
Campbell, Jones and Shuttle (2002) recommend that training for librarians who work
with digital reference services should be timely and ongoing. They emphasise that “training
and support at the actual implementation time is also important, so that no one feelsstranded and panicking the moment they receive their ﬁrst reference question ”(2002, p. 308).
All staff providing digital reference services should receive similar training if they are
expected to provide similar quality service ( Kawakami and Swartz, 2003 ). This is to ensure
consistency in the provision of digital reference services to users and also to allow the staff
members to learn at the same pace.
Competency of librarians dealing with digital reference services
IFLA guidelines ( IFLA, 2008 ) stipulate that the key skills a digital reference librarian should
have include multi-tasking; clear communication skills, especially writing skills; database
and online searching skills; interviewing skills (to compensate for lack of visual and
auditory cues); and knowledge of reference resources.
The IFLA guidelines agree with the ﬁndings of Luo (2008) , which identi ﬁed the following
digital reference service (chat reference) competencies:
/C15Reference interview skills : This competency includes referring users to appropriate
resources; using open probes to clarify questions; recognising when follow-ups arenecessary; offering a personal greeting at the beginning of a chat session to provide
clear interest and willingness to help; and con ﬁrming the satisfaction of users ’
information needs.
/C15Familiarity with electronic resources : This competency includes librarians ’skills in
selecting and searching databases and internet resources; familiarity with
subscribed library databases; a wide-ranging knowledge of Internet resources; and
rapid evaluation of the quality of information resources and services.
/C15Online communication skills : This competency includes mastery of online real-time
written communication skills and understanding and appreciation of the online
culture and chat etiquette.
/C15Instructional role : This competency includes the ability to take the instructional role
to educate users to augment their level of information literacy and the ability toprovide peer instructions to colleagues in obtaining chat reference skills.
/C15Ability to recognise different groups of users : This competency includes the
librarian ’s ability to understand different users and answer their questions using
different techniques.
/C15Ability to handle irregularities of user behaviour : This competency includes a
librarian ’s ability to deal with any kind of inappropriate use of digital reference
services, such as abusive excessive demand from users and rudeness of users
(pp. 308-309).
Rodwell (2001) notes that with changes in the reference services and digital environment,
librarians are required to advance technological skills that are required by current practices.Digital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Rodwell further states that sound and up-to-date subject expertise, in the broad sense,
allows a librarian to be a “dynamo ”in the information gathering process.
Challenges experienced by libraries in providing digital reference services
The reviewed literature revealed that creating and maintaining digital reference services
comes with a number of challenges. Many libraries have struggled to maintain consistent
quality of service for their user population or to serve and respond to piles of questions on
time ( Wasik, 1999 ). Another challenge of asynchronous digital reference services, especially
e-mail, is that library users do not often get prompt responses from librarians. A challenge
from the librarians ’side is that they do not have a chance to conduct reference interviews,
which are crucial in determining the library users ’needs, as library users sometimes ask
incomplete questions ( Kasowitz, 2001 ).
Moreover, reference interviews conducted via e-mail and Web forms do not occur in real
time. Also, they are either limited or non-existent because answers to these questions will
take longer than answers to questions posed in person, by telephone, in chat rooms or overvideoconferencing. Answers to a simple question sent over e-mail or the Web may take up to
24 h to be seen by the library user. If a request is complicated or unclear, it could take even
longer ( Nicholas, 2011 ;Smith, 2001 ).
Another challenge explained by Smith (2001) is that librarians can easily misinterpret
reference requests sent over e-mail or the Web, because they will not have the bene ﬁto f
clues such as the requestor ’s gestures, facial expressions and tone of voice. Although this
can be minimised in cases where the library has “chat ”services or other real-time services,
these services are only available when a reference librarian is on duty. Remote researchers
would, therefore, not be able to send reference requests 24 h a day as they could with e-mail
or Web form reference services.
Presentation and discussion of ﬁndings
This section is divided into the following sub-headings based on the thematic areas of the
interview guides and observation checklist drawn from the research questions.
The process of providing feedback to library users using digital reference service (general
digital reference model)
One of the research questions for this study was, “Does the digital reference services process
used by Namibian academic libraries follow the general digital reference model ?”
Establishing the channels and processes of providing feedback to library users was one wayof answering this research question.
Theﬁndings in this section will be discussed according to three components of the
general digital reference model used in digital reference services. The components are
question acquisition, answer formulation and tracking. These are explained below.
Question acquisition refers to the process of obtaining information from a user. It
includes question categorisation and user identi ﬁcation information through e-mail or Web
forms ( Pomerantz et al. ,2 0 0 4 ). The study found that queries from library users were
acquired through e-mail-based services.
At NUST library, the e-mails were very speci ﬁc as to which subject librarians should
attend to a question asked by the library user because the users had to indicate the facultythey were studying or working in. At UNAM library, the e-mails were sent directly to the
subject librarians, and the speci ﬁc e-mails for librarians were provided on the library
website. The e-mails also came through forwarded e-mails from fellow librarians in other
departments. The study also established that the two libraries entertained all sorts ofILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
reference questions, namely, directional reference, ready reference and in-depth/research
reference.
Answer formulation refers to all actions taken by the subject expert to generate a
response to a question, including sending the response to a reviewer or directly to the user(Pomerantz et al.,2 0 0 4 ). The study found that at the two libraries, librarians were the ones
that sent answers directly to the users and the answers were not veri ﬁed. The process of
providing answers was not monitored by the librarians ’supervisors to determine whether
users were getting suf ﬁcient or satisfactory answers. The lack of supervision at these two
libraries could be a result of lack of digital reference policies and guidelines for the provisionof such services.
The study found that librarians working with digital reference services in the two
libraries preferred consulting electronic resources over print resources to respond and
provide feedback to library users. Reasons given were that electronic resources were faster,time-saving and more convenient for the librarians and library users who did not have time
to come to the library physically.
Tracking refers to identifying popular subjects or common questions. Tracking allows a
library to compile FAQs ( Pomerantz et al.,2 0 0 4 ). The research found that NUST library had
a FAQs platform, although it was not frequently updated, while UNAM library did not have
a FAQs platform, as it was still under consideration. Even though these libraries were aware
of the FAQs, they did not have a tracking system for identifying popular topics and creatingstatistics automatically. The only systems that were in place were the meetings and the
writing of quarterly reports by subject librarians.
The study established that both NUST and UNAM libraries did not have software
applications to manage questions received electronically, which made it dif ﬁcult to
determine the types of questions asked by library users. This ﬁnding agrees with White
(2001), who maintains that not all digital reference services keep and maintain archives of
FAQs and that only some of those services that keep them are publicly available. Librarians
at NUST and UNAM library did not keep records of questions asked through Ask a librarian
and their e-mails. They only kept statistics of the number of people who used the service.The study established that in the absence of a tracking system, some librarians created and
kept document folders for their clients with queries, articles and the answers they gave
them. This was a good initiative, as they could refer to these folders for future queries from
the same users or users looking for similar materials or information.
The study found that the major weakness of the two libraries was that they neither had a
policy nor guidelines for standard responses to users ’questions. This resulted in librarians
responding to users ’queries at their own discretion and answering any questions from users. A
policy is vital for libraries providing digital reference services, as it guides the librarians on
how to answer questions; how much time to spend on a question; how to handle questions thatcannot be answered online; etc. ( Coffman, 2003 ). This policy should also contain the sequence of
how often it should be revised, describe procedures and designate responsibilities for revising.
The policy should also provide for compliance w ith copyright and other legal restriction to
information resources to be provided to users ( IFLA, 2008 ).
Theﬁndings of this study are similar to the ﬁndings of Malik and Mahmood (2013) on
libraries in Pakistan. Malik and Mahmood found that the majority of libraries (74 per cent)
in Pakistan did not have digital reference policies.
Training and competencies of librarians working with digital reference services
The study sought to establish how NUST and UNAM libraries prepared librarians to work
with digital reference services as a way of determining their skills, competencies and on-Digital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
the-job training. The study found that the two libraries provided training on e-resources and
databases to librarians working with digital reference services, but no training on other
aspects of digital reference services, e.g. online customer services and online interview skills,and no training plan. This could be attributed to the fact that the two libraries were notevaluating digital reference services to determine what the librarians were experiencing and
to check for any shortfalls in the process of providing the services. It can be argued that the
training provided by NUST and UNAM libraries is not adequate to make librarians workingwith digital reference services competent to work with library users online.
Librarians working with digital reference services need training on reference interview
skills, chat techniques, providing logical solutions to library users, maintenance of digital
reference services and FAQs. Librarians need regular, similar training and refresher courses
if they are expected to provide similar quality services comfortably and with con ﬁdence in
an online environment. Different training mechanisms need to be used for training theselibrarians to accommodate different learning styles ( Coffman, 2003 ;Kawakami and Swartz,
2003).
Barriers in providing digital reference services
The researcher wanted to ﬁnd out the constraints experienced by the librarians in the
provision of digital reference services. The question “What do you consider as the main
challenge in providing digital reference services ”? was asked. The study established that the
two libraries faced numerous challenges in providing digital reference services. The
following were the main challenges: giving users step-by-step instructions on accessing
library services, such as downloading of articles; slow internet connection; and insuf ﬁcient
support for some of the librarians in doing their work. The study also found that althoughinternet was available, bandwidth was very low in remote areas, where most of the distance
students were. Another challenge was that sometimes, the server was down, as a result,
librarians spent a lot of time helping students remotely. These ﬁndings con ﬁrm conclusions
reached by Nicholas (2011) andSmith (2001) that with e-mail services, it sometimes takes up
to 24 h or longer before a library user can get a response to their question. This could be
because questions are not clear, internet connectivity was low or a document that thelibrarian was sending to the library user exceeded the maximum size allowed.
The study also agrees with the ﬁndings of Francoeur (2001) that the hardest kind of
question to answer is the one that requires a considerable amount of topic development andusers ’instruction, especially for a user doing research, e.g. guiding a user to search in a
particular database can be labour intensive.
How digital reference services can be improved
In view of the challenges these librarians were experiencing, the respondents were asked togive their views and indicate how digital reference could be improved at their libraries.
At NUST, one subject librarian stated that it would be helpful to introduce a Facebook
page for the library and introduce tools such as Skype and chat services. Other librariansindicated that there were no proper records of general questions or questions from the Ask a
librarian service, as they were mixed up with other e-mails. Librarians thus needed a
separate e-mail service, separate from their normal work e-mails. Some librarians indicatedthat they needed training, especially on how to work with people in the digital space and onhow to manage information sources, and on best practices from other libraries. The
librarians also indicated that the FAQs platform should be updated regularly.
At UNAM library, librarians expressed that the library needed to promote digital
reference services and prepare the user community so that they are ready to embrace digitalILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
reference services. The librarians further suggested that digital reference services need to, or
must, be attached to someone ’s job description. Librarians also indicated that they want
online tutorials, chat services and an Ask a librarian service.
In view of challenges faced at UNAM library, librarians needed the digital reference
services to be marketed; library users to be trained on how to use digital reference services;the library to introduce interactive services; and the library to develop tutorials or step-by-
step guide for the librarians to demonstrate and guide library users on how to search
electronic resources in the library with ease (subject librarian).
Future plans for digital reference services
The researcher wanted to know the future plans for digital reference services in these
libraries. A question, “What are your future plans for digital reference service? ”was asked,
and below are the responses from the senior librarians. At NUST, the response was, “Not at
this stage, but if we identify a need for such a service, we will de ﬁnitely look into it ”. This
means that NUST was not planning to implement or introduce new asynchronous orsynchronous digital reference services at the time of the study, but if the library identi ﬁed a
need for such a service, they would certainly look into the possibility of doing so.
At UNAM, a senior librarian was asked about the future plans for digital reference
services, and the response was, “We want to have two sections within the reference service
section; one librarian to attend to digital reference services and the other to attend to
telephone enquiries and other library users ”. However, the response from the ICT librarian
was, “We want to get a commercial chat service and to reach out to all our users ”.
The study also found that UNAM library was further planning to introduce an Ask a
librarian service, which should generate FAQs because the library did not want to lose the
questions that were asked through digital reference services. As part of long-term planning
for UNAM library, the reference librarian was sent for further studies to South Africa, and
she was requested to investigate digital reference services offered by Southern Africanuniversities and to implement the services at the UNAM library upon return.
Conclusions
The following are the conclusions drawn from the ﬁndings.
Digital reference service process in academic libraries in Namibia
The research ﬁndings show that NUST and UNAM followed Lankes ’(1998) general digital
reference model of the question/answer process to provide feedback to library users using
digital reference services. However, the two libraries did not follow all the components of the
model, for instance, UNAM library did not have a FAQs platform. Although NUST hadFAQs, it is not regularly updated. The two libraries also do not have a tracking system for
creating statistics on the usage of the digital reference services.
Namibian academic libraries ’adherence to international standards of providing resources
and training for librarians
Academic libraries in Namibia do not follow the IFLA and RUSA guidelines of providing
resources, especially staf ﬁng and training for librarians working with digital reference
services. The librarians working with digital reference services were not given enough
training on how to work in an online environment. Although the librarians received e-
resources training, the training was not adequate to make them competent to work withlibrary users online.Digital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Barriers encountered by academic libraries in providing digital reference services
Theﬁndings of this study show that a lack of ability to demonstrate how to use various
library services fully to users by e-mail was the main challenge the two libraries
encountered.
References
Berube, L. (2003), “Digital reference overview ”, an issue paper from the Networked Services Policy
Task Group, available at: www.ukoln.ac.uk/public/nsptg/virtual/ (accessed 24 March 2013).
Campbell, K.A., Jones, M.F. and Shuttle, J. (2002), “Chat reference ”,The Reference Librarian , Vol. 38
Nos 79/80, pp. 297-309.
Coffman, S. (2003), Going Live: Starting and Running a Virtual Reference Service , American Library
Association, Chicago.
Dollah, W.K.W. and Singh, D. (2002), “Digital reference services in academic libraries ”, available at:
www.ipl.org/div/papers/symposium-2002/systems.html (accessed 24 March 2013).
Francoeur, S. (2001), “An analytical survey of chat reference services ”,Reference Services Review ,
Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 189-203.
IFLA (2008), “IFLA digital reference guidelines ”, available at: www.i ﬂa.org/ (accessed 24 March 2013).
Kasowitz, A.S. (2001), “Trends and issues in digital reference services ”, ERIC Digest, available at: www.
eric.ed.gov (accessed 23 March 2013).
Kawakami, A. and Swartz, P. (2003), “Digital reference training and assessment for service
improvement ”,Reference Services Review , Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 227-236.
Kuruppu, P.U. (2007), “Evaluation of reference services: a review ”,The Journal of Academic
Librarianship , Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 368-381.
Lankes, R.D. and Kasowitz, A.S. (1998), The AskA, Starter Kit: How to Build and Maintain Digital
Reference Services , Cleaning House on Information and Technology, New York, NY.
Luo, L. (2007), “Chat reference competencies: identi ﬁcation from a literature review and librarians
interviews ”,Reference Service Review , Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 195-209.
Luo, L. (2008), “Toward sustaining professional development: identifying essential competencies for
chat reference service ”,Library & Information Science Research , Vol. 30, pp. 298-311.
Luo, L. (2009), “Effective training for chat reference personnel: an exploratory study ”,Library &
Information Science Research , Vol. 31, pp. 210-224.
Maharana, B. and Panda, K.C. (2005), “Virtual reference services in academic libraries: a case study of
the library of IIMs and IITs in India ”, available at: http://eprints.rclis.org/9314/1/
virtual_reference_service.pdf (accessed 18 February 2014).
Malik, A. and Mahmood, K. (2013), “Readiness for digital reference service (DRS) in university libraries:
a survey in Punjab, Pakistan ”,Library Review , Vol. 62 Nos 6/7, pp. 420-428.
MDR (2010), “Library and information services (LIS) sector strategic assessment study: Namibia,
Education and training sector improvement programme ”, Unpublished.
Moyo, L.M. (2006), “Virtual reference services and instruction ”,The Reference Librarian , Vol. 46
Nos 95/96, pp. 213-230.
Nicholas, P. (2011), “Creating a digital reference agenda for academic libraries in Jamaica: an
exploratory case study ”,Libri , Vol. 61, pp. 258-280.
Pinto, M. and Manso, R.A. (2012), “Virtual reference services: de ﬁning the criteria and indicators to
evaluate them ”,The Electronic Library , Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 51-69.
Pomerantz, J., Nicholson, S., Belanger, Y. and Lankes, R.D. (2004), “The current state of digital
reference: validation of a general digital reference model through a survey of digital referenceservices ”,Information Processing and Management , Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 347-363.ILS
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
Reference and User Services Association (RUSA) (2004), “Guidelines for implementing and maintaining
virtual reference services ”, available at: www.ala.org/rusa (accessed 21 June 2013).
Rodwell, J. (2001), “Dinosaur or dynamo? The future for the subject specialist reference librarian ”,New
Library World , Vol. 102 Nos 1/2, pp. 48-52.
Smith, B. (2001), “Enhancing reference services through technology ”,Legal Reference Services
Quarterly , Vol. 19 Nos 1/2, pp. 133-146.
Strong, G.E. (2006), “If we change it –will they come? ”,Reference Services Review , Vol. 34 No. 3,
pp. 333-339.
Wasik, J.M. (1999), “Building and maintaining digital reference services ”, ERIC Digest, available at:
http:// ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED427794.pdf (accessed 27 February 2014).
Whitlatch, J.B. (2001), “Evaluating reference services in the electronic age ”,Library Trends , Vol. 50
No. 2, pp. 207-217.
Further reading
Lankes, R.D. (2005), “Digital reference research: Fusing research and practice ”,Reference & User
Services Quarterly , Vol. 44 No. 4, pp. 320-326.
Corresponding author
Wilhelm Uutoni can be contacted at: wuutoni@unam.na
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comDigital
reference
services
Downloaded by York University At 08:28 19 June 2018 (PT)
