Search Costs and Relational Contracting: The Impact of
a Digital Phonebook on Small Business Supply Chains
Jess Rudder∗
JOB MARKET PAPER
Latest version available here.
October 16, 2020
Abstract
Information frictions can be substantial in rural markets in developing countries and
can raise the cost of searching for market information. This includes search frictions
associated with learning about goods and services oered by numerous suppliers dis-
persed along urban-to-rural supply chains. I investigate whether lowering search costs
for small rms in rural Tanzania decreases information frictions and changes incentives
to engage in relational contracting with suppliers and customers. Using a randomized
experiment of 500 small rms, I study the impact of a digital phonebook that lowers
the cost of accessing new business and customer networks. Participating rms are split
into a control and treatment group with two variations: 1) a phonebook listing that is
visible to upstream suppliers in urban areas, and 2) a phonebook listing that is visible
to downstream customers in rural areas. I nd that treated rms increase relational
contracting with their suppliers and decrease it with their customers. Yet, there is no
strong evidence that the number of new customers or suppliers increases. It suggests
that being listed in the directory caused rms to update their valuation of relational
contracts and respond by negotiating better terms with suppliers and customers.
∗PhD Candidate in Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California Davis. Email: jrudder@ucdavis.edu. I
thank Brian Dillon, Travis Lybbert, Arman Rezaee, and Rachael Goodhue for providing guidance and advising throughout this
project. Galen Weld and Richard Anderson at the University of Washington provided computer programming support and were
critical to making this research possible. I thank the leadership at the Institute for Rural Development Planning (IRDP) in
Tanzania for their collaboration, especially Emmanuel Mwang'onda and Stanslaus Msuya. Editha Kokushubira, Adili Michael,
Eden Luvinga, Neema Mkuna, and Felix Mbakile provided excellent research assistance. The project was supported by the
Cornell Institute for Social Science at Cornell University and a Jastro Shields grant from the University of California Davis.
This study was pre-registered at the AEA Social Science Registry (ID:AEARCTR-0004430) and has IRB approval in the US
through UC Davis and Cornell University and in Tanzania through IRDP.
1Contents
1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Background: Urban-to-Rural Trade in Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.1 Importance of Information Frictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2 Relational Contracting Norms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3 Retail and Service Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3 Predictions: Search Costs with Relational Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1 Upstream and Downstream Relational Contracting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2 Urban-to-Rural Trade with Heterogeneous Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4 Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1 Description of Intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.1.1 Search and Visibility by Treatment Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.1.2 Random Order of Listed Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.3 Experimental Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.4 Pre-Analysis Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2 Sampling Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2.1 Stratied Treatment Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2.2 Upstream Supplier and Downstream Customer Phone Numbers . . . 23
4.3 Sample Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3.1 Rural Firm Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.2 Balance Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5 Empirical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.1 Discrete Choice Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2 Treatment Eects Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3 Outcome Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4 Empirical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
26.1 Willingness to Pay for Relational Contracting Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2 Upstream, Downstream, and Productivity Treatment Eects . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2.1 Relational Contracting Index Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.3 Heterogeneity by Firm Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.4 Spillovers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7 Anticipating General Equilibrium Eects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Additional Tables and Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A Index Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
B Platform Engagement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
C Robustness Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
C.1 Attrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
C.2 Randomization Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C.3 Inverse Covariance Weighted Index Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
D Discrete Choice Experiment Detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
D.1 Baseline Relational Contracting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
31 Introduction
High search costs along rms' supply chains raise barriers to acquiring new information about
prices, quality, and availability of goods. These information frictions can constrain produc-
tivity for small rms in rural areas of developing countries in both their input and output
markets and prevent them from growing (Jensen and Miller, 2018). Small rms incur search
costs when they source inputs from upstream suppliers located in urban centers. At the
same time, downstream customers of rural rms in their output markets engage in search to
locate goods and services from rural rms. Information frictions can substantially contribute
to transaction costs (Allen, 2014; Startz, 2018; Aggarwal et al., 2018), and lowering search
costs along a supply chain can improve rm productivity (Bernard et al., 2019) and increase
aggregate output (Obereld, 2018).
The presence of search costs can increase the value of relational contracting - where buyers
leverage repeat transactions with sellers to access benets that are not readily provided with
one-o purchases in the spot market - such as when sellers provide credit, price discounts,
and arrange ordering and shipping of goods for buyers (Fafchamps, 2006). If it were costless
to locate new sellers, buyers would have less incentive to repay deferred payments. Likewise,
if it were costless to locate new buyers and if the pool of potential buyers was suciently
large, sellers would have less incentive to sustain relational contracts with their customers.
In practice, it is common for sellers to build-in incentives to ensure that trade relationships
are sustained in agricultural and other settings with informal contracting (Sexton, 2013;
Casaburi and Reed, 2019). Relational contracting helps resolve market failures that persist
in developing country contexts - such as in the provision of credit.
In this paper, I ask if lowering search costs in input and output markets improves rm
productivity and changes incentives to engage in relational contracting with suppliers and
customers. Using a randomized experiment of 500 rural rms, I study the impact of a digital
phonebook connecting mobile phone users to a platform that lists rm contact information
from a variety of sectors in urban and rural areas in central Tanzania. The experiment
generates two sources of exogenous variation. First, rural rms are randomly listed in a
digital phonebook that is searchable by mobile-phone users throughout Tanzania. Second,
4listed rms are split into two treatment groups - 1) a phonebook listing that is visible to
upstream suppliers in urban areas, and 2) a phonebook listing that is visible to downstream
customers in rural areas. The design allows for analysis comparing the extent to which
input or output search costs constrain business performance and whether lowering the cost
of initial contact improves rm productivity.
I dene relational contracting to include benets that rms provide to their customers and
receive from their suppliers that are not readily provided through anonymous transactions
in a spot market. Spot market purchases involve anonymous buyers and sellers that do
not build trust over time. To show that rural rms prefer relational contracts with their
suppliers, I present results from a discrete choice experiment demonstrating that rms value
their suppliers, credit, and delivery, and are willing to pay higher input prices to access these
benets with known suppliers. Firms engage in relational contracting with their suppliers
by receiving credit on input purchases, arranging shipping of inputs, and receiving price
discounts. For their customers, rms provide credit on goods or services purchased, arrange
sourcing of goods, and give price discounts to frequent customers. I document substantial
use of relational contracting and show descriptive evidence that rural rms provide benets
of relational contracting to their customers more often than they receive them from their
suppliers.
Using an index of relational contracting activity, I nd that being listed in the phone
directory causes rms in the upstream treatment group to increase relational contracting
with their suppliers by 0.10 standard deviations compared to the control group. And they
are 75% more likely to receive credit from their suppliers. Firms in both treatment arms
also decrease their search activities and have fewer new suppliers compared to the control
group. With respect to downstream relational contracting with customers, both treatment
arms decrease provision of relational contracting benets by about 0.11 standard deviations
compared to the control group. However, there is no strong evidence that the quantity of
new customers increases compared to the control group. Empirical results do not provide
evidence that sales revenue increased for treated rms. But, the upstream treatment arm
increased output prices and downstream arm was also more likely to purchase inputs locally
(instead of travelling to cities) and paid lower transport costs.
5These ndings are motivated by theoretical predictions about how search costs change
the information structure around how rms search and rely on relational contracting. Specif-
ically, a change in search costs presents the possibility of an asymmetric response by rms
with respect to upstream and downstream relational contracting. Since it becomes less costly
to locate new suppliers, rms can leverage the credible threat of divesting from relationships
with existing suppliers to gain new benets since it becomes less costly to meet new suppli-
ers. But, the value of existing relationships remains high because rms have already formed
relationships and have a history of transactions. Therefore, rms can arrange better benets
from their existing suppliers. On the downstream side, if the rms have higher contact with
new customers (or if they anticipate having more contact with customers), they will reduce
their relational contracting benets. This occurs if rms assess the cost of maintaining re-
lational contracts with customers as too high and are willing to reduce it once it is easier to
connect with new customers.
A nal prediction examines rm heterogeneity - specically whether a rm is in the retail
or services sector. An important aspect of search costs for rural rms that source inputs from
urban areas is the cost of transportation that are paid each time a rm sources inputs. I rst
show descriptively that retail rms source larger orders of inputs and have lower per-unit
transportation costs. The cost of maintaining supplier relationships in cities is less costly for
retail rms than for services rms, since input prices are lower in urban areas and transport
costs can be spread over larger order sizes. Empirical results show that the treatments cause
retail rms to engage in substantially more search activities, pay lower input prices, pay
higher transport costs, and purchase inputs in urban areas compared to service rms. It
supports the idea that rms' per-unit transaction costs drive much of their input search
behavior and determines, in part, the extent to which it is worthwhile it to search for inputs
in urban areas, or if it is more worthwhile to pay higher input prices by searching locally.
Policymakers and researchers have shown interest in investing in programs and policies
that improve productivity for small rms and enable them to grow. Many small rms face
barriers to expansion from both input and output sides of their supply chains. For inputs,
incomplete markets for nance, labor, energy, and supplies create frictions that prevent
enterprises from reliably meeting local demand for goods and services. For outputs, small
6rms in rural areas may have few avenues for reaching new customers or accessing new
markets (an exception is Anderson et al. (2018)). Prior research has examined the role of
in relaxing input-related constraints to rm growth - such as access to capital and credit
(De Mel et al., 2008), management and business training (Bloom et al., 2013; McKenzie
and Woodru, 2014; Anderson et al., 2018), and has begun unpacking the role of networks
to disseminate knowledge and improve business practices (Fafchamps and Quinn, 2016; Cai
and Szeidl, 2018; Hardy and McCasland, 2018). Prior research has studied programs that
relax input market constraints or output market constraints, but no study has been able to
experimentally relax both in a single setting. This research addresses this gap by exploring
how search frictions in input and output markets constrain rural rms' trading relationships
in Tanzania.
Much of the empirical evidence on relational contracting comes from international trade
settings (Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015; Startz, 2018), manufacturing (Mcmillan and
Woodru, 1999; Fafchamps and Quinn, 2016) or focuses on agricultural supply chains
(Fafchamps and Minten, 2002; Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2020; Casaburi and Reed, 2019)
where buyers and sellers only transact during harvest season. In contrast, this setting en-
compasses rural and urban areas in Tanzania to consider how upstream and downstream
relational contracts are formed and sustained. Firms enrolled in this study are small or
microenterprises with few employees - only 15% of rms have any paid employee - based in
medium-sized rural towns in central Tanzania. Most rms source relatively homogeneous
inputs from urban areas and re-sell them or process them into an value-added service in
their rural communities. This includes basic food staples such as rice, beans, vegetables, and
sugar, as well as household items like soap, and inputs for service providers such as thread,
needles, bike tires, and cement. Despite having relatively competitive market conditions, I
document substantial use of relational contracting by rural rms with upstream and down-
stream trading partners. I examine both input and output market constraints at the same
time and compare how relational contracting norms respond to changes in search costs.
Other research oers examples of how rm welfare improves when new business contacts
are introduced. Fafchamps and Quinn (2016) randomly link manufacturing rms in Kenya
and nd that new business practices diuse rapidly across new links. Cai and Szeidl (2018)
7nd that rm productivity increases when managers in small and medium Chinese rms are
randomly assigned to participate in business networking groups with managers from other
rms. Brooks et al. (2018) study microenterprise mentors and showed that an important
mechanisms through which mentors inuenced mentee outcomes was by introducing them
to higher quality input suppliers.
A key dierence in this setting is that contacts generated by this intervention intend to
introduce buyers and sellers, rather than promote general dissemination of business knowl-
edge or practices through exposure to knowledgeable peers. In that sense, it is closer to the
work by Macchiavello and Morjaria and Ghani and Reed, who examine how changes in cost
structure cause relational contracting to change. Another dierence is this research targets
rms from a range of sectors with attention on urban-to-rural supply chains. Most rms in
this study are small or microenterprises, selling relatively homogeneous household commodi-
ties or providing common services. For these types of rms with modestly sized and irregular
orders, we still know little about how the number and quality of business relationships aect
operations.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, I provide background on informa-
tion frictions and relational contracting in this setting. In Section 3, I use the background to
motivate theoretical predictions that can be tested in data to understand how search costs
change relational contracting. Section 4 describes the experimental design and sampling
frame. Section 5 provides details on the empirical strategy. I describe how willingness-to-
pay for relational contracting was elicited through a discrete choice experiment and details
on how treatment eects are measured. Section 6 describes results from the discrete choice
experiment and eld experiment. Results from the eld experiment highlight changes in 3
groups of outcomes: upstream outcomes, downstream outcomes, and productivity. I also
provide results for the primary heterogeneous treatment eect of interest: dierences be-
tween retail and service rms. Section 7 provides a discussion of results. Finally, in Section
8 I conclude by discussing the implications for rm productivity when a new technology
facilitates a disruption to pre-existing marketing norms.
82 Background: Urban-to-Rural Trade in Tanzania
2.1 Importance of Information Frictions
A rm's ability to mobilize resources and make adjustments that respond to changes in the
market environment are important elements of its decision set. This includes the ability
to choose among dierent goods and services oered by suppliers. Under excessive market
fragmentation, which is more likely to occur in disconnected rural markets than in urban
areas, excessive search costs limit rms' ability to engage in business transactions outside of
their local market network. Jensen and Miller (2018) showed that mobile phone proliferation
in southern India initially increased market integration in the sh market and subsequently
lowered the cost of acquiring new information in complementary markets (boat-building)
across geographically dispersed areas. It ultimately enabled high-productivity builders to
grow and gain market share.
Search costs are a type of information friction that contribute to total transaction costs.
In addition to physical travel costs, North's canonical 1991 paper described transaction costs
as including search, bargaining, time, and contract enforcement costs associated with making
market transactions, and well as social norms and institutional constraints. As mobile phone
networks proliferated throughout the 2000s, the cost of communication decreased and lowered
price dispersion in agricultural markets (Jensen (2007); Aker (2010)). Yet, despite gains
from cheaper communication, search and information frictions persist. In a recent paper,
Startz (2018) estimates that information costs, including those required to search for and
maintain supplier relationships, explain a substantial portion of overall transaction costs in
Nigerian wholesaler supply chains. Similarly, Allen (2014) estimates that nearly half of price
dispersion is explained by information frictions in agricultural markets in the Philippines.
In the information frictions literature, it is common to point out that trade declines
faster with distance than is explained by transportation costs alone. If this holds in the
Tanzanian context, it implies that information frictions lower the total volume of trade in
rural areas when substantial information costs are combined with remoteness and high travel
costs. Aggarwal et al. (2018), in North-Central Tanzania, estimated that non-pecuniary
costs of travel (including information frictions, opportunity costs, and concern of stock-outs)
9accounted for 57% of total travel costs.
In aggregate, information frictions and high search costs can lower productivity by in-
creasing the likelihood of stock-outs, increasing transaction costs, and lowering rms' ability
to adapt to changes in demand. For rural consumers that purchase from rural rms, wel-
fare losses depend on whether there are many close substitutes in the market. In settings
where consumers regularly purchase food staples from local markets, this can reduce food
security through higher-than-necessary price variation, regular stock-outs in local rms, and
high transportation costs to obtain preferred goods or services. Given that nearly half of
rural household food budgets are spent in local markets, rural rms' supply chains are worth
studying in detail to understand how local market institutions contribute to regional food
security (Reardon et al., 2019). This research contributes to this literature by clarifying how
input and output market business relationships contribute to small rms transaction costs
and productivity.
2.2 Relational Contracting Norms
Once trading partners establish mutual trust, informal relational contracts are sustained by
the value of future relationships (Baker et al., 2002). Relational contracting occurs both
in markets where third parties have the capacity to enforce contracts and in settings where
contract enforcement is weak. The key dierence is that in settings with more contract
enforcement, some part of the contract is binding and enforceable while additional benets
are contingent and result from a dynamic process where buyers and sellers transact over time
to learn about each other (Michler and Wu, 2020; Sexton (2013). Market transactions with
contingency benets can also arise in settings where little contract enforcement is provided
by state institutions as long as the stream of future benets is suciently high to compensate
for costs of managing the relationship.
Instead externally enforced contracts, agents employ informal mechanisms to validate
the quality of business partners or rely on repeat transactions as a commitment device to
build trust. Informal mechanisms include asking social networks to recommend new business
partners or sharing negative experiences to sanction business partners who have reneged on
contract terms. Using a survey of manufacturing rms in Vietnam, Mcmillan and Woodru
10(1999) found that downstream rms are more likely to obtain credit from their upstream
supplier if they have fewer supplier options because the supplier benets from the credible
threat of holding-up shipments if the downstream customer does not pay their debt. This
arrangement also reduces the downstream rms' bargaining power relative to their suppliers
and it was not clear how this asymmetric power aected rms ability to grow their businesses.
Similarly, Macchiavello and Morjaria (2020) found that higher competition among coee mills
in Rwanda lowers relational contracting with farmers by increasing incentives for farmers to
default and decreasing coee mills prot margins. In contrast, Ghani and Reed (2020) nd
that an increase in competition in input markets increased the provision of credit to repeat
buyers in order to retain them as customers and deter entry of new rms.
The fact that high search costs and information frictions co-exist with relational con-
tracting points to a central tension in this setting. If markets were perfectly competitive,
all agents could engage in ad-hoc search in spot markets and obtain goods with the same
price and quality attributes (Fafchamps, 2006). But, relational contracting, such as provid-
ing credit, arranging delivery, or ordering specialized goods, would not necessarily emerge
because sellers must hold inventory and defer receipt of payment, or buyers must send pay-
ments and defer receipt of goods. If there is no recourse for unpaid debts, agents are forced
to rely on cash payments at the moment of trade. To overcome these missing markets, agents
build trust with their suppliers and customers in order to bear the risk of potential losses
from allowing deferred payments.
In this context, some rms report repeat transactions with known suppliers, while others
report engaging in ad-hoc search each time that they acquire inputs. I used baseline survey
questions to characterize the typical `contract' attributes between rms and their suppliers
and customers. The subsequent sections describe these relational contracting norms.
Table 1 documents common benets at baseline of relational contracts for rural rms in
their upstream (supplier) purchases and their downstream (customer) sales. When purchas-
ing business inputs, only nine percent of rms report receiving any credit on goods purchased,
19% sent payments using mobile money, 29% reported receiving a price discount, and 17%
had goods shipped to their storefront. Most of these benets involve deferred payment and
thus require buyers to build relationships with suppliers through repeat transactions. The
11Table 1: Upstream and Downstream Relational Contracting
Mean SD
Upstream Relational Contracting
Receives Goods on Credit 0.09 0.29
Sends Mobile Money to Suppliers 0.19 0.39
Receives Price Discount 0.29 0.45
Has Preferred Suppliers 0.40 0.49
Input Acquisition Location
Purchased Locally 0.33 0.47
Shipped from City 0.17 0.37
Travelled to City 0.50 0.50
Downstream Relational Contracting
Sells Goods/Services on Credit 0.57 0.50
Receives Mobile Money from Customers 0.16 0.36
Gives Discount to Frequent Customers 0.53 0.50
Makes orders for Customers 0.23 0.42
Primary Customer Base
Subvillage 0.30 0.46
Village 0.52 0.50
Other villages/cities 0.18 0.39
All variables are categorical (0/1).
exception is mobile money payments. Although mobile money payments are instantaneous
and do not involve deferred payments, they represent a step toward formalizing a relationship
because they require rms and their suppliers to exchange phone numbers, a pre-condition
for repaying payments and arranging shipping. Not all rms rely on relational contracting
with their suppliers and customers. Overall, only 40% of rms reported having preferred
suppliers. The remaining 60% of rms may have suppliers that they recognize or are familiar
with, but do not prioritize making purchases from them and are not consistently building
the relationships required to obtain other benets.
On the downstream side it is clear that, on average, rural rms oer benets associated
with relational contracting to their customers more often than they receive them from their
12suppliers. About 57% sold goods or services on credit, 53% gave a price discount to fre-
quent customers, and 23% made special orders for their customers. Instead of asking about
preferred or regular customers, the survey asked where most customers are from. The vast
majority of rms (82%) report that most customers are from either their subvillage (similar
to a neighborhood) or other areas in their village. Using mobile money with customers is
equally infrequent as with suppliers - only 16% reported using it in the previous week.
2.3 Retail and Service Firms
As detailed above, rms report a mix of purchasing inputs locally and travelling or having
inputs shipped from another location. The experiment dierentially lowers search costs for
rural rms to learn information about urban rms in one treatment arm. Therefore, to learn
about how changes to search costs aects rms, it is worth considering which types of rms
are more likely to transact in urban areas and which are more likely to search locally.
The natural division for examining rm heterogeneity is through rm sectors. The major
sectoral demarcation is between retail rms and service rms. Retail rms are characterized
by purchasing inputs and selling them at a mark-up to local customers. The most common
retail rms are small dry-goods stores selling basic household commodities - rice, beans,
sugar, tea, soap, etc. But the sample also include pharmacies, clothing retailers, and agro-
input sellers. Service rms, on the other hand, purchase inputs and then engage in value-
added production to provide a service to their customers. The most common service rms
are tailors, bike mechanics, restaurants, and salon operators. All of these rms source inputs
(thread, needles, bike tires, nails, raw food, shampoo, razors, etc.) that contribute to the
service they provide.
Table 2 shows dierences in input acquisition by rm sector. Over half of service rms
purchased inputs locally, while only 20% of retail rms did. In contrast, 81% of retailers
and 44% of service rms acquired inputs from a city, through travel or shipping. The
average input purchase value was over four times as large for retail rms than services rms
(about 370,000TSH for retailers compared to 73,000TSH for service rms, equivalent to
approximately $30USD and $155USD). Yet, travel costs as a share of order size was twice
as much for service rms than retailers, at 10% and 5%, respectively. The gap in share
13Table 2: Baseline Input Acquisition by Firm Sector
Service Firm Retail Firm
Value of Inputs Purchased (Tsh) 73,187.11 369,618.30
Transport Costs on Inputs (Tsh) 4,140.72 12,349.11
Transport Costs Share of Inputs Purchased 0.10 0.05
Transport Costs Share, if Purchased in City 0.24 0.07
Inputs Acquisition
Purchased Locally 0.56 0.20
Shipped from City 0.09 0.25
Travelled to City 0.35 0.56
of transportation costs widens if the sample is constrained to include only those rms that
purchased from a city. For service rms, the transport costs as a share of the order size
jumps to 24%, while for retailers it only goes up to 7% of total order size.
3 Predictions: Search Costs with Relational Contracts
Thus far, I have presented information about rms participation in relational contracting
with their suppliers and customers. Table 1 showed descriptive evidence that rms provide
relational contracting benets to their customers more often than they receive them from
their suppliers. This merits exploring in detail by asking what does economic theory predict
will happen to relational contracting with suppliers and customers if search costs decrease?
3.1 Upstream and Downstream Relational Contracting
Suppliers have an incentive to oer relational contracts as long as they anticipate that the
stream of future benets from having a repeat customer is higher than the cost of maintaining
the relationship. If it is too easy for customers to switch, sellers would have less incentive
to oer relational contracts (Fafchamps, 2006). On the other hand, if search costs are so
high that there are eectively no other sellers (they are a monopoly), then they also might
not have a strong enough incentive to provide relational contracts to their customers. The
presence of relational contracts for a given regime of search costs exists in between those
two ends of the spectrum. When search costs are high and markets are imperfect, relational
14contracts can be a rational `second best.' As recipients, relational contracts allow rms to
access benets that are not provided by other markets (credit, shipping) or lower input prices
(discounts). As providers, relational contracting allows rms to build a loyal customer base.
The question becomes how do relational contracts change when search costs decrease?
First, consider the upstream case where rms arrange relational contracting with their
input suppliers. Under a regime of high search costs, rural rms have fewer incentives to
search for new suppliers because the cost of doing so could quickly exceed the benet of
meeting a new supplier, including costs to conrm availability of goods, establish trading
norms, and verify quality. When search costs decrease, the outside option becomes more
valuable since it becomes less costly for rms to locate and initiate relationships with new
suppliers.
If upstream relational contracting increases after search costs decrease, it suggests that
suppliers have bandwidth to provide relational contracts after the bargaining position of their
clients improves. In fact, in a survey of rms in urban centers conducted as a part of this
study, 40% of urban rms indicated that they provided credit to their customers and 80%
said they provided price discounts to frequent customers. Recall from Table 1 that only 10%
of rural rms received credit from their suppliers and only 40% received a price discount.
It shows that upstream suppliers in this setting provide relational contracting benets, but
rural rms were less likely to benet from them.
Prediction 1: Decreasing search costs increases the value of an outside option
for rms with respect to their suppliers. If rms initiate many new relationships,
relational contracting would decrease because it requires repeat transactions. If,
however, rms increase engagement with known suppliers, a decrease in search
costs will lead rural rms to negotiate more favorable trades and increase the
extent of relational contracting with known suppliers with whom they have a
record of repeat transactions.
Next, consider the downstream case of rural rms relational contracting with their cus-
tomers. Rural rms provide relational contracts to their customers as long as gains from a
future stream of transactions is suciently high. The intervention increases contact between
15rural rms and rural customers by listing rural rms contact information in a digital phone-
book. From the rural customers' perspective, it is now cheaper to search among potential
sellers. From rural rms perspective, they expect to interact with a pool of new potential
customers. We could expect these rural customers to demand better terms from rural rms
as observed by Ghani and Reed 2020). But from the rural rms' perspective, they are more
likely to interact with new customers and change their oer of relational contracts. This could
occur through two channels. First, if rms reach many new customers, they are less likely
to provide relational contracting benets to new customers with few transactions, bringing
down their average provision of benets. Second, even if rms customer base doesn't change,
they may still anticipate new customers and withdraw relational contracting benets from
their pre-existing customer base. If that is the case, it provides evidence that the change in
search costs increases rms bargaining power relative to their customers.
Prediction 2: Decreasing search costs increases the value of an outside option
for rms andtheir customers. If rms access a new customer base, a decrease in
search costs will lead rural rms to reduce the extent of relational contracting with
their customers. Or, if rms have to compete to retain their existing customers,
they will increase their provision of relational contracting.
3.2 Urban-to-Rural Trade with Heterogeneous Firms
Because relational contracting relies on repeat transactions, it is important to consider how
transaction costs vary with rm type. Retail rms have larger input orders than service
rms and purchase from cities more often, shown in Table 3.2. One important component of
transaction costs are transport costs - a variable cost of production that must be paid each
time a rm sources inputs. For rms with large input order sizes, it is relatively cheaper to
search over a wider geographic area because they have lower transportation costs per unit
of goods acquired.
In general, retail rms have larger orders, lower per-unit transaction costs, and are more
likely to transact in cities. Paying transport costs to reach the city is worth it for some rms
16so that they can access lower input prices that are available in cities. This insight provides
another prediction about how a networking technology that connects urban and rural rms
will inuence search behavior. Specically, retail rms are more likely to search in cities
compared to service rms because they have smaller transportation costs per unit of goods
purchased.
Prediction 3: If per unit transaction costs are high, rms will prefer to search in
their local area. If per unit transaction costs are low, rms will prefer to search
in urban areas because higher travel costs are attenuated by gains from lower
input prices.
4 Experimental Design
This research is part of an ongoing program in central Tanzania to develop and market
digital telephone directories that operate on all types of phones. eKichabi is the name
for the digital phonebook based in Central Tanzania.1The digital phonebook is accessible
through a USSD short code and is organized through a menu system similar to those used
for mobile phone top ups and and mobile money transactions commonly seen in developing
countries. The phonebook platform organizes participating rms by location and sector
and guides users through a set of menus to reach a screen that displays the rm's contact
information, location, sector and product specialities (see Dillon et al. (2018) and Weld et al.
(2018) for more details). Unlike a typical phonebook from a US setting, eKichabi only lists
rm contact information and does not list contact information for households or individuals
that do not operate rms.
4.1 Description of Intervention
The program targets 3 types of participants linked through urban-to-rural supply chains:
upstream urban suppliers, rural rms, and downstream rural consumers. The intervention
focuses on the middle link of the supply chain: rural rms. Rural rms from small to
1The word eKichabi is a portmanteau for \electronic Business Book", or Kitabu cha Biashara in Swahili.
17medium sized commercial centers were invited to list their rm in the digital phonebook
and then were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups.2The rst feature of the
intervention is that all treated rms are listed in the digital phonebook and they can search
for other rms in the same treatment group. This means that they can search for their own
business and search for other rural rms. Second, rural rms were split into two separate
treatment variations - 1) a phonebook listing that targets upstream suppliers in urban areas,
1) a phonebook listing that targets downstream consumers in rural areas.
The objective of the upstream treatment is to lower the cost of contacting new potential
suppliers in urban areas and the objective of the downstream treatment is to lower the cost
of contacting new potential customers in rural areas. Random assignment at the rm level
generates exogenous variation in the likelihood that rural rms communicate with either
upstream and downstream contacts. This variation eectively lowers the cost of making
contacts along the supply chain and can be used to identify the impact of lowering search
costs on business outcomes.
4.1.1 Search and Visibility by Treatment Group
The phonebook aects rms in two ways. First, rms listed in the phonebook are visible
to other users. Second, rms themselves can search within the platform. The phonebook
permits constraining the visibility and search of specic users by assigning phone numbers
to have viewing restrictions. Figure 1 summarizes the search and visibility constraints for
each group. Each treatment group has a `search capacity,' which describes what treated
rms can see when they search within the phonebook application. Each group also has a
`listing visibility', which describes which users can view each treatment group. The upstream
treatment group can search for rms in urban areas (the typical location of suppliers) and
for other rms in their same treatment arm. The downstream treatment group can only
search for other rms in their same treatment group and cannot search for urban rms.
Their listing, however, is visible to customers in rural areas. Customers are not listed in the
phonebook (it only lists businesses) and therefore the downstream treatment arm cannot
search for customers in the phonebook.
2For an example of the phonebook menu system, see Figure 4 at the end of the paper.
18Since both upstream and downstream treatment groups can search for other rms in their
treatment group, it is important to note that treatment eects capture search activity with
nearby rms. Therefore, treatment assignment to the upstream group can be thought of as
increasing the probability that the rm communicates with urban rms and assignment to
the downstream treatment group increases the probability of communicating with customers.
Treatment eects for the upstream group capture any additional eect that occurs due to
having access to urban rms. And, treatment eects for the downstream group capture any
additional eect due to being searchable by customers. When control rms dial into the
phonebook, they are routed to see only rms that are located outside the relevant region
and cannot search for any treated rms or urban rms.
4.1.2 Random Order of Listed Firms
The phonebook platform permits the research team to specify a listing order for rms based
on string search queries, locations, and/or sectors. We assigned pre-specied phone numbers
to view each list. Similar to searches in any online platform, we assume that search order
corresponds to higher exposure for rms at the top of the search list (Varian, 2007; Athey and
Ellison, 2011; de Corni ere, 2016). Given that higher exposure could inadvertently prioritize
some listed rms over others, the rm listing order was randomized for each new user that
accessed the platform. In expectation, no rm in either arm will appear at the top of all
searches within their assigned treatment arm, regardless of whether users search through
menus or enter search terms.
4.1.3 Experimental Compliance
This dual nature of the platform (treated rms can both search and be found) has conse-
quences for interpreting the average treatment eect (ATE). An intent-to-treat (ITT) causal
estimate is equivalent to the ATE under perfect compliance. Here, the research team man-
ages the rm listing on the application platform so that treatment compliance is guaranteed
and all rms and consumers only access the version of the platform that is assigned to them.
But, not all rms were found in searches by consumers nor did all rms choose to search
within the platform itself. The treatment assignments are designed to exogenously increase
19the probability that a rm engages with either their upstream input market or their down-
stream output market. Further, if rms changed their phone number and did not inform the
research team, they could have inadvertently been assigned dierent application visibility
and would not longer be experimentally compliant. Therefore, the treatment eect estimates
are most consistent with an ITT interpretation.
4.1.4 Pre-Analysis Plan
This experiment was registered with the American Economic Association's Social Science
Registry after completing the baseline survey in September 2019. A recent paper by Duo
et al. (2020) encourages researchers to be cautious in pre-specifying every possible outcome
in order to remain open to unanticipated knowledge generation. The primary registered
outcomes for this study includes most of the main outcomes presented here, did not include
a relational contracting index as a primary outcome. The pre-analysis plan emphasized new
relationships that rms could make as a result of treatment but did not directly anticipate the
impact on prior relationships, which is why I provide a conceptual framework and motivate
new ndings using baseline outcomes. In service of increasing transparency of how a pre-
analysis plan morphs into a paper, I report pre-registered outcomes that are not highlighted
in the main paper in an online appendix. This includes the other pre-registered heterogeneous
treatment eects - gender of rm owner, remoteness of village, and rm preferences for either
a downstream or upstream listing.
20Figure 1: Experimental Design and Treatment Descriptions
4.2 Sampling Frame
Two regions in central Tanzania were identied for the digital directory - Dodoma and
Singida. Three urban centers- Singida City, Dodoma City, and Manyoni town- bound a
trading area that encompasses the western half of Dodoma region and the southern half
of Singida region. Villages located within wards connecting these three urban hubs were
selected as the pool of sample villages. Focusing on geographically contiguous area increases
the likelihood that rms in selected communities trade with the chosen urban areas and
21ensures that the phonebook lists rms that are relevant to their local commercial area.
Within this trading area, rms from villages with a population above 3,000 people were
eligible to be drawn into the baseline sample of villages where the research team carried
out phonebook enrollment. The population criteria ensures that there is sucient density
of potential businesses to invite for enrollment. There were 54 eligible villages that t the
population criteria within the study area. Of these eligible villages, 20 villages were randomly
selected after stratifying on primary urban center, distance to urban center, and population.
This stratication scheme ensures that villages are dispersed throughout the trading area
such that there is variation in village remoteness and transportation costs. In addition,
there were 5 pilot villages that were chosen for their relative proximity to Dodoma, where
the research team was based. Although these villages were not randomly selected, enrolled
rms were added to the pool of baseline rms in order to increase sample size and improve
power for estimating eects. Firm-level random assignment followed the same procedure as
that described below for baseline rms from randomly selected villages. Figure 1 shows the
experimental design, sampling criteria, and pre-specied strata.
4.2.1 Stratied Treatment Assignment
Firms were randomly allocated to experimental arms after the baseline survey was imple-
mented. Unit-level randomization was chosen to maximize power and because rm-to-rm
spillovers are expected to be minimal. As suggested in Athey and Imbens (2017), strata
contained 6 rms (two times the number of intervention arms). Enrolled rms were grouped
into strata based on village, sector, gender, and a self-reported measure of whether the rm
places greater weight on accessing upstream contacts or downstream contacts, all of which
were pre-specied in the pre-analysis plan. The measure of rm treatment preferences is
used to ensure that rms who have a strong preference for either treatment are dispersed
across arms.3
3Strata were assigned using the optimal greedy algorithm using R package blockTools , suggested by
Moore (2012). This method is preferred in this setting because there is variation in the number and sector of
rms per village. If strata were created by partitioning rms by village, sector, and gender, there would be
too few rms per strata to optimally estimate sampling variance (Imbens and Rubin, 2015). The blockTools
package assigns rms to strata by minimizing the maximum multivariate distance of rms within strata based
on pre-selected variables.
224.2.2 Upstream Supplier and Downstream Customer Phone Numbers
Treatments intend to connect listed rural rms (the target of the intervention) that have their
contact information in the phonebook platform with platform users , dened as other rms or
consumers that dial into the phonebook platform to connect with listed rms. Figure XX at
the end of the paper shows the timing of treatments, surveys, and communcation with urban
rms and rural customers. After collecting baseline questionnaires with participating rms
in the sample communities drawn from rural areas, the research team also visited three urban
centers - Dodoma City, Singida City, and Manyoni Town. A total of 348 wholesale and retail
rms consented to list their business contact information in the phonebook platform. This
pool of rms is the `urban' rm group. Their phone contact information is only searchable
by rms in the upstream treatment arm.
The last stage of eldwork involved randomly selecting smaller communities in areas
near to rural rms and requesting a community meeting to introduce the digital phonebook.
These are communities with few local businesses and populations less than 3,000 people.
Households in these small rural communities typically have to travel to neighboring towns
to purchase goods and services. During community meetings, attendees were taught how to
use the phonebook and provided with examples of use-cases. Our research team gathered
540 phone numbers from attendees that are used as the pool of `downstream' consumers that
can search for rms in the second treatment arm.
Finally, the digital phonebook was live and accessible to any mobile phone in Tanzania.
Therefore, new, unknown phone numbers were randomly assigned to view group 1 or group
2, which could potentially add noise to nal outcomes.
4.3 Sample Characteristics
The sample area is located in the semi-arid central region of Tanzania. Table 9 in Appendix
compares characteristics from the sample regions with the national average. All three regions
are less urban than the national average, have lower rates of non-farm employment and have
lower mobile phone ownership rates. For a phone based study like this one, access to a mobile
phone is required to participate and is part of the selection criteria. However, the rst lter
23for participation is business ownership, which tends to overlap with phone ownership. No
businesses declined to participate due to a lack of access to a phone.
Figure 2: Upstream Firms, Rural Firms, and Customers Locations
Figure 2 shows the geographic distribution of upstream rms, rural rms, and down-
stream customers in Singida and Dodoma regions in central Tanzania. The size of the
bubble indicates the number of phone numbers that were gathered from each location. Up-
stream rm contact information was obtained from urban centers denoted with blue dots,
rural rms that were assigned to treatment and control are located in villages denoted with
green dots, and villages where the digital phonebook was promoted to potential customers
are represented by yellow dots.
4.3.1 Rural Firm Characteristics
Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for rms that were enrolled into the phonebook plat-
form during the baseline survey. The average rm owner is 35 years old and has 7 years of
schooling. The average rm is just over 5 years old and has 0.21 paid employees - indicating
that the vase majority of rms did not report any paid employees. About 36% of rms
enrolled were owned by women. The majority of rm sectors relate to retail activities, split
24Table 3: Baseline Characteristics for Rural Firms
Variable N Mean St. Dev.
Age 507 35.45 11.06
Woman-owned 507 0.36 0.48
Yrs Education 507 7.41 3.43
Firm Age 506 5.46 6.80
Num. Paid Employees 503 0.21 0.59
Owns Smartphone (0/1) 457 0.24 0.43
Distance (km) to major market 507 65.26 31.32
Num. of competitors in village 435 4.77 3.84
Sector Share
Food/Crop Retail 204 0.40
Non-Food Retail 60 0.12
Ag Services 42 0.08
Non-Ag Services 124 0.25
Skilled Trades 77 0.15
between 40% that sell food and crops and 12% that sell non-food items like clothing and
medicine. The rest of rms are service rms that provide agricultural services (8%) like trac-
tor rentals and milling, non-agricultural services (25%) like barber shops and restaurants,
and skilled trades (15%), which includes tailors, welders, carpenters, and builders. The sam-
ple size varies slightly due to some instances of non-response and because some questions
were dropped at dierent phases in piloting. As described below, regressions that measure
treatment eects control for non-response in baseline outcomes.
4.3.2 Balance Checks
The balance table in Table 10 in Appendix compares the means for the treatment groups,
control group, and t-tests for dierences between the groups. The balance table compares
dierences across groups among 22 covariates, including baseline demographic characteristics
and baseline outcomes. Out of 22 covariates, 4 exhibit imbalance - owner age, whether the
rm has access to electricity, customer calls, and the output price index. But, an F-test
of joint signicance across all covariates fails to reject the null of joint signicance. Rather
than add imbalanced covariates as controls in treatment eects regressions, I use a machine
learning procedure to produce a unit-level prediction index following Ludwig et al. (2019)
25and Wager et al. (2016). The prediction index was constructed by regressing treatment
on baseline outcomes and their interactions and selecting variables through random forest
and lasso selection procedures. The idea is to select variables that explain any arbitrary
correlation between experimental groups and baseline outcomes and add them as a regression
adjustment.
5 Empirical Approach
5.1 Discrete Choice Experiment
To understand how rms value relational contracting, I administered a discrete choice ex-
periment designed to elicit willingness to pay for benets that are associated with relational
contracting with suppliers following Train (2009). During the baseline survey, rms were
asked to compare a series of `contracts' with four dierent attributes:
•Input Price: The price of a recently-purchased input, varied by 5%, 10%, and 15%
discount or cost increase.
•Known Supplier: Preference for whether a supplier was known to them or completely
new.
•Transportation: Preference to pay for travel to purchase goods in an urban area, or
pay shipping to have goods delivered.
•Payment Terms: Preferences for using mobile money payments or being oered
credit to defer payment on some of their balance.
As described in the previous section, in practice these attributes are available to some
rms but are not formalized in written contracts. For each contract attribute, one option is
associated with building trust with a supplier. For example, suppliers must trust that credit
will be repaid, or they must trust that payment for goods shipped will be received.
Discrete choice experiments are eective for identifying which components of trading with
suppliers are relatively more valuable to rms. They require participants to compare sets of
contracts with variation in attribute levels and to state which contract they would prefer.4
4Consistent with the literature on discrete choice experiments, the term attribute refers to components
of informal trading contracts. In this case, price, known supplier, transportation, and payment terms. The
term levels refers to variation within each attribute - such as the dierent prices shown to participants.
26After completing a series of comparisons, each participant will have generated binary choice
data with information on which attributes were available for each choice.
Econometric analysis of discrete choice data draws from a random-utility model and uses
a mixed logit model to estimate choice probabilities that represent the relative importance of
each attribute level (McFadden and Train, 2000).5Coecients on terms in the mixed logit
are interpreted as the group-level preferences for an attributes. Point estimates can also
be converted into measures of willingness-to-pay (WTP) for certain attribute levels. While
these WTP measures are not incentivized, we used the most recent per unit price for an
input as the base price in the experiment. Econometric analysis uses the following model
specication:
Yijk 1Priceijk 2Supplier ijk 3Transport ijk 3Payment ijk k ijk
Firmiselects alternative jamong choice sets k.Yijkis a binary variable which takes a
value of 1 if the rm owner chose a certain contract. Mixed logit specications are robust to
arbitrary correlation within alternatives and heterogeneous preferences of agents. In other
words, each agent is assumed to have their own preference distribution of the various options.
Coecients on terms in the mixed logit are interpreted as the group-level preferences for an
attributes.
5.2 Treatment Eects Estimation
To estimate the causal eect of treatment on the outcome variables, I employ ANCOVA
regressions.6Estimates of intent to treat (ITT) use the following ANCOVA specication:
Yit 1TUS
i 2TDS
i Yi;t0 BLMiss i;t0 Xi t it (1)
5For further detail on assumptions, see Section D in the appendix.
6ANCOVA improves precision of estimates by including baseline values of outcome variables as con-
trols in regressions. It is particularly useful in settings where outcome variables exhibit low and constant
auto-correlation and are measured with noise. Presenting post-treatment data from numerous randomized
evaluations with rms, McKenzie (2012) shows that auto-correlation of rm prots in Ghana and Sri Lanka
are relatively constant, falling between 0.2 and 0.4. He nds that ANCOVA is preferred to dierences-in-
dierences specications for constant auto-correlation below 0.5.
27Yitrepresents the outcome variable of interest for rm iin survey round t.TUSand
TDSare the treatment indicator variables that represent whether rms were assigned to the
upstream or downstream treatment groups. The intent to treat estimates are identied by
^1and ^2, and are interpreted as the eect of being assigned to either upstream ( ^1) or
downstream ( ^2) treatments on the outcome of interest. The subscript tindexes event time
and is set to zero for the baseline value. Yi;t0are the baseline values of the dependent variable
andBLMiss i;t0denotes values that are missing at baseline due to rm non-response.7The
vectorXiincludes strata dummies and the machine learning prediction index, which does
not vary with time. The term tcaptures any survey-specic time shocks. As in conventional
in unit-level random assignment, standard errors were clustered at the rm level.
Multiple hypothesis testing follows Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) and Anderson (2008)
by setting the false discovery rate to 5%. A FDR of 5% expects that at least one test out
of twenty falsely rejects the null of no eect (a false positive or Type I error). Sharpened
q-values are presented by each outcome grouping. Outcomes were grouped according to
whether they pertain to primary upstream, downstream, or productivity outcomes.
5.3 Outcome Variables
Outcomes are grouped into three categories - upstream, downstream, and productivity out-
comes. Within the upstream and downstream categories, there are three analogous out-
comes: Relational contracting index, engagement with new suppliers and customers, and
phone communication. For the upstream outcomes, there is a supplier search index whose
components include a series of variables indicative of search intensity, including number of
suppliers called for information, number of suppliers that a rm transacted with, number
of dierent locations searched, and whether suppliers were non-local. Since rms search
at irregular intervals, these questions reference the most recent time that a rm purchased
inputs.
On the downstream side, since it is not possible for rms to know the full search activities
of their customers, the only variable that was asked is whether any customers came from
7Including the `missing at baseline' variable allows the ITT estimate to keep any rms which do not
provide answers to specic questions during baseline rather than dropping them.
28outside the rms' village. This variable, called 'Non-local Customer', is a binary outcome
that takes a value of 1 if the rm reported having a customer come from outside their village.
As described in the set-up for this experiment, experimental rms are located in medium-
sized towns that often serve as the primary purchasing locations for smaller, surrounding
communities. It is common for rms to know whether one of their customers is from their
same village or comes from nearby. This was a relevant outcome because the experiment pro-
vided information about how to dial into the digital phonebook to surrounding communities,
knowing that they usually purchase goods from rms in participating villages.
Productivity outcomes include a sales revenue index, an output price index, an input price
index, transport costs as a share of inputs purchased, and whether inputs were purchased
locally. The sales revenue and output price indices provides information about whether
treated rms experience a sustained increase in sales relative to control. The input price
index, transport costs, and whether rms purchased inputs locally provide information about
whether rms costs decreased, providing evidence that they became more ecient. Further
detail on index construction is provided in Section A in the appendix.
5.4 Empirical Tests
Table 4 summarizes empirical tests that can be used to inform the theorized relationships
introduced in Section 3. The rst panel summarizes how to interpret coecients for upstream
outcomes related to contact with new suppliers and changes in relational contracting. The
second panel summarizes how to interpret coecients for downstream outcomes related to
contact with new customers and changes in relational contracting. As described in Section
4, treated rms have two levels of treatment. First, all treated rms are listed in the digital
phonebook and can search for their own treatment group. Second, rms were assigned
to two arms designed to exogenously increase contact with either upstream suppliers or
downstream customers. Therefore, an additional part in the analysis compares whether the
upstream treatment led to larger eects in upstream outcomes and whether the downstream
treatment led to larger eects on downstream outcomes. The magnitude of treatment eects
provides evidence about whether rms more readily increase their bargaining power with
suppliers or with their customers.
29Table 4: Summary of Empirical Tests
Rural Firm Upstream Treatment Eects
Relational
New Contracting Interpretation
Suppliers Response
¤0¡0 Increase relational contracting by increasing
bargaining power with current suppliers
¤0 0 Decrease relational contracting by decreasing
bargaining power with current suppliers
¡0 0 Adding new suppliers decreases average provision
of relational contracting benets
Rural Firm Downstream Treatment Eects
Relational
New Contracting Interpretation
Customers Response
¤0¡0 Increase relational contracting by decreasing
bargaining power relative to current customers
¤0 0 Decrease relational contracting by increasing
bargaining power with current customer base
¡0 0 Adding new customers decreases average provision
of relational contracting benets
6 Results
6.1 Willingness to Pay for Relational Contracting Attributes
Table 5 shows results from the discrete choice experiment. To make coecients economically
meaningful, they were converted into a measure of WTP by dividing the point estimate of the
mean of an attribute level by the price coecient.8The column `WTP (Percent)' reports the
willingness to pay and condence interval for each contract level. Not all attribute levels were
meaningful to participants (paying with Mpesa and paying 80% of their balance at once).
It indicates that rms were indierent about some contract attribute levels and consistently
preferred those with dierent features.
8For example, the coecient on price is -6.11 and the coecient on purchasing from a known supplier
is 0.33, so the WTP is obtained by computing 0.33/-6.11. Condence intervals were constructing following
Hole, 2007.
30Table 5: WTP for Contract Attribute Levels
WTP (Percent) Reference Category
[CI]
Supplier Known 0.06 Supplier unknown
[0.02, 0.10]
Goods Delivered 0.33 Travel to city
[0.25, 0.40]
Mobile money payment -0.01 Other payment options
[-0.06, 0.05]
50% cash now 0.18 Other payment options
[0.12, 0.25]
80% cash now -0.01 Other payment options
[-0.08, 0.06]
Notes: The rst column lists contract attribute levels from a discrete choice experiment.
The second column shows the coecients from a mixed logit specication converted.
Coecients represent the percentage point increase or decrease that participants were
willing to pay on average for a contract attribute level. 95% condence interval are
in brackets. The reference category describes the other contract attribute level that
participants compared against. `Other payment options' includes cash, mobile money,
and credit.
Firms expressed a WTP of a 6% premium for inputs from a known supplier relative to an
unknown supplier, a 33% premium for goods to be delivered relative to travelling to a city,
and 18% premium for provision of generous credit terms relative to paying cash at the time
of purchase. This highlights the extent to which rms are willing to pay higher prices on
inputs for contract attributes that benet rms. Although a 6% price premium to purchase
from known suppliers is small compared to having goods delivered and obtaining credit, it is
notable because only 40% of rms in the baseline survey reported having preferred suppliers.
And, in practice, obtaining these benets requires forming relationships with known input
suppliers.
6.2 Upstream, Downstream, and Productivity Treatment Eects
Table 6 reports results for each group of outcomes over three rounds of follow-up surveys.
Coecients on indices can be interpreted as the number of standard deviations increase or
decrease relative to the control group.
First, Panel A reports treatment eects for the upstream outcome grouping. Firms in the
upstream treatment arm signicantly increased relational contracting index with suppliers
31(Column 1). Firms in both treatment arms engaged in fewer search activities (Column 2).
Nearly 28% of rms in the control group reported buying inputs from a new supplier while
both groups were about 4-5 percentage points less likely to have a new supplier, but the
p-value on the upstream arms fails to reject the null of no eect (Column 3). Similarly, of
all suppliers with whom control rms communicated, 12.6% were new, and both treatment
groups signicantly decreased their new suppliers share by 2.6-2.8 percentage points when
using unadjusted p-values (Column 4). Finally, downstream rms also signicantly decreased
phone communication with suppliers.
Earlier, I provided evidence from a discrete choice experiment that rms value relational
contracting with their suppliers (or at least value the benets that are associated with re-
lational contracting). These results provide consistent evidence that when search costs to
locate new suppliers decrease, rms use the information to arm their pre-existing rela-
tionships and bargain for better trading terms. It supports the prediction that the digital
phonebook raises the value of the outside option for rural rms when they search in their
upstream arm. And, they use the information to attain better terms from the suppliers
whom they previously knew, consistent with theory on relational contracts.
Second, Panel B reports treatment eects for the downstream outcomes grouping. Firms
in both treatment arms decreased relational contracting with their customers at nearly the
same magnitude (Column 1). Firms in downstream treatment had small but positive co-
ecients on their likelihood of having any new customer and the share of new customers,
but standard errors were too large to provide conclusive evidence that they had more new
customers (Columns 3 and 4). These mixed results provide evidence that the phonebook
increased the value of the outside option for rural rms, without substantially increasing
their customer base. As highlighted in the conceptual framework, it provides evidence that
the decrease in relational contracting comes from withdrawing contracting benets from
customers whom they previously knew.
Column 2 reports results for the variable 'Non-local Customer', a measure for whether
rms reported having any customer come from outside their village. The point estimate
on the downstream treatment arm is negative but not signicant, providing inconclusive
evidence on whether the downstream arm had fewer non-local customers. Phonebook usage
32data showed that downstream rms were looked-up nearly three times as much as those in
the upstream treatment arm. Despite this, the downstream treatment arm had lower overall
phone engagement with customers according to self-reported measures that were combined
into the `Customer Phone Activity Index'. Firms in the downstream treatment arm had
-0.183 standard deviation decrease in communication with customers via phone.
This is surprising given that this group was by far the most likely to both search and
be found by others in the phonebook platform (see usage data in Table 1 of the appendix).
One potential explanation is that increased engagement with the platform crowded-out the
rms typical engagement with their pre-existing customers relative to the control group. It
is also possible that rural customers sought out new rms in face-to-face interactions that
is not captured by the number of phone calls. Another possibility is that timing of phone
surveys were too infrequent to pick up the timing of phone calls. For upstream outcomes,
survey questions were oriented around the \most recent input purchase," an event that
typically occurs 1-2 times per month. On customer questions, questions were oriented over
the previous week or over the past two days because rms engage with customers on a daily
basis. Therefore, it is more dicult to pick up net changes in composition of the customer
base.
Panel C displays the primary productivity outcomes. There are no signicant changes
in business revenue or input prices. But, rms in both arms had higher output prices. This
is consistent with evidence that rms pull back on downstream relational contracting by
increasing their sales prices. Columns 4 and 5 in Panel C show that the downstream arm
was more likely to purchase inputs locally in their village and paid lower per-unit transaction
costs on their orders. Control rms paid on average 5% of the input order size on transport
costs, and downstream rms paid 1.7% less.9
The downstream treatment arm was also 9.5 percentage points more likely to purchase
locally than the control group. These results reect the fact that downstream treatment arm
could search for other rural rms in their same arm but were not able to search for urban
rms. This is also consistent with behavior that values relational contracting. It may be
9This is most likely due to purchasing locally and driving transport costs to zero. The transport cost
share regression did not control for purchase location.
33more dicult for rms to form relational contracting partnerships with input suppliers in
cities for a number of reasons. Firms in urban centers supply hundreds of rms and it may
be more dicult to keep track of relationships. In that sense, it is much more likely for rms
to form trade relationships in their local area. Despite this, results in section ??below show
that search behavior in cities increases for retail rms, likely due to having larger order sizes
and thus lower per-unit transportation costs.
34Table 6: Upstream, Downstream, and Productivity Intent-to-Treat Eects
Panel A: Upstream Outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Supplier Input Any New Supplier
Relational Search New Supplier Phone
Contracting Activity Supplier Share Activity
Index Index (0/1) Index
Upstream Treat 0.101*** -0.134*** -0.046 -0.028* -0.036
(0.033) (0.043) (0.029) (0.015) (0.047)
Downstream Treat 0.045 -0.136*** -0.048* -0.026* -0.081*
(0.032) (0.041) (0.029) (0.016) (0.044)
Control Mean 0.000 0.000 0.275 0.126 0.000
Upstream p-value 0.0020 0.0018 0.1186 0.0639 0.4400
Upstream q-value 0.0066 0.0066 0.1483 0.1356 0.4400
Downstream p-value 0.1631 0.0010 0.0979 0.0975 0.0678
Downstream q-value 0.1813 0.0066 0.1398 0.1398 0.1356
Obs 1229 1229 1188 1184 1252
Adj R-Squared 0.057 0.296 0.124 0.069 0.224
Panel B: Downstream Outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Customer Any Any New Customer
Relational Non-local New Customer Phone
Contracting Customer Customer Share Activity
Index (0/1) (0/1) Index
Upstream Treat -0.119*** -0.013 0.002 -0.005 -0.038
(0.034) (0.035) (0.032) (0.015) (0.053)
Downstream Treat -0.109*** -0.053 0.011 0.005 -0.183***
(0.034) (0.034) (0.033) (0.014) (0.051)
Control Mean 0.000 0.488 0.687 0.193 0.000
Upstream p-value 0.0006 0.7041 0.9391 0.7288 0.4683
Upstream q-value 0.0028 0.8108 0.9391 0.8108 0.8108
Downstream p-value 0.0014 0.1143 0.7297 0.7277 0.0004
Downstream q-value 0.0046 0.2857 0.8108 0.8108 0.0028
Obs 1252 1252 1203 1191 1252
Adj R-Squared 0.133 0.196 0.086 0.050 0.129
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Table shows results from
ANCOVA regressions of main outcomes on the upstream and downstream treatment groups. Controls
include strata indicators, the prediction index, survey round indicators, baseline outcomes, and an
indicator if baseline outcome was missing. Q-values are multiple hypothesis testing corrections for
each outcome grouping (upstream, downstream, and productivity outcomes).
35Panel C: Productivity Outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Sales Output Input Transport Inputs
Revenue Price Price Costs Share Purchased
Index Index Index of Inputs Locally
Purchased (0/1)
Upstream Treat -0.055 0.124** 0.070 -0.009 0.039
(0.067) (0.054) (0.051) (0.006) (0.033)
Downstream Treat 0.022 0.088* 0.033 -0.017*** 0.095***
(0.070) (0.053) (0.053) (0.006) (0.033)
Control Mean 0.000 -0.092 -0.023 0.052 0.314
Upstream p-value 0.4117 0.0211 0.1703 0.1424 0.2459
Upstream q-value 0.5146 0.0704 0.2838 0.2838 0.3513
Downstream p-value 0.7538 0.0971 0.5329 0.0023 0.0043
Downstream q-value 0.7538 0.2428 0.5921 0.0217 0.0217
Obs 822 1081 1109 1197 1197
Adj R-Squared 0.279 0.063 0.196 0.107 0.354
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Table shows results from
ANCOVA regressions of main outcomes on the upstream and downstream treatment groups.
Controls include strata indicators, the prediction index, survey round indicators, baseline out-
comes, and an indicator if baseline outcome was missing. Q-values are multiple hypothesis
testing corrections for each outcome grouping (upstream, downstream, and productivity out-
comes).
366.2.1 Relational Contracting Index Components
Table 7 shows results for components of the relational contracting indices. Results for index
components are presented to show how each component contributes toward the total eect
that is picked up once aggregated into an index. On the upstream side, rms substantially
increase receiving any credit on goods purchased - 14.1% received credit compared to 8%
in the control group. On average, upstream rms were also slightly more likely to know all
of their suppliers and receive a price discount, but were less likely to have goods shipped
or use mobile money. On the downstream side, rms in both treatment arms reduced
discounting, special orders, and mobile money use with customers. But, provision of credit
was unchanged.10Firms were also slightly less likely to report knowing all of their customers,
but it was not statistically dierent from zero.
Not every component of the relational contracting indices moved in the expected di-
rection. For example, despite an increase in total relational contracting compared to the
control, upstream and downstream rms were less likely to have goods shipped from sup-
pliers (although dierences were not signicant, standard errors are relatively narrow). In
the discrete choice experiment, rms expressed a higher willingness to pay for having goods
shipped over knowing their suppliers, receiving credit, and using mobile money. But, it is
possible that having goods shipped is a more dicult benet to arrange than negotiating
for credit. Thus, when search costs decrease at the margin, rms gain a better bargaining
position to ask for credit, but not quite enough to identify an average change in arranging
delivery. And, as shown in Panel C in Table 6 above, downstream rms were more likely
to purchase locally and have lower transportation costs, suggested that they forwent more
transactions in the city compared to the control and upstream groups.
On the downstream side, rms reduced each component, but not signicantly until ag-
gregated into an index that picks up net changes. This suggests that index aggregation is a
necessary tool to understand changes in outcomes that are often bundled together - such as
capturing how terms of trade change when rms and customers transact.
10There are fewer observations for provision of credit and mobile money with customers because rms
were not asked these questions in the rst follow-up survey round.
37Table 7: Relational Contracting Index Components
Panel A: Upstream Relational Contracting Index Components
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Supplier Receives Knows Receives Goods Sends
Relational Goods All Price Shipped Mobile
Contracting on Suppliers Discount from Money to
Index Credit Supplier Suppliers
Upstream Treat 0.101*** 0.061** 0.046 0.004 -0.017 -0.036
(0.033) (0.024) (0.029) (0.033) (0.027) (0.040)
Downstream Treat 0.045 -0.004 0.048* -0.008 -0.049* -0.044
(0.032) (0.021) (0.029) (0.034) (0.026) (0.037)
Control Mean 0.000 0.080 0.725 0.547 0.181 0.348
Obs 1229 1186 1188 1248 1197 874
Adj R-Squared 0.057 0.076 0.124 0.120 0.065 0.138
Panel B: Downstream Relational Contracting Index Components
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Customer Provides Knows Gives Makes Receives
Relational Goods/Services All Discount to Orders for Mobile
Contracting on Customers Frequent Customers Money from
Index Credit Customers Customers
Upstream Treat -0.119*** 0.021 -0.002 -0.050 -0.033 -0.022
(0.034) (0.040) (0.032) (0.034) (0.033) (0.038)
Downstream Treat -0.109*** 0.000 -0.011 -0.045 -0.052 -0.062*
(0.034) (0.044) (0.033) (0.035) (0.033) (0.035)
Control Mean 0.000 0.480 0.313 0.642 0.341 0.255
Obs 1252 821 1203 1252 1251 873
Adj R-Squared 0.133 0.163 0.086 0.127 0.026 0.121
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Table shows results from ANCOVA regressions
of components of a upstream relational contracting index and downstream relational contracting index on the upstream and
downstream treatment groups. Controls include strata indicators, the prediction index, survey round indicators, baseline
outcomes, and an indicator if baseline outcome was missing.
386.3 Heterogeneity by Firm Sector
As described in Section 3.2, search behavior by retail and service rms is likely to dier
because retail rms search and purchase more in cities and have lower per unit transportation
costs which, in turn, lower search costs in urban areas and make relationships with suppliers
based in cities more valuable.
Table 8 presents heterogeneous treatment eects for retail rms compared to service
rms. Treatment arms are pooled to capture the net eect of being listed in the phonebook.
The table highlights how retail and service rms have divergent search strategies that result
in variation in their input acquisition costs and changes to relational contracting. Results
conrm the prediction from the conceptual framework that service rms are more likely to
search locally, pay higher input costs and pay lower transport costs. Panel A highlights
search activities and price outcomes and Panel B compares relational contracting and new
contacts for service and retail rms.
In Panel A, columns 1-2 are search activity outcomes, and show that service rms de-
creased total activity by 0.32 standard deviations compared to the control and searched 0.23
fewer locations. The consequences of these divergent search decisions show up in input prices
and transportation costs. Columns 3-4 are the output and input price indices. There was
no sector-specic treatment eect in the output price index. But, service rms paid 0.37
standard deviations higher input prices compared to retail rms. Service rms also decrease
transport cost share by 2% and are 12.5 percentage points more likely to purchase locally.
It provides evidence that service rms were willing to pay higher input costs to save on
transport costs. At baseline, service rms paid nearly double the transport costs as a share
of inputs purchased compared to retail rms, so this savings is potentially valuable for them.
Columns 1-3 of Panel B report heterogeneous treatment eects for supplier relational
contracting index and two measures of transacting with new suppliers. Analogously, columns
4-6 report heterogeneous treatment eects for customer relational contracting index and
measures of transacting with new customers. Retail rms increased relational contracting
with suppliers by 0.07 standard deviations and service rms increased marginally more.
But, only service rms were signicantly less likely to transact with a new supplier and had
39fewer new suppliers as a share of the number of suppliers. Both retail and service rms
decrease relational contracting with customers, although service rms decreased by about
0.04 standard deviations more than retail rms. And, there were no dierences in customer
composition - neither sector experienced signicantly more transactions with new customers,
as measured through survey recall data.
Results from the discrete choice experiment suggest that rms were willing to pay slightly
higher input prices to retain familiar suppliers, access credit, and arrange delivery. Service
rms revealed behavior reects this nding - they pay higher input prices, transact with
known suppliers, pay lower transport costs, and increase relational contracting. It is con-
sistent with a theoretical prediction that if per-unit transaction costs are high, rms will
prefer to search in their local area - saving transport costs and lowering the variable cost of
associated with establishing relational contracts.
One of the key dierences between retail and service rms is that service rms purchase
inputs and convert them into a value-added service, while retailers source goods and re-sell
them at mark-up. While this distinction corresponded to dierent search patterns, both
types of rms changed relational contracting in the same direction. For retail rms, the
composition of suppliers and customers did not change. The customer composition did not
change for service rms but they did decrease transactions with new suppliers. Returning to
Table 4, these relationships conrm that being listed in the phonebook caused service and
retail rms to change their valuation of relational contracts and increase bargaining power
with pre-existing suppliers and customers. But, there is stronger evidence that service rms
transacted with fewer new suppliers than retail rms.
40Table 8: Heterogeneous Treatment Eects by Firm Sector
Panel A: Search Outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Input Number Output Input Transport Inputs
Search of Price Price Costs Share Purchased
Activity Locations Index Index of Inputs Locally
Index Searched Purchased (0/1)
Treat 0.016 0.046 0.201 -0.034 -0.004 0.012
(0.046) (0.047) (0.150) (0.072) (0.006) (0.034)
Service Firm -0.127 0.295*** 0.037 0.395*** 0.015 0.314***
(0.083) (0.072) (0.242) (0.147) (0.013) (0.068)
TreatService -0.324*** -0.225*** -0.234 0.366** -0.020** 0.125**
(0.073) (0.070) (0.221) (0.161) (0.010) (0.054)
P-valueHo:1 30 [0.0000]*** [0.0004]*** [0.8473] [0.0325]** [0.0057]*** [0.0011]***
Control Mean 0.001 1.268 -0.010 -0.019 0.052 0.314
Obs 1230 1194 903 995 1198 1198
Adj R-Squared 0.322 0.158 0.033 0.156 0.108 0.390
Panel B: Relational Contracting Outcomes
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Supplier Any New Customer Any New
Relational New Suppliers Relational New Customer
Contracting Supplier Share Contracting Customer Share
Index (0/1) Index (0/1)
Treat 0.070* -0.015 -0.010 -0.097** 0.005 0.010
(0.038) (0.038) (0.019) (0.039) (0.036) (0.014)
Service Firm -0.020 0.011 0.025 0.011 -0.212*** -0.027
(0.074) (0.056) (0.029) (0.073) (0.060) (0.025)
TreatService 0.005 -0.066 -0.037 -0.039 0.000 -0.020
(0.055) (0.051) (0.027) (0.060) (0.054) (0.025)
P-valueHo:1 30 [0.0671]* [0.0134]** [0.0149]** [0.0026]*** [0.9019] [0.6124]
Control Mean 0.001 0.275 0.126 -0.000 0.687 0.193
Obs 1230 1189 1185 1253 1204 1192
Adj R-Squared 0.054 0.126 0.070 0.132 0.096 0.051
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Table shows results from ANCOVA regressions of a
subset of outcomes on pooled treatment groups interacted with a binary variable equalling 1 for service rms and 0 for retail
rms. The treatment eect for retail rms is captured by the coecient for Treat ( 1) and the treatment eect for service rms
is Treat plus Treat Service (1 3). The p-value for a t-test on service rm treatment eect is in brackets with stars to
denote signicance levels. Controls include strata indicators, the prediction index, survey round indicators, baseline outcomes,
and an indicator if baseline outcome was missing.
416.4 Spillovers
Randomization at the unit-level requires that the stable unit treatment value assumption
(SUTVA) holds, implying that there are no spillovers between units in dierent exper-
imental conditions. Extensive margin spillovers (externalities) may occur between rms
within the same village. A negative externality would occur if being listed in the phonebook
drives treated rms to deprive non-treated rms of market share.11Table 6 showed results
for changes in rm revenue (Column 1 in Panel C) and changes in customer composition
(Columns 3 and 4 in Panel B). Neither treatment arm experienced signicant changes in
these outcomes, suggesting that rms did not gain market share or grow at the expense of
control rms in their villages. Further, the attrition section below explains that dierential
attrition by treatment group did not occur, again providing evidence that treated rms did
not gain at the expense of non-treated rms.
A positive externality on non-listed rms would occur if changes to the bargaining or
demand structure of listed rms also improved bargaining or aggregate demand for non-
listed rms. For example, if a rm's connection to upstream suppliers leads them to access
lower prices, a positive spillover would occur if rms in their neighborhood also gain access to
those lower prices or better market terms. Ruling out this type of spillover requires assuming
that rms internalize benets of being listed in the phonebook. In other words, since rms
operate in a competitive environment, their private gains are not shared with their neighbors.
As a quick check, rms were asked if they source inputs in a group to provide evidence that
rms do not engage in collective bargaining. In each survey round less than 1% of rms
reported organizing with other rms in their village to source inputs. As another check,
rms were asked in the endline survey if they discuss business activity with any other rm
owners in their village. Only 10.5% of rms reported discussing any business activity with
their neighbors, a relatively small share.
11After the study ended, all rms were listed in the platform so that any potential gains driven by
exclusivity in the phonebook platform were temporary and would be bid away once the full sample was
listed.
427 Anticipating General Equilibrium Eects
An important question to consider is what would happen to the search cost structure in this
market once all rms have their rm listed in the phonebook and can search for all rms in
their region. One consequence of unit-level experimental design over a relatively short period
of time (14 months) is that it is not possible to measure medium-to-long-term changes to
the general equilibrium of the market. Despite this, economic theory oers insights on what
changes can be anticipated in this setting.
Previous research studying how search costs aect prices in commodity and labor markets
found that price dispersion narrowed (Jensen 2007; Aker, 2010; Aker and Fafchamps, 2015;
Jeong, 2019), but price levels did not change. This study found that output prices increased
after search costs decreased. I argued that this is consistent with a relational contracting
framework where the rural rms increase the average price charged to their customers because
they anticipate having more customers as a result of being listed in the digital phonebook.
Once control rms are added to the phonebook, it is not clear that rms will have more new
customers relative to their peer competitors and it is possible that price levels will return to
their previous equilibrium if competition bids them downward.
Yet, it is also possible that prices remain at the higher level. Like many phone-based
networking platforms, the digital phonebook studied here creates new opportunities for buy-
ers and sellers to meet when they might not have met otherwise. These new contacts may
cause buyers and sellers to decrease their reliance on ex-ante customer networks for sales
and increase engagement with new customers. Since customers that benet from relational
contracting receive lower prices, an aggregate change in customer composition where all rms
increase contact with new customers could cause the average price level to remain above the
previous equilibrium. Evidence that rms with higher downstream relational contracting
have lower prices is seen in Panel B of Table 8 in the appendix. A one standard deviation in-
crease downstream relational contracting index is associated with a 0.16 standard deviation
decrease in the output price index.
The upstream side could theoretically experience similar general equilibrium eects. Low-
ering search costs enables rural rms to locate and contact new potential suppliers. But, it
43does not change the costs required to invest in long-term relational contracting that unlocks
access to credit, shipping, or price discounts. Again, as search costs lower for all rms, we
would expect price dispersion in input markets to decrease. Unlike the downstream side,
there was no signicant change in input price levels. But, rms in the upstream treatment
arm were more likely to access credit. And, the discrete choice experiment showed that rms
were willing to pay higher input prices if they were able to receive credit and purchase from
familiar suppliers.
The fact that experimental results showed that rms searched less and were less likely
to have a new supplier is further evidence that investing in supplier relationships is valuable
to rms, particularly for rms in the services sector - who have smaller, less frequent input
orders. Retail rms searched more and were more likely to transact in urban areas. As a
result, search costs are a more important factor for sourcing inputs for retail rms compared
to service rms and they stand to benet more from technologies that increase connections
between rural and urban areas.
8 Conclusion
New networking technologies have shifted how agents engage with their networks. Digital
phonebooks that are accessible on any type of phone are a bridge technology that allows
users in rural areas that do not own smartphones to access new contacts from outside their
typical networks. Rural rms often face substantial information frictions that lower total
productivity, ultimately constraining rm growth and their capacity to bear shocks. In-
creasing access to contact information for suppliers and customers lowers search costs and
changes incentives to provide and seek relational contracting. I show that when rural rms
have access to new contacts, the value of their outside option increases and they succeed in
increasing relational contracting with their suppliers at the same time as decreasing their
relational contracting with their customers.
I nd evidence that most changes in relational contracting were with existing suppliers
and customers. On the customer side, rms did not report signicant increases in the number
of transactions with new customers. It is possible that rms perceived their customer base
44to increase but those increases did not translate into substantial changes to the number of
transactions. This could be due to transactions being a relatively noisy measure. It is also
possible that customers search was sporadic and did not translate into sustained increases
in the number of customers.
Likewise for upstream outcomes, on average rms decreased transactions with new suppli-
ers and searched less. Relational contracting relies on repeat transactions with both suppliers
and customers to build trust. Increasing relational contracting with suppliers required rms
to increase investment in their existing relationships. The digital phonebook only decreased
search costs to locate initial market information - sectors, locations, and contact details of
upstream rms - but did not change costs for how long it takes to establish trust with sup-
pliers. Yet, lowering search costs for rms increased the value of their outside option because
it became easier to search for new trading partners.
There is substantial variation by rm sector. Retail rms signicantly increase input
search activity compared to service rms. I argue that this is driven by sectoral dierences
in the cost structure for input search. Service rms make less frequent, smaller purchases
and it is not as valuable for them to travel to cities to obtain inputs. Since the downstream
treatment arm could only observe other rural rms in the same treatment arm, it suggests
that learning information about other neighboring rms can encourage agents to thicken
their local networking engagement. This is conrmed by the downstream treatment arm's
lower transportation costs and higher likelihood of purchasing inputs locally rather than
travelling to urban areas.
In introducing a new technology that changes rm networks, this research project pro-
vided rms with an opportunity to learn about the market in their area on a completely
new format - a digital phonebook platform. Firms signicantly changed their search activ-
ities and their engagement with their ex-ante suppliers and customers. It shows that small
changes to the search cost structure have the power to re-shape the way that rms transact
along their supply chain.
45References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G., and Wooldridge, J. (2017). When Should You Adjust
Standard Errors for Clustering?
Aggarwal, S., Giera, B., Jeong, D., Robinson, J., and Spearot, A. (2018). Market Access,
Trade Costs, and Technology Adoption: Evidence from Northern Tanzania.
Aker, J. C. (2010). Information from markets near and far: Mobile phones and agricultural
markets in niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , 2(3):46{59.
Allen, T. (2014). Information Frictions in Trade. Econometrica , 82(6):2041{2083.
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple Inference and Gender Dierences in the Eects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
Projects. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103:1481{1495.
Anderson, S. J., Chandy, R., and Zia, B. (2018). Pathways to Prots: The Impact of
Marketing vs. Finance Skills on Business Performance. Management Science , 64(12):5559{
5583.
Athey, S. and Ellison, G. (2011). Position auctions with consumer search. Quarterly Journal
of Economics , 126(3):1213{1270.
Athey, S. and Imbens, G. (2017). The Econometrics of Randomized Experiments. Handbook
of Economic Field Experiments , 1:73{140.
Baker, G., Gibbons, R., and Murphy, K. J. (2002). Relational Contracts and the Theory of
the Firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics , (February):39{84.
Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Methodological) , 57(1):289{300.
Bernard, A. B., Moxnes, A., and Saito, Y. U. (2019). Production networks, geography, and
rm performance. Journal of Political Economy , 127(2):639{688.
46Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., and Roberts, J. (2013). Does management
matter? Evidence from india. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 128(1):1{51.
Brooks, W., Donovan, K., and Johnson, T. R. (2018). Mentors or teachers? Microenterprise
training in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , 10(4):196{221.
Burlig, F., Preonas, L., and Woerman, M. (2017). Panel Data and Experimental Design.
Technical report, Energy Institute at Haas.
Cai, J. and Szeidl, A. (2018). Interrm Relationships and Firm Performance. Quarterly
Journal of Economics , pages 1229{1282.
Campos, F. and Gassier, M. (2017). Gender and enterprise development in sub-Saharan
Africa: A review of constraints and eective interventions.
Casaburi, L. and Reed, T. (2019). Interlinked Transactions and Competition: Experimental
Evidence from Cocoa Markets. Mimeo , (August):1{47.
de Corni ere, A. (2016). Search advertising. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics ,
8(3):156{188.
De Mel, S., McKenzie, D., and Woodru, C. (2008). Returns to capital in microenterprises:
Evidence from a eld experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 123(4):1329{1372.
Dillon, B., Aker, J. C., and Blumenstock, J. (2018). Telephone Directories for Mobile Phone
Networks .
Fafchamps, M. (2006). Spontaneous Markets, Networks, and Social Capital : Lessons from
Africa. Institutional Microeconomics of Development , 44(November):1{50.
Fafchamps, M. and Minten, B. (1999). Relationships and traders in Madagascar. Journal of
Development Studies , 35(6):1{35.
Fafchamps, M. and Minten, B. (2002). Returns to social network capital among traders.
Oxford Economic Papers , 54(2):173{206.
47Fafchamps, M. and Quinn, S. (2016). Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa: Results
from a Randomized Field Experiment.
Ghanem, D., Hirshleifer, S., and Ortiz-Becerra, K. (2019). Testing Attrition Bias in Field
Experiments.
Ghani, T. and Reed, T. (2020). Relationships on the Rocks : Dynamic Contracts in a Market
for Ice. pages 1{58.
Hardy, M. and Kagy, G. (2018). Mind The (Prot) Gap: Why Are Female Enterprise Owners
Earning Less Than Men? AEA Papers and Proceedings , 108(August 2016):252{55.
Hardy, M. and McCasland, J. (2018). It Takes Two: Experimental Evidence on the Deter-
minants of Technology Diusion.
Imbens, G. W. and Rubin, D. (2015). Causal Inference in statistics, social, and biomedical
sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Jensen, R. (2007). The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance,
and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
CXXII(August):879{924.
Jensen, R. and Miller, N. H. (2018). Market Integration, Demand, and the Growth of
Firms: Evidence From a Natural Experiment in India †.American Economic Review ,
108(12):3583{3625.
Jeong, D. D. J. (2019). Creating ( Digital ) Labor Markets in Rural.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., and Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Eects. Econometrica , 75(1):83{119.
Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., and Spiess, J. (2019). Augmenting Pre-Analysis Plans with
Machine Learning. AEA Papers and Proceedings , 109:71{76.
Macchiavello, R. and Miquel-Florensa, J. (2017). Vertical Integration and Relational Con-
tracts in the Costa.
48Macchiavello, R. and Morjaria, A. (2015). The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a
Supply Shock to Kenyan Rose Exports. American Economic Review , 105(9):2911{2945.
Macchiavello, R. and Morjaria, A. (2020). Competition and Relational Contracts in the
Rwanda Coee Chain.
McFadden, D. and Train, K. (2000). Mixed mnl models for discrete response. Journal of
applied Econometrics , 15(5):447{470.
McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.
Journal of Development Economics , 99(2):210{221.
McKenzie, D. and Pahausen, A. L. (2017). Small Firm Death in Developing Countries.
McKenzie, D. and Woodru, C. (2014). What are we learning from business training and en-
trepreneurship evaluations around the developing world? World Bank Research Observer ,
29(1):48{82.
Mcmillan, J. and Woodru, C. (1999). Interrm Relationships and Informal Credit in Viet-
nam. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 114(4):1285{1320.
Moore, R. T. (2012). Multivariate continuous blocking to improve political science experi-
ments. Political Analysis , 20(4):460{479.
Nix, E., Gamberoni, E., and Heath, R. (2016). Bridging the gender gap: Identifying what
is holding self-employed women back in Ghana, Rwanda, Tanzania, and the Republic of
Congo. World Bank Economic Review , 30(3):501{521.
North, D. C. (1991). Institutions. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 5(1):97{112.
Obereld, E. (2018). A Theory of Input-Output Architecture. Econometrica , 86(2):559{589.
Reardon, T., Echeverria, R., Berdegu e, J., Minten, B., Liverpool-Tasie, S., Tschirley, D.,
and Zilberman, D. (2019). Rapid transformation of food systems in developing regions:
highlighting the role of agricultural research & innovations. Agricultural Systems , 172:47{
59.
49Sexton, R. J. (2013). Market power, misconceptions, and modern agricultural markets.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics , 95(2):209{219.
Startz, M. (2018). The Value of Face-to-Face: Search and Contracting Problems in Nigerian
Trade.
Train, K. E. (2009). Discrete choice methods with simulation . Cambridge university press.
Varian, H. R. (2007). Position auctions. International Journal of Industrial Organization ,
25(6):1163{1178.
Wager, S., Du, W., Taylor, J., and Tibshirani, R. J. (2016). High-dimensional regression
adjustments in randomized experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America , 113(45):12673{12678.
Weld, G., Perrier, T., Aker, J. C., Blumenstock, J., Dillon, B., Kamanzi, A., Kokushubira,
E., Webster, J., and Anderson, R. (2018). eKichabi: Information Access through Basic
Mobile Phones in Rural Tanzania. CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , Montreal,.
50Additional Tables and Figures
Figure 3: Example of Feature Phone
Image from Weld et al., 2017Figure 4: Phonebook Application Menus
Image from Weld et al., 2017
51Figure 5: Experimental Timeline
Table 9: Characteristics of Sample Regions and National Average
Dodoma Region Singida Region Tanzania
Population (millions) 2.3 1.5 50.1
Urban Population Share 16.2 14.7 29.6
Average HH Size 4.6 5.3 4.9
Literacy Rate 67.5 67.1 71.8
Mobile Phone Ownership Rate 49.5 54.7 63.9
Non-Farm Primary Employment 28.2 31.4 37.2
Land Area (Sq. km) 41,000 49,300 883,300
Population density (/sq km) 55.12 30.4 56.7
Average Rainfall (mm/year) 495.7 732 1100
52Table 10: Balance Table
(1) (2) (3) T-test
Upstream Downstream Control Dierence
Variable N Mean/SE N Mean/SE N Mean/SE (3)-(1) (3)-(2)
Woman-Owned (0/1) 169 0.38
(0.04)168 0.36
(0.04)170 0.35
(0.04)-0.03* -0.02
Owner Age 169 35.94
(0.89)168 35.99
(0.85)170 34.42
(0.81)-1.52* -1.56*
Years of Education 169 7.47
(0.26)168 7.29
(0.28)170 7.48
(0.26)0.00 0.19
Firm Age (Yrs) 169 5.71
(0.56)168 5.49
(0.55)170 5.14
(0.46)-0.57 -0.36
Firm Size (Incl. Owner) 169 1.33
(0.04)168 1.36
(0.05)170 1.37
(0.06)0.04 0.01
Retail Sector (0/1) 169 0.54
(0.04)168 0.52
(0.04)170 0.52
(0.04)-0.01 -0.00
No. Competitors 169 3.63
(0.26)168 4.64
(0.34)170 4.01
(0.30)0.37 -0.64
Distance to City (km) 169 67.36
(2.45)168 66.60
(2.42)170 61.84
(2.35)-5.51 -4.76
Firm has Electricity (0/1) 169 0.57
(0.04)168 0.59
(0.04)170 0.49
(0.04)-0.07** -0.10**
Owns Smart Phone (0/1) 169 0.22
(0.03)168 0.21
(0.03)170 0.21
(0.03)-0.02 -0.00
Mobile Top-ups (Tsh) 169 1899.41
(150.70)168 1791.67
(131.98)170 1812.65
(127.19)-86.76 20.98
Listing Priority Index 169 6.65
(0.12)168 6.60
(0.12)170 6.61
(0.13)-0.05 0.01
Customer Calls 169 1.41
(0.16)168 1.58
(0.20)170 1.98
(0.26)0.57* 0.40
Supplier Calls 169 0.29
(0.09)168 0.30
(0.10)170 0.49
(0.13)0.20 0.19
Non-local Customer (0/1) 169 0.50
(0.04)168 0.46
(0.04)170 0.51
(0.04)0.01 0.04
Non-local Supplier (0/1) 169 0.73
(0.03)168 0.74
(0.03)170 0.75
(0.03)0.01 0.00
Output Price Index 169 -0.01
(0.04)168 0.06
(0.05)170 -0.08
(0.04)-0.07 -0.14*
Input Price Index 169 0.03
(0.05)168 0.02
(0.04)170 -0.00
(0.05)-0.04 -0.02
Sales Revenue Index 169 -0.11
(0.05)168 -0.12
(0.05)170 -0.00
(0.06)0.11 0.12
Inventory Mgmt Score 169 0.47
(0.03)168 0.45
(0.03)170 0.50
(0.02)0.03 0.05
Marketing Mgmt Score 169 0.33
(0.02)168 0.29
(0.02)170 0.32
(0.02)-0.01 0.03
Inputs Purchased (Tsh) 169 240623.67
(41373.10)168 203242.26
(28973.69)170 225127.65
(39916.59)-15496.02 21885.39
F-test of joint signicance (F-stat) 1.21 0.91
F-test, number of observations 339 338
Notes : The value displayed for t-tests are the dierences in the means across the groups. The value displayed for F-tests are
the F-statistics. F-stat regression includes strata dummies and dummies for any missing variables, as specied in the primary
treatment eects specication. ***, **, and * indicate signicance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent critical level.
53Appendix
A Index Construction
Analysis of primary outcomes involves 8 indices: upstream relational contracting, down-
stream relational contracting, input search activities, upstream phone communication, down-
stream phone communication, sales revenue index, and input and output price indices. Index
aggregation improves statistical power by testing fewer outcomes. Indices were constructed
following Kling et al. (2007) which employs a procedure that sums equally-weighted z-scores
computed for each component of an index. The z-scores are calculated at the unit-level by
subtracting the control group mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation.
The index captures the net change for a given set of related outcomes and are interpreted
as the number of standard deviations increase or decrease compared to the control. The
authors also suggest an imputation procedure for outcomes with missing information. It lls
in missing data with the experimental group mean (e.g. the treatment group 1 is assigned
the mean of the rest of treatment group 1). Non-response for sensitive outcomes (anything
relating to revenues and costs) is common by small business owners in Tanzania. Indices
constructed by weighting by inverse covariance matrix of components following Anderson
(2008) are provided as a robustness check.
The components the upstream relational contracting index includes whether a rm re-
ceives goods on credit, knows all of their suppliers, receives a price discount, arranges ship-
ping of inputs, and sends mobile money to suppliers. The components of the downstream
relational contracting are analogous: whether a rm provides credit to customers, knows all
of their customers, gives a price discount to frequent customers, places orders for customers,
and receives mobile money payments. The supplier search index includes the number of
suppliers communicated with to ask information about inputs, number of suppliers trans-
acted with, whether any supplier was new, the number of locations searched, and whether
suppliers were local or from urban areas.
The components of the sales revenue index included four survey questions that asked for
daily sales revenue at four dierent time points in the previous month: The best sales day,
the worst sales day, an average sales day, and the most recent full day. Extensive piloting
revealed that rms were willing to report daily revenue gures and were more likely to refuse
questions that asked about prots and weekly revenues. Dierences in sales revenue represent
shifts in a rms' revenue distribution and reveals whether treatment reliably increases rm
revenue at multiple points throughout the prior month.
For customer and supplier phone activity indices, the components of the each index are
whether any calls were received over the previous week, the exact number of calls received
over the previous two days, calls made over the previous two days, and whether contacts were
new. It captures the net change in phone activity and provides information about whether
treatments increase phone engagement with supplier and customer contacts.
To construct input and output price indices, rms were asked 4 input and 4 output prices
on a common set of items according to their sector. For retail rms, input and output prices
are the same good since they sell goods at a mark-up. For service rms, input prices were
asked for typical inputs that a rm would need to operate and output prices were asked
54for common items that are manufactured or services performed. For example, all bicycle
mechanics were asked the price of 4 inputs: tires, tubes, spokes, and chain grease, and asked
the output price for typical services rendered: changing a spoke, changing a tire, changing
a tube, and greasing a chain. This was done to build a set of item prices that could be
compared across rms.
Item prices were winsorized at the top and bottom 1% of the distribution to reduce the
inuence of outliers. Z-scores were constructed at the item-survey round level by subtracting
the control group mean price and standard deviation. Unlike the other indices, there were
sometimes too few items in the control group to subtract the control group mean. Price
z-scores were averaged to create an index. Changes in sample sizes on regressions with
input and output price indices as the dependent variable reect the fact that some rms did
not source or sell the same items as other rms and therefore a comparison could not be
constructed.
B Platform Engagement
Platform usage data includes phone number of callers, search activity within the platform,
time and day of search, number of menu screens, and which rm was ultimately found.
Phone numbers collected by the research team can be matched back to identify whether
it came from a rural rm, rural customer, or urban rm. Table 1 reports results from an
ANCOVA regression where all rms baseline outcome is zero, since no rm appeared in the
phonebook platform during the baseline survey.
Panel A shows the rural rms search behavior. Three types of rms are listed in the
platform: urban rms, rural rms from this research project, and rural rms in a nearby
region. Control rms could only access rural rms from the adjacent region. We could not
assign a phone number to have zero access to the platform. Instead we assigned them to see
rms that are outside of their geographic trading area.
Outcome variables along the top row of each panel are binary variables. Column 1,
\Used eKichabi Platform" denotes whether a rm ever dialled into the application during
the survey period. The control mean in Column 1 shows that 29% of control rms dialed
into the phonebook application at least once. Both treatment arms were signicantly more
likely to dial into the platform, providing evidence that the rms available to them were
more relevant than those visible to control rms.
Columns 2-4 denote whether a rm searched an urban rm, rural rm in the same region,
or the other non-experimental region. Not all rms that dial eKichabi reach a nal screen
that lists a business phone number. Firms reported to the research team that sometimes
they would use it to search for rm names, locations, and sectors, all of which can be found
without going to the nal screen that features a rm phone number. In other cases, the cell
network may have failed or the USSD shortcode host could have timed out.12Columns 2
and 3 conrm that control rms could not search either urban or rural rms in their region.
Likewise, the downstream treatment arm could not search urban rms. Both upstream and
12The drop in control mean from Column 1 to Column 4 reects this tendency for users to stop searching
before reaching a nal screen. The way to interpret the dierence is that 19% of control users dialled eKichabi
and 5% reach a nal screen that featured a rm name and phone number.
55downstream could search for rural rms in the same region and the other region. Again,
the treatment assignments constrained the upstream arm to reach upstream suppliers and
downstream rms to be reachable by rural customers, who are not listed in the application.
Panel B shows whether the treated rms were found by users. The control mean for all
four specications is zero since control rms are not listed in the eKichabi platform. Nearly
all of the downstream rms (92%) were found by a user and 23% of upstream rms were
found.13In both cases, search among rural rms in the same region accounts for a higher
share of the search than by wholesalers and rural customers. However, downstream rms
were far more likely to be found by a rural customer (27% were found each round) compared
to the upstream arm, of which 4% were found by urban suppliers each round. It indicates
that overall, the downstream treatment arm was more active on the application, both in
terms of searching nearby rural rms and in terms of being found by customers.
C Robustness Checks
C.1 Attrition
Two types of attrition rates are assessed, 1) by assigned groups, and 2) by baseline covariates.
The rst compares dierential attrition by treatment status and tests whether the dierence
is statistically dierent. If treatment groups have higher attrition rates, some foreseeable
reasons might be if participants change their businesses in response to treatment, or perhaps
learn new opportunities and migrate to another community. A related concern is if treatment-
related attrition increases rm exit. For example, rms may increase their network and learn
information that discourages them from investing further in their business and decide to close.
Seasonal rm closures is common in this setting as some rms pop-up to take advantage
of the busy agricultural season and temporarily close during periods that require a lot of
agricultural labor. For better or worse, small rm entry and exit is a common element of
small enterprise environment in developing countries (McKenzie and Pahausen, 2017).
For the purposes of measuring attrition, rm closure and rm non-response are measured
the same way. The research team conducted all follow-up surveys via phone. In cases where
rms did not answer the phone after a few attempts, the team reached out to village leaders
and asked to connect with rm owners. In cases where the owner was not found, village
leaders were able to conrm whether the rm closed or connect the research team with the
new rm operators. In cases where rms had new operators, we conducted the survey with
the new operator and updated the phonebook to include the new phone number. It is worth
noting that this rarely occurred - in most cases if a rm operator left a community, they
shut down their business and the rm would be classied as `closed' and `attrited.'
13Since regressions include strata xed eects, survey round indicators, and the prediction index, the
coecients are not precisely equivalent to the unconditional group means, but they are close.
56Table 1: eKichabi Phonebook Platform Usage
Panel A: Firms Search Behavior
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Used Searched Searched Searched
eKichabi Urban Rural Firms Other
(0/1) Firm Firm Region
Upstream Treat 0.10*** 0.04*** 0.11*** -0.04***
(0.03) (0.01) (0.02) (0.01)
Downstream Treat 0.15*** -0.00 0.20*** -0.04***
(0.03) (0.00) (0.02) (0.01)
Control Mean 0.19 0.00 0.02 0.05
Observations 1521 1521 1521 1521
Adj. R-squared 0.15 0.09 0.14 0.03
Panel B: Firms Found in Application
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Found by Found by Found by Found by
Any Rural Urban Rural
User Customer Firm Firm
Upstream Treat 0.23*** -0.00 0.04*** 0.20***
(0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.02)
Downstream Treat 0.92*** 0.27*** 0.02*** 0.36***
(0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02)
Control Mean 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Observations 1521 1521 1521 1521
Adj. R-squared 0.68 0.25 0.01 0.28
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Table shows treatment
eects regressions using application usage data. Each column has an outcome variable regressed
on the treatment group indicators. Controls include strata xed eects, the prediction index,
and survey round dummies.
57Table 2: Dierential Attrition by Treatment Group
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Periodic Permanent Arrit Attrit Attrit
Non-Response Attrition Follow-up 1 Follow-up 2 Follow-up 3
Upstream Treat -0.058 0.006 -0.024 0.006 -0.046
(0.051) (0.024) (0.038) (0.041) (0.043)
Downstream Treat 0.011 -0.005 -0.017 0.004 0.009
(0.051) (0.024) (0.038) (0.041) (0.043)
Control Mean 0.353 0.053 0.165 0.182 0.206
Obs 507 507 507 507 507
Adj R-Squared 0.004 0.004 0.051 0.040 0.000
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. This table reports
results for a set of regressions where an attrition indicator is regressed on treatment
status and strata indicators.
Table 2 shows the dierential attrition rate by two denitions of attrition. First, columns
1 and 2 show results for the variable `Periodic non-response', which takes a value of 1 in
cases where a rm did not respond to at least one survey. About 35.3% of control rms did
not respond to at least one survey round, but there were no dierences by treatment group.
Second, the outcome variable `permanent attrition' takes a value of 1 in cases where there
was no response after the baseline survey. The permanent attrition rate is much lower - only
about 5.3% of control rms attrited after the baseline survey and there were no dierence by
treatment group. Columns 3-5 report the attrition rates for each survey round, also nding
no dierences by treatment group.
To get a sense for drivers of rm closures and attrition, the third survey round asked
rms why they closed and whether they planed to reopen. Nearly 40% of closed/attrited
rms closed their business to work on agricultural activities and 20% reported moving to
another city or village to look for wage work. The remainder closed due to household shocks
(re, ood, and theft), childcare and family healthcare responsibilities, a lack of customers,
lack of capital, or due to faulty equipment in need of repair. 75% of rms that closed stated
that they planned to reopen their rm in the near future.
The second type of attrition rate based on baseline covariates serves to rule out selective
attrition on observables. Table 3 in the Table appendix reports two tests of selective attrition
based on two dentions of attrition described above - ever attrit, and permanent attrit. A
regression with the attrition status as the independent variable and the baseline balance
covariates interacted with treatment status on the right-hand side was run along with an F-
test of joint signicance of regressors. The F-stat for ever attrit regression was 1.63, too low to
reject a null hypothesis of zero joint signicance at the 10% level (p-value is 0.1143). And the
F-stat for permanent attrition group was 0.83, with a p-value of 0.5762, also failing to reject
the null of a joint eect. Given that dierential attrition by assigned groups and selective
attrition on observables do not appear problematic, making the additional assumption that
unobservables do not drive dierences preserves identication of the average treatment eect
58(ATE) for the study population (Ghanem et al., 2019). Here, the empirical strategy estimates
an intent-to-treat (ITT), which equals the ATE under the assumption of perfect treatment
compliance.
59Table 3: Robustness: Selective Attrition Test
(1) (2)
Ever Attrit Permanent Attrit
Upstream Treat Supplier Relational Contracting Index -0.013 0.050
(0.106) (0.051)
Downstream Treat Supplier Relational Contracting Index 0.186* 0.049
(0.108) (0.052)
Upstream Treat Input Search Activity Index -0.064 -0.090*
(0.106) (0.051)
Downstream Treat Input Search Activity Index -0.210** 0.010
(0.094) (0.045)
Upstream Treat Number of Suppliers -0.047 0.015
(0.058) (0.028)
Downstream Treat Number of Suppliers 0.142*** -0.007
(0.054) (0.026)
Upstream Treat Supplier Phone Activity Index 0.101 -0.047
(0.087) (0.042)
Downstream Treat Supplier Phone Activity Index -0.047 -0.030
(0.093) (0.045)
Upstream Treat Customer Relational Contracting Index 0.076 0.043
(0.087) (0.042)
Downstream Treat Customer Relational Contracting Index -0.208** -0.024
(0.087) (0.042)
Upstream Treat Non-local Customer=1 -0.159 -0.084
(0.143) (0.069)
Downstream Treat Non-local Customer=1 -0.349** -0.081
(0.148) (0.071)
Upstream Treat Number of Customers 0.001 0.001
(0.002) (0.001)
Downstream Treat Number of Customers -0.003 -0.000
(0.002) (0.001)
Upstream Treat Customer Phone Activity Index -0.118 -0.060
(0.089) (0.043)
Downstream Treat Customer Phone Activity Index -0.025 -0.018
(0.077) (0.037)
Upstream Treat Sales Revenue Index -0.014 0.007
(0.080) (0.038)
Downstream Treat Sales Revenue Index -0.088 0.010
(0.084) (0.040)
Upstream Treat Output Price Index 0.019 0.026
(0.075) (0.036)
Downstream Treat Output Price Index 0.081 0.031
(0.060) (0.029)
Upstream Treat Input Price Index 0.042 0.066*
(0.075) (0.036)
Downstream Treat Input Price Index -0.060 0.013
(0.073) (0.035)
Upstream Treat Transport Costs Share 0.253 0.151
(0.242) (0.117)
Downstream Treat Transport Costs Share -0.556* 0.180
(0.330) (0.159)
Upstream Treat Purchased Locally=1 0.144 0.059
(0.120) (0.058)
Downstream Treat Purchased Locally=1 -0.134 0.005
(0.114) (0.055)
F-Stat 1.6314 0.8305
p-value 0.1143 0.5762
Control Mean 0.353 0.053
Obs 507 507
Adj R-Squared .041 .011
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Controls include strata
indicators and an indicator if variable was missing at baseline. F-stat reports the test statistic for an
F-test of all the outcome by treatment interactions. The p-value the for both models fails to reject
the null that coecients on the outcome by treatment interactions are zero.
60C.2 Randomization Inference
As a robustness check, p-values were computed by using randomization inference (Athey and
Imbens, 2017). Randomization inference re-assigns treatment and re-estimates treatment ef-
fects under the placebo assignment. The simplest version of randomization inference iterates
through dierent placebo treatment assignments to generate a distribution of treatment es-
timates. The probability that a value as large as the actual treatment eect is computed and
becomes the p-value for that hypothesis. Randomization inference is especially useful to limit
the presence of large outliers that may be present within treated groups. If however, data
do not exhibit substantial outliers, then randomization p-values should be roughly similar to
conventional asymptotic inference (Young, 2019). Here, randomization inference is useful as
a placebo test to check whether treatment-driven heteroskedasticity drives results. Similar
to nite sample inference, only p-values below 0.10 percent threshold support rejecting a
null of zero.
Table 4 reports randomization inference p-values for all of the primary outcomes using the
Stata command randcmd . As suggested by Young (2019), I report randomization-t p-values
which are based on re-sampling from a distribution of t-statistics and is more valid in cases
with multiple treatment arms. The rst two columns report the individual randomization p-
value for the upstream and downstream treatments, respectively. The third column reports
randomization p-value of joint signicance testing a sharp null of whether both treatments
had any eect. Finally, Young (2019) also oers a test of joint signicance based on outcome
groupings. I report them for groupings of upstream, downstream, and productivity outcomes,
similar to how multiple hypothesis testing was conducted.
Individual treatment p-values in columns 1 and 2 roughly mirror those estimated us-
ing standard asymptotic inference reported in the main body of the paper. This provides
evidence that treatment driven heteroskedasticity or outliers did not bias treatment eects
estimates.
Columns 3 and 4 provide new information not presented in the results sections of the
main paper. Column 3 lists p-values for a joint test of whether both treatments combined
outcomes were statistically dierent than control. Out of 15 main outcomes, 7 were jointly
signicant - upstream relational contracting, downstream relational contracting, customer
phone activity index, output price index, transport costs share, and whether rms purchased
inputs from a local vendor rather than in a city. It suggests that access to the directory and
being listed in the directory signicantly changed outcomes in similar ways despite being
sorted into treatment arms meant to `boost' either upstream or downstream contact.
Finally, column 4 presents results from Westfall-Young joint signicance based the eect
of both treatments on all outcomes in a particular group. In other words, it tests whether
the experiment had any eect whatsoever on groups of treatment outcomes. This test also
embeds multiple hypothesis test corrections within each group, but not across groups. For all
three groupings - upstream, downstream, and productivity - p-values are below .05, thereby
rejecting the null hypothesis of no eect whatsoever. And the last row of the table reports a
p-value for a test of joint signicance on all outcomes and rejects the null of no experimental
eects across all main outcomes below a .01 level. These tests further indicate that search
and visibility in the phonebook changed outcomes for rms in the treatment groups.
61Table 4: Robustness: Randomization Inference
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Upstream Downstream Joint Test Joint Test
Treatment Treatment Both Outcome
Individual Individual Treatments Grouping
Outcome p-value p-value p-value p-value Iterations
Upstream Outcomes Grouping
Supplier Relational Contracting Index .0036 .1975 .0159 .0131 2000
Input Search Activity Index .0019 .0011 .0018 .0131 2000
Any New Supplier .1118 .0891 .1625 .0131 2000
New Supplier Share .0644 .1028 .1203 .0131 2000
Supplier Phone Activity Index .7654 .1856 .3830 .0131 2000
Downstream Outcomes Grouping
Customer Relational Contracting Index .0001 .0006 .0009 .0006 2000
Any Non-local Customer .6940 .1180 .2527 .0006 2000
Any New Customer .9324 .7318 .9381 .0006 2000
New Customer Share .7340 .7270 .7370 .0006 2000
Customer Phone Activity Index .3631 .0002 .0012 .0006 2000
Productivity Outcomes Grouping
Sales Revenue Index .4083 .7612 .5611 .0426 2000
Output Price Index .0244 .0996 .0598 .0426 2000
Input Price Index .1708 .5414 .3969 .0426 2000
Transport Costs Share Inputs Purchased .2168 .0049 .0209 .0426 2000
Inputs Purchased Locally .2871 .0077 .0237 .0426 2000
Joint Test - All Outcomes .0062 2000
Notes : This table compares p-values for main outcomes using randomization inference. The rst two columns show individual
p-values for each treatment for main outcomes that can be directly compared to asymptotic p-values and multiple hypothesis
testing p-values presented in Table 6. Column 3 is a joint test of signicance for both treatments combined for each outcome.
Column 4 is a joint test of signicance for both treatments for each group of outcomes. The last row reports the p-value of a
joint test of signicance on all outcomes.
62C.3 Inverse Covariance Weighted Index Construction
A second approach to index construction proposed in Anderson (2008) utilizes a standard-
ization procedure similar to Kling et al. (2007), but weights components by the inverse of
the covariance matrix of outcomes. It has the eect of down-weighting components with
little variation across units, and increasing weight on components that are relatively less
correlated with other components. This index construction would penalize indices whose
components are highly correlated. If between-component correlation were driving results,
this index would result in larger standard errors. And if between-component correlation does
not drive results, the weighting procedure is equivalent to ecient generalized least squares
and can result in smaller standard errors.
All indices that were presented in the main outcomes were constructed following Anderson
(2008) and results are shown in Table 5 in the Table Appendix. Inverse covariance matrix
weighted indices are not centered about zero for the control group, making direct comparisons
of eect sizes between the two indices dicult. But, in most cases standard errors are about
twice as large as unweighted indices in the preferred specication. And, eect sizes tend to
be larger. Overall, signs and eect sizes are relatively similar across both types of indices.
Table 5: Robustness: Inverse Covariance Matrix-Weighted Indices
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Supplier Customer Input Business Customer Supplier
Relational Relational Search Revenue Phone Phone
Contracting Contracting Activity Index Activity Activity
Index Index Index Index Index
Upstream Treat 0.187*** -0.209*** -0.183*** -0.019 -0.056 -0.099
(0.069) (0.069) (0.066) (0.063) (0.073) (0.062)
Downstream Treat 0.084 -0.215*** -0.201*** 0.007 -0.271*** -0.168***
(0.071) (0.068) (0.063) (0.064) (0.071) (0.055)
Control Mean 0.429 0.356 0.705 0.153 0.255 0.114
Obs 1229 1252 1230 1252 1252 1252
Adj R-Squared 0.053 0.119 0.235 0.141 0.130 0.188
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Controls include strata indicators,
the prediction index, survey round indicators, baseline outcomes, and an indicator if baseline outcome was
missing. This table shows a robustness check for index construction using a procedure that down-weights
index components that are highly correlated.
63D Discrete Choice Experiment Detail
An discrete choice experiment was created for baseline rms. It was designed to elicit trade-
os on four attributes of a typical sourcing contract: price, preference for new versus old
suppliers, delivery terms, and provision of credit. Firms examine dierent pairs of contracts
each with four attributes and indicate which contract they prefer. Pilot data showed that
some rms have stronger attachment to their suppliers relative to others, picking a contract
in which they pay a higher price in order to keep their existing supplier.
For each contract attribute, one option is associated with having built trust with a
supplier. For example, suppliers must trust that credit will be repaid, or they must trust
that payment for goods shipped will be received. Table 6 below shows each contract attribute
and the dierent levels. Each column heading represents a contract attribute , and rows denote
thelevels for each attribute. In the course of the DCE, rms were shown 6 pairs of contracts
and asked to specify which was preferred. Each contract listed one level from each attribute
- price, whether a supplier was known or unknown, delivery terms, and terms of credit (see
example contract pairing in Figure A.6).
Table 6: Discrete Choice Experiment Contract Attributes and Levels
Price Supplier Transport Payment
.85 x Price Known Deliver, pay shipping Cash now
.90 x Price Unknown Travel, pay bus fare M-Pesa Now
.95 x Price 50% now,
1.00 x Price 50% in one month
1.05 x Price 80% now,
1.10 x Price 20% in one month
1.15 x Price
DCE require participants to compare sets of contracts with variation in attribute levels.
Attribute levels were randomly determined through an orthogonal array algorithm After
completing a series of comparisons, a mixed logit model is used to estimate the relative
importance of each level. Firms were shown 6 pairs of contracts and asked to specify which
was preferred. Each contract listed one level from each attribute - price, whether a supplier
was known or unknown, delivery terms, and terms of credit (Figure A.6 provides an example
of a contract pairing).
64Figure A.6: Example of Contract Pairing
Econometric analysis of discrete choice data draws from a random-utility model and uses
a mixed logit (also called random parameters logit) model to estimate choice probabilities
that represent group-level preferences for certain attributes (McFadden and Train, 2000).
Coecients on terms in the mixed logit are interpreted as the group-level preferences for an
attributes. Econometric analysis uses the following model specication:
Yijk 1Priceijk 2Supplier ijk 3Transport ijk 3Payment ijk k ijk
Firmiselects alternative jamong choice sets k.Yijkis a binary variable which takes
a value of 1 if the rm owner chose a certain contract. Unlike conditional logits, mixed
logit specications are robust to arbitrary correlation within alternatives and heterogeneous
preferences of agents. In other words, each agent is assumed to have their own preference
distribution of the various options. Coecients on terms in the mixed logit are interpreted
as the group-level preferences for an attributes. DCE are useful to identify strength of
preferences for specic contract attributes relative to other attributes, rather than a precise
measure of willingness-to-pay for a market good.
Table 7 shows results from the discrete choice experiment.14The sample size comes
from the 376 rms that completed the choice experiment multiplied by the 12 contracts
they reviewed.15Coecients are the mean and standard deviation of a distribution of tastes
in the population that participated in the discrete choice experiment. Price is treated as
xed coecient, meaning that only a mean is estimated and assumed to be xed for the
population.
To make coecients economically meaningful, they can be converted into a measure of
14For model specication and further detail on assumptions, see Appendix D.
15The full sample of 507 rms did not complete the discrete choice experiment due to piloting and some
cases of non-response. One rm only managed 10 contracts, thus 376 1224510:
65Table 7: Mixed Logit Results of Discrete Choice Experiment
Dependent Var: Contract Choice
Mean SD WTP (Percent)
(se) (se) [CI]
Price -6.11
(0.58)
Supplier Known 0.330.720.06
(0.12) (0.19) [0.02, 0.10]
Goods Delivered 2.012.050.33
(0.19) (0.18) [0.25, 0.40]
Mpesa payment -0.05 -0.21 -0.01
(0.18) (0.29) [-0.06, 0.05]
50% cash now 1.13-0.51 0.18
(0.18) (0.35) [0.12, 0.25]
80% cash now -0.04 1.67-0.01
(0.23) (0.25) [-0.08, 0.06]
Observations 4510 4510
Standard errors in parentheses
p 0:10,p 0:05,p 0:01
WTP by dividing the point estimate of the mean of an attribute level by the price coecient.
The coecient on price is negative - meaning that participants were less likely to choose a
contract as the price went up. The fact that the price coecient is negative and statistically
signicant provides a check that the experiment was understood and taken seriously by
participants since it suggests adherence to downward sloping demand. Likewise, not all
attribute levels were meaningful to participants (paying with Mpesa and paying 80% of their
balance at once). It indicates that rms were indierent about these contract attributes and
consistently preferred those with better terms.
D.1 Baseline Relational Contracting
One question of interest is whether relational contracting makes a dierence to rms. Here,
I present evidence from the baseline survey on how relational contracting associates with
key rm outcomes, such as revenues, employees, transportation costs, and input and output
prices. Using baseline information on revealed behavior, I construct indices of rm partici-
pation in relational contracting with their upstream suppliers and downstream customers.
I also construct an index of WTP relational contracting with upstream suppliers using
estimates from the discrete choice experiment. Individual level measures of WTP were es-
timated through simulation. Following Train (2009), this is only done for variables with
signicant coecients on the estimated mean (e.g. Supplier known, Goods delivered, and
payment of 50% cash now). The basic idea is that coecient means and standard deviations
of attribute preferences estimated in the mixed logit model are parameters that dene an
unconditional distribution of tastes in the population that can be used to estimate a con-
66ditional distribution of an individual by using their past choices. Since each rm compared
six sets of two contracts, each participant provided six data points from which to estimate a
conditional distribution of their individual preferences.
Results in Table 8 provide suggestive evidence on the importance of relational contracting,
particularly with upstream input providers. Firms with higher index of upstream relational
contracting tend to have higher sales revenue, more employees, lower output prices, lower
transport costs and lower input prices (though the last two were not signicantly dierent
from zero). These results control for a suite of pre-determined rm-level controls, including
rm age, years of education, gender of owner, rm sector, and village xed eects. Despite
adding controls, it is still likely that the relational contracting index is correlated with the
error term and thus results are cautiously interpreted as correlations.
Downstream relational contracting does not exhibit as much correlation with rm pro-
ductivity as the upstream relational contracting. It is not associated with any outcomes
aside from having a lower output price index, which might occur as a result of known cus-
tomers bargaining for lower prices. Similarly, when the results of the DCE are aggregated
into an index, there is no relationship with rm productivity outcomes, except for paying
higher input prices.
And nally, the bottom panel independent variable is constructed by taking the dierence
between rms' stated WTP for relational contracting and their observed upstream relational
contracting index. Here, there are some suggestive correlations. Firms with greater dif-
ferences between their stated and observed relational contracting are associated with lower
sales revenue, fewer employees, higher transport costs, higher output prices, and higher input
prices. This highlights the importance of unlocking rm networks so that rms that aspire
to have relational contracts can more easily meet new rms and build relationships required
to attain benets from relational contracting.
67Table 8: Baseline Outcomes Associated with Relational Contracting
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Sales Total Share Output Input
Revenue Employees Transport Price Price
Index Costs Index Index
Supplier Relational Contracting Index
Supplier Index 0.16** 0.18* -0.02 -0.15* -0.10
(0.08) (0.09) (0.01) (0.08) (0.09)
Mean -0.08 0.60 0.08 -0.01 0.02
Obs 506 501 418 393 343
Adj R-Squared 0.12 0.07 0.07 -0.01 0.11
Customer Relational Contracting Index
Customer Index 0.04 0.02 -0.02 -0.16** -0.04
(0.06) (0.06) (0.02) (0.07) (0.07)
Mean -0.08 0.60 0.08 -0.01 0.02
Obs 506 501 418 393 343
Adj R-Squared 0.11 0.06 0.08 -0.00 0.11
WTP Relational Contracting Index
WTP Supplier Index -0.09 -0.09 0.02 0.10 0.10*
(0.06) (0.08) (0.02) (0.07) (0.06)
Mean -0.08 0.60 0.08 -0.01 0.02
Obs 378 375 341 311 318
Adj R-Squared 0.17 0.04 0.03 -0.02 0.13
Dierence - WTP and Supplier Relational Contracting Index
Dierence WTP -0.09** -0.11* 0.03** 0.17*** 0.11**
(0.05) (0.06) (0.01) (0.06) (0.05)
Mean -0.08 0.60 0.08 -0.01 0.02
Obs 378 375 341 311 318
Adj R-Squared 0.17 0.05 0.04 0.01 0.13
Standard errors in parenthesis. * p 0:10, **p 0:05, ***p 0:01. Each regression
controls include rm age, years of education of owner, gender of owner, rm sector,
and village xed eects.
68