 
MARCH  2020      
DISCLAIMER: The authors' views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency  for 
International Development or the United States Government.  GIG WORK ON DIGITAL PLATFORMS 
Case Study 3: SweepSouth – Platform -Based 
Domestic Work  
 
Learning, Evaluation and Research Activity II (LER II)  
 
 
ROSALIE COLFS / USAID  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
This document was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development, 
Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Center under the Learning, Evaluation and Research 
Activity II (LER II) contract: GS10F0218U/7200AA18M00017.  
 
Prepared by:  
Tandem Research 
343 Coimavaddo Quitla  
Aldona, Bardez 403508  
Goa, India  
 
The Cloudburst Group  
8400 Corporate Drive, Suite 550  
Landover, MD 20785- 2238 
Tel: 301- 918-4400   
 CONTENTS  
1. INTRODUCTION  1 
2. RESEARCH QUERY  2 
2.1 RESEARCH QUESTIONS 2 
2.2 ABOUT SWEEPSOUTH  2 
2.3 METHOD AND LIMITATIONS 3 
2.4 PROFILE OF RESPONDENTS  4 
3. LABOR MARKETS AND DOMESTIC WORK IN SOUTH AFRICA  6 
4. FINDINGS  8 
4.1 FEW JOBS, FEW OPTIONS 8 
4.2 INCREASED EARNINGS BUT IRREGULAR WORK  9 
4.3 AUTONOMY AND FLEXIBILITY ARE OFTEN ONLY NOTIONAL  10 
4.4 LITTLE TO NO BARGAINING POWER  11 
4.5 SOCIAL PROTECTION, BOTH FORMAL AND INFORMAL, ARE BEYOND REACH 12 
5. CONCLUSION  14 
REFERENCES  16 
  
1     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  1. INTRODUCTION  
Domestic workers have long performed piecework, working multiple “gigs” for multiple employers, to 
complete specific tasks at a piece rate. Piecework is typically associated with low wages, poor working 
conditions, and limited social and legal protections.  Women have long been disproportionately 
represented in piecework because of low levels of education, care commitments, and the unavailability 
of suitable work opportunities. Domestic workers remain one of the most underpaid, overworked, and 
ill-treated se ction of workers.1 According to the ILO, more than a third of domestic workers are not 
entitled to a minimum wage or maternity leave benefits, nor do they have a statutory limitation on the 
number of hours worked or stipulated weekly rest hours.2 Given t hat the workers’ place of work is 
somebody’s home, regulating the sector has been a challenge, as is implementing the few regulations that 
do exist.  
The growth of the gig economy has already caused many changes in the structures that govern work.3 
As thes e technological interventions are introduced to a sector of work that is historically exploitative 
and undervalued, it could have the result of further entrenching exploitative practices. In many ways, gig 
work through digital platforms bears a structural resemblance to piecework. On the other hand, t he 
domestic work sector, which has seemingly remained unchanged for generations, could stand to benefit 
from the opportunities that digital technologies offer. Technology can be leveraged to improve 
employment conditions for domestic workers through, for example, standardizing wages, improving 
employment conditions, and professionalizing domestic work.   
 
1International Labour Organi zation. (2010). Decent work for domestic workers IV(1 ). Geneva: ILO. Retrieved from 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@ed_norm/@relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_10
4700.pdf . 
2 Ibid. 
3 Renan Barzilay, A., & Ben -David, A. (2017). Platform Inequality: Gender in the Gig -Economy. SSRN Electronic 
Journal. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2995906.  
2     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  2. RESEARCH QUERY  
2.1 RESEARCH QUESTIONS  
In an effort to understand how platform interventions in job -matchin g affect employment conditions and 
worker rights in the gig economy, this study examines the impact platforms have had on the domestic 
work sector in South Africa. How are employment relationships and conditions changing? Have 
platforms enabled or improved  access to quality work in developing countries? Do such labor platforms 
support or undermine workers’ rights and ability to bargain for adequate wages, compensation, and 
terms and conditions of their labor?  
This study examines the impact SweepSouth, an on -demand cleaning service platform in South Africa, 
has had on employment relationships, working conditions, wages, and the ability to collectivize and bargain. 
2.2 ABOUT SWEEPSOUTH  
SweepSouth is an on -demand cleaning service app which aims to offer clients  “convenient, flexible, and 
reliable”4 services while providing “dignified, flexible work at decent pay to SweepStars.”5 “SweepStars” 
is the name given to domestic workers on the platform, which was established in 2014 and offers 
services in Cape Town, J ohannesburg, Pretoria, and Durban, and has plans to expand to Ghana, 
Botswana, Kenya, and Nigeria. The platform is meant exclusively for women domestic workers and had 
7,500 registered workers, over 150,000 app downloads, and 40,000 users in 2018, making i t the biggest 
on-demand cleaning service app in South Africa. However, it represents less than one percent of 
domestic workers in the country.  
Clients can book a cleaning appointment for a minimum of three hours and a maximum of eight hours 
per day on any day of the week, selecting the number of rooms or bathrooms that need to be cleaned. 
They can add tasks like ironing, dishwashing, interior win dow cleaning, and cabinet cleaning to be 
completed by the worker. Clients are charged upwards of 38 South African Rand (a little less than 
US$3) per hour, along with processing fees. Clients can book recurring cleaning appointments and even 
select the workers they prefer.  
On its website, SweepSouth states that providing training and digital and financial literacy are added 
benefits of the platform for workers. Workers, however, only receive one day of training on how to use 
the app and Google Maps. To join  the platform, workers must fill out an application form and provide 
two reference letters from previous employers. Shortlisted candidates are called to the office to take a 
written multiple -choice test that covers tasks related to cleaning. Those who clea r this test are then 
asked to participate in the training and get verified by law enforcement, after which they can start 
accessing work through the platform.  
 
4 SweepSouth - Trusted, Reliable Home Cleaners. (2019). Retrieved 1 August 2019, from https://sweepsouth.com/ . 
5 SweepSouth calls their workers SweepStars and not cleaners or domestic workers in their bid to professionalize 
the sector and remove the stigma associated with domestic work.   
3     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  2.3 METHOD AND LIMITATIONS  
This study relied on semi -structured interviews with workers, both on and off the platform, and labor 
market experts. In total, 14 in -person and 3 telephonic interviews were conducted for this study. Gig 
work is am emergent field of study, particularly the effects for workers in the Global South. It is thus 
important to und erstand the priorities and experiences of workers. The semi -structured interview 
format enabled flexibility and adaptability, enabling participants to speak about the issues that mattered to them. The importance of interviews to qualitative research is not limited to the fact that they 
highlight subjective experiences, but also that participants are able to express themselves in their own 
voice and language. Much of this cannot be captured through conventional survey methods. The clear 
limitation of this ap proach is that the findings cannot be assumed to represent the experiences of a 
larger sector of SweepSouth workers or domestic workers in general. Wherever possible, however, we 
have corroborated our findings with available secondary literature on both Sw eepSouth and domestic 
work in South Africa.  
Cape Town was chosen as the site because it has the most SweepSouth activity both in terms of 
workers and clients. The SweepSouth main office is also in Cape Town, and we hoped situating our 
study in Cape Town w ould facilitate access to the SweepSouth team. The experience in Cape Town is 
comparable to other large cities, but it does see larger internal and external migration —many workers 
we spoke to had migrated to Cape Town in search of work. We contacted two workers from nearby provinces, but they were still waiting to receive work through the application, which suggests that access 
to work and experience of workers is different in non -urban areas.  
We recruited respondents primarily by booking services through t he SweepSouth app in Cape Town. 
We contacted workers to inform them about the study and asked them to participate in a 40 -minute 
interview on the day of the booking. We conducted five in -person, in- depth, semi -structured qualitative 
interviews with workers  in this manner. We offered respondents a small compensation for participating 
in the interview. A collaborator from the University of Western Cape helped us identify additional SweepSouth workers through their Facebook page for domestic workers in South A frica. We reached 
three workers and conducted the interviews by telephone. All the workers we interviewed worked in the Cape Town area. We spoke to workers about a range of themes: previous work, employment 
conditions, wages, grievance redressal, safety, aspirations, and income security.  
In order to be able to compare employment conditions of workers on and off the platform and the role that unionization plays in improving conditions and addressing workplace exploitation in the domestic 
work sector, we interviewed five members of the South Africa Domestic Service and Allied Workers 
Union (SADSAWU) in person. We offered compensation for their participation. We also interviewed 
four experts to help us understand labor market conditions and the domestic work se ctor in South 
Africa.
6  
 
6 Krish Chetty, Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC); Dr. Alexi Habiyaremye, H SRC; Fairuz Mullagee, Social 
Law Project, University of Western Cape; Myrtle Witbooi, South Africa Domestic Service and Allied 
Workers Union   
4     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  SweepSouth management declined to participate in the study, citing prior commitments with other 
organizations on the same subject.7 We have supplemented the report with publicly available interviews 
and announcements from the platform in lieu of responses from their participation.  
None of the workers on SweepSouth we spoke to were members of SADSAWU and all were unsure of 
how being a member of a union could help them. On the other hand, all the workers off the platform 
we spoke to  were long -time members of the union, and some held offices as well. They were very 
educated about their rights and entitlements. In order to make a fair comparison of the experiences of 
workers on and off the platform, interviews with workers who work off  the platform and are also not 
union members would be ideal. However, we were unable to make contact with workers who fit this 
profile. To compensate for this, we spoke with labor market experts who have been studying domestic 
workers on digital platforms.   
We were allotted only five working days for the field visit, assumedly because of budget and time 
constraints. This limited the number of workers we were able to access and speak with, particularly as 
gig workers are dispersed and do not have a central p oint of contact or coordination.  We contacted 
workers directly through the app, but many workers were reluctant to speak to us. SweepSouth 
instructs workers to limit interactions with clients, including avoiding conversation with them. This is to 
deter wo rkers from taking on private work with clients they are matched with through the platform. 
We found some workers were reluctant to speak to us on account of this, while others shared their experiences more freely when we assured them that we were not assoc iated with SweepSouth and the 
content of the discussion would not be shared with management. We contacted the SweepSouth 
management team hoping to access more workers, but they refused to participate in the study.  
2.4 PROFILE OF RESPONDENTS  
All the workers  on SweepSouth were women between the ages of 26 and 47. Of the eight workers 
from SweepSouth with whom we spoke, five had emigrated from Zimbabwe in search of better work 
opportunities. Respondents’ educational qualifications ranged from those having comp leted middle 
school to those with diplomas or undergraduate degrees.8 Workers who had emigrated from Zimbabwe 
tended to have higher educational qualifications. Most respondents had performed some form of 
domestic work before joining the platform, sometimes in addition to jobs in the hospitality or sales 
sectors. For most re spondents, the platform was their primary source of income, supplemented by 
grants, most commonly childcare grants, from the government, or through other jobs. All the workers we interviewed had been working with SweepSouth for over a year. All the workers  had at least one 
child for whom they were financially responsible, in addition to other dependents. Workers had varying 
degrees of caregiving responsibilities at home.  
 
7 We contacted South African researchers associated with the other organization, Fairwork Foundation, but they 
also noted that SweepSouth had not been particularly cooperative; the same feedback was also received 
from other researchers from HSRC we spoke with, who were studying platforms.  
8 In South Africa, 73.4 percent of women are reported to have completed the sch ool-leaving examination, while 
only 28.5 percent had an undergraduate degree.  
Education Series Volume V Higher Education and Skills in South Africa 2017 (2017) Retrieved 7 August 2019 from 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/Report-92 -01-05/HigherEducationandSkillsSouthAfrica2017.pdf .  
5     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  The five members of SADSAWU we spoke to were also all women ranging in age from 55 yea rs to 67 
years old. SADSAWU members are thus, on average, much older than the platform workers we spoke 
to. They were all from South Africa, having moved to Cape Town in search of better opportunities. 
They had all left full -time jobs as domestic workers on account of their age, but still took on part- time 
work or reduced hours to make ends meet. Although all their children were grown, one worker was 
supporting her grandchildren and niece. They were all long -time members of the union, with the newest 
member  having joined in 2012 after a dispute with her employer’s partner.  
   
6     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  3. LABOR MARKETS AND DOMESTIC WORK IN SOUTH 
AFRICA  
The unemployment rate in South Africa reached 27.6 percent in 2019, a near 15 -year high, with 
women’s unemployment at 29.3 percent comp ared to men’s at 26.1 percent.9 Women consistently face 
higher rates of unemployment and underemployment than men.10 Race also plays a crucial role in 
differential experiences of the labor market among South Africans, with stark disparities in 
unemploymen t rates between white, black Africans, and colored.11  
Government initiatives to develop industry focus on entrepreneurship, and small businesses and 
platforms fall under these initiatives. The high cost of internet connectivity via both data and broadband  
WiFi connections could be a prohibitive factor in the uptake of platform work and the development of 
the digital economy in general in South Africa.12 
Domestic work in South Africa, much like other facets of society, continues to be impacted by the 
legacy of apartheid -era policies. Historically performed by African and mixed -race women, racial 
disparity in the sector continues to remain highly stark, with 91 percent of workers identifying as black 
African and nine percent as colored.13 Workers are usually from disadvantaged communities, while 
employers are predominantly white and affluent. The sector employs 14 percent of the workforce, and 
women make up around 97 percent of the entire sector.14 Many are internal migrants or immigrants 
from neighboring countries with little knowledge of their legal rights, having had limited access to formal 
education. While immigrants have work permits, they are not eligible for state -sponsored schemes or 
benefits such as the Unemployment Insurance Fund. Their vulnerability  is exacerbated by the lack of 
 
9 Quarterly Labour Force Survey Quarter 1: 2019. (2019). Retrieved 1 August 2019, from 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0211/P02111stQuarter2019.pdf . 
10 Ndinda, C., & Ngandu, S. (2019). Winners and losers: gender disparities in the South African labour market. 
Retrieved 1 August 2019, from http://repository.hsrc.ac.za/handle/20.500.11910/9714 . 
11 Interview with Alexi Habiyaremye (HSRC)  
The stark inequality  is partly  a result  of colonial  and apartheid -era policies  that placed  black Africans and coloreds  
at a disadvantage,  but also partly  because  of the failure  of post-apartheid  governments  to radically transform  the 
social  structure  to remove  structural  inequa lities. For example,  current  government  initiatives  aimed  at creating  
job opportunities  are aimed  at the mining,  agriculture,  and construction  industries.  While  these  may create  jobs 
predominantly for men in low- and semi-skilled  work  in the short  term,  they don’t  take into account  the structural  
changes required  to create  long-term  impact.  This would  require  restructuring  the education  sector to create  a 
skilled  workforce  and investment  to develop  dynamic industries  that can absorb  these  workers.   
12  Chute l, L. (2018). Connecting to the internet costs more in Johannesburg and Cape Town than it does in New 
York and Zurich. Retrieved August 2019.  
Sunday Read: Why data and transport costs are the biggest barriers for young job seekers. (2019). Retrieved 1 
August 2019, from https://www.fin24.com/Companies/sunday-read -why-data-and -transport -costs -are-the-
biggest -barriers -for-young -job-seekers -20190512 . 
13 International Labour Organi zation. (2013). Domestic workers across the world: Global and regional statist ics 
and the extent of legal protection [Ebook]. Geneva. Retrieved from 
https://www.ilo.org/travail/Whatsnew/WCMS_173363/lang --en/index.htm . 
14 How do women fare in the South African labour market? | Statistics South Africa. Retrieved 1 August 2019, from 
http://www.statssa.gov.za/?p=11375 .  
7     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  organizations that ensure they enjoy basic rights as guaranteed by the constitution;15 their limited 
participation in trade unions;16 and the fact that their work isolates them to the private sphere because 
their place of work is usually the employer’s home. Exact numbers of domestic workers are difficult to 
ascertain and differ across studies —this is probably due to the fact that domes tic work is often hidden 
or unrecognized and a large part of the labor force is engaged in non -standard forms of work. 
Domestic workers in South Africa are covered by several laws, most notably the Sectoral 
Determination 7: Domestic Worker Sector, 2002 (SD 7), which keeps the definition of domestic worker 
broad enough to include independent contractors as well as employees.17 SD7 stipulates the basic 
conditions of work and includes provisions for wages, working hours, and leave policy. Additionally, other la ws like National Labour Relations Act 1995 (LRA) and Basic Conditions of Employment Act of 
1997
18 make provisions for workers to organize and collectively bargain. LRA has also been used to 
address disputes regarding unfair dismissal. However, there are gl aring gaps in the protection of 
domestic workers, as they have been excluded from the scope of two acts: Compensation for 
Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act (COIDA) and the National Minimum Wage Act (NMWA). The 
latter sets the minimum wage at 20 South African Rand (R20) per hour, but domestic workers’ 
minimum wage continues to stand at R15.  
  
 
15 Mullagee, F. (2011). Domestic Workers in South Africa. Organising for Empowerment.  
16 SADSAWU has membership of around 30,000 of the reported one million domestic workers in South Africa . 
17 Ibid. 
18 Ibid.  
8     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  4. FINDINGS 
4.1 FEW JOBS, FEW OPTIONS 
Workers joined SweepSouth for a number of reasons: lack of alternative employment opportunities; 
potential for higher earning s; distrust of traditional recruitment agencies; and the hope of using 
SweepSouth as a means to find permanent work. SweepSouth requires workers to submit reference 
letters from previous employers and to clear a police verification process, so it is unlike ly to provide 
employment opportunities to those without proper paperwork.  
Some workers were previously employed in the service sector —in shops, as security guards, in 
restaurants, or for professional cleaning services. They left their jobs either because of low wages, 
irregular pay, long hours of work, care responsibilities, or because their contracts had not been 
renewed. Unable to find alternative jobs in the same field, they joined SweepSouth. Those who had been 
in domestic work previously turned to Swe epSouth because their employers left Cape Town or they 
needed to increase their earnings. Many did “char” work previously, i.e., domestic work across different 
homes; such work was found either through acquaintances or job boards like Gumtree,19 but was no t 
regular or reliable.    
“I used to advertise on Gumtree but there people don’t want you to come every day. Some of them became regular clients but they don’t always call.”  
All of the workers we interviewed joined SweepSouth hoping for steady and higher e arnings. The 
system of weekly payouts on the platform was an important feature for workers. For the workers who migrated from Zimbabwe, domestic work was one of the few viable options for employment in South 
Africa. They had difficulty finding jobs that matched their qualifications and skill levels, and they felt they 
were discriminated against because of their migrant status. One of the workers had a degree in 
mortuary science and had worked in a funeral parlor, another was a trained hair stylist, and another had worked in a hospital for ten years. They left Zimbabwe because of the dire economic situation —high 
inflation rates and a crumbling economy meant that even if they were employed, they didn’t receive 
salaries for months at a time.  
“Most places I app ly to don’t want to hire me because I’m a foreigner. They have to hire 
someone from South Africa first and not people from outside.”   
Some workers joined the platform hoping they would find regular, permanent employers through the app. The platform provid ed a way to make quick cash while looking for full -time work.  
“It’s a good way to make cash quickly because we get paid every week. And you might find regular clients.” 
Others said that even though they had been drawn to the platform earlier, their experi ences on the 
platform had made them re -evaluate; they would now prefer a traditional job with a single employer as 
it was more stable and predictable.  
 
19 Gumtree is a job -matching website where workers and employers can advertise their services or needs.   
9     |     CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  “On SweepSouth things keep changing. One week you get many bookings for three or four 
hours. Other times , you get long bookings for just one day. It makes things hard.”   
Workers were also distrustful or skeptical about the utility of traditional recruitment agencies. Agencies, they noted, didn’t pay workers fairly, cutting a significant amount in agency comm ission.  
“You work hard but they (recruitment agencies) benefit, not you. So that’s why I chose 
SweepSouth.”  
4.2 INCREASED EARNINGS BUT IRREGULAR WORK  
Workers joined SweepSouth hoping to earn a higher and steadier income. However, the irregularity of work combined with the costs of transport and data, both of which are borne by the worker, 
significantly reduced their earning potential on the platform.  
Workers on SweepSouth are paid an hourly rate depending on how long they’ve been on the platform. New recruits receive R25 (a little less than US$2) per hour, which is well above the minimum wage of 
R15 for domestic workers in South Africa. Per appointment, workers can earn between R75 to R200. 
However, there are significant hidden costs for the workers —they typically need to spend around R50 
(around US$4.50) on transport per booking, and upwards of R35 on data and airtime per week. These 
hidden costs often amount to as much as R350 -400 per week. High transport costs also reflect the 
spatial segregation of Cape Town, with clients and workers typically living in different parts of the city. 
Thus, while SweepSouth guarantees pay above the minimum wage, these additional or hidden costs 
severely constrain earnings.  
Upon completing 400 hours of work on the platfo rm, the hourly rate increases to R32 (about US$2.50) 
per hour. Most workers we spoke to stated that it took them about five to six months to complete 400 
hours of work. This acts as an incentive for workers to stay on the platform. However, many of the 
workers we spoke with reported only a marginal increase in earnings —while there was an increase in 
the hourly rate, the number of jobs seems to have declined.  
“I don’t know if my earnings have increased much, maybe about five percent in total? The number of jobs has gone down. Before, I was getting more bookings.”  
The reasons for this were not clear—whether it was intentionally designed by SweepSouth to allow 
other workers to reach higher rate slabs, whether it was a calculated business strategy to keep compa ny 
costs stable, or whether it was just worker perception. As we were unable to speak to the platform, we 
could not clarify this information.  
Most workers sought to work more hours, or perform more gigs, than typically offered on the platform. 
As a result, most avail the “Earn More” feature offered by SweepSouth, which is for last minute 
appointments. Workers can check for jobs under this catego ry only after 7 p.m. for appointments the 
next morning.  
“If I don’t have enough bookings for the week, I use Earn More. You have to be quick because 
others are also looking for bookings there.”   
10     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  The platform encourages all monetary transactions take place  over the platform, and even tips to 
SweepStars are processed via the app. However, it reportedly deducts a percentage of this tip amount 
as a processing fee.  
4.3 AUTONOMY AND FLEXIBILITY ARE OFTEN ONLY NOTIONAL 
Despite the promise of greater autonomy and  flexibility associated with gig work, in practice, these are 
severely constrained for most workers. Certain design features of the platform limit the control 
workers have over the terms of their work, privileging client or customer concerns over those of 
workers. For one, there is information asymmetry between clients and workers. Workers on 
SweepSouth have a profile which displays their photo, ratings, and a note that details some biographical 
details along with positive comments from previous employers or clients. This allows clients to pick 
workers based on the ratings and worker profile. Workers, on the other hand, are not shown any 
details of clients they are matched with and are penalized for not accepting jobs.  
Rating systems can also function as a form of reputational control.20 Clients rate workers on a scale of 
one to five stars and have the option of leaving additional comments. Workers are encouraged to maintain a rating of 4.75. Low ratings prompt warnings from the platform and three consecutiv e ratings 
of less than two stars results in worker accounts being deactivated. Workers have little say in 
challenging or negotiating these ratings.  
“If our ratings go down, SweepSouth won’t show us our bookings. And clients also pick those 
with high ratin gs. When a client gives a low rating they don’t think about it, but it affects us 
very badly. They should tell us if they are not happy with the job so that we can fix it. How can 
we know if they don’t tell us and then they give us a low rating?”  
The focus on ratings is intended to give clients confidence as they invite strangers into their home. Yet, 
it can have a negative impact on the worker’s ability to get jobs. Clients often don’t understand the 
rating system, and their ratings are often based on a w him, or deeply ingrained racial and class 
stereotypes. Workers are also unaware how ratings are calculated and the criteria against which they 
are being evaluated. The one -sided nature of the ratings systems creates a structural domination of the 
platform over workers that is dependent on workers fungibility.
21 Although workers can also leave 
ratings for clients, the workers we spoke to did not seem to feel that this was of much consequence to 
worker experience. Workers do not have the option of picking the ir clients or declining those with low 
ratings.  
“We cannot choose clients so even if they have a low rating we still have to go. Sometimes you 
don’t know what they’re going to be like but we still have to go.”  
Nor do they have the option to freely cancel appointments —SweepSouth deactivates their account if 
they cancel more than four appointments in a month. Workers are also unlikely to cancel bookings 
 
20 Vallas, S. (2018). Platform Capitalism: What’s at Stake for Workers? New Labor Forum , 28(1), 48 -59. doi: 
10.1177/109579601881705 9 and van Doorn, N. (2017). Platform labor: on the gendered and racialized 
exploitation of low -income service work in the ‘on -demand’ economy. Information, Communication & 
Society , 20(6), 898- 914. doi: 10.1080/1369118x.2017.1294194. 
21 Ibid.  
11     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  because of the loss of earning potential. Autonomy is thus constrained both because of platform design 
and broader labor market conditions.  
The same is true of the promise of flexibility. Flexibility on the platform is supposed to work in two ways: workers can choose the areas and neighborhoods in which they would prefer to work, and the 
days of the week they  prefer to take bookings. In practice, however, high transport costs and spatial 
spread in Cape Town and the surrounding suburbs mean that it is often unviable for workers to take on 
gigs over vast areas. Moreover, the paucity of gigs also means that worke rs end up taking whatever 
booking comes their way, even if it is not in their desired time slot.    
Although technically workers can choose which bookings to accept, disciplinary tactics employed by the 
platform keep them at risk of having their accounts d eactivated. For example, workers are allowed to 
cancel bookings with 72 hours of notice, but this is an unreasonably long time, as workers are often 
notified of a booking only 24 hours before the appointment. The opacity of algorithmic monitoring 
makes it difficult for workers to plead their case in times of genuine difficulty like for an illness. One 
worker recounted:  
“I was really ill and couldn’t go to a booking so I contacted support through the app in the morning. No one answered me. The client called me at 9:30 to ask me why I wasn’t there yet 
for my appointment and I realized SweepSouth had not contacted the client or addressed my 
request at all. Later, this was included in my cancelled booking even though I was genuinely 
sick.” 
4.4 LITTLE TO NO BARGA INING POWER  
The most discernible difference between workers we spoke to who were on the platform and workers from the union was in their knowledge of their legal rights and entitlements. Those involved in or helped 
by the union were aware of their legal protections and were able to recognize and tackle exploitative 
behavior or ill treatment from their employers. Domestic workers in the union spoke of taking their 
disputes with their employers over severance pay or serious verbal harassment to the Commission  for 
Conciliation, Mediation, and Arbitration, or in other cases, union members helped some workers 
mediate their disputes with employers. Members of the union were politically active, attending 
demonstrations with the union and eager to help other domestic workers facing disputes with their 
employers. Union members that we spoke with also did not see SweepSouth as an attractive 
proposition because they already had full -time or regular work, and this was seen as preferable to gig 
work. Most union workers we re also much older, and this might limit their interest and capacity in gig 
work, preferring employment in a few houses rather than having to move from gig to gig.  
In contrast, workers on the platform reported having few avenues for meaningful grievance re dressal on 
the platform. The app allows workers to make complaints, but the platform is responsive only when 
complaints relate specifically to tasks expected of work —for example, if the client expects workers to 
complete more tasks than is reasonable in th e number of hours booked, the platform requests clients to 
increase the duration of the appointment or to include the tasks required on the bill. However, 
complaints against harassment and rude behavior from clients aren't adequately addressed, and even 
dismissed as being characteristic of domestic work. This arguably has the effect of normalizing 
exploitation associated with domestic work. One worker spoke of her experience:   
12     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  “Sometimes a client will be very rude, or they’ll have dangerous pets like snakes  or spiders. It’s 
not safe and I complained. But SweepSouth just said to me ‘you know, this is how domestic 
work is, just keep working.”’  
Another shared with us:   
“When we complain about a client they tell us they will not match us with them again. Or th at 
it is part of domestic work and we should just do our work properly. But what happens to the 
next lady who has to go work there?”   
Workers from the union regularly socialized with other workers and learned from each other’s 
experiences. In contrast, wo rkers on the platform had little interaction with other workers. Although 
SweepSouth management created a WhatsApp group for workers on the day they received their 
training consisting of workers in the same training group along with their manager, most rep orted that 
they were inactive in the group. They felt that the presence of the manager prevented them from 
speaking to each other freely. The one exception we came across was through a worker from 
Zimbabwe who told us about a WhatsApp for Zimbabwean worker s on SweepSouth. The limited 
interaction between workers makes it hard to form friendships or solidarities. The fact that domestic work functions in the private sphere makes it difficult for workers to interact. However, in traditional 
domestic employment, workers are still able to meet through other means. For example, it isn’t 
uncommon for nannies to make friends when taking their wards to the park or the nursery. Families 
may sometimes hire a separate nanny for childcare responsibilities.  
None of the wor kers on SweepSouth were members of the SADSAWU. Although some knew about 
the union, they weren’t sure how it could help them. The unpredictability of gig work also makes it difficult for them to attend union meetings; union members firmly believe that in -person contact is 
required for strong union membership. This might also suggest the difficulty in creating offline platforms 
for organizing workers when the work is mediated through online, algorithmic, systems —workers are 
dispersed, do not have regular, or the same, working hours, and the limited regular interaction between 
workers makes it harder to develop bonds of solidarity and loyalty.  
4.5 SOCIAL PROTECTION, BOTH FORMAL AND INFORMAL, ARE BEYOND 
REACH  
Workers on SweepSouth are classified as “independent  contractors,” thus absolving the platform of 
responsibilities associated with formal employment. SweepSouth has, however, partnered with a local 
financial technology company to offer workers disability and life insurance coverage. This is available to 
workers after completing 400 hours on the platform. However, none of the workers we spoke with had 
availed of this and were unclear on the eligibility requirements.  
Workers also said that SweepSouth had assured workers that they would be signed onto the national Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF). The UIF is a government scheme, introduced in 2003, that 
provides workers with maternity benefits, health benefits, and unemployment pay. Workers can access 
this fund to help absorb the shock if they are dismissed fro m their job. Employers must register their 
workers and make a contribution to the fund every month.   
13     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  Workers who inquired about being enrolled into UIF were told by SweepSouth management that they 
would have to satisfy a few conditions. The UIF requires workers to complete 24 hours of cumulative 
employment with one employer to be registered. Rather than SweepSouth registering itself as the 
employer, the onus is shifted onto workers. Workers say they were told that they would only be 
eligible once they had completed 24 hours of cumulative work with one client. However, workers 
cannot choose their clients and are assigned clients by an algorithm, making it almost impossible to fulfill 
this criterion. At the same time, workers also report being told that they w ould have to give the 
platform a guarantee that they would continue to be engaged on the platform for an extended duration 
for SweepSouth to consider extending this coverage to them. The message conveyed to workers was 
that SweepSouth would be making an in vestment by enrolling workers to the UIF and would only do so 
if they knew workers would stay on.   
“They said to me, we don’t know if you are going to stay or go. And we can only give you UIF if 
we know you’re going to stay.”  
Domestic workers have long worked without any legal or social protections. In the absence of formal 
avenues of social protection, workers have often sought and received informal forms of protection from 
their employers. This was borne out by interviews wit h workers associated with the union. While they 
were often dependent on “good employers” to treat them well, they also spoke of bonuses received 
during Christmas, help with a child’s education, or assistance with medical bills. This only applied to 
domesti c workers off the app. While it is important not to romanticize these forms of informal social 
protection, many of which can put workers in a situation of constant indebtedness to their employers or 
make them more vulnerable to exploitation, such informal social protection can nonetheless provide 
temporary relief and security to at least some workers.   
   
14     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  5. CONCLUSION  
SweepSouth appears to be creating new opportunities for paid work, particularly relevant in a context 
of high unemployment among the black African and colored population, and for migrant workers from 
Zimbabwe. However, whether this is “good work” is highly debatable. What is striking in this regard 
was the expressed preference for regular or standard forms of work over gig work; many workers 
hoped that working on the platform would enable them to find permanent employment.  
The Fairwork Foundation, a University of Oxford project focused on measuring the best and worst practices of the gig economy, rates the platform as a seven out of ten based on the following criteria: the platform providing at least the minimum wage; the existence of policies to minimize the risks to 
workers while at work, including insurance; clear terms and conditions accessible to workers through 
the app; and processes thro ugh which workers can communicate and share concerns with workers.
22 
From this perspective, it would seem that SweepSouth is improving employment conditions for 
domestic workers who have traditionally been in an exploitative sector.  
However, our conversat ions with workers suggested otherwise. Many of these policies and schemes for 
workers were not understood or availed of, and only existed on paper. Further, even though workers 
receive more than the minimum wage, work is irregular and incomes are variable.  Minimum wage is in 
itself a very low benchmark and does not indicate whether earnings are commensurate with a living 
wage. Further, workers have little control over the terms of their work or their time, despite the 
promise of autonomy and flexibility off ered by the platform. As independent contractors, they are also 
not eligible for state -sponsored insurance schemes. For most workers, regular work with a single 
employer remains preferable.  
How does one reconcile these two perspectives? It would seem ther e is a disconnect or gap between 
principle and practice —much of what the platform promised was not realized in practice. This was 
confirmed by South African researchers who work with the Fairwork Foundation—they too had 
difficulty accessing SweepSouth management and much of their information about the formal policies of 
the platform were inferred from press coverage. From their own field work, they too found that worker 
experiences diverged significantly from this formal narrative.23 This discrepancy also h ighlights the value 
of an ethnographic approach to understanding changing employment conditions that puts the lived and everyday experiences and concerns of workers at the forefront.  
But such outcomes are not inevitable. Both design choices within the pla tform and alternative types of 
platforms can serve workers better. SweepSouth has leveraged the architecture of the platform to 
benefit the client. Most of the practices that have been discussed have been put in place to ensure that clients are satisfied and return to the platform. It doesn’t seem to concern itself directly in improving 
working conditions. However, the platform has the potential to improve working conditions, 
standardize domestic work, and professionalize the service, were it to change its priorities to address 
workers’ perspectives. For example, Domestly, SweepSouth’s competitor, is designed so that workers 
 
22 Fairwork.  (2019, July 15). Fairwork Ratings: SweepSouth.  Oxford Internet Institute. Retrieved from 
https://fair.work/ratings/sweepsouth/ . 
23 Fairwork has only published their rankings of the platform, not any det ailed studies.   
15     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  are hired on a regular basis, either weekly or fortnightly. This addresses one of the key concerns for 
workers around regular work and enables building long -term relationships.  
Alternative platforms are also possible. Researchers at the University of Western Cape are building a cooperative platform for domestic workers owned and led by workers themselves. They plan to engage 
domestic wor kers who are willing to buy into the platform for an initial period of three years to design 
the platform. Some of the initial challenges they’re facing include finding strategies to involve and engage 
domestic workers, convincing clients to use the platfo rm, scaling responsibility, and making the platform 
sustainable without turning to investment funding.  
Exploitation of domestic workers is not new and continues to persist around the world. Workers on 
and off the platform share similar experiences of racial and gendered discrimination. In this sense, the 
platform is merely reflecting and reproducing existing structures of exploitation. Yet, it is also important 
to recognize the differences that arise from the digital and algorithmic inte rmediation of domestic work. 
Domestic work involves not only physical work but also affective labor —it involves relationship -building, 
trust, and negotiation. The intimacy involved in domestic work is different from many other domains —
taking a taxi is not the same as having work done in one’s home. The latter involves intimacy, 
relationship -building, and negotiation. It might also generate informal relationships for social protection, 
though imperfect. Much of this is rendered impossible with work mediated through digital platforms. 
While the terms of engagement between employer and domestic worker still remain hierarchical, the 
difference now is that they are embedded in an impersonal structure which reduces space for 
negotiation and bargaining. Finally, it  is important to recognize how platforms are structured to fragment 
labor. Workers have little interaction with one another, the platform, or clients, resulting in little to no 
opportunities to exchange experiences and grievances. The contrast with union m embers was striking in 
this regard; they used the union to negotiate harassment and unfair terms of work, and perhaps even 
more importantly, address alienation and build friendships.  
   
16     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  REFERENCES  
Casale, D. (2004). “What has the Feminisation of the Labour Market ‘Bought’ Women in South Africa? 
Trends in Labour Force Participation, Employment and Earnings, 1995 –2001.” Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Economics , 15(3- 4), 251- 275. doi: 10.1177/02601079x04001500302.  
Flanagan, F. (2018). “Theorising the Gig Econom y and Home -based Service Work.” Journal of Industrial 
Relations , 61(1), 57- 78. doi: 10.1177/0022185618800518.  
Glenn, E. (1992). “From Servitude to Service Work: Historical Continuities in the Racial Division of Paid 
Reproductive Labor.” Signs: Journal of  Women in Culture and Society , 18(1), 1 -43. doi: 
10.1086/494777.  
Gutierrez Rodriguez, E. (2011). Migration, Domestic Work and Affect: A Decolonial Approach on Value 
and the Feminization of Labor. Routledge Research in Gender and Society (book 26): London, 
U.K.  
“How Do Women Fare in the South African Labour Market?” Statistics South Africa. Retrieved 1 August 
2019, from http://www.statssa.gov.za/?p=11375 . 
International Labour Organi zation. (2013). Domestic Workers Across the World: Global and Regional 
Statistics and the Extent of Legal Protection [Ebook]. Geneva. Retrieved from https://www.ilo.org/travail/Whatsnew/WCMS_17336 3/lang --en/index.htm
. 
Marais, C. (2016). “Caring and Connectedness in the Context of Domestic Worker Employment in 
South Africa.” Journal of Psychology in Africa , 26(3), 237- 245. doi: 
10.1080/14330237.2016.1185903.  
Mullagee, F. Domestic Workers in South Af rica. Organising for Empowerment. Discussion Paper 
Prepared for the COSATU Gender Conference in Cape Town, 2011.  
Ndinda, C., & Ngandu, S. (2019). Winners and losers: gender disparities in the South African labour 
market. The Human Sciences Research Council . Retrieved 1 August 2019, from 
http://repository.hsrc.ac.za/handle/20.500.11910/9714 . 
Education Series Volume V: Higher Education and Skills in South Africa, 2017. (2017). Retrieved 7 
August 2019, from http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/Report- 92-01-05/Report -92-01-
052017.pdf . 
Statistics South Africa Department. Quarterly Labour Force Survey Quarter 1: 2019. (2019). Retrieved 
1 August 2019, from http://www.stat ssa.gov.za/publications/P0211/P02111stQuarter2019.pdf . 
Sunday Read: Why Data and Transport Costs are the Biggest Barriers for Young Job Seekers. (2019). 
Retrieved 1 August 2019, from https://www.fin24.com/Companies/sunday -read-why-data-and-
transport -costs -are-the-biggest -barriers -for-young -job-seekers -20190512 .  
17     |      CASE STUDY 3: SWEEPSOUTH —PLATFORM -BASED DOMESTIC WORK   USAID.GOV  Ticona, J., & Mateescu, A. (2019). How Domestic Workers Wager Safety in the Platform Economy. 
Retrieved 1 August 2019, from https://www.fastcompa ny.com/40541050/how -domestic -
workers -wager -safety -in-the-platform -economy . 
Vallas, S. (2018). “Platform Capitalism: What’s at Stake for Workers?” New Labor Forum , 28(1), 48 -59. 
doi: 10.1177/1095796018817059      
van Doorn, N. (2017). “Platform Labor:  On the Gendered and Racialized Exploitation of Low -income 
Service Work in the ‘On -Demand’ Economy.” Information, Communication & Society , 20(6), 898-
914. doi: 10.1080/1369118x.2017.1294194.  
Wood, A., Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., & Hjorth, I. (2018). “Go od Gig, Bad Gig: Autonomy and 
Algorithmic Control in the Global Gig Economy. Work, Employment and Society , 33(1), 56- 75. 
doi: 10.1177/0950017018785616.  
Writer, S. (2019). Uncovering SA Employment by Race. Retrieved 1 August 2019, from 
https://businesstech.co.za/news/general/68842/uncovering -sa-employment -by-race/.  
 
 