UNESCO’S 
INTERNET 
UNIVERSALITY 
INDICATORS8QLWHG1DWLRQV
(GXFDWLRQDO6FLHQWL¿FDQG
&XOWXUDO2UJDQL]DWLRQ
A Framework for Assessing Internet DevelopmentAlgo-r(h)i(y)thms, 2018. Installation view at ON AIR, carte blanche 
exhibition to Tomás Saraceno, Palais de Tokyo, Paris, 2018. 
Curated by Rebecca Lamarche-Vadel. Courtesy of the artist; 
Esther Schipper, Berlin; Pinksummer contemporary art, Genoa.
© Andrea Rossetti, 2018David Souter
Anri van der Spuy
UNESCO’S Internet Universality Indicators: 
A Framework for Assessing Internet DevelopmentPublished in 2019 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
7 place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO, 2019
ISBN 978-92-3-100314-1
This publication is available in Open Access under the attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) 
license (http:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, 
the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http:/ /www.
unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbya-en).
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or 
boundaries.
The idea and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily 
those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
UNESCO Project coordination: Xianhong Hu and Josselyn Guillarmou.
Email: internet.indicators@unesco.org  
Website: http:/ /en.unesco.org/internetuniversality  
Cover photo: © Andrea Rossetti, 2018
Graphic design, cover design, illustrations, and typeset: UNESCO
Printed by UNESCO in Paris, France
This project was supported by Sweden, the Internet Society (ISOC), the Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers (ICANN), the Brazilian Network Information Center (NIC.br), as well as the Latin 
America and Caribbean Network Information Centre (LACNIC).
Foreword
Have you ever wanted to gain a deeper understanding of the 
complexities of the digital environment? To have a map of the Internet 
measuring its compliance with human rights, evaluating its openness 
and accessibility, and assessing the involvement of different actors 
and communities in its governance? If so, UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality Indicators are for you.
In the 21st century, digital technologies offer unprecedented 
opportunities for access to information, freedom of expression, human 
connectivity, technological innovations, as well as multistakeholder 
engagement. At the same time, they pose major challenges, 
especially with regards to free expression, privacy, online disinformation, the safety of journalists, transparency, 
accountability, deepening inequalities, gender and other divides.
For this reason, UNESCO has developed the Internet Universality Indicators (IUIs), an innovative tool to support 
our Member States and all interested stakeholders. The Indicators enable everyone to voluntarily assess their 
national Internet environment, address digital gaps, and improve the Internet.
The Internet Universality Indicators are linked to the very heart of UNESCO’s mandate to “promote the free 
flow of ideas by word and image” and build inclusive Knowledge Societies. This new and unique resource 
can strengthen the Internet’s role in achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
The framework helps to operationalise the concept of ‘Internet Universality’ adopted by UNESCO in 2015, by 
enabling a practical assessment of the Internet following the ROAM principles which advocate for an Internet 
that is based on human Rights, that is Open and Accessible to all, and nurtured by Multistakeholder participation. 
The results of a research based on these Indicators can highlight gaps and inform recommendations for 
targeted improvement.
The Indicators were developed through a global, innovative, open, and inclusive multistakeholder consultation 
both online and offline. From March 2017 to September 2018, 46 consultation events were organized in 36 
countries, covering all regions of the world. 66 Member States contributed to the elaboration of the indicators. 
More than 300 submissions were also received on a dedicated platform1. In total, over 2000 experts have 
engaged with UNESCO in developing the Internet indicators. 
This new tool has already started to generate a significant impact. In July 2018, it was highlighted in the UN 
Human Rights Council Resolution on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet.
The final IUIs framework contains 303 indicators, including 109 core indicators, distributed under six categories, 
25 themes, and 124 questions. Besides the four ROAM categories, 79 cross-cutting indicators address issues 
related to gender equality and the needs of children and young people, sustainable development, trust and 
security, as well as legal and ethical aspects of the Internet.
By measuring the crosscutting role and transformative power of the Internet and ICTs, the Internet Universality 
Indicators framework clearly contributes to the achievement of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. 
Amongst many other points relevant to UNESCO’s work, the framework covers key aspects of the UN’s 
Sustainable Development Goal 16.10 which calls for public access to information and fundamental freedoms. 
In this way, the Indicators can contribute to achieving key objectives that substantially impact other Sustainable 
Development Goals – ranging from ending poverty and countering climate change to advancing gender 
equality.
1  UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Platform. https:/ /en.unesco.org/internetuniversality  
3
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe Internet Indicators also assess a wide range of issues related to freedom of expression and media 
development, thus updating and complementing UNESCO’s Media Development Indicators, Journalists’ 
Safety Indicators, and Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media.
The Indicators were recognised in November 2018 at the 31st Session of UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Council 
of the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC). The IPDC “welcomed the 
Internet Universality Indicators framework” and “endorsed the use of this tool on a voluntary basis as a useful 
resource available for Member States.”2
Since the value of using this tool is recognized internationally, we encourage its uptake and application. We 
especially encourage cooperation between authorities, civil society, the technical community, the private 
sector, academia, and the journalism and media community. They can all benefit from coming together 
to voluntarily conduct national assessments of Internet development and maybe feed their findings into 
evidence-based policy.
We thank all those involved in the consultation process to develop these indicators, especially the Kingdom 
of Sweden, the Internet Society (ISOC), the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), 
the Brazilian Network Information Center (NIC.br) and the Latin America and Caribbean Network Information 
Centre (LACNIC).
We hope that these Internet Universality Indicators will help to reinforce the values of a universal Internet, 
respectful of human rights, freedom of expression, privacy and the right to participate in public life. This 
should be a transparent, technologically neutral, accessible, and affordable Internet. It should be one that 
connects people together, that is inclusive and embraces diversities, that empowers individuals from all 
genders, ages, races, cultures, and social backgrounds. That is the Internet we want, and need to achieve 
Sustainable Development.
These Internet Universality Indicators were developed for you. We invite you to adopt and adapt them, to 
assume ownership of the tool and use it for research, dialogue and improvements in your country. 
Let’s work together and leave no one behind in the digital age.
Moez Chakchouk
Assistant Director-General for Communication and Information
UNESCO
2  Decisions taken by the 31st Council Session of the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), 21-22 November 2018, 
UNESCO HQ. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/ 48223/pf0000266235  
4
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAcknowledgments
UNESCO would like to thank the Swedish International Development Agency (Sida), the Internet Society 
(ISOC), the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), as well as the Brazilian Network 
Information Center (NIC.br), and the Latin America and Caribbean Network Information Centre (LACNIC) for 
their essential support to the project.
UNESCO also thanks all UNESCO Member States which have participated in and contributed to the 
consultation process. In this regard, we would also like to highlight the contribution of the Freedom Online 
Coalition as well as the involvement of members of UNESCO’s IPDC Council.
We would also like to thank all the participants and contributors of the online consultation, all the speakers 
and audience members of our consultative meetings, as well as all national, regional, and international 
platforms which have hosted our workshops and have invited us to their events.
Advice has been garnered during the project from a Multistakeholder Advisory Board made of 15 international 
experts and the Organisation for Cooperation and Economic Development (OECD). UNESCO thanks them 
for their guidance.
For UNESCO-wide teamwork, we would like to thank all UNESCO colleagues from the Communication and 
Information Sector, the Culture Sector, the Education Sector, the Social and Human Sciences Sector, the 
Division for Gender Equality, UNESCO’s Institute for Statistics (UIS), the UNESCO Institute for Information 
Technologies in Education (IITE), as well as UNESCO’s Field Offices in Montevideo, Bangkok and Beijing for 
their strong contribution to the development of the indicators.
We also thank Alexandre Barbosa, João Brant, Enrico Calandro, Mawaki Chango, Alison Gillwald, Tatiana 
Jereissati, Sadaf Khan, Waqas Naeem, Hassan Naqvi, Fola Odufuwa, Pirongrong Ramasoota, Talal Raza, 
Fabio Senne, and Arthit Suriyawongkul for pre-testing and piloting the indicators in Brazil, Ecuador, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Senegal, and Thailand.
UNESCO would like to acknowledge the professional collaboration with a research consortium led by the 
Association for Progressive Communications (APC) and made up of ict  Development Associates (ictDA), 
LIRNEasia, and Research ICT Africa (RIA), who have helped us to develop the framework of indicators. We thank 
David Souter and Anri van der Spuy, as the leading authors of the publication, as well as Anriette Esterhuysen 
for the excellent coordination of the consortium that helped UNESCO conduct global consultations on this 
Framework.
5
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsForeword 3
Acknowledgments 5
Abbreviations and Acronyms 8
Executive Summary 11
4
CATEGORY R • RIGHTS 41
Theme A • Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  44
Theme B • Freedom of Expression  45
Theme C • Right of Access to Information  47
Theme D • Freedom of Association and the Right to 
take part in the Conduct of Public Affairs  49
Theme E • The Right to Privacy  50
Theme F • Social, Economic and Cultural Rights  52
5 
CATEGORY O • OPENNESS  55
Theme A • Policy, Legal And Regulatory Framework  58
Theme B • Open Standards  59
Theme C • Open Markets  60
Theme D • Open Content  62
Theme E • Open Data and Open Government  641
UNESCO’S INTERNET UNIVERSALITY 
INDICATORS PROJECT  15
The Evolving Internet  17
Internet Universality Concept  18
Why Internet Universality Indicators?  19
Methodology and Development Process of the 
Indicator Framework  20
2
THE INDICATOR FRAMEWORK  25
Introduction  27
The Structure of the Framework  27
3
CONTEXTUAL INDICATORS 33
1. Economic Indicators  35
2. Demographic Indicators  36
3. Development Indicators  36
4. Equality Indicators  37
5. Governance Indicators  37
6. ICT Development Indicators  38
6
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsContents
9
SOURCES AND MEANS OF  
VERIFICATION 103
Sources Concerning Research Methodology 104
Sources for Indicators 104
10
IMPLEMENTING UNESCO’S  
INTERNET UNIVERSALITY  
INDICATORS  129
Introduction  131
Implementing the indicators  132
Looking to the future  151
Engagement with UNESCO  151
Annex 1.  Members of the Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board 153
Annex 2. Physical Consultation Events 154
Annex 3. Online Consultation Submitters 163
Annex 4. Core Internet Universality Indicators 178
Endnotes 1906
CATEGORY A • ACCESSIBILITY TO ALL  67
Theme A • Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  70
Theme B • Connectivity and Usage  71
Theme C • Affordability  73
Theme D • Equitable Access  74
Theme E • Local Content and Language  76
Theme F • Capabilities / Competencies  77
7
CATEGORY M • MULTISTAKEHOLDER 
PARTICIPATION  81
Theme A • Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  84
Theme B • National Internet Governance  85
Theme C • International and Regional Internet 
Governance  86
8
CATEGORY X • CROSS-CUTTING 
INDICATORS  89
Theme A • Gender  91
Theme B •  Children  94
Theme C •  Sustainable Development  96
Theme D • Trust and Security  98
Theme E •   Legal and Ethical Aspects  
of the Internet  100
7
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAbbreviations and Acronyms
APC Association for Progressive Communications
API Application Programming Interface(s)
APNIC Regional Internet address Registry for the Asia-Pacific 
ccTLDs Country Code Top-Level Domain 
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
CERT Computer Emergency Response Team
CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child
DNSSEC Domain Name System Security Extensions
FOSS Free and Open-Source Software
GAC ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GNI Gross National Income
GSMA Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association
gTLDs Generic Top-Level Domains
HDI Human Development Index (UNDP)
ICANN Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICERD Conventions on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
ICESCR Economic Social and Cultural Rights
ICT Information and Communications Technology (or technologies)
IDN ccTLDs Internationalized Country Code Top-Level Domain
IGF Internet Governance Forum
IPDC International Programme for the Development of Communication (UNESCO)
IPv4 Internet Protocol Version 4
IPv6 Internet Protocol Version 6
ISPs Internet Service Provider
8
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsITU International Telecommunication Union
IXPs Internet Exchange Points
LDCs Least Developed Countries
MDIs Media Development Indicators
NGOs Non-Profit Organization
OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OER Open Educational Resources
RIA Research ICT Africa
ROAM Rights, Openness, Accessibility, Multistakeholder (UNESCO)
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations)
SIDA Swedish International Development Agency
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SMEs Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UIS UNESCO Institute for Statistics
UN DESA United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UN HRC United Nations Human Rights Council
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNGA United Nations General Assembly  
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
VPNs Virtual Private Network(s)
WHO World Health Organisation
WSIS World Summit on the Information Society
9
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsExecutive Summary
The Internet has developed rapidly into a communications medium which continues to transform access 
to information, opportunities for expression, and many aspects of government and business for people 
around the world. It has become a global marketplace for ideas, goods and services. It has both facilitated 
the enjoyment of human rights and raised new risks. Among the challenges that need to be addressed if the 
benefits of the Internet are to be universally available, are digital divides between developed, developing 
and least developed countries, between urban and rural areas within countries, between people with higher 
and lower incomes and higher and lower levels of educational experience and attainment, and between 
women and men. Opportunities and risks will continue to become more complex, more powerful and more 
influential on the future as a result of the Internet’s technology, services and markets are in constant change. 
Understanding and assessing the complexity of the Internet’s development, and its impact is crucial if we are 
to effectively address the Internet for optimum contribution to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
UNESCO has long engaged with this agenda, emphasising the Internet’s potential for developing Knowledge 
Societies, based on freedom of expression, universal access to information and knowledge, respect for 
cultural and linguistic diversity, and quality education for all. For example, the Organisation played a prominent 
part in the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS, 2003 and 2005) and has continued to play an 
important role in Internet Governance Forum (IGF), the Broadband Commission on Sustainable Development 
and other fora concerning the Internet and its impact. As the Internet has continued evolving, so UNESCO 
has developed the concept of Internet Universality in order to help comprehend the developments. 
Internet Universality
The Internet is much more than digital technology; it is also a network of economic and social interactions and 
relationships. As such, this has shown potential to enable human rights, empower individuals and communities, 
and facilitate sustainable development. It has also presented challenges to established norms in ways that 
can have both positive and negative impacts on economic, social and developmental outcomes. How the 
range of Internet issues are integrated within public policy affects matters like equality, inclusiveness, media 
and journalism, cultural diversity, quality education for all, and the protection of human rights. These impacts 
are all relevant to UNESCO’s mandate, and they are part of the complex Internet environment that can be 
profitably explored and enhanced through the prism of Internet Universality.
After a two-year process of evolution, this concept of Internet Universality was endorsed by UNESCO’s 
General Conference in 2015. The concept sets out a vision which highlights four principles that serve as the 
key pillars underpinning the growth and evolution of the Internet, and it points to the need to strengthen 
these as the Internet becomes more pervasive in human affairs. Understanding the Internet in this way helps 
to draw together different facets of its ecosystem which are relevant to UNESCO’s role in the world and the 
Organisation’s support for its Member States.
11
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe four principles identified as key to Internet Universality are summarised as the R-O-A-M principles, and 
are fundamental to the development of the Internet in ways that are conducive to achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals with no one left behind. These principles are:
R – that the internet is based on human Rights
O – that it is Open
A – that it should be Accessible to all , and
M – that it is nurtured by Multistakeholder participation.
To enable the concept of Internet Universality to be more concretely understood and applied, UNESCO 
has spent two years developing indicators for the four principles. These indicators enable the empirical 
assessment of Internet Universality in terms of its existence at the level of a national Internet environment. 
By using these new indicators for research, a collage of evidence can be assembled to help governments 
and other stakeholders to identify achievements and gaps. The indicator framework is tailored for national 
use in regard to improving the local Internet environment, and is not designed or suited to rank countries 
in comparison with one another.
A process of desk research, expert consultation internationally, and field testing in a range of countries, lies 
behind the Internet Universality indicators that are set out in this document. This work was undertaken by 
UNESCO with the support of a consortium led by the Association for Progressive Communications (APC) 
and including ict Development Associates, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa. 
The first round of consultation was concerned with the broad themes of Internet Universality and the ways 
in which they might be encapsulated in an indicator framework. An online consultation was held between 
June and October 2017 and attracted 198 contributions. Consultative meetings and workshops were also 
held at 26 international, regional and national events between March and October 2017.
A second round of consultation, held along similar lines between December 2017 and March 2018, invited 
contributions and comments on a draft indicator framework and set of indicators. This attracted 138 
contributions, while additional consultative meetings and workshops were held at a further 15 international, 
regional and national events.
In a third phase, the indicators which emerged from these consultation processes were then further refined 
and put to the test through scientific screening or pre-testing in four countries – Brazil, Ecuador, Nigeria and 
Pakistan. This was followed by another refinement exercise as a prelude to part-piloting exercises in three 
countries – Brazil, Senegal and Thailand. The result of this experience enabled a final improvement of the 
indicators, with the results contained in this document.
Advice from a Multistakeholder Advisory Board, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) and the Organisation 
for Cooperation and Economic Development (OECD) has been garnered during the project. Financial support 
has come from the Swedish International Development Agency, the Internet Society and ICANN.
The result of the development process has constituted an up-to-date, holistic, and road-tested research 
instrument, drawing from key insights and experiences gained across the world and across stakeholder 
groups. 
12
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe Indicator Framework
The Internet Universality indicator framework is structured around the four ROAM Principles, with the addition 
of Cross-Cutting Indicators concerned with gender and the needs of children, sustainable development, 
trust and security, and legal and ethical aspects of the Internet. Together, these form the “ROAMX” indicator 
framework.
In addition to the ROAMX indicators, the framework provides a number of contextual indicators concerned 
with a country’s demographic, social and economic characteristics. These contextual indicators are intended 
to help users to understand their findings in the most appropriate way for different countries. 
Themes, Questions and Indicators
Each of the ROAMX categories is divided into a number of themes. These themes form the basic structure 
for research and assessments to be made using the indicators.
Within each theme, a number of questions are identified, and each question is associated with one or more 
indicators. 
Implementation of the Indicators
It is recognised that evidence may not be available for all indicators in any given country. However, the number 
and range of indicators provides that researchers should nevertheless be able to gather sufficient data for a 
substantive assessment to be made in spite of data limitations. Further, to help interpret the indicators and 
find appropriate information for them, the framework provides generic sources of quantitative and qualitative 
evidence, relevant background documentation, and established international indices as well as other indicator 
frameworks that may be of value. 
UNESCO hopes that the indicator framework will be used as a whole by interested parties, but also recognises 
that this can require significant resources in research time and expertise. A shorter selective set of core 
indicators has therefore also been identified (Annex 4). These core indicators have been taken entirely from 
the full framework.
An Implementation Guide (Chapter 10) for researchers accompanies this framework document, providing 
technical guidance and advice on the research process. 
Because the Internet is changing very fast, UNESCO will seek to review the indicator framework five years 
after adoption and at five-yearly intervals thereafter. Such a review will also draw on the experiences and 
lessons learnt of assessments conducted and completed. 
Based on this explanation of the genesis, role and future for the Internet Universality indicators, UNESCO is 
confident that this quality research tool will be of great value for any interested Member State that is seeking to 
map relevant Internet issues in its national space. The findings of such an assessment of Internet Universality 
at national level can feed into evidence-based policy to improve the contribution of the Internet to achieving 
sustainable development in the country concerned.
13
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators1
UNESCO’s  
Internet 
Universality 
Indicators 
Project
Info Lady Shathi shows videos to a group of women in a rural village. In 
Bangladesh, the Info Ladies are bringing Internet services to men and 
women who need information but don’t have the means to access the 
web. After three months of training, the Info Ladies set out each day 
in their pink and blue uniforms to cycle to remote villages where they 
provide connection to villagers who want to communicate with relatives 
working overseas.
© G.M.B. Akash/Panos Pictures
15 UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsINTERNET  
UNIVERSALITY
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
16The Evolving Internet
The Internet is still a relatively recent development in communications. From its first beginnings, when it 
provided robust communications links for small groups of scientists and researchers, it has developed into a 
multidimensional communications medium that can be difficult to comprehend holistically. The Internet is also 
increasing the wider ecosystem of media and communications development, as well as a global marketplace 
for ideas, goods and services. It has both facilitated the enjoyment of human rights and posed new risks to 
that enjoyment. The complexity of the Internet can inhibit our understanding of, and our ability to shape, the 
ways in which it is transforming access to information, opportunities for expression, as well as government 
and business. Understanding and assessing Internet development, and its impact on emerging Knowledge 
Societies as foundations for achieving sustainable development, becomes increasingly more important.
Change is linked to the Internet’s open architecture which has facilitated innovation. New developments in 
technology, access devices and services continually create new opportunities for individuals, governments 
and businesses. The most significant of these developments include the creation of the World Wide Web, the 
emergence of the mobile Internet and development of smartphones, and the growth of social media. Continual 
growth in bandwidth has enabled much higher volumes of Internet traffic, facilitating the development of 
cloud computing and the growth of services such as video streaming. Further Internet-enabled innovations 
and related digital developments, including the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence and algorithmic 
decision-making, will continue to alter the nature of the Internet and its impact on economies and societies, 
including on the United Nations’ the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Our understanding of the Internet 
must evolve alongside its changing technology and services, and interdependent components. 
The SDGs stress that no one should be left behind. Inclusiveness remains a major concern of international 
discourse on the Internet, dating back to its early days. Some regions, countries, communities and individuals 
have been better placed than others to take advantage of its opportunities. There are pronounced digital 
divides between developed, developing and least developed countries, between urban and rural areas within 
countries, between people with different incomes and levels of educational experience and attainment, and 
between women and men. Young people have generally higher rates of Internet participation than older 
people, while some social groups, such as persons with disabilities, have lower participation rates. UNESCO 
shares the concern of other stakeholders to ensure accessibility for all, as a condition for the universality of 
the Internet.
As the Internet has become more pervasive, policymakers and the technical community have had to address 
not just opportunities, but also risks associated with it. Cybersecurity, used in a broad sense here, is concerned 
with the integrity of the network as well as the protection of Internet users against fraud and other types 
of criminality. Other concerns which have become prominent in Internet debates include privacy and data 
protection, incitement to violence and discrimination, personal abuse, the use of social media to mislead as 
well as to inform, and child protection. These issues, which have both legal and ethical dimensions, are also 
important aspects of the Internet environment.
UNESCO has been engaged with this agenda for many years, emphasising the Internet’s potential within its 
goal of developing Knowledge Societies,1 based on freedom of expression, universal access to information 
and knowledge, respect for cultural and linguistic diversity, and quality education for all. The Organisation 
played a key role in the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS, 2003 and 2005), which mapped 
out the implications of information technology for development, including the Internet, and reinforced 
multistakeholder approaches in Internet governance.2 UNESCO has played a significant part in the WSIS 
Action Lines and the annual WSIS Forum over the years, as well as in its participation in the Internet 
Governance Forum. The Organisation has also convened a series of conferences and other events on Internet 
developments, and published many reports and analyses of the Internet’s impact on different aspects of its 
mandate. The Internet is central to the work of UNESCO’s Communication and Information Sector, as well 
as to its work in education, culture, natural and social science.3
17
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsUNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Project
The Evolving Internet  
1UNESCO sees the Internet as much more than an aggregation of infrastructure, devices and applications. 
It recognises that this is also a network of economic and social interactions and relationships, reaching far 
beyond technology, with great potential to enable human rights, empower individuals and communities, 
and facilitate sustainable development. The Internet raises challenges to established economic and social 
norms with both positive and negative impacts on economic, social and developmental outcomes. The 
ways in which it is integrated within public policy and practice impact upon equality, inclusiveness and the 
protection of human rights, as well as on media, cultural diversity, quality education for all and other UNESCO 
concerns. All these aspects of the complex Internet environment can be explored and enhanced through 
the prism of Internet Universality.
Internet Universality Concept
UNESCO launched the concept of Internet Universality in 2013 as a way to identify features of the internet 
that are fundamental to fulfilling the potential of this human creation for the building of knowledge societies 
and achieving sustainable development.4 
The concept of Internet Universality was elaborated by UNESCO through an extensive programme of research, 
analysis and consultation with Member States and the Internet stakeholder community. This included a 
multistakeholder conference, CONNECTing the Dots ,5 held in Paris in March 2015, and the publication of the 
expert report Keystones to foster inclusive Knowledge Societies .6 
The concept of Internet Universality was then endorsed by UNESCO’s General Conference in 20151. It serves 
as a heuristic for approaching Internet-related issues and their relevance to our aspirations for sustainable 
development. The concept highlights four principles that serve as the key pillars underpinning the growth 
and evolution of the Internet, and it points to the need to strengthen these as the Internet becomes more 
pervasive in all dimensions of life. 
Understanding the internet in this way helps to draw together different facets of its ecosystem which are 
relevant to UNESCO’s mandate in the world, and which shape the intersection of technology, public policy, 
human rights and sustainable development.
The four principles embraced by Internet Universality –known as the R-O-A-M principles – are seen as 
fundamental to the development of the Internet in ways that are conducive to achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. These principles are:
R – that the internet be based on human Rights
O – that it is Open
A – that it should be Accessible to all , and
M – that it is nurtured by Multistakeholder participation .
Internet Universality as a concept emphasises the importance of understanding the development of the 
Internet holistically, including the interaction between these four principles. This holistic approach to the 
Internet can enrich discussion about the role which it can play in facilitating achievement of the United 
Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .7 
While the concept of Internet Universality and the indicators framework set out in this document primarily 
concern the Internet, they are also appropriate and applicable to other, wider aspects of the rapidly evolving 
digital environment. The pace of change in information technology and services and the emergence of new 
technologies such as artificial intelligence and advanced robotics require continual review of mechanisms 
1 Outcome document of the "CONNECTing the Dots: Options for Future Action" Conference. 38C/53 (2015).  
http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002340/234090e.pdf  
18
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  The Evolving Internet    UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Projectdesigned to foster opportunities and mitigate risks arising from them. The four principles and the direction 
in which they point provide insights into the evolution of humanity and digital developments more broadly.
Why Internet Universality Indicators? 
It is to enable more concrete analysis of the Internet Universality concept at country level that a research 
framework of indicators has been developed. The purpose of this framework of Internet Universality indicators 
is to assist interested governments and other stakeholders who seek to voluntarily assess their national 
Internet environments as a means towards enabling evidence-based policy formulation. 
This development of Internet Universality indicators has been undertaken on mandates from the UNESCO 
General Conference and from the intergovernmental Council of the International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC).2 Further mandates concerning the development of Internet 
Universality indicators include the 39 C/5 programme adopted by the 2017 General Conference of UNESCO. 
The IPDC Bureau in 2016 also approved a funds in trust project supported by the Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA) to support a global consultation as part of the development process. In addition 
to this support, resources have also been mobilised from the Internet Society and ICANN to support this work.
The indicators are comparable to the Media Development Indicators  (MDIs) which were adopted by the IPDC 
in 2008 and are intended for use by governments and other stakeholders (from any group or sector) where 
interested, and where resources can be mobilised to undertake national assessments. By mid 2018, almost 
30 MDIs had been completed or were underway in different countries, thereby enriching knowledge and 
understanding of national media landscapes. While the MDI framework continues to be relevant, the Internet 
Universality framework is a complementary research tool to provide a mapping of the broader ecosystem 
in which media institutions exist and of other evolving dimensions of the communications ecosystem that 
impact on the range of UNESCO concerns. 
The Internet Universality indicators which are set out in this document draw on UNESCO’s previous experience 
with indicator frameworks concerned with media and communications. Besides the MDIs adopted at the 
26th session of the IPDC in 2008,8 and subsequently used in a number of Member States around the world,9 
there are also other indicator frameworks which are used, voluntarily, by interested Member States and other 
stakeholders to assess aspects of the communications environments in their countries and develop policy 
approaches to enhance the quality of those environments: 
 •IPDC adopted indicators for assessing the safety of journalists in 2013.10 
 •Gender-sensitive Indicators for Media  were put in place in 2012.11 
 •Indicators concerned with media and information literacy have also been published.12 
Where appropriate, the framework set out in this document makes use of these existing documents. 
The indicators in this document follow work that has been undertaken to implement these mandates. It is 
hoped that the indicator framework set out in this document will complement efforts by United Nations and 
other stakeholders to monitor and measure implementation and achievement of the SDGs, including the 
work of the Task Group on ICT Indicators for the SDGs which has been established by the Partnership on 
Measuring ICT for Development.13
2 The possibility of developing indicators to assess the Internet from a UNESCO point of view was signalled in November 2014 at the 29th session of 
the intergovernmental council of UNESCO’s International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC). This authorised ‘continued 
work in standard setting through the elaboration and application of indicators relevant to media development’, building on experience with the 
MDIs. The outcome document from the CONNECTing the Dots  conference in 2015, which presented the concept of Internet Universality, and which 
was endorsed by the General Conference, also called for ‘further research’ to be undertaken into ‘law, policy, regulatory frameworks and the use of 
the Internet, including relevant indicators’.
19
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe Evolving Internet    UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Project
1Methodology and Development Process of the 
Indicator Framework
In April 2017, a consortium led by the Association for Progressive Communications (APC) was appointed 
through a global competitive tendering process to undertake work with UNESCO on the development of 
the Indicators. In addition to APC, this consortium included ict  Development Associates and two regional ICT 
research institutes LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa. Research for the project was led by Dr David Souter 
of ict Development Associates, supported by Ms Anri van der Spuy. The project team was coordinated by 
Ms Anriette Esterhuysen.
UNESCO appointed a Multistakeholder Advisory Board, made up of fifteen international experts in different 
aspects of the Internet, from different regions and stakeholder communities, to advise on implementation 
of the project (See Annex 1). Additional support and advice have been provided by the UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics. Advice was sought and received from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD).
The project has been developed through three phases of research, consultation and validation.
The first phase was concerned with the broad themes of Internet Universality and the ways in which they 
might be encapsulated in an indicator framework. It included two elements:
a.  Desk research into existing indicators and indices which have been developed or adopted by 
intergovernmental organisations, international NGOs and other stakeholders.
b.  Consultation with the diverse stakeholder communities that are concerned with the Internet. 
The governments of Member States, international organisations and associations with particular 
interest in the Internet were explicitly invited to participate in this consultation.
The consultation process had two elements:
a.  An online consultation, in the six official UN languages, was launched at the WSIS Forum on 14 
June 2017 and remained open until 31 October 2017. This attracted 198 contributions  
(See Annex 3). 3
b.  Consultative meetings and workshops were held at 26 international, regional and national 
events concerned with the Internet, in 22 countries, 4 between 29 March and 31 October 2017 
(See Annex 2).
This first phase of work enabled the preparation of a draft indicator framework and set of indicators which were 
set out in the document Defining Internet Universality Indicators, published online and offline in December 
2017. Six main criteria, drawn from UNESCO’s previous experience with indicators, were considered in this 
work:
 •that indicators should be chosen where measurement data are sufficiently reliable in quality to permit 
confident interpretation;
 •that the selected indicators should be quantitative where possible and qualitative where appropriate;
 •that they should be independently verifiable where possible;
 •that they should, where possible and relevant, permit disaggregation by sex, age group, locality 5 and 
other population characteristics;
3 This process built on exploratory work in 2014 led by Mr. Andrew Puddephatt, with support from the Internet Society. http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/
fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/news/defining_internet_indicators_draft.pdf  
4 Argentina, Austria, Belgium, China, Colombia, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Portugal, Russia, South 
Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates and Vietnam.
5 e.g. the distinction between rural and urban areas.
20
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  
  The Evolving Internet    UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Project •and that it should be possible for the necessary data or information to be gathered, at reasonable cost in 
time and money, in the majority of countries.
A second consultation process was held from 1 December 2017 to 18 May 2018, enabling all stakeholders to 
respond to this framework and draft indicators. The governments of Member States, international organisations 
and associations with particular interest in the Internet were again explicitly invited to participate.
Stakeholders were invited, in this second consultation, to address three questions:
1.  Are there any additional themes, questions or indicators  which you believe should be included in 
the framework?
2.  Are there any suggestions that you wish to make in respect of the proposed themes, questions and 
indicators  which are included in the framework as it stands?
3.  What sources and means of verification would you recommend, from your experience, in relation 
to any of the questions and indicators that have been proposed?
As in the first phase, this second phase included:
a.  An online consultation in six languages, which received 138 contributions (See Annex 3).
b.  Consultative meetings and workshops at 15 international, regional and national events which 
were held in 13 countries between 1 December 2017 and 18 May 2018. 6 These included regional 
consultation events in the Asia-Pacific, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Arab States 
regions (See Annex 2).
The draft indicators were revised in light of contributions made to this consultation process. The third phase 
of work comprised scientific assessments of the feasibility of revised draft indicators which were undertaken 
in four countries – Brazil, Ecuador, Nigeria and Pakistan – during May 2018. These assessed the viability of 
obtaining evidence to assess each of the indicators included in the framework and considered ways of 
implementing the framework in pilot countries. 
Part-pilots of the indicators, exploring actual evidence, were undertaken in Brazil, Senegal and Thailand 
between July and September 2018.
On 21 November 2018, the 31st Session of UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme 
for Development of Communication (IPDC) “welcomed the Internet Universality indicators framework” and 
“endorsed the use of this tool on a voluntary basis as a useful resource available for Member States.”7 The 
Council also “encouraged interested Member States and all stakeholders, on voluntary basis, to support and 
conduct national assessments of Internet development with the Internet Universality indicators,” and “to use 
the research findings for evidence-based policy discussions and recommendations.”
6 Brazil, Canada, Egypt, France, Ghana, Italy, Peru, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.
7 Decisions taken by the 31st Council Session of the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), 21-22 November 2018, 
UNESCO HQ. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/ 48223/pf0000266235  
21
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   
The Evolving Internet    UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Project
1THE PROCESS 
AND TIMELINE
March 2017  
Launch
November 2017  
First reportNovember 2018  
Final reportNovember  
2018  
Endorsement of the 
use of the indicators 
by UNESCO’s 
Intergovernmental 
Council of IPDC
PHASE 1 PHASE 2 PHASE 3
FOCUS ON BROAD 
THEMES
March to October 2017
Desk research and 
multistakeholder 
consultation on the 
broad themes of Internet 
Universality.FOCUS ON SPECIFIC 
INDICATORS
November 2017 to March 2018
Desk research and 
multistakeholder 
consultation on the draft 
Internet Universality 
Indicators.PRE-TESTING AND PILOTING 
THE INDICATORS
April to November 2018
Feasibility assessments in 
Brazil, Ecuador, Nigeria, and 
Pakistan (May 2018). Part-
pilots in Brazil, Senegal, and 
Thailand (July to September 
2018).
23 UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators2
The Indicator 
Framework
Locals from Sanikiluaq, Nunavut, Canada take part in a digital mapping 
activity in 2015 to document their distinctive place-based knowledge, 
traditions, histories, and cultural practices. In collaboration between 
Indigenous communities, cartographers, and Google, the project aims 
to empower the 1.4 million people who self-identity as First Nations, 
Métis or Inuit in Canada with the ability to map territories and reflect 
their own communities.
© Google Canada
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
25ROAM-X  
INDICATORSAR
Rights
MAccessibility 
to All
Multistakeholder 
participation X
Cross-cuttingO
Openness
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
26Introduction
The indicator framework which is set out in this document is intended to help governments and other 
stakeholders to assess their national Internet environments, identify areas in which improvements in policy 
and practice could enhance those environments and their alignment with the ROAM principles, and develop 
appropriate policy approaches and improvements in implementation in the light of that analysis. While the 
indicators are appropriate in all Internet environments, their application will vary between countries according 
to those countries’ different circumstances. 
The framework is not intended either to provide a basis for scoring national performance or to make 
comparisons between countries. Instead, it has been designed to be used by diverse national stakeholders, 
including governments, industry, civil society organisations, academia and other multistakeholder groups 
concerned with Internet development, access and rights. 
The Structure of the Framework
The Internet Universality Indicators framework is structured around the four ROAM Principles, with the addition 
of Cross-Cutting Indicators concerned with gender and the needs of children, sustainable development, 
trust and security, and legal and ethical aspects of the Internet. Together, these form the ROAMX indicator 
framework.
In addition to the ROAMX indicators, this document identifies a number of contextual indicators concerned 
with the demographic, social and economic characteristics of a country, which are intended to help users 
to understand their findings in terms of conditions in their country.
Categories . The framework as a whole is structured around five categories, which include the four ROAM 
principles together with a category of Cross-Cutting Indicators (X). 
Themes . Each of the ROAMX indicators is divided into a number of themes. There are six themes in the R 
and A categories, five themes in the O and X categories, and three themes in the M category. 
Questions . A number of questions are set out within each theme. These address the specific points on which 
national performance is to be assessed and on which evidence is to be gathered and assessed. UNESCO 
has drawn extensively on contributions and suggestions made during the consultation process in selecting 
the questions and indicators on the basis of experience with other frameworks. Six criteria have also been 
used to support the selection of indicators: 
 •that each question and associated indicators should address a single issue;
 •that indicators should be chosen where measurement data are sufficiently reliable in quality to permit 
confident interpretation;
 •that the selected indicators should be quantitative where possible and qualitative where appropriate;
 •that they should be independently verifiable where possible;
 •that they should, where possible and relevant, permit disaggregation by sex, age group, locality and other 
population characteristics;
 •and that it should be possible for the necessary data or information to be gathered, at reasonable cost in 
time and money, in the majority of countries.
27
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe Indicator Framework
Introduction  
2Indicators. One or more indicators is/are identified for each question. These indicators provide the evidence 
base for assessment of the question. These indicators fall into three categories:
 •quantitative indicators, which use data derived from official statistics and other data sources where these 
are available, including household and other professionally-conducted quantitative surveys, private sector 
data gathered by Internet businesses where these are made available, and, where necessary, estimation 
based on reliable parameters and proxies;
 •institutional indicators, such as the inclusion of specific principles in constitutional or legal instruments, 
and the establishment and functioning of implementing agencies or other organisations;
 •qualitative indicators, which include written reports by government agencies, international organisations, 
academics and other credible authorities, media sources, information from professionally-conducted 
research studies using qualitative methods such as focus groups, interviews with informants during an 
assessment, and invited contributions to a consultation process undertaken as part of an assessment. 
Sources. Chapter 9 provides guidance concerning sources and means of verification for all of the questions 
and indicators included in these categories and themes. This is intended to help researchers making use of 
the indicators, recognising that the availability of data and information sources will vary significantly between 
countries. For each theme, there is a list of generic sources of quantitative and qualitative evidence, relevant 
background documentation, and pointers to established international indices and other indicator frameworks 
that may be of value.
It is clear that evidence for all of the indicators included in the indicator framework will not be available in all 
cases. It may be difficult to assess some of the questions and indicators adequately in some countries for this 
reason. The indicator framework has been explicitly designed to address this by including a diverse range 
of indicators and potential sources. This should provide enough evidence for a substantive assessment to 
be made of the Internet environment as a whole notwithstanding data limitations. 
UNESCO hopes that the indicator framework will be used as a whole but recognises that doing so can require 
significant resources in research time and expertise. A shorter, more concentrated and more selective set of 
core indicators has therefore also been signalled by means of an asterisk next to these indicators within the 
full framework as set out in Chapters 4 to 8. These can also be found in Annex 4. Taken as a whole, using either 
the full indicator framework or the core indicators, this will enable researchers to build a collage of quantitative 
and qualitative measures that supports a comprehensive understanding of the Internet environment from 
the perspective of UNESCO’s ROAM principles.
UNESCO anticipates that the indicator framework will be used by a variety of different assessment teams 
with different levels of available resources and expertise. Experience with the MDIs suggests that small 
teams of researchers that bring together diverse experience and perspectives can be particularly effective in 
drawing out the full range of evidence available, particularly with the benefit of support from a representative 
steering committee. Such teams can work collaboratively in a relatively short space of time, using a variety of 
sources and approaches, including desk research into published and online reports and datasets, requests 
for information to government departments, private companies and other organisations, discussions with 
key informants, and group discussion within the assessment team itself, drawing on its members’ diverse 
experience and perspectives.
28
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsIntroduction    The Indicator Framework  Technical guidance and advice on how researchers can best use the indicators are provided in a companion 
Implementation Guide (Chapter 10). Issues addressed in this Guide include:
 •the identification of available sources and source material;
 •the gathering of data from public and private, national and international sources;
 •the assessment of quantitative evidence, including data quality, including accuracy, reliability and timeliness;
 •the disaggregation of data between different groups within the population; 
 •the assessment of qualitative evidence, including relevant research and analytical techniques;
 •the preparation of reports on findings
29
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsIntroduction    The Indicator Framework  
2R O
Rights Openness
THEME A Policy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal and 
regulatory frameworkPolicy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkGender
THEME B Freedom of expression Open standards Connectivity and usage National Internet governance Children
THEME C Right of access to information Open markets Affordability International and regional 
Internet governanceSustainable 
development
THEME D Freedom of association and 
the right to take part in public 
affairsOpen content Equitable access Trust and security
THEME E The right to privacy Open data and open 
governmentLocal content and language Legal and ethical 
aspects of the Internet
THEME F Social, economic and cultural 
rightsCapacities/competencies
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
30A M X
Accessibility 
to AllMultistakeholder 
participationCross-Cutting  
issues
THEME A Policy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal and 
regulatory frameworkPolicy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkPolicy, legal and regulatory 
frameworkGender
THEME B Freedom of expression Open standards Connectivity and usage National Internet governance Children
THEME C Right of access to information Open markets Affordability International and regional 
Internet governanceSustainable 
development
THEME D Freedom of association and 
the right to take part in public 
affairsOpen content Equitable access Trust and security
THEME E The right to privacy Open data and open 
governmentLocal content and language Legal and ethical 
aspects of the Internet
THEME F Social, economic and cultural 
rightsCapacities/competencies
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
313
Contextual 
Indicators
Students (from left) Sawera, Fouzia, Zaruda, Sadia and Gulnaz work on 
educational programs in the computer room at Bagga Sheikhan school 
near Rawalpindi, supported by Developments in Literacy (DIL) , Punjab 
Province, Pakistan on September 28, 2012. Media and Information 
Literacy (MIL) empowers people to be curious, to search, to critically 
evaluate, to use and to contribute information and media content wisely.
© Kristian Buus/STARS, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
33CONTEXTUAL 
INDICATORSDemographic 
indicators
Development 
indicatorsEconomic 
indicators
Equality 
indicators
Governance 
indicatorsICT 
development 
indicators
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
34In addition to the five ROAMX categories, the proposed indicator framework also includes a number of 
contextual indicators. These provide background information which is important for interpreting findings 
derived from indicators in the ROAMX categories. All are derived from data sets or indices compiled by 
international organisations of various kinds, which are readily available from those organisations’ websites 
and publications. They are divided into six groups, as follows:
1. Economic indicators
2. Demographic indicators
3. Development indicators
4. Equality indicators
5. Governance indicators
6. ICT development indicators
These contextual indicators and their sources are summarised below. In addition to quantitative values for 
these indicators, those using the indicator framework will find it valuable to consider a country’s performance 
relative to comparable countries, and to assess trends in its performance within their wider context.
Most of these data sets include most but not all countries. It should be noted that, in some cases, data on 
some countries have been estimated on the basis of historic data or data concerning comparable countries. 
This is more likely to be the case with Least Developed Countries (LDCs). This may not always be clear in 
online sources, but information should be available from the international organisations responsible for 
publication.
1. Economic Indicators
These indicators are concerned with a country’s overall economic standing and performance. Indicator A 
(GNI p.c.) is a common proxy indicator for average income, and should be considered alongside contextual 
indicator 4.A, which is concerned with the distribution of that income. Indicator B (GNI growth rate) measures 
the extent to which an economy is growing and therefore has the propensity to invest in new technologies. 
The proportion of the economy which is attributable to services (indicator C) is significant because service 
sectors have so far been more susceptible to innovation and investment in ICTs than extractive industries, 
commodities or manufacturing.
Assessments should also take into account special factors affecting national economic performance, such 
as landlocked, small island (including SIDS) or LDC status.14
A.  Gross National Income (GNI) (purchasing power parity) per capit  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on GNI p.c. maintained by the World Bank.15
B.  GNI growth rate over the past ten years  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on GNI p.c. maintained by the World Bank.16
C.  Proportion of GDP attributable to services  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on sectoral distribution of GDP which is 
maintained by the World Bank.17
35
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsContextual Indicators
32. Demographic Indicators
These indicators are concerned with the population of a country. Indicator A (population size) affects  
the extent to which a country can generate economies of scope and scale in Internet services rather than 
relying on those that originate elsewhere. Indicator B (life expectancy) is an important indicator of a country’s 
level of development.1 Indicators C (age profile) and D (linguistic diversity) are important when interpreting the 
distribution of Internet access and use. Indicator E (urbanisation) affects the cost and pace of infrastructure 
investment and thereby of the provision of Internet services across a country or territory, as well as being 
relevant to urban/rural disaggregation.
Other demographic factors which may be particularly relevant in some countries, and which should be 
considered during investigations, include ethnic and cultural diversity, and the extent of migration (including 
refugee populations).
A.  Overall population size and growth trend  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on population size and growth trend 
maintained by the Population Division of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs.18
B.  Average life expectancy at birth, disaggregated by sex  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set concerning life expectancy at birth 
maintained by the World Health Organisation (WHO).19 Data on life expectancy at birth are also 
included in the Human Development Index (HDI).20
C.   Proportions of children, young people, people of working age and elderly people  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on population by age group maintained by 
the Population Division of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs.21 
D.  Linguistic diversity  
The principal source for this indicator is the index of linguistic diversity (with country summaries) 
maintained by Ethnologue.22
E.  Degree of urbanisation  
The principal source for this indicator is the data set on urban and rural population size 
maintained by the Population Division of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs.23
3. Development Indicators
These indicators are concerned with a country’s overall level of development, which, evidence shows, is 
closely associated with ICT access and use.24 Indicator A (UNDP’s Human Development Index) is a composite 
index made up of indicators concerned with life expectancy, education and GNI p.c., and is widely used as 
an overall proxy for development. Indicators B (educational experience) and C (literacy) are concerned with 
individual capabilities which have a significant bearing on people’s capacity to use the Internet. Indicator D 
(access to electricity) is concerned with crucial complementary infrastructure that facilitates Internet use. 
Other factors which may be relevant in some countries, and which should be considered during investigations, 
include the incidence of humanitarian problems, including conflict and natural disasters. 
A.  UNDP Human Development Index (HDI)  
The principal source proposed for this indicator is the HDI prepared by UNDP and reported in its 
annual Human Development Report.25 
1  It is also one component of the Human Development Index, contextual indicator 3A.
36
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Contextual IndicatorsB.  Mean years of schooling and proportions of appropriate age groups in primary, secondary 
and tertiary education, disaggregated by sex  
The principal source for this indicator consists of data sets which are gathered by the UNESCO 
Institute for Statistics.26 Data on mean years of schooling are also included in the HDI.27
C.  Adult literacy rate, disaggregated by sex (and language where appropriate)  
The principal source for this indicator consists of data gathered by the World Bank.28
D.  Proportion of population covered by electricity supply  
The principal sources for this indicator is the World Bank’s Sustainable Energy for All database.29 
4. Equality Indicators
These indicators are concerned with the degree of equality and inequality within society. Evidence shows that 
levels of equality and inequality are important factors in determining the affordability and extent of Internet 
access and use. Indicator A (Gini coefficient), which measures the dispersion of wealth or income within a 
population, is the most widely used indicator of overall societal inequality. Indicator B (gender inequality) is 
a composite index made up of health, empowerment and labour market indicators.
A.  GINI coefficient  
The principal source for this indicator is the Gini index produced by the World Bank.30
B.  Gender Inequality Index  
The principal source for this indicator is the Gender Inequality Index generated by the UN 
Development Programme.31
5. Governance Indicators
These indicators are concerned with different aspects of the quality of governance. Indicator A (the World 
Governance Indicators), is concerned with the overall quality of governance, and includes a variety of sub-
indicators concerned with different aspects of governance. Indicator C (the Doing Business Index) is compiled 
by the World Bank from ten indicators concerned with different aspects of establishing and managing a 
business in each country. This is particularly important to the development of Internet and online businesses 
which seek to take advantage of technological innovation and are susceptible to rapid change in technology 
and markets. 
A.  World Governance Indicators  
The principal source for this indicator are the six aggregate World Governance Indicators 
developed by the World Bank.32
B.  Rule of Law Index  
The principal source for this indicator is the Rule of Law Index developed by the World Justice 
Project.33
C.  Doing Business Index  
The principal source for this indicator is the Doing Business Index prepared by the World Bank.34
37
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsContextual Indicators
36. ICT Development Indicators
These indicators are concerned with the overall level of ICT preparedness and performance, and provide 
overall assessments of the ICT environment within which the Internet Universality indicators are located. 
Indicator A (the ICT Development Index) brings together statistical indicators concerned with ICT access, use 
and skills. Indicator B (the Mobile Connectivity Index) similarly combines data concerned with infrastructure, 
affordability, consumer readiness and content for mobile connectivity. Indicator C (the Networked Readiness 
Index) takes a wider view of the national ICT environment, the readiness of diverse stakeholders to make use 
of ICTs, and the actual usage evident amongst those stakeholders. Indicator D is concerned with one aspect 
of ICT development, e-commerce.
A.  ICT Development Index  
The principal source for this indicator is the ICT Development Index prepared by the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU).35 (Some of the indicators included in this Index are 
included in Category A of this indicator framework).
B.  Mobile Connectivity Index  
The principal source for this indicator is the Mobile Connectivity Index prepared by the GSMA 
Association.36 (Some of the indicators included in this Index are included in Category A of this 
indicator framework).
C.  World Economic Forum Networked Readiness Index  
The principal source proposed for this indicator is the Networked Readiness Index prepared 
by the World Economic Forum.37 (Some of the indicators included in this Index are included in 
Category A).
D.  UNCTAD E-Commerce Index  
The principal source proposed for this indicator is the B2C (business to consumer) E-Commerce 
Index prepared by UNCTAD.38
38
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Contextual Indicators4
Category R  
Rights
A Khayae FM reporter interviews a local Htan Tabin shop keeper. Khayae 
FM, in the Htan Tabin community, is Myanmar’s first community radio 
station. They are currently on-air for 2 hours per day, under a pilot 
program hoping to bring community radio to people of Myanmar.
© Chris Peken
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
41R
Rights
Right of access 
to informationFreedom of 
expression
Policy, legal 
and regulatory 
framework
Freedom of 
association  
and the right to take  
part in public  
affairs
The right to 
privacySocial, economic 
and cultural  
rights
42
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators4Human rights are central to both the Internet and sustainable development. The United Nations’  2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development  envisages ‘a world of universal respect for human rights and human dignity, the 
rule of law, justice, equality and non-discrimination; of respect for race, ethnicity and cultural diversity; and of 
equal opportunity permitting the full realization of human potential and contributing to shared prosperity.’39 
An Internet environment that failed to uphold this principle would be incompatible with the Agenda .
The fundamental principles of human rights have been agreed by the international community in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights  (UDHR)40 and international rights agreements including the International 
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)41 and on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),42 the 
Conventions on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)43 and of Discrimination against 
Women (CEDAW),44 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).45 The UN Human Rights Council 
(HRC)46 and the General Assembly47 have affirmed that ‘the same rights that people have offline must also be 
protected online.’ Aspects of the application of international rights agreements online have been addressed 
in resolutions of the HRC. 
These international agreements emphasise that no restrictions may be placed on rights other than ‘those which 
are prescribed by law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, […] 
public order, the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.’1 
In particular, the Human Rights Council has asserted the importance of legal frameworks, proportionality and 
independent oversight of any such restrictions if they are to be legitimate and to avoid counting as violations 
of the affected rights. 
Internet Universality emphasises the importance of harmony between the growth and use of the Internet and 
human rights. A free Internet is one that respects the human rights set out in these international agreements 
and enables people to enjoy and exercise them fully. It includes the full range of inter-relationships between 
human rights and the Internet, such as freedoms of expression and association, privacy, cultural participation, 
gender equality, security and rights concerned with education, employment and welfare.
This category of the indicator framework is divided into six themes, each of which includes a number of 
questions and associated indicators. 
 •Theme A is concerned with the overall policy, legal and regulatory framework for human rights and their 
relation to the Internet. 
 •Theme B is concerned with freedom of expression.
 •Theme C is concerned with the right to access information. 
 •Theme D is concerned with freedom of association and with rights to participate in public life. 
 •Theme E is concerned with the right to privacy and related issues.
 •Theme F is concerned with economic, social and cultural rights.
Understanding and assessment of the rights which are included in this category should include all of the 
rights agreements identified above. Assessments should pay particular attention to the rights of women and 
of children, as articulated in CEDAW and the CRC, relating findings concerning these to those sections of 
category X which are concerned with gender and with children. Particular attention may be to other groups 
within society, including indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and migrant 
and refugee communities.
National assessments should also pay attention to regional rights agreements such as the American 
Convention on Human Rights,48 the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights,49 and the European 
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.50 They should also consider 
the consistency of the relationship between the implementation of rights offline and online, which should 
be considered holistically rather than distinctly one from another. 
1 ICCPR, Art. 22.2. This should not be taken to imply that States are permitted to place restrictions on all rights. There should therefore be no 
interpretation to mean, for example, that the rights to be free of torture and slavery could ever be justifiably restricted.
43
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsRightsCategory R RightsTheme A •  Policy, Legal 
and Regulatory 
Framework
The fundamental principles of human rights have been agreed by the international community in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)51 and international rights agreements including the International 
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)52 and on Economic Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),53 the 
Conventions on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)54 and of Discrimination against 
Women (CEDAW),55 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).56 A number of regional rights 
agreements have also been agreed. 
The UN Human Rights Council57 and the General Assembly58 have affirmed that ‘the same rights that people 
have offline must also be protected online.’ The Human Rights Council has also adopted several resolutions 
on ‘the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet,’ which address aspects of these 
and subsequent questions and indicators.59
RA.1 Is there a legal framework for the enjoyment and enforcement of human 
rights which is consistent with international and regional rights agreements, 
laws and standards, and with the rule of law?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a constitutional or legal framework, including oversight arrangements, which is consistent 
with international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that it is respected 
and enforced by government and other competent authorities2
RA.2  Is there a legal framework which recognises that the same rights that people 
have offline must also be protected online?
Indicator: 
 ▶Evidence that the principle of online/offline equivalence is accepted and implemented in law and practice
RA.3  Is there a legal framework to protect individuals against violations of rights 
which arise from use or abuse of the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence of a legal framework and appropriate procedural powers concerned with protection against 
cybercrime, Internet-enabled crime and rights violations which is consistent with international and regional 
rights agreements, laws and standards3
2  Indicators marked with a triangle have been identified as ‘core indicators’. The subset of core indicators can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. These core indicators can also be 
found in Annex 4.
3 Definitions of cybercrime vary. Assessments should refer both to national legal frameworks and to international agreements such as those reached 
by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (see Chapter 9).
44
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme A •  Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  Category R RightsRA.4  Do individuals have recourse to effective remedies to address violations of 
rights, online and offline, by state or non-state actors? 4
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework for due process and effective remedies
 ▶Existence and effective functioning of a national human rights institution
 ▶Evidence from legal judgements and court rulings
RA.5  Are judges, magistrates and other legal professionals trained in issues 
relating to the Internet and human rights?
Indicator: 
 ▶Availability of relevant courses and proportions of relevant personnel who have undertaken or completed 
training
Theme B •  Freedom of 
Expression
Freedom of expression is one of the human rights within the Universal Declaration  that has been significantly 
affected by the Internet’s emergence as a communications medium. It is defined in article 19(2) of the ICCPR  
as including an individual’s ‘freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless 
of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.’60 
Regional rights agreements also include relevant provisions. 
Article 19(3) of the ICCPR states that the exercise of these rights ‘may be subject to certain restrictions, but 
these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary: (a) for respect of the rights or reputations 
of others; [or] (b) for the protection of national security or of public order, or of public health or morals.’61 Other 
international agreements place restrictions on information concerning (for example) racial hatred (ICERD) 
and child sex abuse images (CRC). The UN Human Rights Committee emphasised in its General Comment 
No. 34 (2011) that any such restrictions must be provided by law, necessary for the explicit purposes set out 
in the Article, and proportionate.62 It is also relevant to consider differences that may exist between legal 
frameworks and implementation online and offline.
Questions B.1 to B.4 are concerned with the overall legal and regulatory framework for freedom of expression 
within a country.63 Questions B.5 and B.6 are concerned with the extent to which individuals can and do 
exercise expression. Questions B.7 and B.8 are concerned with the punishment of expression and with self-
censorship. The questions and indicators in Category A Theme D are also relevant to this theme.  
4  Note that the term “violations” as used here covers both violations of human rights by state actors as well as abuses of human rights by non-State 
actors.4
45
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B • Freedom of ExpressionCategory R RightsRB.1  Is freedom of expression guaranteed in law, respected in practice, and widely 
exercised?
Indicators: 
 ▶Constitutional or legal guarantee of freedom of expression consistent with ICCPR Article 19, and evidence 
that it is respected and enforced by government and other competent authorities64
 ▶Constitutional or legal guarantee of press/media freedom consistent with ICCPR Article 19 
 ▶Assessments by credible and authoritative sources of extent and diversity of expression online and offline
RB.2  Are any restrictions on freedom of expression narrowly defined, transparent 
and implemented in accordance with international rights agreements, laws 
and standards?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal restrictions on freedom of expression that are consistent with international and regional rights 
agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that these are respected by government and other 
competent authorities
RB.3 To what extent is ex ante or ex post censorship5 of online content undertaken, 
on what grounds and with what transparency?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal or regulatory framework relating to restrictions on freedom of expression
 ▶Quantitative and qualitative evidence of ex ante and ex post censorship of online content
RB.4 Under what conditions does the law hold platforms and other online service 
providers liable for content published or shared by users on them?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework for intermediary liability and content regulation is consistent with international and regional 
rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence concerning proportionality of implementation
RB.5 What proportion of the population generates online content?
Indicator: 
 ▶Proportion of the population making use of social media, microblogging and blogging services
RB.6 Are individuals, journalists or other media/online actors subject to arbitrary 
detention, prosecution or intimidation for disseminating information online?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence and nature of relevant legal provisions and practice
5 i.e. censorship which is exercised before publication (ex ante) and after publication (ex post)
46
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B •  Freedom of Expression  Category R Rights ▶Evidence concerning the extent and nature of arbitrary detentions and prosecutions for online expression
RB.7 Do individuals, journalists or other media/online actors practice self-
censorship in order to avoid harassment by government or other online actors?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence of self-censorship by journalists, bloggers and other media/online actors
 ▶Evidence of self-censorship as a result of online abuse, particularly by women and children
Theme C  •   Right of Access to 
Information
The right of access to information concerns the right to access information and ideas which have been 
published or made available by others. It is included in Article 19(2) of the ICCPR which asserts the freedom ‘to 
seek […] information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, […] through any […] media of […] choice.’65 Article 
19(3) of the ICCPR (see above) and related provisions in other international and regional rights agreements 
also address access to information, including restrictions concerning ‘propaganda for war’ and ‘advocacy of 
national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence’ (ICCPR 
Article 20), and ‘exploitative use of children in pornographic performances and materials’ (CRC Article 34).
As with freedom of expression, the Human Rights Committee has asserted the importance of legal frameworks, 
requirement for necessity and proportionality in any restrictions permitted to these rights.66 
This should be distinguished from measures concerning the ability to access government or publicly-funded 
information, which is addressed in Category O Themes C and D.
Question C.1 in this theme is concerned with the overall legal framework for access to information. Question 
C.2 is concerned with the presence or absence of censorship by government, as seen from the perspective of 
consumers of online information. Question C.3 is concerned with the diversity and independence of content 
which is available within the country, and question C.4 with the related issue of harassment by government 
agencies and other stakeholders. The questions and indicators in Category A Theme D are also relevant to 
this theme.
RC.1 Is the right of access to information guaranteed in law and respected in 
practice?
Indicators: 
 ▶Constitutional or legal guarantee of the right of access to information consistent with international and 
regional rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that it is respected and enforced by 
government and other competent authorities
 ▶Objectives and scope of restrictions on access to content, online and offline4
47
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C •  Right of Access to InformationCategory R RightsRC.2 Does the government block or filter access to the Internet as a whole or to 
specific online services, applications or websites, and on what grounds and 
with what degree of transparency is this exercised?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework for blocking or filtering Internet access, including transparency and oversight arrangements
 ▶Evidence in government and court decisions, and from other credible and authoritative sources, concerning 
blocking or filtering of access
 ▶Incidence, nature and basis for shutdowns or other restrictions on Internet connectivity
 ▶Numbers and trend of content access restrictions, takedowns of domain names and other interventions 
during the past three years
RC.3 Is a variety of news sources and diverse viewpoints on issues of public 
importance available online?6
Indicator: 
 ▶Number and diversity of news services concerned with international, national and local news, online and 
offline
RC.4 Are individuals, journalists or other online/media actors subject to arbitrary 
detention, prosecution or intimidation for accessing information online?
Indicators: 
 ▶Scope and nature of legal provisions and practice
 ▶Numbers of arbitrary detentions and prosecutions for access to content that is not illegitimate in terms of 
international agreements as to the circumstances and criteria for permissible restrictions. 7
6  This issue is covered more extensively in the Media Development Indicators.
7  See introductory text above.
48
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C •   Right of Access to Information  Category R RightsTheme D •  Freedom of 
Association and 
the Right to 
take part in the 
Conduct of Public 
Affairs
Freedom of association is another human right which has been particularly affected by the Internet. Article 
21 of the ICCPR establishes the right of peaceful assembly, and Article 22 the right to freedom of association 
with others. 
The first question in this theme (D.1) is concerned with the overall legal framework for freedom of association. 
Question D.2 is concerned with the ability of civil society organisations to organise effectively online.
Article 25 of the ICCPR states that ‘Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity … to take part in the 
conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely chosen representatives,’ and ‘to have access, on general 
terms of equality, to public service in his country.’ 
Questions D.3 and D.4 are concerned with the extent to which government has enabled citizens to exercise 
this right online as well as offline.
RD.1 Is freedom of association guaranteed in law and respected in practice?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of an established legal framework that is consistent with international and regional rights 
agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that it is respected and enforced by government and 
other competent authorities
RD.2 Can non-governmental organisations organise freely online?
Indicator: 
 ▶Evidence of online organisation, and absence of undue interference with such organisation
RD.3 Are there government policies for e-government and/or e-participation that 
encourage participation in government and public processes?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of government policies for e-government and e-participation, including use of the Internet for 
public consultation4
49
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D – Freedom of Association and the Right to take part in the Conduct of Public AffairsCategory R Rights ▶Assessments in the Online Services Index of UNDESA’s E-Government Development Index
 ▶Values/rankings in UNDESA’s e-participation index
RD.4 Are government websites/apps available that enable individuals to undertake 
a wide range of e-government activities securely online as well as offline?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of national e-government services available through websites and apps
 ▶Number of users of e-government services (disaggregated by sex and, where appropriate, by language)
 ▶Extent to which data on e-government sites have transparent terms of service, are protected by cybersecurity 
measures and encryption (e.g. https) and are available using diverse browsers and operating systems
 ▶Credible reports concerning cybersecurity of government websites and services 
Theme E •  The Right to 
Privacy 
Privacy is another right that has been substantially affected by the Internet. Article 17 of the ICCPR provides 
that ‘No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his [ sic] privacy, family, home or 
correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation,’ and stipulates that ‘Everyone has the 
right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.’ Article 16 of the CRC further asserts 
these rights for children.
While freedoms of expression and association, and the right of access to information, are generally considered 
to have been extended by the Internet, there has been growing concern about threats to privacy which may 
be posed by it, including surveillance by governments and tracking by third parties, the exploitation of private 
data for commercial ends and the unlawful acquisition and use of data for criminal purposes. 
The UN General Assembly has adopted a number of resolutions concerning ‘the right to privacy in the digital 
age,’ which, in addition to general principles, have addressed issues including surveillance, encryption and 
anonymity.67 
Questions E.1. E.2 and E.3 are concerned with legal arrangements for privacy, data protection and surveillance. 
Data protection in this context relates to the collection, analysis, use, storage, transfer and sharing of data. 
Questions E.4, E.5 and E.6 are concerned with individuals’ rights concerning their own identities. Questions 
E.7 and E.8 are concerned with the relationship between the state and business holders of commercial and 
personal data sets.
RE.1 Is the right to privacy guaranteed in law and respected in practice?
Indicators: 
 ▶Constitutional or legal definition of privacy and right to privacy and evidence that it is respected by 
government and other competent authorities
 ▶Number of privacy violations reported to and by data protection authority or equivalent entity, as a 
proportion of population
50
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme E –  The Right to Privacy   Category R Rights ▶Evidence from media and civil society sources concerning privacy violations
RE.2 Is the protection of personal data guaranteed in law and enforced in practice, 
with respect to governments, businesses and other organisations, including 
rights of access to information held and to redress?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework for data protection, including monitoring mechanisms and means of redress, and evidence 
that it is respected and enforced by government and other competent authorities
 ▶Legal framework concerning the commercial use of personal data and international data transfer/security, 
including monitoring mechanisms and means of redress
 ▶Existence and powers of an independent data protection authority or similar entity
RE.3 Are the powers of law enforcement and other agencies for the lawful 
interception of user data necessary, proportionate and limited to 
circumstances which are consistent with international and regional rights 
agreements, laws and standards? 68
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework for the lawful interception of data, including independent oversight and transparency, 
and evidence concerning implementation by government and other competent authorities
RE.4 Are any requirements for identification and registration, including telephone 
and Internet subscription registration, necessary, proportionate and 
consistent with international and regional rights agreements, laws and 
standards?
Indicator: 
 ▶Nature and proportionality of identity and registration requirements, if any, including verification processes
RE.5 Are data encryption and online privacy protected in law and practice in a way 
that is consistent with international and regional rights agreements, laws and 
standards?69
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a legal framework consistent with international rights agreements and evidence that it is 
respected by government and other competent authorities
RE.6 Do individuals have legal rights to protect their online identity and to manage 
or correct information concerning them online, in ways that protect their 
rights to privacy as set out in Article 17 of the ICCPR?
Indicator: 
Legal frameworks and jurisprudence concerning privacy and freedom of expression, and evidence that they 
are respected by government and other competent authorities4
51
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme E – The Right to Privacy Category R RightsRE.7 Are government requirements for Internet businesses to provide information 
to government agencies concerning Internet users necessary, proportionate, 
transparent and consistent with international and regional rights agreements, 
laws and standards?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal and regulatory provisions concerning the provision of information about users to government
RE.8 Are provisions concerning the location and duration of data retention 
consistent with international standards of data protection and legitimate 
requirements of law enforcement?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal and regulatory provisions concerning data retention and cross-border data flows, and evidence of 
enforcement by government and other competent authorities
Theme F •  Social, Economic 
and Cultural Rights
The Internet is widely believed to hold great potential for economic and social development, including many 
of the goals which are set out in the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development .70 The developmental 
impact of the Internet is covered in Category X Theme C, which is specifically concerned with Sustainable 
Development.
Economic, social and cultural rights are also identified and elaborated in the ICESCR.71 This theme is 
concerned, in general terms, with the integration of those rights which are included in the ICESCR with Internet 
Universality, and should be considered in conjunction with Category X Theme C (Sustainable Development).
Articles 6 to 14 of the ICESCR are concerned with the progressive realisation of rights concerned with 
employment, social security, family life, an adequate standard of living including freedom from hunger, 
health and education. Question F.1 is concerned with the incorporation of the Internet in national strategies 
for three of these areas of economic and social policy: employment, health and education. 
Article 15 of the ICESCR recognises the right of everyone to take part in cultural life. Question F.2 is concerned 
with the extent to which this right can be enjoyed online by people from different communities and ethnicities 
within the country.
52
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme F –  Social, Economic and Cultural Rights  Category R RightsRF.1 Do government policies incorporate the Internet in strategies concerned with 
employment, health and education,8 with particular reference to ICESCR 
rights?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence of inclusion of a) the Internet, and b) respect for ICESCR rights, in sector strategies for employment, 
health and education
 ▶Evidence of analysis by government of the impact of Internet on employment, health and education
 ▶Submission and content of country reports to the OHCHR on implementation of ICESCR rights
RF.2 Are all citizens and other individuals equally able to take advantage of the 
Internet to participate in cultural activities?
Indicators: 
 ▶Extent and nature of differences in Internet access and use between different communities/ethnicities
 ▶Existence of government policy concerning cultural heritage online
 ▶Constitutional or legal guarantee of freedom of artistic expression
8 These have been selected as representative groups of ESC rights.4
53
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme F – Social, Economic and Cultural RightsCategory R Rights5
Category O  
Openness
In Oaxaca, Mexico, the Indigenous Community Telecommunications 
network (TIC) provides affordable mobile phone and Internet services to 
rural areas. Supported by the non-profit organization Rhizomatica, the 
project helps communities who need or want to build and maintain self-
governed and owned telecommunications infrastructures.
© Luisa Civardi
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
55O
Openness
Policy, legal 
and regulatory 
frameworkOpen  
standards
Open  
contentOpen 
marketsOpen data 
and open 
government
56
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsInternet Universality’s second principle is that the Internet should be open for all to develop or take advantage 
of its resources and opportunities in whatever ways seem most appropriate or valuable to them. The category 
of openness is concerned alike, therefore, with technical issues, markets, content, transparency and trust in 
the Internet and Internet-enabled services, including issues such as open source software and development, 
open government, open data and open educational resources. Through openness, Internet Universality 
acknowledges the integrity of the Internet as enabling a common global exchange, rather than being confined 
to ‘walled gardens’ based on incompatible technologies. 
This category is divided into five themes:
 •Theme A is concerned with the overall policy, legal and regulatory framework. 
 •Theme B is concerned with open standards.
 •Theme C is concerned with open markets. 
 •Theme D is concerned with open content. 
 •Theme E is concerned with open data.
Open standards, interoperability, public application programming interfaces (APIs) and open source software 
have made a vital contribution to the technical development of the Internet, enabling it to evolve more 
expeditiously and facilitating service innovation. Open markets have also played an important part in the 
development of the Internet, allowing market access to innovative and competitive businesses rather than 
excluding these through restrictive licensing arrangements or protectionist limitations on service provision. 
For example, the Linux operating system has fostered an extensive IT ecosystem, while W3C1 standards 
have enabled a usable/accessible web experience for users.
Openness to new technologies and market access are important but not sufficient conditions for the 
innovation that has enabled the Internet to move from the margins of society and economy to the mainstream 
of development. 
Trust and security in the integrity of the Internet and Internet-enabled services are essential for the Internet to 
function effectively and in the interests of all. These are linked, in turn, to the degree to which transparency is 
part of the openness of the Internet. Attention should also be paid to Theme D in Category X when assessing 
this category 
1  World Wide Web Consortium.
57
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsCategory O Openness
5Theme A •  Policy, Legal 
And Regulatory 
Framework
An appropriate policy, legal and regulatory framework – including multistakeholder governance structures – 
is necessary to support an evidence-based, transparent and forward-looking policymaking process that will 
preserve the Internet as an open, public and universal resource. Policy instruments should seek to ensure 
that the Internet runs on an open and neutral platform, facilitating cooperation and competition through 
interoperability, and delivering content and applications to users in a secure environment which respects 
human rights.
Questions A.1 and A.2 are concerned with the policy, legal and regulatory frameworks, respectively, for the 
Internet and Internet-enabled services. Question A.3 is concerned with the extent to which the ability to 
innovate online is universally available within the country.
OA.1 Is there an overall policy, legal and regulatory framework for Internet 
development and policymaking which is consistent with international norms 
concerning openness and transparency?1
Indicators:
 ▶Existence of an overall framework consistent with relevant international norms72
 ▶Existence of legal and regulatory frameworks to enable e-commerce, digital signatures, cybersecurity, 
data protection and consumer protection
This question and indicators are also included in Category M Theme A.
OA.2 Does the legal and regulatory framework for business, academia and civil 
society facilitate innovation on the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence concerning the conduciveness of the legal and regulatory framework towards the establishment 
of new business ventures and innovation by academia and civil society2
 ▶Perceptions of experience of the regulatory environment for business and ICTs by businesses, including 
Internet-enabled business
1  These norms arise from agreements in international organisations concerned with the Internet, and evolve along with Internet technology and 
services.
2 Indicators marked with a triangle have been identified as ‘core indicators’. The subset of core indicators can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. These core indicators can also be 
found in Annex 4.
58
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Theme A •  Policy, Legal And Regulatory FrameworkCategory O OpennessOA.3 Are there restrictions on which organisations or individuals can establish 
Internet, or Internet-enabled, services?
Indicator: 
 ▶Requirements of legal framework for the establishment of Internet and Internet-enabled services and 
businesses
Theme B •  Open  
Standards
The evolution of the Internet requires attention by all stakeholders to the implementation of standards and 
protocols that facilitate the growth and security of the Internet. Open standards play a crucial role in promoting 
interoperability, and thereby innovation and the diversity of service provision on the Internet. Public authorities 
can play an important part in promoting open standards through the procurement and provision of public 
services. 
Questions B.1 and B.2 are concerned with the overall legal and regulatory framework for open standards. 
Question B.3 is concerned with free and open source software (FOSS). Question B.4 is concerned with the 
extent to which two major developments in global Internet protocols/standards which are considered vital 
to the future development of a secure global Internet – IPv6 and DNSSEC - have been deployed within the 
country. National participation in international standard-setting processes is included in Category M Theme C.
OB.1 How does the legal and regulatory framework encourage and/or constrain 
investment and innovation using all available technologies?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence concerning public policy and practice towards online innovation, including procurement of 
public services
 ▶Evidence concerning the initiation and sustainability of Internet start-ups
OB.2 Do national standards setting processes conform to international standards 
including due process and transparency? 
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal and regulatory arrangements for standards processes
 ▶Perceptions of standards processes amongst relevant stakeholders
 ▶Indicators in Category M are also relevant to participation in standard setting processes.
59
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B • Open standards  Category O Openness
5OB.3 Does the government promote the diversity of intellectual property licensing 
options including free and open-source software (FOSS)?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy towards FOSS and other licensing options
 ▶Extent to which software with diverse licensing options are used in government departments
OB.4 Does the government promote and adopt standards to facilitate accessibility 
to the Internet and e-government services for persons with disabilities?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy and practice towards ensuring accessibility for persons with disabilities
 ▶Perceptions of persons with disabilities concerning accessibility policy and practice
OB.5 How extensively are developments in Internet protocols and standards 
implemented within the country?
Indicators: 
 ▶Data concerning the extent of IPv4 and IPv63 deployment
 ▶Data concerning the extent of DNSSEC4 deployment
 ▶Evidence concerning adoption of current international cybersecurity standards and best practices
Theme C •  Open  
Markets
Open markets for networks and communications services facilitate consumer choice, stimulate innovation and 
tend to lead to lower prices and improved quality of service for end-users. An open market approach seeks to 
promote an efficient, affordable, innovative environment for the development of the Internet, recognising the 
risk that market concentration could lead to reduced choice and opportunity for users. Independent regulators 
have been established in many countries to oversee competition amongst network and telecommunication 
services. 
Questions C.1., C.2 and C.3 are concerned with the legal and regulatory framework governing markets for 
communications networks and Internet domains. Questions C.4 and C.5 are concerned with the extent to which 
there is competition between suppliers of networks and services, including the availability of international 
online services. These questions are also relevant to Category R Themes B (Freedom of Expression) and C 
(Right to Access Information).
3  Internet Protocol versions 4 and 6.
4  Domain Name System Security Extensions.
60
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Theme C • Open Markets Category O –Openness  Cooperation between competing services is also necessary to maximise the value of communications 
networks, for example through technical interoperability. Question 7 is concerned with the existence and 
performance of Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) for the local exchange of Internet traffic.
OC.1 Is there independent regulation of communications markets, undertaken in 
accordance with international norms and standards?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of an independent regulatory authority or authorities 
 ▶Evidence concerning regulatory performance, including perceptions of the quality of regulation by 
communications businesses, consumer associations and other organisations
OC.2 Are licensing and allocation of critical resources (including spectrum) 
transparent, flexible, technology- and service-neutral, non-restrictive and 
non-discriminatory?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal and regulatory arrangements for spectrum, including affordability of access to spectrum
 ▶Perceptions of the quality of arrangements for licensing and allocation of critical resources among relevant 
stakeholders
OC.3 Is there independent management of the domain name system?
Indicators:
 •Independence of the domain name registrar and legal arrangements concerning domain name registration
 •Proportion of domain registrations from the country which are registered as ccTLDs
OC.4 Is there sufficiently effective competition in communications access networks 
to protect consumer interests?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of fixed and mobile broadband providers
 ▶Market shares of fixed and mobile broadband providers 
 ▶Rating in the Internet and telephony sectors competition sub-index of the Networked Readiness Index
OC.5 Can Internet users choose between diverse Internet service providers, 
including domain name registrars, ISPs and online services?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of domain name registrars5 and distribution of market shares 
 ▶Number of ISPs and distribution of market shares 
5  A domain name registrar is an organisation which registers domains on behalf of end-users. In most countries this is a competitive market. It should 
not be confused with the unique national domain name registry which manages the domain itself and accredits registrars.5
61
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C • Open Markets   Category O –Openness     ▶Restrictions, if any, on access to online service providers based outside the country (including, for example, 
search, social media, microblogging, news access and e-commerce platforms)
 ▶Availability, extent of use and distribution of market share within the country between online service 
providers in core areas of Internet use (including, for example, search, social media, microblogging, news 
access and e-commerce platforms)
OC.6 Are communities able to establish their own networks to provide Internet 
access?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework enabling establishment of community networks.6
OC.7 Are there Internet Exchange Points (IXPs), peering and other arrangements for 
exchange of Internet traffic that facilitate effective access?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence and effective management of IXP(s)
 ▶Proportion of domestic traffic using IXPs, including trend
 ▶Latency levels for leading mobile broadband services to access national, regional and international servers
 ▶Existence of local caching services for international content
Theme D •   Open  
Content
The theme of open content is concerned with providing for the availability of content of all kinds, including 
public information and information from other sources within and beyond the country, which can be made 
available online. Legal requirements and licensing restrictions may change the degree of openness of 
content, place requirements on the use of content or restrict its distribution. Open content approaches seek 
to maximise the availability of content to end-users, through open licensing arrangements that are consistent 
with international intellectual property agreements. For example, Creative Commons licenses allow content 
creators to set licence conditions which they consider appropriate to their content. There has been particular 
interest in the availability of educational content through open educational resources (OER).
This theme is related to – and should be considered alongside – Theme C (Access to Information) in Category 
R. Questions D.1 and D.2 are concerned with the government’s overall policy on access to knowledge and on 
the implementation of international intellectual property agreements. Questions D.3 and D.4 are concerned 
with the openness of public information and with open educational resources, respectively. Questions D.5 and 
D.6 are concerned with relevant regulatory provisions, concerning net neutrality and virtual private networks. 
6  The definition of community networks will vary between countries.
62
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D - Open Content  Category O –Openness  OD.1 Does the government actively promote access to knowledge and open 
content through its policies for education, culture and science?
Indicators:
 ▶Existence and nature of government policy and practice on access to knowledge, including information 
generated using public funds and other information of public interest
 ▶Stakeholder perceptions of government policy and practice concerning access to knowledge, and of 
their impact
OD.2 Do arrangements for intellectual property protection balance the interests of 
copyright holders and information users in ways that promote innovation and 
creativity?
Indicators: 
 ▶Nature of legal arrangements for copyright enforcement, including arrangements for access to and fair 
use of copyright material7
 ▶Government policy and practice concerning the availability and use of alternative intellectual property 
arrangements such as Creative Commons licenses
OD.3 Does the government provide or encourage access to and facilitate sharing of 
public and publicly-funded information?
Indicators: 
 ▶Extent to which licensing options promoting free reuse of content are deployed in government departments 
and the public education system
 ▶Evidence concerning the extent of use of access to such content
Consideration should be given and cross-reference made to data/evidence for indicators concerning government 
policies on e-government and e-participation (Category R: Questions D.3, D.4) and public access facilities which 
can be used to access public information (Category A: Question A.5).
OD.4 Does the government encourage the use of open educational resources (OER) 
and facilitate open access to academic and scientific resources?
Indicators: 
 ▶Educational policy framework concerning OER
 ▶Arrangements for access to academic and scientific resources by higher education institutions and students
7  Given diverse legal traditions, the notion of “fair use” in this indicator needs to be interpreted in terms of the applicable law and the national 
regulatory framework as regards the existence or otherwise of any exceptions to copyright (such as for cases of commentary, criticism, teaching 
and research).5
63
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D - Open Content Category O –Openness    OD.5 Does the government require ISPs to manage network traffic in a way that is 
transparent, impartial and neutral, without discriminating against particular 
types of content or content from particular sources?
Indicator: 
 ▶Regulatory arrangements and practice concerning net neutrality and competition for online and network 
services
OD.6 Does the government allow individuals to publish and access content through 
protocols and tools of their own choice, including virtual private networks 
(VPNs)?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework and practice concerning the rights of end-users to publish and access content through 
all available tools, including VPNs
Theme E •   Open Data and 
Open Government
Open data policies are concerned with making publicly available data that are gathered by governments 
(and, sometimes, other stakeholders) so that they can be used by individuals, businesses (including both 
local and foreign businesses) and civil society organisations to undertake their own analysis and support their 
own objectives. The benefits of open data policies include improved access to knowledge, opportunities for 
business innovation and service provision, improved data analysis through recombination of data from diverse 
sources, and improved policymaking as a result of more rigorous expert analysis by diverse stakeholders. Data 
protection arrangements are important in ensuring that open data sets do not undermine individual privacy.
Question E.1 concerns the legal framework for open data, while questions E.2 to E.4 are concerned with its 
implementation by governments. Questions E.5 and E.6 are concerned with the use of data, including the 
impact of use on development.
OE.1 Has legislation been enacted which requires open access to public and 
publicly-funded data, with appropriate privacy protections, and is that 
legislation implemented?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a legal framework for access to open data which is consistent with international norms73 and 
privacy requirements
 ▶Evidence concerning implementation of the legal framework
 ▶Evidence concerning the extent to which open data resources are available and used online
64
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme E •  Open Data and Open Government    Category O –Openness  OE.2 Do government departments and local government agencies have websites 
which are available in all official languages and through all major browsers?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy to ensure provision of websites with appropriate language and browser access, and 
evidence concerning effective implementation
 ▶Proportion of government services with websites (value/ranking in UNDESA online services index)
 ▶Quality of government websites (extent of language availability, range of content, availability of mobile 
version)
 ▶Proportion of adults who have used e-government services within twelve months, aggregate and 
disaggregated8
OE.3 Do government and other public stakeholders provide easy online access to 
anonymised publicly-held data sets,9 including machine-readable access to 
original data?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework concerning access to publicly-held data sets, including arrangements for anonymisation, 
and evidence of implementation by government and other competent authorities
 ▶Number and range/diversity of open data sets made available by government and available through 
public access facilities
 ▶Data on the extent of use of open data to which access is provided by users within and outside the country
OE.4 Can individuals and organisations use and share data which have been made 
publicly available?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework concerning access to public information and nature of any restrictions, including 
restrictions concerning privacy
OE.5 Are open data used by stakeholders in ways which have a positive impact on 
sustainable development?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of access requests for open data from government sources
 ▶Evidence of use of open data to support sustainable development in selected sectors ( e.g. environment, 
health, agriculture, enterprise)
8  With particular reference e.g. to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
9  Public data, as understood here, should not include personal data.5
65
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Theme E • Open Data and Open Government  Category O –Openness    6
Category A  
Accessibility 
to All
Children sitting around a school in Gbiti, Cameroon, play with cellular 
phones that they drew. Located on the border with the Central African 
Republic and separated from its neighboring country by a 150-meter 
backwater, Gbiti is one of the three gates where Mbororo refugees enter 
Cameroon. Gbiti is a remote place. The first phone connection is located 
18 kilometers away, without any insurance that the network is working.
© UNHCR/Frederic Noy
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
67A
Accessibility to All
AffordabilityConnectivity 
and usage
Policy, legal 
and regulatory 
framework
Local content 
and languageCapacities/
competenciesEquitable  
access
68
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators69
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsCategory A Accessibility to All
6The ability of all to access the Internet lies at the heart of Internet Universality. The reach of the Internet and 
Internet-enabled services has grown more rapidly than that of almost all previous communications media, 
particularly since the popularisation of the World Wide Web and, more recently, the emergence of mobile 
access to the Internet and the availability of smartphones. 
Nevertheless, access to the Internet remains highly unequal. The existence of digital divides between and 
within regions, countries and communities has preoccupied United Nations agencies and other stakeholders 
since before the World Summit on the Information Society more than a decade ago.74 The World Bank is 
among agencies that have expressed concern, recently, that the benefits of Internet may be accruing more 
to those with economic and educational advantages, thereby increasing rather than reducing inequality.75 
The principle of Accessibility to All has technical, economic and social aspects. It reaches far beyond mere 
connectivity, for example, to include issues of affordability, content and capability. It is closely related within 
societies to the distribution of income and resources between women and men, poor and rich, rural and urban 
communities, language groups and ethnic minorities, and those affected by disability or marginalisation.
Technical dimensions of Accessibility to All include the availability of adequate infrastructure for connectivity 
and of the capacity of devices used to enable access to the higher-bandwidth services that now make up 
a high proportion of Internet traffic and services. Economic and social dimensions include affordability, the 
availability of relevant content, including content in relevant languages, and the capabilities which people 
have to make effective use of the Internet for their own purposes. Aspects of these point to the need for 
legal and regulatory frameworks which seek to enable affordable access for those living in all communities 
within a country. This includes the adoption of universal access policies and sustainable business models 
to address technical and economic differences for current and future needs.
Efforts to address digital divides cannot stand alone, but stand alongside efforts to address other structural 
inequalities within society, based on factors such as gender, age, education, literacy, language and disability. 
These are core elements of the UN’s Sustainable Development Agenda. 
Data concerning access need to be disaggregated if they are to be fully understood and addressed in policy 
and practice. The phrase ‘aggregate and disaggregated’ is used in many of the indicators in this category to 
indicate where this is particularly valuable. Where this phrase is used, assessments should pay particular 
attention to the accessibility of the Internet for women, children, relating findings concerning these to themes 
concerned with them in Category X, as well as to issues of locality, ethnicity and disability 
This category is divided into six themes concerned with different aspects of Accessibility to All.
 •Theme A is concerned with the legal and regulatory framework for universal access and related issues.
 •Theme B is concerned with technical and geographic connectivity.
 •Theme C is concerned with the affordability of networks and services.
 •Theme D addresses issues of equitable access.
 •Theme E is concerned with content and language.
 •Theme F is concerned with capabilities and competencies.
Many of the questions/indicators in this category make use of quantitative indicators. It should be noted, 
when using these, that many international data sets make use of estimations as well as empirical data which 
have been gathered locally. Wherever possible, data should be sourced directly from the country itself 
rather than from international data sets. 
Quantitative data also rapidly go out of date, and care should be taken to interpret available data in the 
light of observable changes that are taking place in access to and use of networks, devices and services. In 
particular, where quantitative series are available, assessment should consider the trend in quantitative data 
as well as their current value. This is particularly important when considering themes such as connectivity 
and affordability. 70
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme A • Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  Category A Accessibility to All
Theme A •   Policy, Legal 
and Regulatory 
Framework 
The first theme within this category is concerned with the legal, regulatory and infrastructural framework 
for communications access, which provides the context within which efforts to implement accessibility for 
all are undertaken. 
Question A.1 is concerned with the quality of measurement of access. Questions A.2, A.3 and A.4 are concerned 
with aspects of the legal and regulatory framework – legal provisions concerning access, the existence of a 
regulatory authority and the establishment of universal access policy. Question A.5 concerns the availability 
of access opportunities for those that cannot afford or do not otherwise have personal access.
AA.1 Is statistical information concerning access and use of Internet regularly 
gathered by national statistical systems and/or other competent authorities, 
on a systematic basis?
Indicators: 
 ▶Arrangements for gathering aggregate and disaggregated statistical information, from diverse sources, 
including the inclusion of relevant questions in household surveys1 
 ▶Availability of independent household surveys and other evidence concerning aggregate Internet access 
and use
AA.2 Are there constitutional or legal provisions concerning access the Internet and 
online services?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence of a legal or regulatory entitlement to Internet access
AA.3 Is there a legal or regulatory authority which seeks to implement universal 
access to communications and the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a legal or regulatory authority concerned with universal access, and evidence concerning 
the use of universal access funds and mechanisms
 ▶Stakeholder perceptions of regulatory performance concerning universal access
1 Indicators marked with a triangle have been identified as ‘core indicators’. The subset of core indicators can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. These core indicators can also be 
found in Annex 4.71
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B • Connectivity and UsageCategory A Accessibility to All  
AA.4 Does the government have a policy and programme to implement universal 
access to reliable, affordable broadband, and is this effectively implemented?
Indicators: 
 ▶Adoption of a universal access strategy and evidence of effective deployment of UA resources
 ▶Statistical evidence of progress towards universal access, aggregate and disaggregated2
Consideration should be given and cross-reference made to data/evidence for contextual indicator 3.D, which 
is concerned with the availability of electricity.
AA.5 Are public access facilities available that provide access to the Internet for 
those who cannot afford or obtain personal access to the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Inclusion of public access in universal access strategy
 ▶Numbers of telecentres, libraries and other facilities open to the public that offer Internet access, compared 
with proportion of the population without personal access
Theme B •   Connectivity and 
Usage
The availability of networks of sufficient capacity and reliability to enable people to access and use the 
Internet is fundamental to Accessibility for All. 
Question B.1 is concerned with the physical availability of networks. Questions B.2, B.3 and B.4 are concerned 
with the extent to which those networks are used in practice, and with perceived barriers to access and use. 
Question B.5 is concerned with the scale of Internet traffic within the country.
AB.1 What proportion of the population uses the Internet, with what frequency, and 
is this proportion growing?3
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of individuals who have ever accessed the Internet, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of households with Internet access76 
 ▶Number of Internet users per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated, by frequency of use77
 ▶Number of social media (social networks, microblogs, messaging, user-generated video streaming) 4 users 
per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Number of visits to social media websites (defined as above) per hundred population
2  With particular reference e.g. to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability
3  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
4  It should be noted that the incidence of social media platforms varies between countries.672
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B • Connectivity and Usage    Category A Accessibility to All
AB.2 Are broadband networks available in all districts of the country?5
Indicators: 
 ▶Percentage of population covered by fixed broadband networks, including bandwidth tiers, disaggregated 
between urban and rural areas and by district
 ▶Percentage of population covered by mobile broadband signal, disaggregated by available technology/
bandwidth6 (and compared with proportion covered by mobile cellular signal) and by district
 ▶International Internet bandwidth per Internet user78 
 ▶Domestic Internet bandwidth per Internet user, disaggregated by district
 ▶Download speeds for mobile Internet traffic
AB.3 What proportion of the population subscribes to communications/broadband 
services, and is this growing?7
Indicators: 
 ▶Percentage of individuals who own a mobile phone, aggregate and disaggregated79
 ▶Number of fixed broadband subscriptions per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated80
 ▶Number of unique active mobile broadband subscribers per hundred population, by bandwidth, aggregate 
and disaggregated81
 ▶Number of IP addresses within the country, per hundred population
AB.4 What barriers to access are identified by users and non-users of the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Perceptions (by users and non-users) of barriers to their Internet access and use, aggregate and 
disaggregated,8 from household surveys and/or other sources. 
AB.5 How rapidly is the volume of Internet traffic within the country growing 
compared with global growth in traffic?
Indicators: 
 ▶Volume of fixed broadband Internet traffic in exabytes (including and excluding video streaming), per 
individual, per Internet user, and trend82
 ▶Volume of mobile broadband Internet traffic in exabytes (including and excluding video streaming), per 
individual, per Internet user, and trend83
5  It should be noted that the definition of broadband varies between organisations and jurisdictions. Some still define it as any bandwidth above 
a floor of 256kbps and above, while others apply floors as high as 10Mbps. It is therefore important to consider the different tiers of bandwidth 
available where possible.
6  i.e. 2G, 3G, 4G etc.
7  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
8  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.73
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C • Affordability  Category A Accessibility to All  
AB.6 Are affordable online services available which enable individuals and civil 
society organisations to make use of the Internet to access content and 
services or to express their views?
Indicators: 
 ▶Availability of affordable blogging and webhosting services
 ▶Proportion of the population making use of social media and blogging services
Theme C •   Affordability
Connectivity is insufficient to enable people to access and use the Internet. The extent to which they can 
do so also depends on its affordability. Targets for affordability have been adopted by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU),84 the Broadband Commission for Digital Development85 and the Alliance 
for Affordable Internet.86
Questions C.1 and C.2 are concerned with the affordability of access devices and of broadband use. Question 
C.3 is concerned with policy and practice to enable access to low-income segments of the population.
AC.1 Are mobile handsets capable of Internet connectivity affordable to all 
sections of the population?9
Indicators: 
 ▶Cost of a) entry-level87 mobile handset and b) smartphone as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
 ▶Perceptions of affordability by users and non-users, aggregate and disaggregated 
AC.2 Is broadband88 access and use affordable to all sections of the population?10
Indicators: 
 ▶Monthly cost of entry-level89 fixed broadband connection and use as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
 ▶Monthly cost of entry-level90 mobile broadband connection and use as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
 ▶Availability or otherwise of zero-rated or low-cost access
AC.3 Are universal access/service arrangements in place that seek to reduce 
the cost of access and usage for poor and marginalised groups within the 
population?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence that universality policies and arrangements address affordability in law and practice91
 ▶Availability of price packages appropriate for groups with low or variable incomes
9  See endnote. Assessments should note different definitions of ‘entry level’ between countries and over time. Disaggregation should pay particular 
attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
10  See endnotes. Assessments should note different definitions of ‘broadband’ and ‘entry level’ between countries and over time.674
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D • Equitable Access      Category A Accessibility to All
Theme D •   Equitable  
Access
Evidence from many countries shows that there are significant digital divides within national populations, 
associated with factors such as geography, gender, age, ethnicity and disability. In many cases, these are 
consistent with structural inequalities in society as a whole, and so with differences in access to other goods 
and services. 
Questions in this theme are concerned with digital divides relating to geography, gender, age, ethnicity, 
and disability. They should be assessed in conjunction with findings for overall connectivity and usage in 
Theme B above, including barriers to access and usage identified by users and non-users of the Internet, 
and alongside those concerned with Gender and with Children in Category X. Question D.2 is also included 
in Theme A (Gender) of Category X. 
Attention should be paid when using these indicators to intersectionality, i.e. the relationship between different 
demographic and other social and economic factors which can be identified through disaggregation.
AD.1 Are there significant differences in broadband access and use between 
regions and between urban and rural areas?
Indicators: 
 ▶Geographical coverage of broadband networks in urban and rural areas, by level of bandwidth
 ▶Numbers of mobile broadband subscribers and of Internet users, aggregate and where possible 
disaggregated between urban and rural areas and in different regions
AD.2 Are there significant differences in broadband access and use between 
different ethnic communities within the population, including indigenous 
peoples?
Indicator:
 ▶Num bers of mobile broadband subscribers and of Internet users by different ethnic communities, including 
indigenous peoples
AD.3 Does the government survey and/or consult different groups with society, 
and organisations representing them, about their perceptions and use of the 
Internet?
Indicators:
 ▶Existence of surveys and consultation arrangements addressed to or disaggregating between different 
population groups
 ▶Perceptions of the Internet derived from household surveys and other sources, aggregate and disaggregated 
between population groups75
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D • Equitable Access      Category A Accessibility to All  
AD.4 Is there a gender digital divide in Internet access and use and, if so, is this 
gender divide growing, stable or diminishing?  (This question and indicators are 
also included in Category X Theme A)
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportions of individuals using the Internet, disaggregated by sex, compared with differences between 
men and women’s income and educational attainment11
 ▶Proportions of adult women and men with mobile broadband subscriptions disaggregated by sex, 
compared with gender gaps in income and educational attainment
 ▶Survey data on patterns of Internet use, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of values of Internet access and use, disaggregated 
by sex
AD.5 Do adults in all age groups make use of the Internet to the same extent?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of adults in different age groups who are using the Internet, and frequency and type of use 12, 
including disaggregation by sex
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of Internet access and use to end-
users (where available), disaggregated by age and sex
AD.6 Are people with disabilities able to make effective use of the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of legal and regulatory provisions to promote access and use of Internet by people with disabilities
 ▶Extent to which accessibility for people with disabilities is enabled on government websites and 
e-government services
 ▶Proportion of those with and without disabilities who are using the Internet, by type of disability and age 
group
 ▶Perceptions by people with disabilities of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value to them of 
Internet access and use
11  This enables comparison of the gender digital divide with structural inequalities between women and men.
12  “Type of use” means the various activities that Internet users conduct online such as using social media, browsing web news, playing games, 
checking emails, etc.676
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme E • Local Content and LanguageCategory A Accessibility to All
Theme E •   Local Content and 
Language
Relevant content, including content which is generated locally and concerned with local issues, is necessary if 
people are to use the Internet in order to improve their quality of life or livelihoods, and to contribute to national 
development. Defining and assessing local content is, however, problematic. People define content which 
they consider locally relevant in different ways. Language may be one of a number of potential indicators. 
Social media content posted by individuals may differ in this context from content on websites.
Questions E.1 and E.2 are concerned with the availability of locally-generated content within and about 
the country, and should also be assessed with reference to the proportion of individuals generating online 
content (Category R Question B.5).
The availability of content in languages which are used by local populations is also critical to the value of 
Internet access, particularly for minority language speakers. Questions E.3 and E.4 are concerned with the 
availability of content in local languages, and should be assessed with reference to contextual indicator 2.D.
AE.1 How many Internet domains and servers are there within the country?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of registered domains (including ccTLDs. gTLDs92 and IDNccTLDs) per thousand population, and 
trend where available
 ▶Number of secure webservers per million population, and trend where available
AE.2 Is a substantial and growing volume of content about the country available 
online, including locally-generated content?
Indicator: 
 ▶Number of articles/words concerning the country in Wikipedia or an equivalent source,13 compared with 
other countries, including source (proportion generated in-country)
AE.3 Are domains and online services available which enable individuals to access 
and use local and indigenous scripts and languages online?
Indicators:
 ▶Availability of Internet domains and websites in local scripts 
 ▶Availability of local languages on major online platforms
 ▶Availability of mobile apps in local languages
 ▶Availability of content on government websites in all languages with significant user groups within the 
population
13  The number of Wikipedia articles was selected as an indicator following WSIS by the Partnership on Measuring ICT for Development. Wikipedia 
data are freely available which facilitates monitoring and assessment. However, it should be noted, when using them, that Wikipedia access and 
use vary between countries and between economic and language groups within countries. Other reference sources should also be considered.77
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme F • Capabilities / Competencies      Category A Accessibility to All  
 ▶Proportion of content generated in and read by individuals on leading online services, by language, 
compared with proportion of total population using each language as their principal language
AE.4 Is there a substantial and growing volume of Internet content14 in diverse local 
and indigenous languages, including locally-generated content?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of population whose principal language and script are available on leading online services
 ▶Availability of content on government websites in all languages with significant user groups within the 
population
Theme F •   Capabilities / 
Competencies
Effective use of the Internet and Internet-enabled services requires certain capabilities and competencies on 
the part of users. This is important for both individuals and for businesses and organisations which seek to use 
the Internet for commercial and other purposes. The UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  calls for 
a substantial increase in the number of people who have ‘relevant skills, including technical and vocational 
skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship.’ The importance of media and information literacy to 
achievement of this goal is widely recognised. This includes basic literacy (which is included in the contextual 
indicators earlier in this volume), capabilities required for effective use of online services and applications, 
and technical competence at various levels.
UNESCO has an established group of media and information literacy indicators,93 which are partly incorporated 
in this theme and provide a valuable resource for in-depth investigation. UNESCO has also published an ICT 
Competency Framework for Teachers.94
Question F.1 is concerned with educational curricula and Question 2 with government activity to promote 
media and information literacy throughout society. Question F.3 is concerned with the prevalence of ICT skills 
at different skill levels. Attention should also be paid to Category X Question C.7 which is concerned with the 
prevalence of the Internet within business.
AF.1 Do school and higher educational curricula include training in ICTs and media 
and information literacy, focused on effective and safe use, and are these 
curricula implemented in practice?
Indicators: 
 ▶Policy concerning school curricula, including media and information literacy, intercultural dialogue and 
training in ICT skills
 ▶Evidence of appropriate educational curricula at primary, secondary and tertiary levels
 ▶Proportion of teachers in primary and secondary schools with training in ICTs or the use of ICTs in education
14  This should include text, audio and video content.678
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme F • Capabilities / CompetenciesCategory A Accessibility to All
 ▶Proportion of schools with Internet access
 ▶Proportion of learners who have access to the Internet at school
AF.2 Are media and information literacy programmes (including digital aspects) 
provided for adults by government or other stakeholders, and, if so, to what 
extent are they being used?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of media and information literacy programmes, and usage statistics, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Perceptions of media and information literacy among users
AF.3 What proportion of the population and the workforce is skilled in the use of 
ICTs?15
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of Internet users with particular Internet skills, by skill level (basic, intermediate, advanced), 
aggregate and disaggregated95 
 ▶Proportion of the workforce using ICTs in the workplace, by skill level Proportion of the workforce using 
ICTs in the workplace, by skill type (basic, intermediate, advanced), aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of tertiary education students enrolled in STEM16 and ICT courses, disaggregated by sex, 
compared with global averages
15  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to sex, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
16  i.e. science, technology, engineering and mathematics.7
Category M  
Multi-
stakeholder 
participation
The 10th annual meeting of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) 
was held in November 2015 in João Pessoa, Brazil. The IGF is a 
multistakeholder forum for policy dialogue on issues of Internet 
governance. It brings together all stakeholders in the Internet 
governance debate, whether they represent governments, the private 
sector or civil society, including the technical and academic community, 
on an equal basis and through an open and inclusive process.
© Ricardo Matsukawa/IGF Secretariat
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
81M
Multistakeholder 
participation
Policy, 
legal and 
regulatory 
framework
International and 
regional Internet 
governanceNational  
Internet 
governance
82
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators83
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsCategory M Multistakeholder participation
7The development of the Internet has been characterised by multistakeholder participation. The Tunis Agenda 
for the Information Society , adopted at the second session of the World Summit on the Information Society 
(WSIS) in 2005, acknowledged that ‘multi-stakeholder participation is essential to the successful building of a 
people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented Information Society,’ and encouraged ‘the development 
of multi-stakeholder processes at the national, regional and international levels to discuss and collaborate 
on the expansion and diffusion of the Internet as a means to support development efforts to achieve 
internationally agreed development goals and objectives, including the Millennium Development Goals.’96 
The United Nations General Assembly, in its ten-year review of WSIS outcomes in 2015, reaffirmed ‘the value 
and principles of multi-stakeholder cooperation and engagement …, recognizing that effective participation, 
partnership and cooperation of Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, the 
technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders, within their respective roles and 
responsibilities, especially with balanced representation from developing countries, has been and continues 
to be vital in developing the information society.’97
Multistakeholder participation in the development and governance of the Internet has drawn together 
governments, intergovernmental and international organisations, the private sector, civil society and the 
Internet technical and professional community and academia. The goal of multistakeholder participation is 
to improve the inclusiveness and quality of decision-making by including all those who have an interest in 
the Internet and its impact on wider social, economic and cultural development in open and transparent 
decision-making processes. 
The Tunis Agenda  agreed a ‘working definition’ of Internet governance as ‘the development and application 
by governments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, 
rules, decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the evolution and use of the Internet.’ 
Multistakeholder participation has been a central principle of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), which was 
established by the UN Secretary-General following WSIS, and has been widely adopted in other national, 
regional and international fora concerned with the Internet. It has also gained resonance beyond the Internet. 
The United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development also calls for ‘multi-stakeholder partnerships’ 
to be established ‘that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to 
support the achievement of the sustainable development goals in all countries, in particular developing 
countries.’98 The extent to which stakeholders do or can participate effectively is determined by a number 
of factors, including the extent of their awareness, interest, concern and knowledge, their level of agency 
or responsibility for Internet-related outcomes, and the nature of the consultative and decision-making 
processes involved.
This category of indicators is divided into three themes: 
 •Theme A is concerned with the overall legal and regulatory framework for participation in governance. 
 •Theme B is concerned with national Internet governance.
 •Theme C is concerned with international and regional Internet governance.
Assessments of multistakeholder participation should consider both the existence of institutional arrangements 
and the extent to which multistakeholder participation results in practice from them. This should include an 
assessment of whether participation is genuinely balanced and includes the interests of all parts of the 
community not just those that are explicitly and directly concerned with the development of the Internet.84
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme A • Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework  Category M Multistakeholder participation
Theme A •   Policy, Legal 
and Regulatory 
Framework
This theme is concerned with the broad national legal and regulatory framework for governance, rather than 
specifically with the Internet or Internet governance. This provides the overall context within which policies 
and decisions concerning the Internet are made. The evidence on which it is assessed, however, is drawn 
partly from the extent to which governance processes are available online, which also indicates the extent 
to which government is taking advantage of opportunities provided by the Internet.
MA.1 Is there an overall policy, legal and regulatory framework for Internet 
development and policymaking which is consistent with international norms?
Indicators:
 ▶Existence of an overall framework consistent with relevant international norms99
 ▶Existence of legal and regulatory frameworks to enable e-commerce, digital signatures, cybersecurity, 
data protection and consumer protection1
MA.2 Does the government encourage public participation in national policy 
processes? 
Indicators: 
 ▶Value and ranking in UN DESA E-Participation Index
 ▶Policy and legal arrangements requiring public consultation and legal and practical arrangements for 
online consultation processes
 ▶Number and range of government consultation processes and opportunities available online
 ▶Evidence of participation by diverse stakeholder groups in online consultation processes which are not 
Internet-related
 ▶Evidence of participation by diverse stakeholder groups in Internet-related policy-making processes
MA.3 Is government accountable to citizens and stakeholder groups?
Indicator: 
 ▶Constitutional and institutional arrangements for government accountability, and evidence from credible 
and authoritative sources that these are implemented in practice
1 Indicators marked with a triangle have been identified as ‘core indicators’. The subset of core indicators can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. These core indicators can also be 
found in Annex 4.85
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Theme B • National Internet GovernanceCategory M Multistakeholder participation  
Theme B •   National Internet 
Governance
This theme is concerned with the extent to which diverse stakeholder groups are involved in national-level 
policymaking concerned with the Internet. Question B.1 is concerned with the extent to which potential 
participants in policymaking have established their own fora for discussion. Questions B.2 and B.3 are 
concerned with the institutional framework for discussions, within government itself and through the national 
IGF format which has become widely adopted in recent years.
MB.1 Are there active associations of professionals (including Internet 
professionals), consumers and other stakeholder groups that focus on or 
engage with Internet-related policy and governance issues?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence, membership data (aggregate and disaggregated by sex) and level of activity of relevant 
associations
MB.2 Does the government actively involve other stakeholder groups in developing 
national Internet policies and legislation?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of arrangements for multistakeholder consultation and involvement in national policymaking 
institutions and processes concerned with the evolution and use of the Internet
 ▶Numbers of non-governmental stakeholders actively participating, by stakeholder group, disaggregated 
by sex
MB.3 Is there a national Internet Governance Forum and/or other multistakeholder 
forum open to all stakeholders, with active participation from diverse 
stakeholder groups?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of national IGF and/or other multistakeholder forum concerned with Internet governance
 ▶Participation data for national IGF or other fora, aggregate and disaggregated by sex and stakeholder 
group, with particular attention to participation by selected groups (e.g. education ministries, SMEs, NGOs 
concerned with children, trades unions), and including arrangements for remote participation
MB.4 Does the national domain name registry involve all stakeholders in its 
decision-making processes?
Indicator :
 ▶Constitution and practice of domain name registry786
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C •   International and 
Regional Internet 
Governance
This theme is concerned with the extent to which diverse stakeholder groups within the country participate in 
international fora concerned with Internet governance. Question C.1 concerns the extent to which government 
encourages multistakeholder participation in international activities. Questions C.2 and C.3 are particularly, but 
not exclusively, concerned with the extent to which it and other stakeholder communities actively participate 
in two of the most important international fora concerned with the evolution and use of the Internet, the IGF 
and ICANN. It will not be possible for investigations to assess participation in a wide range of Internet fora 
so the ITU, global and regional IGFs and ICANN have therefore been selected to reflect different aspects of 
the overall Internet governance environment.
MC.1 Does the government actively involve other stakeholder groups in developing 
policy towards international Internet governance?
Indicator: 
 ▶Evidence that government encourages and facilitates multistakeholder preparation for international 
meetings
MC.2 Do government and other stakeholders from the country actively participate 
in major international fora concerned with ICTs and the Internet?
Indicators: 
 •Number of government submissions to international fora concerned with ICTs and the Internet
 •Extent of involvement by government and other stakeholders in international standard-setting processes 
concerned with communications and the Internet
 ▶Number of participants from different stakeholder groups participating in global and regional IGFs, per 
million population, aggregated and disaggregated by stakeholder group and sex
 ▶Participation or otherwise of non-government stakeholders in official delegations to ITU, aggregated and 
disaggregated by stakeholder group and sex
MC.3 Does the government and do other stakeholders participate actively in 
ICANN?
Indicators: 
 ▶Membership of and active participation in ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC)
 ▶Membership of and active participation in ICANN constituencies, working groups and other foraTheme C • International and Regional Internet Governance  Category M Multistakeholder participation8
Category x  
Cross-Cutting 
Indicators
Mansoor,12, watches the virtual reality documentary ‘Clouds over Sidra’ 
outside a UNICEF-supported Makani centre in the Za’atari camp for 
Syrian refugees, near the Syrian border in Mafraq Governorate, Jordan, 
19 January 2017. The short film depicts a day in the life of Sidra, an 
adolescent girl living in the camp, where children make up more than 
half of the population of 80,000.
© UNICEF/Herwig
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
89X
Cross-Cutting issues
Gender Children
Trust and 
securitySustainable 
developmentLegal and 
ethical 
aspects of 
the Internet
90
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators91
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators
Theme A • Gender
8The final category included in the Internet Universality framework draws together five themes containing 
cross-cutting indicators.
 •Theme A is concerned with gender equality.
 •Theme B is concerned with children.
 •Theme C is concerned with sustainable development.
 •Theme D is concerned with trust and security.
 •Theme E is concerned with legal and ethical aspects of the Internet.
The first two of these themes are concerned with issues of inclusion which require special attention in any 
assessment undertaken using the indicators. They draw attention to issues of structural inequalities within 
society and towards groups that often face challenges where access, adoption and use of the Internet 
are concerned. Assessments of Internet Universality in these contexts should also draw fully on indicators 
throughout the ROAM categories, particularly where these can be disaggregated by sex or age group. The 
indicators in Groups A and B complement and supplement those indicators, and provide a further basis for 
analysis, including analysis of intersectionality.
The third group of cross-cutting indicators is concerned with issues of sustainable development, including 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which are included in the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development ,100 and the impact which the Internet is having on particular development sectors.
The fourth theme is concerned with trust and security. Without effective network security, users feel less 
confident that their rights, data and integrity will not be compromised, and networks will be less trusted and 
less universal. 
The final group of cross-counting indicators (group E) is concerned with legal and ethical aspects of the Internet. 
There has been increasing concern in recent years about use of the Internet in ways which undermine rights 
and development, including criminality, sexual exploitation, racial hatred and the deliberate dissemination 
of misinformation. These developments challenge the effectiveness with which the Internet can be used 
to enhance rights and development, and need to be considered in any overall assessment of the evolving 
Internet environment within a country. 
Theme A •   Gender
ICTs are not gender neutral: they are shaped by the contexts in which they are developed and used. Women 
in many countries face a number of barriers in gaining access to or using the Internet, including ‘concrete’ 
barriers such as affordability and network rollout, quality and availability; ‘analogue’ barriers such as the 
availability of relevant content, structural barriers concerned with educational access and attainment, lack of 
relevant skills and income, occupational status, the effect of online abuse and gender-based violence and 
threats, and intersectional challenges including the impact of stereotypes and cultural norms on their ability 
to access and use the Internet.101 
The term ‘gender digital divide’ is used to assess the difference between female and male participation in 
the information society, particularly access and use of ICTs and the Internet. Addressing the gender digital 
divide was identified as a priority by the UN General Assembly in its ten-year review of WSIS outcomes in 
2015.102 Although increased attention is now being paid to this divide, estimates made by the ITU suggest that 
the global gap between men’s and women’s access to the Internet is not declining.103 The intersectionality of 
gender with age and other demographic characteristics should also be reflected in assessments.92
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme A • Gender  Category x Cross-Cutting Indicators
UNESCO believes that a distinct analysis on gender should form part of any assessment that is made using 
the indicators in this framework. This should be based on data from all five categories of indicators (ROAMX). 
Many of the indicators in the ROAM categories – both quantitative and qualitative – should be disaggregated 
to provide data concerning women as compared with men. The Gender Inequality Index which is prepared by 
UNDP and included among the contextual indicators for this framework should be incorporated in analysis. 
The questions and indicators included in this section address a number of issues that are explicitly concerned 
with gender differences, which supplement those addressed by questions and indicators in other Categories. 
Question A.1 is concerned with government policies on gender and ICTs/Internet. Questions A.2, A.3, and A.4 
are concerned with the gender digital divide. (Question A.2 is also included in Theme D (Equitable Access) of 
Category A.) Questions A.5 to A.7 are considered with additional dimensions of women’s experience of the 
Internet – gender-based harassment and violence, training and employment, and information concerning 
reproductive and sexual health. 
XA.1 Are the interests and needs of women and girls explicitly included in national 
strategies and policies for Internet development, and effectively monitored?
Indicators: 
 ▶National strategies include explicit consideration of a) women’s needs relating to the Internet and b) the 
potential of the Internet to support women’s empowerment and gender equality1
 ▶Numbers of women and men in senior policymaking positions in government concerned with ICTs/Internet
 ▶Extent of disaggregation of available data on ICT access and use by sex
 ▶Existence of national mechanisms to monitor women’s inclusion in strategies for Internet access and use
XA.2 Is there a gender digital divide in Internet access and use and, if so, is this 
gender divide growing, stable or diminishing?  (This question and some of its 
indicators are also included in Category A Theme D)
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportions of individuals using the Internet, disaggregated by sex, compared with gender gaps in income 
and educational attainment
 ▶Proportions of adult women and men with mobile broadband subscriptions disaggregated by sex, 
compared with gender gaps in income and educational attainment
 ▶Survey data on Internet awareness and on patterns of Internet use, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of Internet access and use, disaggregated 
by sex
XA.3 Do social and cultural barriers to access and use of the Internet affect 
women’s ability to access and use the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of Internet access and use, disaggregated 
by sex
1 Indicators marked with a triangle have been identified as ‘core indicators’. The subset of core indicators can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. These core indicators can also be 
found in Annex 4.93
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme A • GenderCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators  
XA.4 Do women and men participate to the same degree in use of online services?
Indicators:
 ▶Proportion of Internet users using social media networks, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Proportion of adults using mobile financial and online banking services, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Proportion of adults using e-government services, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Proportion of adults using electronic shopping services, disaggregated by sex
XA.5 Do the law, law enforcement and judicial processes protect women and girls 
against online gender-based harassment and violence?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a relevant legal framework and judicial processes
 ▶Incidence of online gender-based harassment and violence experienced by women and girls
 ▶Evidence of government, law enforcement and judicial action to provide protection to women against 
online gender-based harassment and violence
 ▶Existence of online services which are intended to protect women against online gender-based harassment 
or support those affected by it
XA.6 Is the proportion of women in STEM training, employment and Internet 
leadership significant and growing?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of women enrolled in and graduating from STEM courses in higher education 
 ▶Proportion of women in STEM employment, by level of skill
 ▶Proportion of women in senior management positions in Internet/communications businesses at national 
level
XA.7 Is accurate information about reproductive and sexual health freely available 
online?2
Indicator: 
 ▶Presence and/or absence of restrictions on online information about reproductive and sexual health, ease 
of access (including language) and extent of use
2  This is included as a sample area of content of particular relevance to women.894
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme B •   Children
The Convention on the Rights of the Child defines as children ‘every human being below the age of eighteen 
years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier.’104 This is the definition for 
childhood which is recommended in these indicators. Some variation in age definition may be required 
because of different ages of majority in different countries.
Children are increasingly coming into contact with the Internet at an early age. The Internet has great potential 
to enable them to access information that they need and cannot readily obtain by other means, to participate 
in social groups, and to express their wishes, hopes and needs. At the same time, there is widespread 
concern at threats to children’s wellbeing which may be facilitated by the Internet, including exposure to 
content which they may find disturbing or addictive, sexual predation, harassment, bullying and manipulative 
advertising. Initiatives such as Global Kids Online and agencies including UNICEF are working to establish 
ways of promoting the opportunities which Internet access and use open up for children while protecting 
them from harm.
Questions B.1 to B.3 are concerned with children’s experience of the Internet. Questions B.4 to B.7 are 
concerned with government policy (B.4), education (B.5 and B.6), and child protection (B.6). 
The interests of children should be considered across the whole of this indicator framework, including 
questions concerned with policy and legal frameworks as well as quantitative and qualitative outcomes. Issues 
such as the right to privacy and right to access information have particular implications and requirements 
where children are concerned. Where policies are concerned, it is also important to consider whether these 
are mainstreamed into broader policies that deal with wider issues (such as broadband access and the digital 
economy), and not just to consider policies that relate explicitly to children.
XB.1 Does the government survey children or consult them and/or parents (and 
organisations concerned with children) about their use of the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence of surveys and consultation arrangements explicitly addressed to children and relevant 
organisations
XB.2 What proportion of children aged between 5 and 18 make use of the Internet?3
Indicator: 
 ▶Proportions of children making use of the Internet, aggregate and disaggregated by sex and age group, 
including frequency and type of use4
3  Article 1 of the CRC defines a child as ‘every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is 
attained earlier.’
4  “Type of use” means the various activities that Internet users conduct online such as using social media, browsing web news, playing games, 
checking emails, etc.Theme B •  Children  Category x Cross-Cutting Indicators95
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsXB.3 How do children perceive and use the Internet?5
Indicators: 
 ▶Perceptions of the Internet among children derived from surveys, including barriers to use, value of use 
and fears concerning use, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Data on use of the Internet by children, aggregate and disaggregated, compared with other age groups 
(e.g. data on location, frequency and type of use6)
XB.4 Is there a legal and policy framework to promote and protect the interests of 
children online, and is this effectively implemented?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a policy framework and legal protections consistent with the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC), and evidence that this is implemented by government and other competent authorities
XB.5 Do primary and secondary schools have Internet and broadband access?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportions of schools with broadband and Internet access, disaggregated by tier (primary/secondary), 
status (public/private) and location (rural/urban) 
 ▶Learner to computer-device ratio in schools, disaggregated by tier (primary/secondary), status (public/
private) and location (rural/urban)
XB.6 Do government and educational institutions support digital dimensions of 
media and information literacy with respect to children’s effective and safe 
use of the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of government programmes to promote digital literacy and awareness of Internet safety and 
responsible use of the Internet among children
 ▶Evidence of educational curricula concerned with digital literacy, including effective and safe use of Internet
 ▶Availability of online services to support children’s use of the Internet, including child protection services 
accessible by children
 ▶Usage data of online services to support children’s use of the Internet, including child protection services 
accessible by children
5  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
6  “Type of use” means the various activities that Internet users conduct online such as using social media, browsing web news, playing games, 
checking emails, etc.8Theme B • ChildrenCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators  96
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme C •   Sustainable 
Development
Information and communication technologies, including the Internet, have been expected to make an 
important contribution to social and economic development since before the World Summit on the Information 
Society in the early years of this century. Understanding the impact of the Internet on development is an 
important dimension of any assessment of a national Internet environment.
The United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development sets out the global framework for international 
action on development for the fifteen years from 2015 to 2030, including seventeen Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).105 The Agenda notes that ‘The spread of information and communications technology and 
global interconnectedness has great potential to accelerate human progress, to bridge the digital divide 
and to develop knowledge societies,’ and its Goal 9(c) accordingly calls for the international community to 
‘Significantly increase access to information and communications technology and strive to provide universal 
and affordable access to the Internet in least developed countries by 2020.’
Questions C.1 to C.3 are concerned with government policies relating to the Internet and the Sustainable 
Development Agenda. Questions C.4 to C.7 are concerned with the impact of the Internet on particular 
development sectors.
XC.1 Do national and sectoral development policies and strategies for sustainable 
development effectively incorporate ICTs, broadband and the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a recent, comprehensive policy for the development of ICTs, broadband and the Internet, 
which includes consideration of likely future developments in these fields
 ▶Inclusion of recently developed or updated policies and strategies for broadband and the Internet in national 
strategies to monitor and achieve the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  and Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) 
 ▶Inclusion of recently developed or updated policies and strategies for broadband and the Internet in 
selected economic and social sectors (such as enterprise, agriculture, education, health)
XC.2 Does the government have an agreed policy on the management of e-waste 
and is this implemented effectively?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a national policy on e-waste, and evidence concerning implementation by government and 
private companies
 ▶E-waste collection rateTheme C • Sustainable Development  Category x Cross-Cutting Indicators97
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsXC.3 Are there adequate arrangements in place for monitoring and assessment of 
the development of the Internet and its impact on society?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of national statistical office
 ▶Arrangements for statistical monitoring of Internet access and use, including household surveys
 ▶Arrangements for regular review and revision of policies relating to the Internet and its impact on sustainable 
development
XC.4 Does the government have a long-term strategy to address new 
developments in information technology and incorporate these in 
development, with multistakeholder participation?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence and composition of a strategic forum or equivalent addressing new developments in information 
technology including artificial intelligence
XC.5 What proportion of adults makes use of major online services?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of adults using e-government services in specific categories, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of adults using a) online banking and b) mobile financial services, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of adults using online learning services
 ▶Proportion of adults using online health services
 ▶Proportion of adults using online shopping services
XC.6 What proportion of public service facilities have Internet access?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of primary schools with Internet access
 ▶Proportion of libraries with Internet access
 ▶Proportion of health clinics with Internet access
XC.7 What proportion of businesses, including small and medium sized businesses 
make use of the Internet and e-commerce?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of business-to-business activity undertaken through e-commerce
 ▶Proportion of SMEs using the Internet, by type of access
 ▶Proportion of SMEs trading (and exporting) online
 ▶Volume of business-to-business and business-to-consumer activity as a proportion of total relevant activity
 ▶Perceptions of the value of Internet use by SMEs8Theme C • Sustainable DevelopmentCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators  98
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme D •   Trust and  
Security
Trust and security in the integrity of the Internet and Internet-enabled services are essential for the Internet 
to function effectively and in the interests of all. Users and potential users who do not feel that the Internet 
is secure will be inhibited from making full and effective use of it. Risks and anxieties concerning trust and 
security may particularly deter disadvantaged groups within society.
Cybersecurity – which is understood here broadly as the protection of the Internet, online services and service 
users from efforts made to harm them – has become an increasingly important part of ensuring Internet 
Universality, requiring the attention of all stakeholders.7 Without effective network security, users feel less 
confident that their rights, data and integrity will not be compromised, and networks will be less trusted 
and less universal. As understood in these indicators, the term cybersecurity encompasses the threats to 
businesses and individuals posed by cybercrime8 and threats to critical infrastructure and databases. These 
threats may come from diverse sources, including governments, non-state actors, criminal organisations 
and individuals. Many governments have developed strategies to counteract these risks, including the 
establishment of computer emergency response teams (CERTs). 
Questions D.1 and D.2 are concerned with the legal and regulatory framework for cybersecurity as it affects 
the network and its users. Question D.3 is concerned with the extent to which trust and security issues pose 
a problem in the country. Questions D.4 and D.5 are concerned with individuals’ and businesses’ perceptions 
and responses to network security. Issues concerning personal harassment and with misinformation, which 
are sometimes considered alongside cybersecurity, are, however, addressed in Theme E below.
XD.1 Is there a national cybersecurity strategy, with multistakeholder engagement 
and aligned with international human rights standards, including a national 
computer emergency response team (CERT) or equivalent?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of cybersecurity strategy, with multistakeholder involvement, which is consistent with international 
rights and norms
 ▶Establishment of national CERT or equivalent, and evidence concerning its effectiveness
XD.2 Is there a framework for the investigation of cybercrime and other crimes 
involving computer systems which is consistent with international and 
regional rights agreements, laws and standards?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of legal framework for investigation and online evidence concerning the investigation of 
cybercrime and other crimes
7  Definitions of cybersecurity can vary, and researchers should therefore indicate what interpretation they are giving to the concept.
8  Definitions of cybercrime can vary. Assessments should refer both to national legal frameworks and to international agreements such as those 
reached by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).Theme D • Trust and Security  Category x Cross-Cutting Indicators99
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsXD.3 Is there a legal and regulatory framework for consumer rights online which 
gives adequate protection for e-commerce customers?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of an established legal framework and evidence concerning compliance by businesses and 
implementation by government and other competent authorities
 ▶Number (and trend) of complaints, prosecutions and civil cases related to online consumer protection
 ▶Perceptions of the adequacy of protection against online fraud and criminality
XD.4 Have there been significant breaches of cybersecurity in the country within 
the last three years?
Indicators: 
 ▶Incidence and nature of breaches reported, and numbers of individuals and businesses affected
 ▶Perceptions of Internet security among users, businesses and other stakeholder groups
 ▶Data concerning phishing, spam and bots in national level domains
XD.5 Are individuals and businesses sufficiently aware of cybersecurity and taking 
action to reduce risks to security and privacy?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a cybersecurity awareness programme implemented by government or other competent 
authority
 ▶Number of personnel in government and business with cybersecurity skills
 ▶Evidence of business awareness of and contingency plans to counteract cybersecurity attacks, including 
the protection of data which they hold on individuals
 ▶Number of secure Internet servers per million population, currently and over time
 ▶Proportions of Internet users with up-to-date malware protection
 ▶Extent to which encryption services are used by individuals and businesses
Consideration should be given and cross-reference made to data/evidence for Category R Question E.5, 
which is concerned with law and practice concerning encryption and anonymity.8Theme D • Trust and SecurityCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators  100
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTheme E •   Legal and Ethical 
Aspects of the 
Internet
There has been increasing concern about the use of the Internet in ways that adversely affect individual users 
or potentially undermine trust and confidence in the Internet. These include concerns about criminality, fraud 
and identity theft; harassment and sexual abuse; hate speech inciting hostility, discrimination or violence, 
concerned with race, religion, gender, disability and other personal characteristics; and the use of the Internet 
to spread ‘fake news’, misrepresentations or distortions (including false documents and distorted images) and 
propaganda.106 These concerns, and the challenges that underlie them, should also be considered within 
the Internet Universality framework. 
Many of the issues which arise in this context have both legal and ethical implications. National legal 
frameworks concerned with online and offline criminality, harassment and discrimination also vary significantly 
between countries, for reasons which may include challenges that are specific to individual countries such 
as post-conflict reconciliation. 
Questions E.1 and E.2 are concerned with government and multistakeholder consideration of these aspects of 
the Internet. Question E.3 is concerned with overall perceptions of the Internet by individuals, and questions 
E.4 to E.6 with perceptions of particular issues. Disaggregation and trend data are of particular significance 
in these latter questions.
XE.1 Is there a national policy framework concerned with legal and ethical 
challenges raised by usage of the Internet which is consistent with 
international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence and assessment of national policy or legal frameworks concerned with incitement to hatred, 
discrimination and violence, and to other ethical challenges, online and offline that are consistent with 
international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards
XE.2 Are there any multistakeholder or private sector self-regulatory bodies 
concerned with ethical aspects of the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Existence or otherwise of relevant multistakeholder or self-regulatory bodies
XE.3 How do individuals perceive the benefits, risks and impact of the Internet 
within the country?
Indicator:
 ▶Perceptions of the benefits, risks and impact of the Internet, derived from household or opinion surveys, 
disaggregated by sexTheme E • Legal and Ethical Aspects of the Internet  Category x Cross-Cutting Indicators101
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsXE.4 Do Internet users report experiencing significant harassment or abuse at the 
hands of other Internet users which deters them from making full use of the 
Internet?
Indicators:
 ▶Availability of reporting mechanisms for online harassment or abuse, including reporting arrangements 
by online service providers
 ▶Data on the extent to which Internet users report harassment or abuse, with particular attention to specific 
demographic and social groups (including women, ethnic and other minorities, and civil activists) 
XE.5 Do Internet users in the country experience activities defined as cybercrime or 
Internet-enabled crime in national law?
Indicators:
 ▶Definition of cybercrime and Internet-enabled crime in national law
 ▶Number and trend of prosecutions for activities defined as cybercrime in national law
 ▶Perceptions of the Internet and Internet content derived from household or opinion surveys and other 
sources
XE.6 Do individuals believe that the content of online sources of information 
is determined or manipulated by the government, foreign governments, 
commercial or partisan interests?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence from credible and authoritative sources of government or other stakeholders concerning the 
quality and reliability of online information, the extent to which information is manipulated, and assessments 
of the prevalence and impact disinformation
 ▶Perceptions of the Internet and Internet content derived from household or opinion surveys8Theme E • Legal and Ethical Aspects of the InternetCategory x Cross-Cutting Indicators  9
Sources and 
Means of 
Verification
On 19 January 2017 in Jordan, cellphones, chargers, adapters and 
other electronic equipment sit in a solar kiosk in the Za’atari camp for 
Syrian refugees, in Mafraq Governorate, near the Syrian border. The 
kiosk provides Internet connectivity and is equipped with tablets and 
computers. It also serves as a charging station for cellphones and other 
electronics equipment, and as an e-learning centre for children and 
youths in the camp.
© UNICEF/Herwig
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
103This chapter begins with a brief list of sources of guidance concerning research methodology and ethics. 
Sources for the contextual indicators listed in Chapter 3 are included in that chapter and its associated 
endnotes. 
This chapter is concerned with sources and means of verification which may be used in assessments of the 
indicators in each of the five ROAM Categories which are set out in Chapters 4 to 8. Those listed here are those 
which will be generally available. In each country, there will be additional sources which will be identified in 
the course of investigations. The following pages should therefore be considered as a guide rather than a 
comprehensive reference source.
It should be noted that international sources often contain more data on developed and middle-income 
developing countries than they do on LDCs and other low-income countries. For this reason, assessment 
may rely more on quantitative evidence in some countries and more on qualitative evidence in others. 
Sources Concerning Research Methodology
The indicator framework set out in this document covers a wide range of sources and methodologies, including 
quantitative and qualitative sources of many different kinds. There is an extensive range of methodological 
literature on which researchers on which draw in order to maximise the effectiveness of their assessments. 
A number of sources of this kind are indicated below. It is envisaged that a practical handbook to support 
researchers and assessments using the indicators would be helpful.
Researchers should also comply with ethical conventions concerning research methodology. The collection, 
analysis and reporting of data have potential implications for a number of human rights including the right 
of access to information and the right to privacy, and are also affected by international norms and national 
legislation in areas such as data protection. Researchers should take care to comply with standard ethical 
principles concerned with research methodology and with relevant national laws and regulations.
The following texts provide useful background information concerning research methodology and ethics.
 •Agresti; C. Franklin & Klingenberg, B. (2017).  Statistics: The Art and Science of Learning from Data (4th Ed.);107
 •P. Alasuutari, L. Bickman, J. Brannan & J. Brannen (2008).  The SAGE Handbook of Social Research Methods ;108 
 •R. M. Groves, F. J. Fowler, M. P. Couper, J. M. Lepkowski, E. Singer & R. Tourangeau  (2009). Survey 
Methodology ;109 
 •UNHCHR (2012). Human Rights Indicators: A Guide to Measurement and Implementation.110
Sources for Indicators
The remainder of this chapter is concerned with sources for specific questions and indicators within the 
ROAMX framework.
104
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Sources and Means of Verification  9 Category R • Rights 
General
 •The international legal framework for human rights is established in the six documents identified in the 
introduction to this theme:
 •the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)111
 •the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)112
 •the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)113
 •the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)114 
 •the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)115 
 •the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)116
The United Nations General Assembly has agreed that ‘the same rights that people have offline must also 
be protected online.’117 This and other aspects of human rights online are discussed in the UN Human Rights 
Council’s 2016 resolution on The Promotion, Protection and Enjoyment of Human Rights on the Internet , 2016.118
The following regional rights agreements are relevant to their particular regions:
 •the American Convention on Human Rights119
 •the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights120
 •the Arab Charter on Human Rights121
 •the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms122
A number of UNESCO reports and resolutions address general issues concerning the Internet and rights, 
including:
 •CONNECTing the Dots , conference outcome document, 2015123
 •Keystones to Foster Inclusive Knowledge Societies , 2015124
 •Renewing the Knowledge Societies Vision for Peace and Sustainable Development , 2013125
 •Internet Freedom  series of reports126
International and regional instruments agreed by UNESCO can also be found online.127
Indicator frameworks for the assessment of national rights frameworks have been developed by a number 
of organisations, including:
 •Council of Europe, Internet Freedom Indicators  (section on an enabling policy environment)128
 •Freedom House, Freedom on the Net129
 •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness  Index , 2016 – e.g. environment sub-index130
Comparative assessments of the national human rights environment and legal framework in different countries 
are made by a number of intergovernmental and non-governmental agencies including:
 •Freedom House, Freedom on the Net  country assessments131
 •Reporters Without Borders, World Press Freedom  Index132
 •V-Dem Institute, Varieties of Democracy  – e.g. the electoral democracy index and the expanded freedom 
of expression indicators133 
105
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Sources and Means of Verification   •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness  Index , – e.g. environment sub-index134 
Other information on developments concerning rights online can be found in:
 •Internet and Jurisdiction project, Retrospect Database135
 •Managing Alternatives for Privacy, Property and Internet Governance, MAPPING Policy Observatory136
Theme A •   Policy, Legal 
and Regulatory 
Framework
Evidence concerning the legal frameworks and enforcement of human rights in individual countries may 
be sought from:
 •official publications (including constitutional and legal instruments)
 •country information pages on the website of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)137
 •reports by national human rights committees and councils
 •media reports and academic studies
 •transparency reports published by online platforms and other media companies 
 •evidence from legal judgements and court records (and media reports concerning these)
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Additional evidence concerning training of judges and legal professionals (A5) may be sought from:
 •court authorities and associations of legal professionals
 •fact-finding and training feedback reports of the International Bar Association138
 •International Bar Association reports on aspects related to the rule of law139
 •UNODC, Cybercrime Repository  (database) – e.g. database of cybercrime legislation, lessons learned, 
case law database140
 •UNODC, Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime , 2013141
 •International Association of Prosecutors, Global Prosecutors e-Crime Network  – training and database of 
best practices142
106
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Sources and Means of Verification  9 Theme B •   Freedom of 
Expression
Evidence concerning the legal frameworks and enforcement of human rights in individual countries may 
be sought from:
 •official publications, including reports of media regulatory agencies 
 •country information pages on the website of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)143
 •reports by national human rights committees and councils and media regulatory councils
 •legal precedents and judgements
 •media reports and academic studies
 •transparency reports published by online platforms and other media companies 
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Additional evidence concerning the legal framework, implementation and exercise of freedom of expression 
in individual countries may be obtained from:
 •Akamai, State of the Internet  index144
 •Article 19’s repository of information on legal and policy developments of relevance to freedom of 
expression in individual countries145
 •Assessments of national legal frameworks by the Global Network Initiative146 
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation147 
 •Open Technology Institute, Ranking Digital Rights  Corporate Accountability Index148
 •Reporters Without Borders, World Press Freedom Index ,149 e.g. indicators legislative framework
 •Varieties of Democracy  (V-Dem) (annual) – e.g. the electoral democracy index and the expanded freedom 
of expression indicators150 
Additional evidence concerning the proportion of the population generating online content and the costs of 
online services (B6-B7)can be sought from social media and online service providers, and from regulatory 
authorities.
Additional evidence concerning the environment for journalists can be sought from the above sources and 
by using relevant Media Development Indicators.151
107
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  Theme C •   Right of Access to 
Information
Evidence concerning indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications, including reports of media regulatory and data protection agencies 
 •country information pages on the website of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)152
 •reports by national human rights committees and councils 
 •legal precedents and judgements
 •media reports and academic studies
 •transparency reports published by online platforms and other media companies 
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Additional evidence concerning the legal framework, implementation and exercise of freedom of expression 
in individual countries may be obtained from the international indices and resources identified for Theme B.
Theme D •   Freedom of 
Association 
and the Right 
to Participate in 
Public Life
Evidence concerning all of the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications and reports 
 •country information pages on the website of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)153
 •reports by national human rights committees and councils 
 •reports by civil society organisations
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
108
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Sources and Means of Verification  9Additional evidence concerning e-government, e-participation and government websites and online 
resources in individual countries (D3-D4) may be obtained from a variety of sources including:
 •UN, E-Government Survey , 2016 – e.g. online service index154
 •UN, E-Participation Index , 2015 – e.g. e-consultation and e-decision-making155
 •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness Index , 2016 – e.g. environment sub-index and usage/
government usage sub-index156
 •World Justice Project, Open Government Index  – e.g. civic participation sub-section157
Additional evidence concerning civil society organisation in individual countries (D2) may be obtained from 
a variety of sources including:
 •reports by civil society organisations and informants
 •World Justice Project, Open Government Index  – e.g. civic participation sub-section158
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Open Data Barometer (2016) – e.g. citizen and civil society sub-section159
Theme E •   Right to  
Privacy
Evidence concerning all of the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications and reports, including reports of national data protection or equivalent authorities
 •country information pages on the website of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)160
 •reports by national human rights committees and councils 
 •legal precedents and judgements
 •media reports, academic studies and reports by civil society organisations
 •transparency reports published by online platforms and other media companies 
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Indicator frameworks and comparative assessments concerning national environments for privacy have been 
developed by a number of organisations, including:
 •Breach Level Index, Data Breach Statistics161
 •Council of Europe, Internet Freedom  indicators (appendix to Recommendation CM/Rec (2016)5) – specifically 
subsection 4 on right to private and family life162
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation163 
 •Freedom House, Freedom on the Net  (annual) – specifically  violations of user rights  section – no 5 and 6164
 •Privacy International, State of Privacy briefings (annual) – e.g. data protection laws and accountability 
measures165
109
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification     •UNCTAD, Global Cyberlaw Tracker  (interactive database), 2018 – see Data Protection and Privacy Legislation 
Worldwide section166
 •UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Expression, Frank la Rue & APC’s Monitoring Framework on Freedom 
of Expression Online , 2013167 
Theme F •   Social, Economic 
and Cultural Rights
Evidence concerning all of the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications, including national development strategies and reports of government departments 
concerned with development and with the selected areas of employment, health and education 
 •reports by development agencies and civil society organisations, particularly those concerned with the 
selected areas of employment, health and education (for example, trades unions)
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
The following UNESCO conventions, recommendations and other resources are relevant to this theme:
 •Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, 2005168
 •Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, 2003169
 •Recommendation concerning the preservation of, and access to, documentary heritage including in digital 
form, 2015170
 •Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and Universal Access to 
Cyberspace, 2003171
 •UNESCO Charter on the Preservation of the Digital Heritage, 2003172
The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals are included in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development .173 These are concerned with development in general. Goal 3 is concerned with health, Goal 4 
with education and Goal 8 with employment. Goal 5 is concerned with issues of gender equity.
The International Labour Organisation is the UN agency concerned with employment. It is undertaking a 
programme of work on The Future of Work  which is relevant to this framework,174 and is also a source of 
statistics on employment.175
The World Health Organisation is the UN agency concerned with health. Its Global E-Health Observatory  
undertakes regular surveys of e-health activities compiling data from different countries.176
The UNESCO Institute for Statistics compiles comparative data on educational experience in different 
countries.177
Additional evidence concerning participation in online activities in may be obtained from official statistics 
concerning Internet access and use, household surveys and other sources identified for Category A, 
particularly Themes A and D.
110
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 Category O • Openness
General
The following international agreement is concerned with policy, legal and regulatory frameworks for openness 
on the Internet: 
 •Open Government Partnership, Open Government Declaration178
Other general resources concerned with policy, legal and regulatory frameworks for openness include:
 •Budapest Open Access Initiative179
 •SPARC, various resources180
The following UNESCO reports contain relevant information:
 •Privacy, Free Expression and Transparency , 2016181
 •Fostering Freedom Online: the Role of Internet Intermediaries , 2014182
 •Principles for governing the Internet: a comparative analysis , 2013183
 •Freedom of connection, freedom of expression: the changing legal and regulatory ecology shaping the 
Internet , 2011184
Theme A •   Policy, Legal, 
and Regulatory 
Framework
Evidence concerning all of the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications, including national development strategies and reports of government departments 
concerned with innovation and information technology 
 •reports by development agencies and business organisations
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with the policy, legal and regulatory framework 
for openness include:
 •Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative, Cyber Norms Index185
111
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Sources and Means of Verification     •UNCTAD, Global Cyberlaw Tracker186
 •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness Index  – e.g. environment sub-index187
Theme B •   Open  
Standards
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications, including national development strategies and reports of government departments 
concerned with innovation and information technology 
 •international and national standard-setting and oversight authorities
 •Internet professional associations, including Internet Society chapter, and business organisations
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
Additional information concerning standards concerned with accessibility for people with disabilities (B4) can 
be sought from disability associations and civil society organisations.
Additional information concerning Internet protocols and standards can be sought from ICANN and the 
relevant Regional Internet Registry (RIR), national domain registries and agencies concerned with cybersecurity.
International documents and norms concerned with open standards include:
 •APNIC, DNSSEC global validation map188
 •Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative, Cyber Norms Index189
 •Internet Society, DNSSEC deployment maps190
 •Internet Society, collection of IPv6 deployment data191
 •Network World, map of countries with open source laws192
 •Open Knowledge International, Global Open Data Index193
 •Open Stand, The Modern Paradigm for Standards194
 •OSS Watch (concerned with open source software)195
Theme C •   Open  
Markets
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
112
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification9 •government departments and regulatory authorities concerned with communications and the Internet 
 •opinion/perception surveys and focus groups of businesses, households and individual users
 •national communications regulators
 •communications and Internet businesses
 •the national domain name registry
 •Internet Exchange Points
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
International documents and data sets concerned with open markets include:
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation196 
 •ICANN, data resources on domain names and IP addresses
 •ITU, regulatory databases and information resources (these may require subscription)
 •Open Knowledge International, Global Open Data Index197
 •UNESCO, Trends in Media Pluralism (part of the report on  World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media 
Development )198
 •World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Index  – e.g. innovation and technological readiness sub-
section199
Theme D •   Open  
Content
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •legal and regulatory arrangements concerning communications and traffic management
 •government departments and legal authorities concerned with content and copyright
 •transparency reports and information concerning traffic management arrangements from communications 
and Internet businesses 
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
Additional evidence concerning copyright enforcement can be sought from the World Intellectual Property 
Organisation (WIPO).
Additional evidence concerning open educational resources can be sought from educational authorities, 
agencies and associations.
The following international agreements are concerned with intellectual property arrangements:
113
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators    Sources and Means of Verification     •The WIPO Copyright Treaty, 1996200
 •The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 1993201
 •The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 1886202
 •UNESCO Paris OER Declaration, 2012203
 •UNESCO, Ljubljana OER Action Plan, 2017204 
International documents and data sets concerned with open content include:
 •Global Innovation Policy Centre, Global IP Index205
 •Global Net Neutrality Coalition, Status of Net Neutrality around the world206
 •INSEAD, WIPO and SC Johnson College of Business, Global Innovation Index207
 •Open Knowledge International, Global Open Data Index208
 •SPARC, OER State Policy Tracker209 and Open Access Spectrum Evaluation Tool210
 •UNESCO and Commonwealth of Learning, A Basic Guide to Open Educational Resources211
Theme E •   Open Data and 
Open Government
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •legal and other arrangements concerning open data and open government
 •reports from government departments concerning implementation and use of open data and open 
government 
 •government websites
 •information compiled by UN DESA through its regular E-Government Survey212 and E -Participation Index213
 •opinion surveys of users of open government services
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with open data and open government include:
 •Open Government Partnership, Independent Reporting Mechanism214
 •Open Knowledge International, Global Open Data Index215
 •Open Technology Institute, Ranking Digital Rights  Corporate Accountability Index216
 •UN DESA, E-Government Survey217 (particularly Online Service Index) and E-Participation Index218
 •Waseda University , E-Government Index219
 •World Justice Project, Open Government Index220
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Open Data Barometer221
114
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Sources and Means of Verification  9 Category A • Accessibility to 
All
General
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  include the target to ‘significantly increase access to information 
and communications technology and strive to provide universal and affordable access to the Internet in least 
developed countries by 2020.’222 More detailed targets have been established by the ITU’s Connect 2020 
Agenda and by the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development.
Data sets on ICT access and use are gathered from national statistical systems by the ITU and published 
online in a variety of formats (some of which require subscription).223 The GSM Association researches and 
collates data on mobile and mobile Internet.224 The Economist Intelligence Unit and internet.org publish an 
Inclusive Internet Index.
Theme A •   Policy, Legal 
and Regulatory 
Framework
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •legal and practical arrangements for data gathering on Internet access and use, and reporting arrangements 
to international agencies
 •existence of household and opinion surveys
 •legal and regulatory framework for communications access and rights
 •data concerning universal access from government departments and communications businesses
 •data concerning public access facilities
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants, including Internet businesses
National regulatory approaches are catalogued by the ITU in a variety of formats, some of which require 
subscription.225 National broadband policies are listed by the Broadband Commission for Sustainable 
Development,226 which has published a series of reports on broadband policy development.227
115
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators      Sources and Means of Verification    Theme B •   Connectivity and 
Usage
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government statistical offices and communications departments, including reports on connectivity and 
usage submitted to the ITU and other international agencies
 •government policies and regulatory arrangements concerned with universal access
 •communications regulators
 •fixed and mobile communications network operators
 •Internet service businesses, including social media companies
 •domain name registries
 •household and other surveys concerned with Internet access and use
 •international Internet traffic data
 •media reports, academic and business consultancy studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with accessibility and use include:
 •Alliance for Affordable Internet, Affordability Index228
 •Budde.comm, various indicators of relevance229
 •CETIC.br, ICT Households and Enterprises Index230
 •DIRSI, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa, After Access  surveys231
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation232 
 •GSMA, Mobile Connectivity Index233
 •Internet Governance Forum, reports on Connecting and Enabling the Next Billion(s)234
 •ITU, ICT Development Index235 and its access and usage sub-indices, analysed in annual Measuring the 
Information Society reports236
 •OECD connectivity and usage indicators237
 •Packet Clearing House, Internet Exchange Directory238
 •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness Index239
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Women’s Rights Online: Digital Gender Gap Audit and Digital Gender Gap 
Scorecard240
116
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 Theme C •  Affordability
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government statistical offices and communications departments, including reports on connectivity and 
usage submitted to the ITU and other international agencies
 •government policies and regulatory arrangements concerned with universal access
 •communications regulators
 •fixed and mobile communications network operators
 •Internet service businesses, including social media companies
 •household and other surveys concerned with Internet access and use
 •media reports, academic and business consultancy studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with affordability include:
 •Alliance for Affordable Internet, Affordability Index241 and Policy and Regulatory Good Practices242
 •DIRSI, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa, After Access  surveys243
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation244 
 •Economist Intelligence Unit and Facebook, Inclusive Internet Index245
 •Freedom House, Freedom on the Net  – e.g. obstacles to access sub-section246
 •ITU, Measuring the Information Society reports247
 •World Economic Forum, Networked Readiness Index248
 •GSMA, Mobile Connectivity Index249
Theme D •   Equitable Access
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government statistical offices and communications departments, including reports on connectivity and 
usage submitted to the ITU and other international agencies
 •government policies and regulatory arrangements concerned with universal access
 •communications regulators
 •fixed and mobile communications network operators
 •Internet service businesses, including social media companies
 •household and other surveys concerned with Internet access and use, including perception surveys 
concerned with barriers to access and use 
117
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification •international and national agencies concerned with specific groups within the community, including 
women, children, young people, people with disabilities and ethnic minorities
 •media reports, academic and business consultancy studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with equitable access include:
 •DIRSI, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa, After Access  surveys250
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation251 
 •Economist Intelligence Unit and Facebook, Inclusive Internet Index252
 •GSMA, GSMA Intelligence reports253 (requires registration)
 •ITU, data sets in ICT Indicators database (some of which may require subscription)254
 •UNESCO, Opening New Avenues for Empowerment: ICTs to Access Information and Knowledge for Persons 
with Disabilities , 2013255
 •World Health Organisation, 
 •World Wide Web Consortium, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines256
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Women’s Rights Online: Digital Gender Audit and Digital Gender Scorecard257
Theme E •   Local Content and 
Language
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government statistical offices and communications departments, including reports on connectivity and 
usage submitted to the ITU and other international agencies
 •government policies and regulatory arrangements concerned with universal access
 •communications regulators
 •ICANN, Regional Internet Registries and national domain name registries
 •fixed and mobile communications network operators
 •Internet service businesses, particularly Wikimedia (for E2)258 and social media businesses (for E3)
 •household and other surveys concerned with Internet access and use, including perception surveys 
concerned with barriers to access and use
 •international and national agencies concerned with linguistic and ethnic minorities, including indigenous 
communities
 •media reports, academic and business consultancy studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
118
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with local content and language include:
 •DIRSI, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa, After Access  surveys259
 •DW Akademie, Model on Digital Participation260 
 •Partnership on Measuring ICT for Development, Final WSIS Targets Review , chapter concerning target 9 
(assesses indicators on content and language, including those concerned with domains and Wikipedia 
content)261
 •Statistica, data on ccTLDs262
 •GSMA, Mobile Connectivity Index263
 •OECD, Measuring Digital Local Content264
 •Packet Clearing House, Internet Exchange Directory265
 •UNESCO, Twelve years of measuring linguistic diversity in the Internet: balance and perspectives266
 •UNESCO, G lobal Report: Re/shaping Cultural Policy1
 •World Bank data on secure webservers267
Theme F •   Capabilities /
Competencies
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government statistical offices and communications departments, including reports on connectivity and 
usage submitted to the ITU and other international agencies
 •government departments 
 •educational authorities, higher education institutions and civil society organisations concerned with 
education
 •household and other surveys concerned with Internet access and use, including perception surveys 
concerned with barriers to access and use 
 •workplace surveys and labour market data
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
International data relevant to ICT skills are gathered by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and in the ITU 
ICT Indicators Database. Relevant data can also be found in the Human Capital Index of the UNDESA 
E-Government Survey. See also ITU, Digital Skills Toolkit, 2018.268
Evidence concerning media and information literacy (F2) may be obtained from a variety of sources including 
UNESCO, Global Media and Information Literacy Assessment Framework269 and UNESCO, Media and 
Information Literacy Policy and Guidelines , 2013.270 
Issues concerning the definition of STEM subjects and occupations have been addressed by UNESCO’s 
International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training.271 
1  http:/ /en.unesco.org/creativity/global-report-2018
119
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification   Category M • 
Multistakeholder Participation
General
The Tunis Agenda for the Information Society ,272 which concluded the World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS) in 2005, endorsed ‘the development of multi-stakeholder processes at the national, regional 
and international levels’ concerning the Internet ‘as a means to achieve internationally agreed development 
goals and objectives….’ The UN General Assembly reaffirmed its commitment to multi-stakeholder processes 
in the Outcome Document from its 2015 review of implementation of WSIS outcomes.273
Indicator frameworks for the assessment of participation in governance have been developed by a number 
of organisations, including:
 •UN, E-Participation Index274
 •World Justice Project, Open Government Index  – e.g. publicised laws and right of access to information 
sub-sections275
The following reports from UNESCO are concerned with multistakeholder participation and multistakeholder 
principles on the Internet:
 •Principles for governing the Internet: a comparative analysis , 2013276
 •What if we all governed the Internet? The evolution of multistakeholder participation in Internet governance , 
2017277
Other documents and reports concerning multistakeholder Internet governance include
 •APC, GISwatch 2017 – National and Regional Internet Governance Forum Initiatives278
 •Global Commission on Internet Governance, One Internet279
 •Global Partners Digital, Framework for Multistakeholder Cyber Policy Development280
 •IGF, National and Regional IGFs registry281
 •NETmundial Initiative, NETmundial Internet Principles282
 •World Justice Project, Open Government Index283
120
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 Theme A •   Legal and 
Regulatory 
Framework
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government official publications and reports
 •legal frameworks for e-commerce, digital signatures, cybersecurity, data protection and consumer 
protection
 •data compiled and published in DESA’s biennial E-Government Survey and e-participation index
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Theme B •   National Internet 
Governance
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government official publications and reports
 •arrangements representation and participation in Internet and Internet-related decision-making
 •information from Internet associations, including Internet Society chapter
 •national IGF, including annual reports to global IGF
 •national domain name registry
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
121
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Sources and Means of Verification    Theme C •   International 
Internet 
Governance
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government official publications and reports
 •arrangements for representation and participation in Internet and Internet-related decision-making
 •information from Internet associations, including Internet Society chapter
 •national IGF, including annual reports to global IGF
 •global and regional IGFs
 •ICANN and ITU
 •media reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Category X • Cross-Cutting 
Indicators
Theme A •   Gender
Articles 3 of the ICCPR and the ICESCR assert the equal rights of men and women.284 The rights of women 
are elaborated in the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).285
Goal 5 of the UN Sustainable Development Goals is concerned with gender equity.286 The following other 
international documents and reports are concerned with gender equality and empowerment:
 •UNDP, Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
 •UNDP, Gender Development Index
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •government official publications and reports
 •statistics on connectivity and access compiled by national statistical offices
122
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 •statistics from communications businesses, including network operators and online services
 •household and other surveys, including perception surveys and focus groups of women users and non-
users
 •legal reports concerning online gender-based harassment and violence
 •media and civil society reports and academic studies
 •evidence concerning skills and skills development from educational authorities, higher educational 
institutions 
 •workplace surveys and other evidence concerned with skills and capabilities
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
Attention should be paid when using these indicators to intersectionality, i.e. the relationship between gender 
and other social and economic factors which can be identified through disaggregation.
Many areas of content are relevant to gender equality and empowerment. Information about reproductive 
and sexual health has been chosen as a representative theme for this indicator (A6). Evidence concerning 
relevant content may be obtained from ministries of health and civil society organisations
International indicator frameworks and data sets concerned with gender and the Internet include:
 •Association for Progressive Communications, Gender Evaluation Methodology287
 •Broadband Commission for Digital Development, Doubling Digital Opportunities: Enhancing the Inclusion 
of Women and Girls in the Information Society288
 •Broadband Commission for Digital Development, Recommendations for Action: bridging the digital gender 
gap in Internet and broadband access and use289
 •GSMA, Mobile Gender Gap Report290
 •IGF Best Practice Forum on Gender, Overcoming Barriers to Enable Women’s Meaningful Internet Access291
 •ITU, Women in ITU Meetings292
 •UNCTAD and ILO, Empowering Women Entrepreneurs through ICT293
 •UNESCO, Cracking the Code: Girls’ and Women’s Education in Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics294
 •UNESCO, Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media295
 •UNESCO, Mobile Phones and Literacy: Empowerment in Women’s Hands296
 •UNCTAD, Measuring ICT and Gender297
 •World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap Report , 2017298
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Women’s Rights Online: Digital Gender Audit and Digital Gender Scorecard299
Theme B •   Children
This theme is concerned with children. In addition to the rights for all people established by the UDHR, 
ICCPR, ICESCR, CEDAW and ICERD, the rights of children are established by the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child.300 
123
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators    Sources and Means of Verification    Evidence for indicators concerned with children can be obtained from:
 •government official publications and reports
 •statistics on connectivity and access compiled by national statistical offices
 •statistics from communications businesses, including network operators and online services
 •media and civil society reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
 •household and other surveys that include children as a defined group, including perceptions of attractions 
of and barriers to use of the Internet
 •international and national children’s agencies including UNICEF
 •educational authorities and institutions
An indicator framework for comparative assessment of children’s relationship with the Internet, Children’s 
Rights in the Digital Age ,301 has been developed by Global Kids Online.
The following reports from UNESCO and other UN agencies are also concerned with children’s rights and 
appropriate policies for children.
 •Council of Europe, Child Participation Assessment Tool302
 •UNESCO, Survey on Privacy in Media and Information Literacy with Youth Perspectives303
 •UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children 2017 – Children in a Digital World , 2017304
 •UNICEF, Child Online Safety Assessment Tool305
 •UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, Report on the right of the child to freedom 
of expression, 2014306
Theme C •   Sustainable 
Development
The internationally-agreed framework for sustainable development is set out the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development . This includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals, each of which includes a 
number of targets for achievement, usually by 2020 or 2030. 
An indicator framework for assessing progress towards achievement of the SDGs has been developed by 
the UN Department for Economic and Social Affairs in cooperation with other UN agencies. This contains a 
small number of Internet-related indicators, and will be updated during the course of SDG implementation.
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications and reports from government departments concerned with sustainable development
 •national statistical offices
 •statistics on e-waste 
 •statistics from communications businesses, including network operators and online services
124
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 •household and other surveys concerned with the use of online banking, mobile financial services, online 
learning services, online health services and online shopping services
 •educational authorities
 •statistics concerning e-commerce and surveys of SMEs 
 •media and civil society reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
The following international documents and data sets are concerned with the Internet and sustainable 
development:
 •Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, various publications307
 •DIRSI, LIRNEasia and Research ICT Africa, After Access  surveys308
 •GSMA, State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money309
 •Internet Society, The Internet and Sustainable Development310
 •ITU and UNU, Global E-Waste Monitor311
 •UN DESA, E -Government Surveys312
 •UN DESA, Advancing a Sustainable Information Society for All , 2015313
 •UN Stats, SDGs314 
 •World Bank, World Development Report 2016,  Digital Dividends315
Theme D •   Trust and  
Security
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications and reports from government departments concerned with sustainable development
 •national statistical offices
 •reports from national CERT and other cybersecurity authorities
 •reports from consumer and data protection authorities
 •evidence from communications businesses, including network operators and online services
 •evidence from ISPs and antivirus businesses
 •household and other surveys, including perceptions of cybersecurity
 •media and civil society reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
The following international documents and data sets are concerned with trust and security:
125
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification    •Akamai, State of the Internet  index316
 •Breach Level Index, Data Breach Statistics317
 •Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative, Cyber Norms Index318
 •Europol, Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment319
 •Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre, Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for Nations320
 •ITU, Global Cybersecurity Index321
 •OECD, Guidelines in Measuring Trust322
 •UNCTAD, Global Cyberlaw Tracker323
 •UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Cybercrime Repository324
 •World Bank, Combating Cybercrime Index325
 •World Bank, data on secure Internet servers per million population326
Theme E •   Legal and Ethical 
Aspects of the 
Internet
Evidence concerning the indicators in this theme can be obtained from:
 •official publications and reports from government departments concerned with sustainable development
 •industry self-regulatory bodies
 •police and cybersecurity/cybercrime authorities and consumer protection agencies
 •evidence from communications businesses, including network operators and online services
 •household and other surveys, including perceptions of cybersecurity
 •media and civil society reports and academic studies
 •information from credible and authoritative informants
The following international documents and data sets are concerned with legal and ethical aspects of the 
Internet:
 •APC, From Impunity to Justice327 
 •GSMA, A framework to understand women’s mobile-related safety concerns in low-and middle-income 
countries328
 •IGF BPF, Online Abuse and Gender-Based Violence Against Women329
 •International Association of Prosecutors, Global Prosecutors e-Crime Network  – training and database of 
best practices330
 •Open Technology Institute, Ranking Digital Rights  Corporate Accountability Index331
 •Take Back The Tech!, Mapping Technology-Related Violence Against Women332
126
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification  9 •UNCTAD, E-Commerce Index333
 •UNCTAD, Global Cyberlaw Tracker334
 •UNESCO, Countering Online Hate Speech335
 •UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Annual Report 2013336
 •UNODC, Cybercrime Repository337
 •UNODC, Cybercrime Repository  (database) – e.g. database of cybercrime legislation, lessons learned, 
case law database338
 •World Bank, Combating Cybercrime Index339
 •World Wide Web Foundation, Women’s Rights Online: Digital Gender Audit and Digital Gender Scorecard340
127
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSources and Means of Verification    10
Implementing 
UNESCO’s 
Internet 
Universality 
Indicators
African migrants on the shore of Djibouti City at night raise their 
phones in an attempt to catch an inexpensive signal from neighboring 
Somalia—a tenuous link to relatives abroad. Djibouti is a common stop-
off point for migrants in transit from such countries as Somalia, Ethiopia 
and Eritrea, seeking a better life in Europe and the Middle East. John 
Stanmeyer’s “Signal” won the 2013 World Press Photo of the Year award.
Cover photo: John Stanmeyer/National Geographic Creative
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
129A practical guide to 
conducting national 
assessments
1.   Introduction
2.  Implementing the indicators  
Action step 1: Establishing a Multistakeholder Advisory Board  
Action step 2: Building a research team  
Action step 3: Developing a project action plan  
Action step 4: Data gathering and sources  
Action step 5: Data analysis  
Action step 6: Report-writing and recommendations  
Action step 7: Organizing of national validation multistakeholder workshop and conducting 
related advocacy activities  
Action step 8: Impact assessment and monitoring
3.  Looking to the future
4. Engagement with UNESCO10
131
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsIntroduction   Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators1. Introduction
UNESCO’s framework of Internet Universality Indicators (IUIs) was developed through a global, open, inclusive 
and multistakeholder process between 2017-2018. This work was presented to UNESCO’s International 
Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC) in November 2018. The governing council of the 
IPDC then took a decision to welcome the Indicators Framework and to endorse the voluntary application of 
the instrument for stakeholders to conduct national assessments of Internet development. 1
The framework is a unique and powerful resource which has been developed through an extensive process 
of research, consultation and analysis, to help governments policy and regulation authorities as well as other 
stakeholders to:
 •develop a clear and substantive understanding of their national Internet environment and policies;
 •assess that environment and policies in relation to the implementation of UNESCO’s Rights, Openness, 
Accessibility to all, and Multistakeholder (ROAM) principles; and
 •formulate policy recommendations and practical initiatives that will enable them to meet their goals and 
align with the UNESCO principles as the Internet evolves.
This chapter comprises an Implementation Guide that is intended to help researchers implement the IUIs 
in diverse national contexts. 
The Implementation Guide
This Implementation Guide draws upon discussions held during the IUIs framework consultation process 
and the experience of researchers and stakeholders who undertook the pre-tests and pilots of the IUIs. It 
considers the organisation and management of research projects and addresses some of the challenges that 
are likely to arise while undertaking them. It will be revised in response to further experience in implementing 
the indicators and new developments in Internet.
Core indicators and partial assessments
The IUIs provide a comprehensive framework for assessing national Internet environments. UNESCO hopes 
that this framework will be used as a whole, in order to develop as full information base as possible concerning 
the national Internet environment from the evidence that is available.
UNESCO recognises, however, that implementation of the comprehensive framework will require significant 
resources in research time and expertise, which may not be available in all cases. A shorter and more 
concentrated set of core indicators has therefore been selected, from among those in the comprehensive 
framework, for use where insufficient resources are available to undertake a full assessment. These include 
at least a number of indicators taken from every ROAM-X Category within the comprehensive framework. 2 
UNESCO also recognises that some governments and other stakeholders may wish to undertake partial 
assessments built around ROAM-X Categories that are of particular concern to them. This ‘toolbox’ approach 
is possible, as many of the ROAM-X Indicators in the framework allow researchers to pay additional attention 
to issues which are of special interest to them. Individual Categories could be used, for example, to explore 
1  Decisions taken by the 31st Council Session of the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC), 21-22 November 2018, UNESCO HQ. https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/ 48223/pf0000266235  
2  An earlier version of the core indicators was successfully piloted in Brazil, Senegal and Thailand in 2018, and that 
experience fed into the finalised version.
132
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsparticular dimensions of the national Internet experience. UNESCO believes that such uses could be helpful 
where appropriate, although ’cherry-picking’ of scattered indicators which will bias the overall impression 
created by the findings is to be avoided.
A further use of these ROAM-X Indicators is pedagogical. Lecturers are invited to use this international 
instrument to educate learners about the complexities of Internet governance issues and the need for 
knowledge about the range of dimensions covered in these indicators.
2. Implementing the 
indicators
The IUIs framework is a multifaceted research tool designed to achieve substantive and wide-ranging findings 
that will have real value to policy-makers, regulatory bodies, and other stakeholders, thereby improving the 
quality of policy-making and practice. An application of the indicators in a given country requires a budget to 
be elaborated and funds be raised. UNESCO can assist in this process, although will not be able to meet the 
full cost in many cases. Therefore, mobilisation of resources from government, private sector, foundations and 
in-kind contributions (e.g. by research institutions) is part of the process. Those actors contributing resources 
should be clear, however, that the integrity of the research process requires its independence of donors.
Implementation of the framework will require careful planning, sufficient time and resources for effective 
data gathering and analysis, and inclusive discussion of findings and recommendations. This can be divided 
into eight main action steps:
 •Action step 1: Establishing a Multistakeholder Advisory Board
 •Action step 2: Building a collaborative research team
 •Action step 3: Developing a research action plan
 •Action step 4: Data gathering
 •Action step 5: Data analysis
 •Action step 6: Report-writing and recommendations
 •Action step 7: Organizing of national validation multistakeholder workshop and conducting related advocacy 
activities
 •Action step 8: Impact assessment and monitoring 
These are discussed in the following sections of this guide.10
133
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAction step 1: Establishing a Multistakeholder Advisory 
Board
Creating such a board is not a prescribed condition for conducting a national assessment using these 
indicators. However, it is strongly recommended where political conditions do allow an independent research 
exercise to be conducted.
UNESCO’s success in developing the indicators benefited significantly from the support of a Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board (MAB) composed of a wider group of independent experts from different areas of expertise and 
interest. UNESCO believes that the same can apply to doing a national assessment with the indicators where 
conditions make this possible. Hence, it is recommended in general that a broad-based Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board be established before conducting the research action steps, and be regularly engaged so as 
to support the national assessment process and trigger policy discussions on the findings. UNESCO National 
Commissions or any other stakeholder could play a role in setting up a MAB.
It is also recommended to involve Policy and Regulation authorities in ICT or digital economy as well as 
National Statistical offices and the major Internet stakeholders in an inclusive and transparent manner.
1.1 Objectives of the Board 
The role of the Board is to reinforce the quality, legitimacy and transparency of national assessment processes. 
It will also help to ensure the assessments are sufficiently resourced through contributions in cash and kind 
so and can be carried out to a high standard, ensuring an effective impact. 
1.2 Composition
Each member should be an expert who has expertise and experience in some areas of the research in relation 
to applying the Internet Universality indicators. 
The Multistakeholder Advisory Board should preferably be composed of leading experts from various 
stakeholders including governments (regulatory and policymaking bodies), academic, technical community, 
private sector, journalists and media organizations, civil society, individual Internet users, UN agencies and 
intergovernmental groups. The pre-tests and pilots undertaken for the IUIs have demonstrated the particular 
value of government engagement in enabling access to official data sources. 
The Multistakeholder Advisory Board should also ideally extend beyond the traditional stakeholder groups 
(government, business, civil society, the Internet technical community) to reflect diversity within those groups 
(e.g. business users of the Internet, as well as businesses supplying Internet services). The Multistakeholder 
Advisory Board should have geographical and gender balance, engage youth and particularly include experts 
in gender and children/youth issues.
Between 8 and 18 members is likely to be manageable. 
Members should support the project in their expert capacity, not as representatives of any entity. What is 
important is that they should be credible persons and capable of adding value as well as bring perspectives 
from the communities they come from. Their role is advisory, and not editorial. 
The Multistakeholder Advisory Board members are not paid, but tend to be given credit in the final report 
(should they so wish).
1.3 Terms of Reference 
MAB members are expected to suggest resources for the assessment as well as data sources to the 
researchers and help to open doors to these.
134
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsEach MAB member should be able to commit a few hours every two months to respond to relevant emails 
and work on the Multistakeholder Advisory Board. 
Each MAB member should seek to attend physical and/or online consultation meetings and events whenever 
possible and without budgetary burden.
Each MAB member should take responsibility to help peer review the final report for publishing purpose. 
This role is not to override research findings or influence them in pursuit of vested interests, but to consider 
issues of scientific quality and linkage between findings and recommendations, as well as how the work 
can be strengthened. 
Each MAB member should be proactive in participating in a national validation workshop at the end of the 
research, and in engaging with policy makers in government, business and other institutional settings to 
effect change in line with the recommendations arising from the findings of the assessment.
1.4 UNESCO support 
UNESCO, via its National Commissions and/or its field offices, can provide overall support and technical 
assistance in establishing the Multistakeholder Advisory Board and avail representatives to serve as a member 
or observer.
UNESCO can also provide support through its intergovernmental programmes, including the Information 
for All Programme (IFAP). Through its network of national committees, IFAP can join synergies with national 
stakeholders to facilitate the implementation of the ROAM-X indicators at the national level..
Action step 2: Building a research team
Generally, the research will be conducted by a team of researchers. The team should be substantial enough 
to work effectively, but small enough to facilitate effective group work. An assessment of all the indicators 
(not restricted the core ones) may involve between 5 and 8 researchers at various levels of expertise and 
experience. 
One of these persons needs to be team leader with overall responsibility for the successful execution 
of the research. The team leader has a responsibility to contribute to establishing and engaging with the 
Multistakeholder Advisory Board for advice as the liaison person. 
2.1 Composition of the research team
The IUIs framework has been designed to be used by a group of researchers that brings together a range 
of expertise in different aspects of the Internet environment. UNESCO believes that most value will arise 
where teams include researchers, while having research experience as a necessary consideration, are 
also drawn from diverse stakeholder groups concerned with Internet development, access and rights. A 
broad composition of the research team helps ensure that a full range of perspectives is considered during 
research and in strengthening the credibility of findings including amongst those who will be affected by 
subsequent recommendations. The composition of research teams along these lines will help to ensure that 
recommendations are more inclusive and representative, and that they focus on the interests of the country 
as a whole rather than privileging the views of its Internet community.
The following aspects of diversity could usefully be considered when assembling such a team:
 •Implementation teams should reflect the demographic diversity of the country concerned, including 
gender, different age groups, ethnicity and regionality.
 •They should include diversity of expertise, including at least one member with expertise in each of the 
different ROAM-X Indicators Categories.10
135
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators •Teams should include both Internet insiders and those whose expertise does not lie with the Internet but 
who are primarily concerned with its impact on economy, society and culture. 
Teams should include different perspectives on the Internet and its role within society. Research teams 
should not be made up only of those who hold a particular view of the Internet but should rather provide a 
space for dialogue between different perspectives and ideas about its future.
In addition to ensuring diversity within the research team, special efforts should also be made in the data-
collection and analysis to reflect not just the perspectives and experiences of Internet experts, but also of 
different communities of Internet users and non-users. This means a team’s assessment should be sensitive 
to perspectives of women, children, people in different age groups, migrants and refugees, people with 
disabilities, sexual minorities and people from different language groups.
Action step 3: Developing a project action plan
Once a research team has been established, it will be important to:
a) build a common understanding within this team of the objectives of the research project;
b) elaborate, within the available budget, a work plan; and
c) mutually agree upon how the group will work together as the project proceeds.
3.1 Establishing objectives
As previously noted, the IUIs have been developed to help governments and other stakeholders:
 •develop a clear and substantive understanding of their national Internet environment;
 •assess this environment in relation to the implementation of UNESCO’s ROAM principles; and
 •formulate policy approaches and practical initiatives that will enable them to meet their goals in line with 
the UNESCO principles and international standards as the Internet continues to evolve.
While these broad goals are likely to apply in all applications of the IUIs framework, the implementation of 
the indicators in individual countries will also need to respond to particular challenges or opportunities in 
those countries, and feed into other policy processes and national priorities. There may be some indicators 
of greater significance than others to a given country, and which merit more in-depth research than others. 
It will therefore be important to clarify and agree specific goals for the project from the outset. This should 
be done in terms of elaborating or adapting the three points above, and by considering any specific issues 
that need to be addressed within the national context.
A clear written statement of project goals and priorities for special attention will help to facilitate cooperation 
amongst researchers. Experience in the pre-tests and pilots shows that such a statement can also prove 
invaluable in demonstrating the legitimacy and credibility necessary for facilitating access to sources – 
including data held by government and business.
3.2 Designing a work plan
After developing the statement of objectives, the next priority for the research team should be to design a 
work plan that will enable it to maximise data gathering in a way that allows sufficient time for analysis and 
the development of recommendations within the timeframe and resources available. 
The detailed design of a work plan will depend on the circumstances of each individual project, including 
the goals that were agreed upon, participating organisations, the expected availability of evidence, and 
other aspects of the national context. Researching a large country with multiple population centres poses 
different challenges to researching a small island state. A study will normally take a minimum of six to eight 
months from start to finish.
136
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThe work plan should pay particular attention to:
 •the interpretation of indicators where needed, the means of verification for each indicator, as well as data 
sources;
 •the distribution of work between different members of the research team;
 •a timetable for preparation, research, analysis and report-writing; and
 •methods of coordination and collaboration between team members.
A report arising from an application of the IUIs may be published independently of UNESCO, given that the 
Indicators Framework is open access under a Creative Commons licence. However, where UNESCO is the 
publisher, the Organization reserves the right to quality assurance of the text to be published. In this case, 
time should be built in so as to provide for the Organisation’s review processes. Contact UNESCO for further 
information in this regard. 
The work plan should provide a realistic and robust framework for implementing the IUIs, but some flexibility 
will be needed, for example to deal with unexpected difficulties in obtaining evidence in certain areas. It 
should be reviewed at key points in the timetable to determine whether adjustments should be made.
Research teams may find it helpful to make use of project management software in order to keep track of 
research and analysis during implementation.
3.3 Coordination of the research team
Experience with UNESCO’s Media Development Indicators has shown the importance of ensuring effective 
cohesion and coordination within the research team.
While individual team members may take lead responsibility for different Categories or areas of work (for 
example, for particular Categories), they should ideally not undertake research and assessment of findings in 
isolation. UNESCO recommends that several team members should conduct research in communication with 
colleagues and participate in collective assessment of each Category. This is particularly important in ensuring 
that diversity of experience and perspective is brought to bear on potentially controversial or contentious 
issues while research is being undertaken, rather than being left for resolution at later stages of the project.
It would be helpful in this context to establish from the outset:
 •the lead responsibility for particular areas of work between different members of the research team;
 •supporting roles to be played in these areas by other team members;
 •arrangements for regular discussion within the team, either online or face-to-face; and
 •arrangements for drafting and discussing project findings and recommendations.
Action step 4: Data gathering and sources
The third and central phase of work within a project to apply the ROAM-X Indicators Framework in a country 
consists of data gathering. This phase will vary substantially between countries because of differences in 
the quantity and quality of evidence that is available.
This section of the guide is concerned with the overall framework for data gathering, the sources that are likely 
to be available, and some of the challenges that are likely to arise in obtaining and making use of evidence. 
Issues concerned with the analysis of evidence will be discussed in section 6 below.10
137
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators4.1 The framework for data gathering
The broad framework for data gathering should be included in the project’s work plan (see above). It should 
begin with discussion about how the indicators are to be interpreted in the context of the country. 
 •While most indicators will be straight-forward and clear, some will require adaptation and interpretation 
that should be made explicit both for the research process as well as in the final report.
 •Discussion should ensure that the team is clear about the means of verification for the indicator concerned. 
 •It is necessary to undertake a comprehensive review to identify the sources that are available within the 
country, in addition to the sources identified in the relevant chapter of the ROAM-X Indicators Framework 
itself. 
UNESCO recommends that this review should include:
 •a literature review to identify official and non-official sources of quantitative data, academic and other 
research reports, credible and authoritative qualitative sources, and agencies and organisations from 
which unpublished information can be sought;
 •email or telephone interactions with official agencies, businesses and other organisations concerning 
access to unpublished evidence they may hold; and
 •discussions with key informants (including Multistakeholder Advisory Group members) to identify additional 
sources of evidence and establish relationships which will include subsequent informant interviews.
Group discussions and sampled questionnaire survey can be considered, for example, for collecting 
information related to users and individuals’ experience including those related to gender and youth issues. 
This clarification of sources will enable the research team to:
 •establish a realistic timetable for data gathering (including desk research, informant interviews and other 
sources);
 •finalise the allocation of research time and resources (including the distribution of research team roles); and
 •clarify aspects of the framework which either cannot be effectively included or would require primary 
research which may not be possible to do within the assessment process.
While an initial ‘literature-plus’ review along these lines should identify the large majority of potential sources, 
others are likely to become apparent during the course of subsequent research and should be incorporated 
as and where appropriate as the project proceeds.
4.2 Sources
Three main types of sources are included in the Indicators Framework: institutional indicators, quantitative 
indicators, and qualitative indicators. These are elaborated later in this section. 
Researchers will find a wide variety of sources of evidence and means of verification available to them. 
Some of these will be useful across a range of indicators, while others will be specific to particular indicator 
categories.
Together, it is desired that indicators of these three kinds will enable researchers to form a collage of evidence 
that reinforces synergies amongst the Categories that make up the IUI framework. 
An overall guide to sources and means of verification is included in the relevant chapter in the Indicators 
Framework. This suggests potential sources for each category and for each theme within each Category. 
Those concerned with themes are usually divided into two main groups.
 •The first group identifies generic sources which are likely to be available and useful when considering 
the theme concerned (for example, ‘official publications and reports’, reports of national committees and 
councils including ‘reports by national human rights committees and councils’, ‘opinion surveys of users 
of government services’, ‘domain name registries’, ‘ICT observatories reports,’etc.). There will be some 
138
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsvariation in these between countries, and there are likely to be some sources that are specific to individual 
countries that should be identified during the ‘literature-plus’ review described above. 
 •The second group identifies published sources, including international treaty instruments and standards, 
international indices compiled by United Nations agencies, the World Bank and other intergovernmental 
bodies, and assessments by international non-governmental agencies, which may include evidence on 
the country concerned as well as other countries.
Arrangements for gaining access to official data and other evidence will vary between countries. In some, 
access to official data has been made much easier because of open data policies. However, the pre-tests 
and pilot studies indicated that access to data can be much more difficult in countries that have not yet 
adopted these (or implemented them). Government participation in research projects using the IUIs should 
help to alleviate this problem, especially if government participants can make formal requests for access 
on behalf of the research team. 
4.3 Consultation, informant interviews and group discussions
The ROAM-X Indicator Framework has been designed to make use of existing available sources of evidence, 
particularly written sources. Research teams are not expected to undertake primary research, although 
they may wish or choose to do so, particularly if certain data points are missing from existing research and 
resources are available (see below).
Research teams will need to supplement desk research through dialogue with relevant stakeholders who 
have official responsibilities or expertise in particular indicators Categories. 
 •Experience with UNESCO’s Media Development Indicators has shown the importance of informant 
interviews in building a clearer and stronger evidence base, including the identification of additional 
published and unpublished sources and understanding of the expert viewpoints held by such informants 
(some of whom will have been consulted during the design of the project work plan).
 •Group discussions involving key informants have also proved useful in other research projects of this kind. 
Bringing together a number of key informants enables researchers to explore different perspectives on 
an issue. Such discussion groups differ from focus groups because they are made up of experts chosen 
for their engagement with and different views on the issues under discussion, rather than made up of 
participants selected in order to represent particular social or economic groups. 
Experience with other indicator frameworks and the development of this indicator framework has also shown 
that it may be valuable for research teams to invite contributions from interested parties through an open and 
transparent consultation process. If used, this should not drive the project but be supplementary to desk and 
other research using existing sources. Evidence derived from consultation responses should be interpreted 
with care to ensure that findings are not unduly influenced by vested interests. It may be appropriate to 
publish consultation responses online in order to promote transparency and to prevent the opportunity for, 
or perception of, undue influence.
Evidence gathered through consultation should distinguish factual from interpretative material, and be 
cautious about treating either in isolation from additional substantiation. Just because one expert, or even 
several, said something does not necessarily make it accurate or generalizable. In all cases, such evidence 
should be attributed to the observer concerned when writing the final report (see also section 5.1 below on 
Assessing Evidence in General). 
4.4 Dealing with data gaps
Significant gaps in the available evidence base will exist in all countries. Experience with other indicator sets 
indicates, and the pre-tests and pilots verified, that this is likely to be particularly true of Least Developed 
Countries (LDCs), small islands, and other countries where limited administrative and data gathering resources 
are available to national statistical services. In some countries, it will be possible to gather evidence for only 
a minority of indicators in the framework.10
139
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsThis is to be expected, and the framework has been designed to address the challenges posed by such data 
deficiencies. The aim of the framework is to bring together as much evidence as is available for any country 
to improve understanding and the quality of policy development. UNESCO believes that this is not less but 
more important in countries where the available evidence base is limited. This is one reason for the large 
number of indicators included in the framework, which should help to maximise the range of evidence that 
can be identified in any country and so contribute, even where data are limited, to improved understanding 
and policy development. Appropriate sources of evidence for individual Categories are suggested in the 
Sources chapter and should be supplemented by members of the research team during the initial phase 
of project planning. It may be necessary for researchers to combine a number of different sources to obtain 
as full a picture as possible. As far as possible, researchers should prioritise using the most representative 
and recent data.
Some available sources may be proprietary (paid-for or subscription basis) or gathered by private sector 
businesses for commercial purposes. Data owners may, if approached, be prepared to make some data 
from these sources available on a pro bono basis to support an IUIs assessment. Relevant data may also be 
available from unexpected or unfamiliar sources, such as the data that some online service providers make 
publicly available through marketing themselves as advertising platforms.
Issues concerned with the nature and availability of data and ways in which this might be addressed are 
discussed below for each of the three main types of indicators.
4.5 Institutional evidence
Some of the indicators in the framework are concerned with the existence of particular constitutional or 
legal arrangements and the performance of government agencies and other ‘competent’ (i.e. responsible) 
authorities in implementing or enforcing them.
Evidence concerning the existence of constitutional and legal arrangements should be relatively easy to obtain 
from official publications and informants. Evidence concerning the performance of government agencies and 
other competent authorities including ICT policy and regulation bodies will require analysis derived from a 
variety of sources. These sources will vary between countries, but are likely to include government reports 
and legal instruments, media reports and analyses by academic and civil society sources.
In some cases, Questions and Indicators refer to specific international instruments which have been accepted 
or ratified by governments. This is particularly the case in Category R, where a number of Indicators refer to 
international rights agreements such as the International Covenants on Civil and Political and on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights (ICCPR and ICESCR), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). These instruments, 
and regional rights agreements which complement and supplement them, set international standards for 
laws and practices concerning human rights. Additional guidance concerning their implementation and 
enforcement is available in documents agreed by the UN Human Rights Council. These are referenced in 
the Sources chapter.
A significant number of other intergovernmental agreements, including UNESCO agreements in areas such 
as multilingualism and cultural heritage, are relevant to particular Questions and Indicators, and are also 
referenced in the Sources chapter. In some other cases, international norms and standards have been 
developed less formally, or with fewer legal obligations, whether by agreement between governments or 
between other stakeholders. Agreements which have been reached through multistakeholder arrangements 
and/or by the Internet professional or business communities are also relevant, particularly in Category O 
(Openness). These types of instruments are also referenced in the Sources chapter.
A large number of international fora now exist for the discussion of Internet governance issues, and it is not 
possible for a research project with limited resources to explore them all. For this reason, Indicators sometimes 
select specific exemplar international agreements or arrangements for assessment. Some of the Indicators 
in Category M (Multistakeholder), for example, focus on multistakeholder participation in three international 
institutional arrangements – the global, regional and national Internet Governance Fora (IGFs), the International 
140
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsTelecommunication Union (ITU) and the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). 
These were selected because they have the largest number of participating countries, and so are likely to 
have relevance in almost every case. Researchers can and should, however, also take participation in other 
relevant international fora into consideration if they wish.
The terminology and interpretation of terminology in some of these (and other) Questions and Indicators 
varies from country to country. Where there is no agreed international definition or standard, UNESCO 
believes that it would unduly restrict research teams to propose within the implementation of this framework 
a particular definition on them. The Indicators are essentially a tool for national-level research. It is therefore 
more appropriate for research teams to interpret terminology as it is understood within the national context 
but then make explicit the meaning they give, as well as reflect on any alternative interpretations which may 
be current elsewhere and could also have local resonance. 
4.6 Quantitative evidence
Some of the indicators in the framework rely on quantitative data, which may be derived from a variety of 
sources. These may include:
 •international data sets, such as those developed by United Nations agencies, which rely on reporting by 
national statistical offices and other primary sources;
 •government data sets, derived through a variety of methodologies;
 •business data, which are gathered for commercial purposes, and which may be more up-to-date than 
data gathered by governments or intergovernmental agencies. (While some businesses may regard such 
data as commercially confidential, others make relevant data available for public queries, for example 
through their advertising platforms);
 •household surveys undertaken by government agencies, independent research centres, academics or 
others, which use a sample of the total population; as well as
 •other sources of quantitative information. 
It should be noted that quantitative data are derived from particular conceptualisations, scoping and research 
methods, and should be assessed against this background (see 5.4 below). Official data for many quantitative 
indicators in the framework are likely to be available in countries that have long-established national statistical 
services, but this is much less likely to be so in many other countries that lack resources for such services. In 
such contexts, it will be particularly important to identify other potential sources of quantitative information 
such as those in business data, academic studies and household surveys. 
The volume of data which businesses gather and hold for their own commercial purposes comfortably 
exceeds that available to most governments, particularly on issues such as access. While businesses are 
generally reluctant to divulge such data, they may be prepared to make some available, particularly if this 
aims to illuminate understanding of the Internet and support appropriate policy development. Research 
teams should therefore pursue this avenue, ideally starting in the initial phase of project planning and design.
Disaggregation
Some of the quantitative indicators in the framework request assessment of disaggregated as well as 
aggregate data. Disaggregation refers to the breakdown of aggregate data for an indicator into separate 
figures for different population groups within the total population sample. This is particularly important when 
considering access to and impact of the Internet on different social groups, for example, women and men, 
particular age groups (such as children and the elderly), regions (for example urban and rural areas, or 
for different provinces in federally-governed countries), ethnic or language communities, and people with 
disabilities. 
Attention should also be focused, where possible, to intersectionality, i.e. to the relationship between multiple 
disaggregated factors (e.g. gender plus ethnicity plus income) in influencing outcomes for individuals and 
consequential policy requirements.10
141
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsUnfortunately, as the pre-tests and pilots for the IUIs have shown, few data sets which are currently available 
will be susceptible to disaggregation in many countries. Researchers should nevertheless seek out what is 
available. Household and similar sample surveys, where they are undertaken, often have greater granularity 
in this respect than official statistics. Businesses may also be willing to divulge more disaggregated data to 
researchers than they would usually expect to publish. UNESCO hopes that greater demand for disaggregated 
data will encourage governments and national statistical offices to pay them more attention in the future.
4.7 Qualitative evidence
Some of the indicators in the framework are concerned with qualitative evidence, i.e. with the non-statistical 
assessment of what is happening within national Internet environments. Qualitative evidence is no less 
valuable or insightful than quantitative evidence: the two types of evidence complement one another, and 
both are critical to effective analysis of Internet universality.
Qualitative evidence is particularly important in the IUI framework because:
 •many of the indicators Categories addressed within the framework are not reducible or susceptible to 
quantitative measurement; and
 •quantitative data are not available for many of those which would benefit from quantitative measurement.
 •Evidence can be derived for the assessment of qualitative evidence from many different sources, including:
 •reports by government, business, civil society and other organisations;
 •academic and research centre studies;
 •media reports; and
 •interviews and discussion groups with key informants.
As with quantitative data, qualitative evidence is derived from particular conceptualisations, scoping and 
research methods, and should be assessed against this background.
4.8 Perception data
A small number of indicators in the framework are concerned with the perceptions of particular population 
groups. 
The inclusion of users’ (and non-users’) perceptions and attitudes towards their experience has long been 
considered an essential part of ensuring effective policy development in ICTs and other sectors. Evidence 
concerning these is crucial, for example, to understanding the barriers to access and use experienced by 
women, the use of the Internet by children, and changing views concerning legal and ethical aspects of the 
Internet. Perception questions are therefore frequently included in household surveys and other selective 
quantitative studies, as well as qualitative studies using evidence from consultation processes, focus groups 
and other methodologies. 
4.9 Primary research
The indicator framework has been designed to make use of existing available evidence, rather than expecting 
new primary research to be undertaken. 
In some cases, however, it is possible that resources may be available for primary research to be undertaken 
which could supplement the existing evidence base and fill in some of the gaps that are evident before or 
become evident during the course of the research. This can build a stronger analysis and recommendations 
provided that it does not alter the overall context of an investigation (for example by unduly skewing it towards 
the goals of funding organisations).
Primary research arising from such opportunities would be particularly valuable in areas where evidence 
proves, in the country in question, to be particularly limited in quantity or quality. This might relate to particular 
142
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsCategories or Themes (e.g. multistakeholder participation, or the impact of the Internet on children), or to 
particular types of indicator (e.g. enabling more extensive disaggregation of existing data sets).
A number of different methodologies may be appropriate for primary research if resources are available, 
including:
 •household or other sample surveys, enabling more extensive and more disaggregated data gathering, 
which might be particularly useful in Category A (Accessibility to All) and Category X (Cross-Cutting) for 
the gender and children Themes;
 •in-depth assessment of performance against objectives of institutional arrangements included in the 
framework (which might be undertaken in collaboration with relevant government agencies or competent 
authorities);
 •focus groups that could supplement existing published qualitative assessments and information from 
informants, including different groups of users of the Internet; and
 •interviews with a more extensive range of informants than might otherwise be possible.
Any primary research that is undertaken should conform to high professional, ethical and privacy standards 
– for example, using standard methodologies for the design and sample size of household surveys or for the 
selection of participants and the conduct of focus groups. Relevant sources concerning this are identified in 
the relevant chapter in the Indicator Framework..
Action step 5: Data analysis
This section is primarily concerned with the assessment of individual Indicators and the Questions with which 
they are associated, but extends to the overall assessment of Themes and Categories. 
Researchers using the IUIs framework need to ensure that the evidence they use comes from credible 
and authoritative sources – which may include government departments, academic studies, international 
agencies, national research institutes and civil society organisations, media and other sources. They should 
ensure that it reliably addresses questions within the framework and that, if possible, it can be confirmed by 
reference to other sources.
Assessing individual indicators is more complicated than it sometimes seems. Researchers should take a 
critically realistic approach and never take evidence at face value. The following paragraphs discuss some 
general issues and then raise a number of points concerning the three main types of indicator in the framework.
5.1 Assessing evidence in general
Few of the indicators in this framework provide a comprehensive answer to the question with which they are 
associated. They are merely indicators, whose implications need to be interpreted. 
All of the evidence that will be available to researchers will have been gathered in a specific context – at a 
particular time, in a particular place, using a particular methodology, by an individual or organisation with a 
particular interest in what that evidence suggests. No matter how authoritative the source, assessment of it 
requires careful consideration of four things in particular:
1. What is the source? Who gathered the evidence? What was their motive? Do they have a vested 
interest in finding a particular outcome? What assumptions (and blind spots) may have informed 
their concept, definitions and scoping?
2. How was the evidence gathered? Was the methodology sound? In the case of quantitative 
indicators, how reliable or representative is the population from which it was derived (including 
sample size)? In the case of focus groups, how were participants chosen and how representative 
were they? In the case of qualitative assessments, how expert and how independent were the 
authors or reports and other documents?10
143
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators3. When was it gathered? The Internet and Internet markets are changing rapidly. Data concerned 
with access, for example, rapidly become out of date. The enjoyment or violation of rights may 
be affected suddenly by a change of government or other circumstance. Researchers should 
consider whether data are sufficiently timely to be representative of the current state of Internet 
development. To avoid incessant updating, which can delay finalisation of the research indefinitely, 
researchers need to specify a cut-off period, and are advised to have a focus on emerging trends 
rather than ‘snapshot’ analysis.
4. What does it show? Does the evidence which has been gathered point to the conclusions that 
have been drawn? How reliable are these conclusions?
5.2 International norms and standards
A number of indicators in the framework, of all three types, refer to international norms and standards. 
 •Some of these are contained in treaty or other legally-binding agreements which have been entered 
into by governments, such as the obligations to support human rights contained in international rights 
agreements like the ICCPR and the CRC. Also relevant are the goals, targets and indicators established 
by the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, such as SDG 9.c “Significantly increase access to 
information and communications technology and strive to provide universal and affordable access to the 
Internet in least developed countries by 2020”, SDG 16.10 on ensuring public access to information and 
fundamental freedoms, as well as SDG 5 on achieving Gender Equality.
 •Some refer to international agreements which have been reached through UNESCO’s intergovernmental 
processes, in areas including multilingualism and cultural heritage, or which follow agreements of other 
United Nations or intergovernmental agencies.
 •Some have been reached by broad consensus amongst governments, businesses and Internet 
professionals, such as the targets for access and affordability established the Broadband Commission 
for Sustainable Development co-chaired by UNESCO and ITU, and the principles underpinning 
multistakeholder participation that emerged from the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in 
2003/2005 and its ten-year review in 2015.
 •Similar non-formal standards, benchmarks and targets have been established by non-governmental 
organisations, particularly in Category R (Rights) and by business associations, particularly in Category O 
(Openness).
These instruments provide valuable benchmarks against which national Internet environments can be 
assessed and have been included in the framework where appropriate. Sometimes they are accompanied 
by comparative quantitative or qualitative indices, which are referenced in the Sources chapter. Regional 
standards and benchmarks have been agreed in many areas, and these are treated likewise. Interpretation 
of them should draw on their original source documents, which are identified in footnotes and endnotes, as 
well as in the Sources chapter.
5.3 Institutional evidence
Institutional evidence is concerned with both:
 •the existence of constitutional or legal arrangements concerned with the category and indicator under 
consideration, and 
 •the performance of government agencies and other ‘competent authorities’ in implementing or enforcing 
them. ‘Competent authorities’ in this context refers to agencies other than governmental ones which play 
roles relevant to Internet governance and use.
It should be relatively straightforward to ascertain the existence of formal constitutional and legal 
arrangements, though it should be remembered that government structures vary considerably and that 
relevant arrangements may not always be found in the most obvious places. 
144
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsIt will be more difficult for researchers to assess the performance of institutional arrangements. As indicated 
in section 4.5, evidence concerning this will be derived from a variety of sources with varying degrees of 
authority, independence, comprehensiveness and credibility. The research team will need to assess this 
evidence base carefully, reflecting on differences of view between different credible sources, seeking 
to confirm evidence from multiple sources, and exploring issues in semi-structured interviews with key 
informants, who should include informants from the institutions concerned and from other stakeholders 
that interact with them. Researchers should be especially aware of the risk of their own confirmation bias 
when analysing performance of institutional arrangements. It is also important to assess whether cases that 
question the extent of implementation be assessed for their broader significance in order to avoid overstating 
the case as if it were inherently emblematic of a wider trend.
A number of indicators of this type refer specifically to reports by ‘credible authorities’. This reference is 
intended to suggest those who have expertise in the issue addressed by the Indicators concerned, have 
sufficient information to make reliable assessments, and do not have a particular vested interest to pursue. 
In this context, “authorities” designates expert sources rather than governmental actors as such.
It should be remembered, too, that the performance of institutional and legal arrangements varies over time, 
sometimes suddenly or rapidly. The relevance of recent changes in government, laws and regulations should 
also be borne in mind when assessing qualitative indicators, particularly where these are concerned with 
policy approaches and with the incidence and implementation of legal and other processes. Researchers 
should consider the trajectory of performance over time (i.e. whether the desired outcome is more or less 
observed), as well as the situation at the time of study. Any recommendation that arises should take account 
of the extent of changes in the gaps between institutional standards and actual implementation trends. 
5.4 Quantitative evidence
Quantitative data are sometimes falsely considered as more reliable or objective than other forms of evidence. 
In practice, statistics can be used in different ways to reach alternative conclusions. Researchers should 
subject them to the same scrutiny of relevance and reliability as every other form of evidence, including 
the four questions identified above in Section 5.1. The following paragraphs raise four additional issues that 
should be borne in mind by researchers.
 •The quality of quantitative data depends on the quality and reliability of data gathering. This varies 
considerably even with official statistics. Some apparently quantitative data (including some national data in 
some UN data sets) are estimates that draw on previous experience or on data from comparable countries. 
This is not always clear, although it may sometimes be discovered in endnotes. Household surveys vary 
greatly in quality because of differences in the size and representativeness of their samples, and the 
extent to which they follow established data gathering principles. Big data sets, including those used to 
assess developmental challenges, may be distorted by over-representation of particular groups (those with 
higher incomes and educational attainment levels, for example, who make more use of Internet, and the 
commonly urban, male population groups from which those groups are often disproportionately drawn).
 •The terminology used to describe measurable phenomena varies between countries and different data 
sets. The term ‘broadband’, for example, is used in some countries to describe much higher broadband 
connectivity than in others, while some data-sets still use the original ITU definition to identify any speed 
over 256kbps as broadband. Questions asked in household surveys, which may seem ostensibly the same, 
vary in substance and in detail from one place to another.
 •Data concerning ICTs and the Internet are likely to become out of date more quickly than those in other 
economic sectors because of the pace of change in Internet markets – both in the number of people 
making use of the Internet, and in the technologies and services in use. Quantitative data concerning 
access and usage of the Internet that are more than three years old, for example, are already likely to have 
limited value. Data used should be as close as possible to the date of the assessment. 
 •Few data in this context offer simple answers; most need some degree of contextual interpretation. The 
number of mobile broadband subscribers, for example, differs substantially in many countries from that for 10
145
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsmobile broadband subscriptions because many people subscribe to more than one network. The extent 
to which this happens varies between countries. The meaning of ‘active’ participation in multistakeholder 
participatory processes may likewise vary between contexts.
Where researchers have reservations about the quality or reliability of quantitative data, these should be 
clearly expressed in the final assessment report.
There is, finally, a risk in quantitative analysis that assessment of what is statistically measurable may lead 
to its being given undue weight at the expense of that which is less quantifiable. Judgement should be 
exercised by researchers to avoid and mitigate this risk.
5.5 Trends in quantitative data 
Where quantitative data sets are recurrent, they can provide evidence of trends which is particularly helpful 
in identifying where intervention may be most valuable and hence in guiding recommendations for policy 
and practice. Researchers should take advantage of the availability of recurrent data sets where they are 
available to add longitudinal perspective to their findings.
Although the indicator framework is intended to provide a snapshot of experience at the time of an assessment, 
data on experience in previous years should therefore be considered alongside the most recent data available, 
in order to assess the extent and pace of change. 
In some countries, it may be possible to undertake recurrent studies using the IUIs at regular intervals, 
perhaps every three or five years. This would add substantial additional value to the indicators by enabling 
observation of changes over time and assessment of the impact of changes in policy and practice that may 
have resulted from recommendations made in earlier IUI reports. The original findings and analysis may 
thereby serve as baselines against which changes can be measured.
5.6 Qualitative evidence
Research teams should approach qualitative indicators in the framework with the same degree of scientific 
rigour as they do quantitative indicators. Many of the points made above in connection with institutional 
indicators also apply to qualitative indicators. 
As with other types of evidence, the research team should consider carefully the quality and reliability of 
qualitative sources when analysing the assembled data. Three main types of qualitative sources are likely 
to be available.
The first of these consists of research studies made by diverse stakeholders – including government 
departments, academics, research centres, civil society organisations and the media – which often use 
qualitative rather than quantitative methodologies to build an evidence base for their own purposes. These 
might include, for example, focus group or interview studies in which groups or individuals, purposely chosen 
to be representative without, however, constituting a generalisable sample, have been used to probe if there 
are different perceptions on an issue. Findings from such groups are, of course, always merely indicative, 
and do not represent statistical samples of a population. 
Researchers should pay particular attention in these cases to the methodological robustness of the study 
and potential vested interests of those financing or undertaking the research.
The second type of qualitative sources consists of commentaries made by ‘credible authorities’ based not 
on specific research which they have undertaken but on their experience and understanding of the issue 
under Question. Some of this material will have been written with a distinct (for example commercial or 
ideological) perspective on a Theme or Question. Researchers should not discount this material but use it 
with due care and circumspection. They should, firstly, consider whether authors/publishers are ‘credible 
authorities’ as defined in Section 5.3 above. If there are significant differences of view within the evidence, they 
should consider possible reasons for this, and the implications of divergent viewpoints for understanding of 
the national Internet environment and for possible recommendations. A discussion of divergent viewpoints 
146
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorscan be reflected in the final report, thereby adding to the value of the completed output. Equally, where 
research teams have doubts about the quality or reliability of qualitative evidence, this should be clearly 
indicated in their reports.
The third type of qualitative evidence available to research teams will come from their own data gathering, in 
particular interviews with key informants and group discussions. These are most likely to be effective if they 
are semi-structured – based on an initial planned series of questions but flexible enough to allow exploration 
of other issues that might arise. Where possible, interviews and discussions should be recorded for later 
reference (though only with the consent of all participants). 
5.7 Assessment of findings
Researchers are encouraged to structure their data under each indicator in three parts: first, if applicable, 
any specific metadata about how they have interpreted the meaning of the Indicator; second, the data; and 
third, a short analysis of the significance of the data as analysed in the light of the question which frames 
the Indicator concerned. Together, the metadata (if applicable), the data and the analysis will constitute the 
findings of the assessment.
The assessment of findings (metadata where applicable, data plus analysis) should be the responsibility of 
the research team as a whole and should, ideally, be concluded with consensus amongst team members. 
Where it is not possible to reach consensus within the research team, differences should be transparently 
reflected in the final report (see next section). 
UNESCO suggests that assessment should proceed from the bottom up, beginning with consideration of 
findings on individual Indicators and Questions before these are drawn together for a written brief overall 
assessment for the particular Theme and, subsequently, for each of the five Categories. Only at the end of 
this process should the research team consider recommendations for individual Categories as well as any 
cross-cutting or overarching recommendations.
UNESCO suggests that those team members who have been involved in assessment of a Question or the 
Questions in a Theme or Category should first discuss their findings with one another. The lead researcher for 
that area of work should then draw up a short report on the quality of the findings which have emerged from 
that discussion. This draft should then be refined by those involved before being shared with the research 
team as a whole. Some of this information may feed into a methodology chapter of the final report.
Research teams may wish to revert to some key informants and others who have been consulted during 
the project to clarify some data points or to discuss their findings during this phase of work. It may, likewise, 
be worth consulting members of the Multistakeholder Advisory Group. This may be useful in clarifying 
findings and resolving differences within the team. Care should be taken, however, to ensure that this does 
not become a lobbying exercise on the part of those consulted and does not alter research findings which 
should remain the responsibility of those who have actually conducted the research.
5.8 Comparing questions and indicators
Some research teams may find it helpful to adopt a structured or standardised approach to the comparison 
of questions and indicators. One method is the adoption of comparable numerical (or ‘Likert’) scales for the 
assessment of all three types of indicator (institutional, quantitative, qualitative). In this approach, researchers 
allocate a numerical value – say, from one to five or one to ten – to their assessment of each of the questions 
in the framework, basing this on evidence provided by the relevant indicator or indicators. Another approach 
is a “traffic light” perspective which allocates green, orange and red colours to the assessment of how a 
country is performing in relation to a given indicator or question. 
These kinds of processes have advantages, but also risks: 
 •They can help to achieve comparability between questions/indicators which fall into the three types 
described earlier 10
147
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators •They can help to draw out differences of view within the research team (by concentrating discussion on 
points which are scored significantly differently by different team members). 
 •They can also help to identify priority areas for policy or practical intervention (by clarifying where the 
research team as a whole scores current findings relatively low). 
 •They can focus the mind of individual researchers on the relative importance of different indicators and 
the relative performance of Internet environments against them. 
On the risk side, UNESCO advises against a mechanistic adding-up of rankings to establish an average 
performance for a given Category. Researchers using this kind of method should thus avoid compounding 
different scores, as such reductionism would assume that each indicator is of equal value. It would certainly 
detract from considering performance of individual specific indicators that may be of greater value than 
others to the specific country concerned. 
With these caveats, some researchers for the Media Development Indicators and for pilot implementations 
of the IUIs have found the Likert scale useful to reach consensus on each individual indicator. Others have 
preferred less structured ways of reaching a consensus assessment. 
5.9 Using international indices
As discussed earlier, the IUIs framework is not intended to provide a basis for cross-country comparisons in 
the manner of indices like UNDP’s Human Development Index and the ITU’s ICT Development Index. The 
IUIs are, rather, intended to support understanding of distinct national Internet environments and the design 
of appropriate policy responses and practical initiatives to maximise the value of the Internet and minimise 
risks and problems associated with it at national level. The objective is to harness the implementation of the 
ROAM principles at the national level.
In some cases, however, there is value in reviewing an individual country’s experience within a peer group, 
whether those within its geographic region or those with comparable development experience or status. It 
is clear, for example, from ITU data that there is a broad association between levels of Internet access and of 
GNI per capita. Some countries’ access outcomes are better than might have been expected in comparison 
with other countries that have similar GNI per capita, while others underperform against these peers. 
It can therefore be helpful to consider performance levels on specific indicators with a country’s ranking on 
relevant international indices like GNI per capita, the ICT Development Index or the Gender Inequality Index, 
to judge whether a country is performing better or less well than might have been expected where certain 
IUI indicators are concerned given the country’s overall performance in the more general index. A good 
example here might be to compare a country’s gender digital divide with those of comparable countries in 
the Gender Inequality Index.
Action step 6: Report-writing and recommendations 
The final report of an assessment made using the IUIs will vary to some extent between countries according 
to national contexts and to the objectives established at project initiation. In most circumstances, the report 
should include both the findings of the national Internet environment and recommendations to government 
and other stakeholders. These twin elements add value to both national stakeholders and the wider 
international community concerned with Internet universality. The report should be suitable for publication 
and may be published by UNESCO after a quality-assurance review (as has been the case with most reports 
prepared using the Media Development Indicators).
UNESCO suggests that the overall framework for the report to be compiled following an IUI assessment 
should include the following sections:
a. A brief introduction to the IUIs (to familiarise readers who are not otherwise aware of them), which can 
draw on the IUI framework;  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
148
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsb. A summary of overall findings (for the framework as a whole rather than individual Categories):
• a short account of the study, including methodology and participation, which establishes its bona fides, 
including:
- a commentary on the approach taken to evidence gathering
- a note on any primary research that has been undertaken
• a summary of key findings per Category
• a commentary on the available evidence base, including:
- recommendations for improvements in data gathering and analysis
- a section concerning the priority and/or over-arching recommendations of the assessment
c. Individual chapters for each of the ROAM-X Categories, each including:
• a section on each Theme within the chapter
• a paragraph on each Question within the Theme, which will include Indicator metadata (where applicable), 
the data gathered and the analysis thereof per each indicator
• recommendations relating to the Category
d. A full compilation of recommendations that have been included in the earlier chapters, structured by 
targeted stakeholder groups (see section 6.2 below).
e. An appendix including detail on the research process, acknowledgements and sources.
Researchers may also find it useful to consult the reports that have been published following Media 
Development Indicators assessments and the initial pilot reports of IUIs conducted, which can be found on 
the UNESCO project website, when preparing their reports.
Reports that are intended for publication by UNESCO should be written in or translated into one of the six 
languages recognised at the United Nations.
6.1 Report preparation
Different research teams will take different approaches to the drafting and agreement of reports. The overall 
approach to report writing should be discussed and agreed during initial discussion of the work plan, though 
this may need to be adapted later in the project.
The findings and recommendations contained in the report should arise from the work done by the research 
team. The report should, wherever possible, be the consensus view of these team members. To achieve 
this, UNESCO recommends that drafts should be shared and discussed by the research team as a whole, 
during report preparation, in order to resolve differences of view before publication. While much of this can 
be done online, it may be useful to have a joint in-person review workshop for quality assessment of draft 
findings (see Section 5.7).
It is, however, better to reflect differences of view than to hide them in false consensus or fail to address 
them adequately, especially where these are significant and substantial. Where it is not possible to reach 
consensus within the research team, these differences should be reflected in the report. This applies to both 
analysis and recommendations.
As indicated earlier, research teams may wish to revert to some key informants to clarify some data points 
or to discuss their findings during this phase of work, without allowing this to become a lobbying exercise 
on the part of those consulted. Such consultation may include canvassing the most effective ways in which 
recommendations might be identified, phrased and subsequently implemented. 
If a Multistakeholder Advisory Board has been appointed as part of the research project, its members should 
also be consulted on the draft of the final report. Their views should not alter the research findings but may 10  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
149
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsbe useful in considering how recommendations might most effectively be expressed or implemented by 
the various stakeholders concerned following publication.
6.2 Drafting recommendations
The value of the IUIs framework lies in its ability to improve understanding of national Internet environments. 
Thereby, an assessment can facilitate more effective policy and practice which seek to maximise the 
value of the Internet for the Sustainable Development agenda and minimise risks and problems. Research 
findings should therefore lead to well-defined recommendations targeted at specific stakeholders. A finding 
or set thereof may inform a possible recommendation, although not every finding can or should imply a 
recommendation. Nevertheless, all recommendations should have a foundation in relation to specific findings. 
A strategic approach is needed in order to keep the list of recommendations at a reasonable length.
National Internet environments differ, and so do the remits associated with particular stakeholder groups 
such as duty-bearers, rights holders and their representatives, as well as other actors. Different Categories 
and Themes will require different responses resulting from these differences. Recommendations need to 
be directed towards those with relevant responsibilities which may include:
 •a variety of government departments and agencies;
 •businesses concerned with the supply of Internet connectivity and services;
 •associations of Internet professionals and Internet governance bodies active in the country (including, for 
example, those responsible for managing domains);
 •national statistical systems, research centres, academics and others undertaking or capable of undertaking 
relevant research now and in the future;
 •civil society organisations, including those concerned with rights, access, development, gender and the 
lives of children; 
 •other stakeholders at national level;
 •international development agencies that may be interested in funding Internet-related work within the 
country.
It is beyond the scope of this guide to discuss the kind of policy and practical recommendations that may arise. 
However, UNESCO suggests four points concerning the scope and presentation of these recommendations 
that should be borne in mind:
 •Recommendations should consider what a country’s stakeholders can do to advance Internet Universality 
overall as well as in terms of the specific individual Categories and Themes. In other words, there is a 
need to keep in mind the interdependencies in ROAM-X and ensure consistency and complementarity 
of recommendations.
 •Recommendations should relate future development of the Internet to other established national public 
policy goals, including national development strategies, open government, digital economy strategies, 
commitments to the Sustainable Development Goals, policies concerned with gender equality, etc.
 •Recommendations should recognise that the opportunities presented and challenges posed by the Internet 
are both short and long term, and bring both into consideration. This should inform the prioritization of 
issues selected for recommendations that have a significant chance of leading to meaningful impact on 
the national Internet experience.
 •Recommendations should likely include ways to improve the evidence base within the country concerned, 
drawing attention to areas of data deficiency and suggesting ways in which these might be addressed.
Finally, it may be useful for reports to suggest whether/when a second or subsequent implementation of the 
indicators might be undertaken. Where a comprehensive assessment has been made using the full indicator 
framework in the first instance, it may be appropriate to suggest that subsequent recurrent assessments 
focus on the core indicators..
150
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAction step 7: Organizing of national validation 
multistakeholder workshop and conducting related 
advocacy activities
At the end of national assessment process, a national validation workshop should be organized to discuss 
the assessment results and policy recommendations, involving multistakeholder participants, key policy 
makers, and major regulatory bodies involved in the research. The event will also discuss the possible actions 
for future implementations of policy options. 
Such a workshop would also provide an opportunity for the discussion of potential implementation processes 
that might follow from recommendations and might therefore involve a wider range of stakeholders and not 
only policymakers. It could also propose a timetable to review the extent of implementation and impact of 
recommendations.
UNESCO, the Multistakeholder Advisory Board as well as the research team should collaborate in organizing 
this event. UNESCO may also be able to support additional advocacy and awareness-raising activities around 
the national assessment.
Given that an assessment is a national knowledge-resource, it is important to involve the research and 
academic community for ongoing use of the study, such as in curricula within a range of relevant disciplines.. 
Action step 8: Impact assessment and monitoring 
After the completion of the national assessments and in due time, UNESCO, the Advisory Group and 
the research team may be able to support further follow-up actions (for example, technical advice) and 
mechanisms to monitor and assess the implementation progress and policy improvements. The scope 
here would be in terms of the recommendations, which – for this purpose as well as for practicality - need 
enough definition and specificity as to enable measurement of change at a later date. Impact monitoring 
and evaluation should ideally be done independently of the research team, in order to avoid any potential 
for self-interest to skew outcomes. If possible, this phase of an assessment should be included in the initial 
concept and budget. 
3. Looking to the future
The Internet is changing very fast. Twenty years ago, Internet access was limited and the range of services 
available was far narrower than it is today. Mobile Internet and broadband Internet were then in their infancy 
so far as the general public was concerned; there were no significant social media applications; and video 
streaming and cloud computing lay in the future. Today, the Internet is changing even more rapidly, alongside 
other changes in information technology, including the emergence of 5G connectivity, the Internet of Things, 
big data analysis, algorithmic decision-making, virtual reality, artificial intelligence and advanced robotics. 
Researchers should be aware of these rapid and unpredictable developments as they undertake assessments 
and make recommendations for future policy and practice. Four issues in particular are likely to be significant 
during the next five years:
 •Some questions that are included in the indicators will become less important and others more significant 
over time. The relative deployment of IPv4 and IPv6, for example, is likely to become less significant as 10
151
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Implementing UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsIPv6 becomes more universally deployed. The impacts of electronic commerce along with the relationship 
between big data and privacy are likely to become more significant. 
 •Some indicators will require revisions in value or definition. The meaning of ‘broadband’, for example, is 
changing with the level of bandwidth that is generally available. It is still defined in some data sets as any 
data transfer rate above 256kbps, though this would not be capable of delivering many of the services 
that are now standard online. Definitional revisions like this should be consistent with those evolved within 
the UN system.
 •It is to be desired that the range and quality of evidence, including quantitative evidence, will improve 
as policymakers and national statistical systems, among others, become more committed to gathering 
relevant data and making these public. New international indices are also likely to be prepared by various 
stakeholders, some of which may be appropriately included alongside those that are currently available.
 •Further new developments in technology and markets, which are now emerging or will emerge in future, 
will impact the ROAM principles and ROAM-X Categories. The present framework includes only a brief 
assessment of the policy framework concerning them. Relevant indicators are not available for these at 
present but are likely to become so. Researchers should also be prepared to supplement the existing 
framework with additional evidence sources as they become available. 
4. Engagement with UNESCO 
UNESCO aspires to review the indicator framework as a whole, in the light of experience and of changing 
circumstances, ahead of the biennial meeting of its IPDC Council in 2024. 
The views of those who have participated in implementations during the intervening period will be invaluable 
in that review. UNESCO therefore also invites research teams to submit feedback to UNESCO on their 
experience of implementing the indicators in their national contexts, which can help to improve the value of 
the indicators as a research tool for the future.
The online edition of this guide will be updated in the light of experience with implementation.
UNESCO stands ready to support the entire process ranging from establishing the Multistakeholder Advisory 
Group, to co-organizing events and monitoring the impact. Where suitable, UNESCO will publish the results 
of a national assessment as part of a dedicated UNESCO publication series. UNESCO will also establish a 
global online platform to assist the national assessment process and share national exercises in order to 
facilitate exchange of practices, advocacy activities and policy debates.
Those who are interested to conduct the national assessments of IUIs in their countries are encouraged to 
express their interest and contact UNESCO through different channels: 
 •UNESCO project coordination and contact: internet.indicators@unesco.org
 •UNESCO Project website: https:/ /en.unesco.org/internetuniversality
To keep updated on the future implementation process of Internet Universality Indicators, stakeholders can 
sign up to the Internet Universality community and receive periodic emails:  https:/ /en.unesco.org/feedback/
join-our-internet-universality-community
152
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 1. Members of the Multistakeholder Advisory BoardAnnex 1. Members of the Multistakeholder Advisory Board
UNESCO appointed a Multistakeholder Advisory Board, made up of fifteen international experts in different 
aspects of the Internet, from different regions and stakeholder communities, to advise on implementation 
of the project. Additional support and advice has been provided by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Advice 
was also sought and received from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Name Organization Stakeholder group Region
Alexandrine Pirlot de 
CorbionPrivacy International NGO International
Andrea CalderaroCentre for Internet and 
Global Politics (CIGP), 
Cardiff UniversityAcademia Europe
Demi GetschkoBrazilian Internet Steering 
Committee (CGI.br)Technical community 
and multi-stakeholder 
bodyLatin America and Carib -
bean
Elettra RonchiOrganisation for Econo -
mic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD)Intergovernmental International
Grace Githaiga KICTANet Multi-stakeholder body Africa
Jasmina ByrneUnited Nations Children's 
Fund (UNICEF)Intergovernmental International 
Jason PielemeierGlobal Network Initiative 
(GNI)NGO International 
Jeanette HofmannSocial Science Research 
Center Berlin (WZB) AcademiaWestern Europe and 
North America
Julia PohleSocial Science Research 
Center Berlin (WZB)AcademiaWestern Europe and 
North America
Manisha Pathak-Shelat MICA Academia Asia and the Pacific
Mishi ChoudharySoftware Freedom Law 
CentrePrivate Sector Asia and the Pacific
Nibal IdlebiUnited Nations Economic 
and Social Commission 
for West Asia (ESCWA)Intergovernmental International
Sonia LivingstoneLondon School Eco -
nomics and Political 
Science (LSE)Academia Europe
Stephen WyberInternational Federation 
of Library Associations 
and Institutions (IFLA)NGO International
Tarek Kamel ICANN NPO International
153
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 2. Physical Consultation EventsAnnex 2. Physical Consultation Events
As part of key methodology to develop the Internet Universality indicators, UNESCO has held a series of 
face-to-face discussions at international, regional, and national events.
These consultations were meant to publicize the project, gather prominent and leading regional experts, and 
engage with different stakeholders – from Member States, international organizations, technical community, 
private sector, civil society and NGOs, Internet and legal experts, political scientists, journalists and media 
experts to students and civil society groups. These activities had an important impact on the project, providing 
UNESCO with valuable suggestions from interested stakeholders, boosting the number of online submissions, 
building a sense of ownership of the project, and advocating UNESCO key values regarding human rights, 
openness, accessibility and multistakeholder participation.
During the first phase of the project (from March to November 2017), 26 consultation events were held in 
22 countries, including Argentina, Austria, Belgium, China, Colombia, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, 
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Portugal, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the 
United Arab Emirates, and Vietnam. 
During the second phase of the project (from December 2017 to May 2018), 15 consultation events (including 
four regional consultation fora) were held in 13 countries, including Brazil, Canada, Egypt, France, Ghana, 
Italy, Peru, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, UK, USA.
During the third phase of the project (from June to September 2018), five consultation events were held in 
five countries, including France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, USA.
We estimate that above 2000 experts across all stakeholders groups and regions were consulted during 
those three phases.
Phase 1 Consultation Events
Events Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on 
UNESCO’s website
RightsCon Conference 
2017 29-31 March 2017 Brussels, BelgiumUNESCO consults ex -
perts on Internet Uni -
versality Indicators at 
Brussels conference
GIG-Arts Paris 30-31 March 2017 Paris, FranceUNESCO consults Gig-
ARTS Conference on 
its new project Defining 
Internet Universality 
Indicators
Annual Conference of 
BILETA (British and Irish 
Law Education and Tech -
nology Association)10-11 April 2017 Braga, PortugalUNESCO advocates In -
ternet Universality indica -
tors and online freedoms 
at BILETA conference
World Press Freedom 
Day1-4 May 2017 Jakarta, IndonesiaUNESCO consults on 
developing Internet Uni -
versality Indicators during 
World Press Freedom 
Day
Stockholm Internet Fo -
rum 201722 May 2017 Stockholm, SwedenUNESCO consults on 
Internet Universality 
indicators
154
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 2. Physical Consultation EventsEvents Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on 
UNESCO’s website
Africa Internet Summit 30 May 2017 Nairobi, KenyaKenya: Internet Gover -
nance Forum Conference 
2017
European Dialogue on 
Internet Governance 
(EuroDIG)6-7 June 2017 Tallinn, EstoniaUNESCO holds a multis -
takeholder consultation 
on Internet Universality 
Indicators at EuroDIG 
conference
World News Media 
Congress7-9 June 2017 Durban, South AfricaUNESCO promotes 
source confidentiality 
study to editors
WSIS Forum 12-16 June 2017 Geneva, SwitzerlandUNESCO launches 
consultation website to 
define Internet Univer -
sality Indicators during 
WSIS Forum 2017
Global Media Forum  19-21 June 2017 Bonn, GermanyInternet Universality in -
dicators consulted at the 
Deutsche Welle Global 
Media Forum 2017
IAMCR 2017 16-20 July 2017 Cartagena, ColombiaUNESCO consults 
academics on Internet 
indicators
Asia Pacific IGF 26-29 July 2017 Bangkok, ThailandUNESCO Internet Uni -
versality Indicators 
consulted at the 8th Asia 
Pacific Regional Internet 
Governance Forum
IGF LAC 2-4 August 2017 Panama City, PanamaUNESCO finalizes a 
series of consultations on 
Internet Universality Indi -
cators in Latin America
APC member meeting 16-18 August 2017Johannesburg, South 
Africa 
Centro de Estudios en 
Libertad de Expresión y 
Acceso a la Información 
(CELE17)6-8 September 2017 Buenos Aires, ArgentinaUNESCO finalizes a 
series of consultations on 
Internet Universality Indi -
cators in Latin America
Forum on Internet Free -
dom in Africa (FIFAfrica)27-29 September 2017Johannesburg, South 
Africa 
IPDC Council informal 
meeting28 September 2017 Paris, FranceUNESCO Member States 
encouraged to parti -
cipate in the framing 
of Internet Universality 
indicators during IPDC 
meeting
155
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 2. Physical Consultation EventsEvents Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on 
UNESCO’s website
Global Privacy and Data 
protection conference28-29 September 2017 Hong Kong, ChinaUNESCO Internet Uni -
versality Indicators 
consulted at 39th In -
ternational Conference 
of Data Protection and 
Privacy Commissioners in 
Hong Kong
International Seminar on 
Freedom of Expression, 
Children’s Rights and 
Media2-4 October 2017 Lima, PeruUNESCO finalizes a 
series of consultations on 
Internet Universality Indi -
cators in Latin America
Internet Freedom confe -
rence13 October 2017 Vienna, AustriaUNESCO advocates 
Internet Universality 
and international human 
rights standards at the 
Internet Freedom Confe -
rence in Vienna
World Telecommunica -
tion Development Confe -
rence (WTDC-17)9-20 October 2017 Buenos Aires, ArgentinaUNESCO finalizes a 
series of consultations on 
Internet Universality Indi -
cators in Latin America
Moscow: European Jour -
nalism Training Associa -
tion18-20 October 2017 Moscow, RussiaRussian journalism com -
munity and academia 
engage in UNESCO’s 
project to develop Inter -
net Universality indica -
tors
Jordan Media Institute 24 October 2017 Amman, JordanInternet Universality 
Indicators consultations 
organized in Amman
Global Media and Infor -
mation Literacy week 25 October - 1 November 
2017Kingston, JamaicaSeventh Media and 
Information Literacy and 
Intercultural Dialogue 
(MILID) Conference
ICANN28 October - 3 November 
2017Abu Dhabi, UAEUNESCO consults on 
Internet indicators at 
ICANN60
Vietnam Internet Forum 27-28 November 2017 Hanoi, VietnamVietnam Internet Forum 
discusses Internet Uni -
versality indicators  
Use Internet Universality 
to assess cyberlaws
156
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 2. Physical Consultation EventsPhase 2 Consultation Events
Events Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on 
UNESCO’s website
North African and Afri -
can Internet Governance 
Forum28 November - 6 De -
cember 2017Sharm El Sheikh, EgyptUNESCO consults on its 
draft Internet Universality 
Indicators at the North 
African and African Inter -
net Governance Forum in 
Egypt
Global Voices summit 
20173 December 2017 Colombo, Sri LankaGlobal Voices summit 
2017 participants contri -
bute to UNESCO Internet 
Universality Indicators
IGF 2017 17-21 December 2017 Geneva, SwitzerlandUNESCO consults with 
participants of the Inter -
net Governance Forum 
2017 on the Internet Uni -
versality indicators
Global Network Initiative 
briefing9 February 2018 Paris HQ, FranceUNESCO briefs Global 
Network Initiative on 
Internet Indicators
2nd Global Conference of 
the Internet & Jurisdiction 
Policy Network26-28 February 2018 Ottawa, CanadaJurisdiction experts in -
vited to enrich UNESCO’s 
draft Internet indicators
Regional Consultation 
Forum in Latin America5 March 2018 São Paulo, BrazilUNESCO finalizes a 
series of consultations on 
Internet Universality Indi -
cators in Latin America
International Working 
Meeting on Governance 
Innovation for a Connec -
ted World8-9 March 2018 Stanford, CA, USA  
Regional Consultation 
Forum in the Arab states12-13 March 2018 Tunis, TunisiaLeading experts from 
Arab states stress the 
relevance of Internet 
Universality Indicators
WSIS Forum 2018 21 March 2018 Geneva, SwitzerlandUNESCO promotes Inter -
net Universality indica -
tors to advance SDGs at 
WSIS Forum 2018
International Journalism 
Festival14 April 2018 Perugia, ItalyJournalism community 
addresses Internet Uni -
versality Indicators at the 
International Journalism 
Festival
GIG-ARTS Conference 27 April 2018 Cardiff, United KingdomAcademic community 
welcomes UNESCO’s 
project to develop Inter -
net Universality Indica -
tors during GIG-ARTS 
conference
157
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 2. Physical Consultation EventsEvents Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on 
UNESCO’s website
World Press Freedom 
Day3 May 2018 Accra, GhanaWorld Press Freedom 
Day 2018
UNESCO design 
workshop on Internet 
Universality3-5 May 2018 Bangkok, ThailandInternet freedom beyond 
words: artists and crea -
tors capture Internet Uni -
versality and its ROAM 
principles
Orbicom International 
Symposium8-9 May 2018 Lima, PeruCities can align to SDG 
16.10 and Internet Univer -
sality to develop sustai -
nably
RightsCon Toronto 16-18 May 2018 Toronto, CanadaUNESCO consults 
RightsCon stakeholders 
about implementing 
Internet Universality 
Indicators
Phase 3 Consultation Events
Events Dates LocationsNews releases publi -
shed on UNESCO’s 
website
EuroDIG 2018 4 June 2018 Tbilisi, GeorgiaUNESCO presents 
second draft of Internet 
Universality Indicators at 
EuroDIG 2018
Global Media Forum 11-13 June 2018 Bonn, GermanyUNESCO presents Inter -
net Universality Indi -
cators at Global Media 
Forum
IAMCR 2018 21 June 2018 Eugene, OR, USAUNESCO’s Internet 
indicators should assess 
practical realities – aca -
demics
Forum sur la gouver -
nance de l’Internet5 July 2018 Paris, FranceUNESCO promotes 
an Open and Inclusive 
Internet at the Internet 
Governance Forum of 
France
Forum on Internet Free -
dom in Africa 201828 September 2018 Accra, GhanaUNESCO advocated 
Access to Information 
and Internet Universality 
Indicators at FIFAfrica 
2018
158
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators 
Annex 2. Physical Consultation EventsPHASE 1
List of cities, countries: Brussels, Belgium; Paris, France; 
Braga, Portugal; Jakarta, Indonesia; Stockholm, Sweden; 
Nairobi, Kenya; Tallinn, Estonia; Durban, South Africa; 
Geneva, Switzerland; Bonn, Germany; Cartagena, 
Colombia; Bangkok, Thailand; Panama City, Panama; 
Johannesburg, South Africa; Buenos Aires, Argentina; 
Hong Kong, China; Lima, Peru; Vienna, Austria; Moscow, 
Russia; Kingston, Jamaica; Abu Dhabi, UAE; Hanoi, 
Vietnam.
PHASE 2
List of cities, countries: Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt; Colombo, 
Sri Lanka; Geneva, Switzerland; Paris, France; Ottawa, 
Canada; São Paulo, Brazil; Stanford, CA, USA; Tunis, 
Tunisia; Perugia, Italy; Cardiff, United Kingdom; Accra, 
Ghana; Bangkok, Thailand; Toronto, Canada.
PHASE 3
List of cities, countries: Tbilisi, Georgia; Bonn, Germany; 
Eugene, OR, USA; Paris, France; Brussels, Belgium.
PRE-TESTS AND PILOTS
Feasibility assessments were undertaken in May 2018 in 
Brazil, Ecuador, Nigeria, and Pakistan.  
Part-pilots were undertaken between July and September 
2018 in Brazil, Senegal, and Thailand.A MAP OF THE PHYSICAL 
CONSULTATION  
PHASES 1, 2, 3
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
160UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators16157  
Government48  
Civil society
37  
Academic15  
Individual 
capacity14 
Internet 
technical 
and 
professional 
community
11 
Private sector7
Journalism/
media
5 
Intergovernmental 
organisation5 
Other public 
sectorSTAKEHOLDER 
DISTRIBUTION OF PHASE 1 
SUBMISSIONS
The first phase of consultation was concerned with the broad themes of Internet Universality and the ways in 
which they might be encapsulated in an indicator framework. An online consultation platform, in the six official 
UN languages, was launched at the WSIS Forum on 14 June 2017 and remained open until 31 October 2017. This 
attracted 198 contributions. This first phase of work enabled the preparation of a draft indicator framework and set of 
indicators which were set out in the document Defining Internet Universality Indicators, published online and offline 
in December 2017.
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators
162Annex 3. Online Consultation Submitters
The Internet Universality Indicators have been developed through two phases of consultation.
The first phase of consultation was concerned with the broad themes of Internet Universality and the ways 
in which they might be encapsulated in an indicator framework. An online consultation platform, in the six 
official UN languages, was launched at the WSIS Forum on 14 June 2017 and remained open until 31 October 
2017. This attracted 198 contributions. This first phase of work enabled the preparation of a draft indicator 
framework and set of indicators which were set out in the document Defining Internet Universality Indicators , 
published online and offline in December 2017.
A second consultation process was held from 1 December 2017 to 15 March 2018, enabling all stakeholders 
to respond to this framework and draft indicators. As in the first phase, this second phase included an online 
consultation in six languages, which received 138 contributions, as well as an interactive platform which 
received 136 comments.
All submissions can be found online at the following address: http:/ /en.unesco.org/internetuniversality  
Submissions received during the phase 1 online consultation, June to October 2017
Governments
Albania IGF / Albania Government Albania
Bulgarian Ministry of Transport, IT & Communications Bulgaria
Commission nationale burkinabé pour l'UNESCO Burkina Faso
Danish Delegation to UNESCO Denmark
Fundación Museos de la Ciudad - Municipio de Quito Ecuador
German Commission for UNESCO Germany
Information Commissioner's Office UK United Kingdom
Instituto Dominicano de las Telecomunicaciones República Dominicana
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía México
Kenya National Commission for UNESCO Kenya
Ministerio de Educación de la República Dominicana (MINERD) República Dominicana
Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia Guinea Ecuatorial
Ministerio de las Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones de 
ColombiaColombia
Ministerio del Poder Popular para la Educación Universitaria, Ciencia y  
TecnologíaVenezuela
163
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersMinistry of Communications and Technology Syria
Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics Qatar
Ministry of Education and Research Sweden
Ministry of Education and Science Bulgaria
Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation Russia
Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Innovation Barbados
Ministry of Foreign Affairs - The Republic of Bulgaria Bulgaria
Ministry of Information Technology and Communications Republic of Rwanda
Ministry of Interior Somalia
Ministry of Transport Austria
Ministry of Transport, IT & Communications Bulgaria
ONTSI (Red.es - Ministerio de Energía, Turismo y Agenda Digital de España) Spain
Vanuatu Police Force Vanuatu
Other public sector
Mansur D. Liman Federal Radio Corporation Of Nigeria Nigeria
  Instituto Federal de Telecomunicaciones México
  Consejo para la Transparencia Chile
Hannah McCausland Information Commissioner's Office United Kingdom
Intergovernmental
Alejandro Patiño CEPAL Chile
Ashwini Sathnur United Nations Development Programme India
Madeline Salva World Health Organisation (WHO) South Pacific
Tatiana MurovanaUNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Edu -
cation Russia
The Freedom Online Coalition (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Canada, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, the Maldives, 
Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Spain, Sweden, Tunisia, the 
United Kingdom, the United States of America).
164
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersInternet technical and professional community
Abdourahamane Ali SoumanaAssociation Nigérienne pour 
l'Emergence des TICNiger
Constance Bommelaer de Leusse and Nicolas 
SeidlerInternet Society Switzerland
Daniel Chong   Malaysia
Gabriela Ramirez   Argentina
Gideon DotConnectAfrica Kenya
Gorla Praveen Swecha India
Malisa Richards Internet Society Guyana Chapter Guyana
Moisés Roberto Escobar Independent consultant El Salvador
Omar Zaccardi FULL SYSTEM Argentina
Solana Larsen Mozilla Foundation Germany
Tao JinWomen and Children’s Hospital 
of Hubei ProvinceChina
Tom eQualit.ie Australia
Tatiana Jereissati NIC.br/Cetic.br Brazil
Tom Mackenzie ITEMS International France
Private sector
Alexandrs Saulevics Latvijas Vega Latvia
Azam Shiri Yeganeh   Iran
Benjamin Uwaigbe VOGUISH Wifi Nigeria
Dimitri Martinis MCM DIGITAL MEDIA Greece
Hichem Rezgui E-Energy Magazine Algeria
Jimson Olufuye Africa ICT Alliance - AfICTA Africa
John AcireNile Institute of Information and 
Communication Technology LtdUganda
165
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersLorena Villada Mastterss G&R Colombia
Ruben Caicedo Ninguna Colombia
Sam BahourApplied Information Manage -
ment (AIM)Palestine
Said Abdullah Ali Al Ajmi Oman Telecommunications Co. Oman
Civil society
Abdelkerim Ousman ToudjaniAction Citoyenne pour l'Informa -
tion et l'Education au  
Développement Durable - 
ACIEDDTchad
Abdenour Toubrinet Algerian Muslim Scouts Algeria
Adjidjatou Barry Baud ACSIS Switzerland
Baudouin Schombe Centre Africain d'Echange Cultu -
relRépublique Démocratique du 
Congo
Carlos Germán Guerrero Argote Hiperderecho Perú
Clement ChigboAnambra state Rural water supply 
and Sanitation agencyNigeria
Denitsa Kozhuharova Law and Internet Foundation Bulgaria
Esmeralda MoscatelliInternational Federation of Library 
Associations and InstitutionsNetherlands
Federico GiordanoCentro de Estudios para la Go -
bernanza (CEG)Argentina
Idowu Adewale Media Rights Agenda Nigeria
Jeremy Malcolm Electronic Frontier Foundation United States of America
José Eduardo Rojas Fundación REDES Bolivia
Julián Casasbuenas G. Colnodo Colombia
Mahendranath BusgopaulMauritius Internet Governance 
Forum & Halley MovementMauritius
Maheeshwara Kirindigoda ISOC Sri Lanka Sri Lanka
Marcos UrupáIntervozes - Collective Brazil of 
Social CommunicationBrazil
María Florencia Roveri Nodo TAU Argentina
Maria Paz Canales Derechos Digitales Chile
166
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersMarie Jeanne Abega Ndjié Apeda-c Cameroun
Mariengracia Chirinos and Scarlet 
ClementeIPYS Venezuela Venezuela
Marwan Abdallah AmishSirte homeland for stability and 
social peaceLibya
Maryant Fernández Pérez European Digital Rights (EDRi) European Union
Matilde Carlota Campusmana 
DíazROTARY Peru
Mei Lin Fung People Centered Internet United States of America
Minna Kylmalahti Save the Children Finland
MohamadJanzour Association for Voluntee -
rism and DevelopmentLibya
Mohammed Saeed AfICTA Egypt
Avis Momeni Protege QV Cameroun
Muhammad ShabbirInternet Society, Islamabad Pakis -
tan ChapterPakistan
Nadim Nashif7amleh - The Arab Center for the 
Advancement of Social MediaIsrael / Palestine
Nasser Yousfi   Algeria
Nighat Dad Digital Rights Foundation Pakistan
Njoya DaoudaCentre d'entraînement aux 
méthodes d'éducation active du 
Cameroun (CEMEA-C)Cameroun
Omar Lozano V. Responde Diversidad Ac. México
Peter Micek Access Now United States of America
Poncelet IlelejiThe Gambia YMCAs Computer 
Training Centre and Digital StudioThe Gambia
Raymond MatlalaSouth African Youth for Internatio -
nal DiplomacySouth Africa
Reynaldo Alonso Unión de Informáticos de Cuba Cuba
Richard HillAssociation for Proper Internet 
GovernanceSwitzlerand
Roman Chukov Center for International Promotion Russia
Sandra ChaherAsociación Civil Comunicación 
para la IgualdadArgentina
Sheetal Kumar Global Partners Digital United Kingdom
167
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersShu LuoBeijing Municipal UNESCO Clubs 
AssociationChina
Sylvie Siyam Protege QV Cameroun
Uirá PorãInstituto Brazileiro de Politicas 
DigitaisBrazil
Vladimir ChornyRed en defensa de los derechos 
digitales (R3D)México
Zainab Neekzad AkbariEquality For Peace And Democra -
cy (EPD)Afghanistan
Academia
Adrian SchofieldJoburg Centre for Software En -
gineering (JCSE)South Africa
Ali Al. Shuaili Sultan Qaboos University Oman
Angela JaquezUniversidad Autónoma de San -
to Domingo, Recinto Santiago. 
(UASD)República Dominicana
Anna Maria Sganga ForeroIIS Campus Leonardo da Vinci 
UmbertideItaly
Bachir Shahi An-Najah National University Palestine
Ben Akoh University of Manitoba Canada
Carissa VélizUehiro Centre For Practical Ethics, 
University of OxfordUnited Kingdom
Chris ZielinskiPartnerships In Health Informa -
tion Programme, University of 
WinchesterUnited Kingdom
Claudia Padovani University of Padova Italy
Cláudio Lucena Paraíba State University Brazil
Cristóbal Suárez Guerrero Universidad de Valencia Spain
David A. BrayHarvard Visiting Executive In-Re -
sidenceUnited States of America
Ekaterina Sorokova MGIMO University Russia
Elagina Maria Higher School of Economics Russia
Emmanuel Angoda Lira Town College Uganda
Friedrich KrotzCenter For Media, Communicatin 
And Internet Research (Zemki), 
University of BremenGermany
168
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersGuadalupe VadilloUniversidad Nacional Autónom 
de MéxicoMéxico
Hamad Mohamad Salem Al-Azri Sultan Qaboos University Oman 
Ismael Peña-López Universitat Oberta de Catalunya Spain
John Samuel Not provided
Jose Luis MendozaCentro Latinoamericano de Inves -
tigaciones Sobre InternetVenezuela
Jose Manuel Gomez Fundacion Metropolitana Ecuador
Dmitry Kochegurov Inion Ran Russia
Lucas Costa dos AnjosInstituto de Referência em Inter -
net e SociedadeBrazil
Luz Silvia Roman CuetoI.E. Cap Fap Jose Quiñones Lima 
PeruPeru
Miguel FadulSociedad de Profesionales de las 
Telecomunicaciones de la Repu -
blica DominicanaRepública Dominicana
Muratova Nozim National University of Uzbekistan Uzbekistan
Nasser Hamdan al Riyami Sultan Qaboos University Oman
Oba Abdulkadir LA'ARO University of Ilorin Nigeria
Olufemi Samson AdetunjiFederal University of Technology, 
AkureNigeria
Osvaldo I. Larancuent CuetoInstituto Tecnológico de Santo 
Domingo (INTEC)República Dominicana
Paola BarrónUniversidad Nacional Autónom 
de MéxicoMéxico
Paulo Roberto de Lima LopesTelemedecine Academic 
Network - RUTE/RNPBrazil
Rashid bin Hamad bin Humaid Al 
BalushiSultan Qaboos University Oman
Renato Verceis Mader ESPM Brazil
Rosa M. Mariño Mesías Universidad de Andorra Andorra
Ruben Aroca JácomeUniversidad Católica de Santiago 
de GuayaquilEcuador
Journalism/media
al Abdul Samed Haider Aljabri Iraq
Frederico Links ACTION Coalition Namibia
169
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   Annex 3. Online Consultation Submitters  Annex 3. Online Consultation Submitters
Farhad Ibragimov Article Information Agency Russia
Kassem Khashan al RikabiArab Editors Network / Shomoos 
Media Foundation / National  
Center for JournalismIraq
Nashilongo Gervasius Internet Society Namibia Chapter Namibia
Shreedeep Rayamajhi RayZnews Nepal
Sivuyile Sviggy Sesi Internative Digital South Africa
Individual capacity
Aleksandr S. LATVIJAS VEGA Latvia
Amali De Silva-Mitchell   Sri Lanka
Courtney Radsch  United States of America
Eang Seanghong RULE Cambodia
Emilia CorreaProyecto riquezas en  
latinoamericaArgentina
Erika   Argentina
Gorla Praveen Swecha India
Günther Cyranek Independent Consultant Germany
Ich   China
Lokesh Gujjarappa   India
Luel Ras Mesfin Haile Selassie IKingdom of Debre Zeit, New Debt 
Free Sovereign Land-locked Na -
tion StateJamaica
Prinzessin Regine "Pegi" Hohen -
zollerUnited States of America 
Teresa Lopez Ideales soluciones sociales República Dominicana
Silvia Marcela Blasco Argentina
Zakir Bin Rehman Pakistan
170
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  53   
Government29  
Civil society
21 
Academic10  
Intergovernmental 
organisation
10 
Individual capacity
6 
Internet 
technical and 
professional 
community6 
Private sector
3 Journalism/mediaSTAKEHOLDER 
DISTRIBUTION OF PHASE 2 
SUBMISSIONS
A second consultation process was held from 1 December 2017 to 15 March 2018, enabling all stakeholders 
to respond to this framework and draft indicators. As in the first phase, this second phase included an online 
consultation in six languages, which received 138 contributions, as well as an interactive platform which received 136 
comments.
171
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsSubmissions received during the phase 2 online consultation, December 2017 to March 2018
Governments
Agence Nationale de Certification Electronique Tunisia
Agence Nationale de la Sécurité Informatique Tunisia
Bahrain National Commission For Education, Science and Culture Bahrain
Comisión Nacional De Telecomunicaciones (CONATEL) Honduras
Conseil National des Télécommunications Haiti
Délégation permanente de la France auprès de l'UNESCO France
Global Affairs Canada Canada
Information Technology Authority  Oman
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of China China
Lao National Internet Center Laos
Latvian National Commission for UNESCO Latvia
Mauritius National Commission for UNESCO Mauritius
Ministère des Postes et Télécommunications Cameroun
Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnologia y Telecomunicaciones Costa Rica
Ministerio de Energía, Turismo y Agenda Digital de España, ONTSI, Red.es Spain
Ministerio de las Tecnologías de Información y las Comunicaciones Colombia
Ministry of Communication Technologies and Digital Economy Tunisia
Ministry of Communications and Information Singapore
Ministry of Education Trinidad and Tobago
Ministry of Education and Higher Education Qatar
Ministry of Education and Research Sweden
Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Latvia Latvia
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology Tanzania
Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Innovation Barbados
172
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  
  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersMinistry of Finance, Information Systems Directorate Bulgaria
Ministry of Public Administration and Communications Trinidad and Tobago
Ministry of Transport, IT & Communications Bulgaria
National Broadcasting Council of Poland Poland
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti India
Oman National Commission for UNESCO Oman
Pakistan National Commission for UNESCO Pakistan
Palestinian Legislative Council Palestine
Permanent Delegation of Finland to UNESCO Finland
Permanent Delegation of Mexico to UNESCO Mexico
Permanent Delegation of Romania to UNESCO Romania
Permanent Delegation of the Kingdom of Denmark to UNESCO Denmark
Permanent Delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to UNESCO Saudi Arabia
Permanent Delegation of Turkey to UNESCO Turkey
Portal Brasileiro de Dados Abertos Brazil
Presidencia de El Salvador El Salvador
Sri Lanka National Commission for UNESCO Sri Lanka
Swedish National Commission for UNESCO Sweden
The Public Library Saudi Arabia
United States Marine Corps United States of Americ
Intergovernmental
Abbas Üzülmez UNESCO International
Alexandru Frunza-Nicolescu Cybercrime Division, Information Society 
and Action against Crime Directorate, 
Council of EuropeEurope
Dina Youssef Salib Bibliotheca Alexandrina Egypt
Ito Misako UNESCO International
Jasmina Byrne UNICEF International
173
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   
   Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersMirna Barbar ESCWA Lebanon
Omar Salim Al-Shanfari Oman Representitive at IFAP Council 
(UNESCO)Oman
Council of Europe, Data Protection Unit Europe
Council of Europe, Media and Internet 
Division, Data Protection UnitEurope
The Freedom Online Coalition’s group of the Friends of the Chair (Canada, Costa Rica, Estonia, Finland, 
Germany, Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, the United States of America).
Internet technical and professional community
Ahmad Bahlak Engineering Student Lebanon
Camila Trentadue Network Information Center (NIC) Argentina
Eric Mousset Asian Development Bank  Cambodia
Hafedh Gh. Yahmadi Arab IGF - MAG member Tunisia
John Mangar ReechditYouth IGF South Sudan, Youth IGF  
AmbassadorSouth Sudan
Tom McKenzie ITEMS International France
Private sector
Alicia PazBuro Internacional de Tecnologias  
Honduras BIT-HNHonduras
Andrew O'Connor A penny for water United Kingdom
Lauren Dawes GSMA United Kingdom
Leonardo Saboia Goes de Azevedo Gestão Transversal Brazil
Ma Dawei Kongxi Cuba
Mohamed Timoulali GTOPIC Morocco
Civil society
Babatunde Okunoye Paradigm Initiative Nigeria
Brenda Itzel Palacios Los niños no se divorcian México
Claire Milne Antelope Consulting United Kingdom
Deborah BrownAssociation for Progressive  
Communications (APC)United States of America
174
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersElena Sherstobojeva Media Lawyer Russia
Erika SmithAssociation for Progressive 
Communications Women’s Rights 
Programme(APCWRP)Mexico
Gayatri KhandhadaiAssociation for Progressive Com -
munications Communications and 
Information Policy Programme 
(APCCIPP)India
Gustavo Gómez OBSERVACOM Uruguay
Jason Pielemeier Global Network Initiative United States of America
Jeremy Malcolm Electronic Frontier Foundation United States of America
Jessica Dheere Social Media Exchange Lebanon
Jorge Vargas Wikimedia Foundation United States of America
Liz WooleryCenter for Democracy and  
TechnologyUnited States of America
Loujain Alhathloul Human Rights activist Saudi Arabia
Marcos UrupáInervozes - Coletivo Brasil de  
Comunicação SocialBrazil
Martha GiraldoAsociacion Colombiana de Inge -
nieros de Sistemas.Colombia
Maryant Fernandez Perez European Digital Rights (EDRi) European Union
Mike JensenAssociation for Progressive  
Communications (APC)South Africa
Miriam Cristina Rojas Fundacion REDES Bolivia
Roger Roberts TITAN Belgium
Sheetal Kumar Global Partners Digital United Kingdom
Stephen WyberInternational Federation of Library  
Associations and InstitutionsNetherlands
Sunny KangElectronic Privacy Information 
CenterUnited States of America
Valeria BetancourtAssociation for Progressive  
Communications (APCCIPP)Ecuador
Vladimir Cortés Roshdestvensky Artículo 19 Mexico
175
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersZothan Mawii Digital Empowerment Foundation India
netCommons Europe
Academia
Bouziane Zaid American University of Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Chris Zielinski University of Winchester United Kingdom
Dag Pinar Kadir Has Üniversitesi Turkey
Dan Svantesson Bond University Australia
Dennis RedekerUniversity of Bremen / Island Ark 
ProjectGermany
Eileen DonahoeStanford Global Digital Policy Incuba -
torUnited States of America
Elena Vartanova Moscow State University Russia
Fred Mudhai Coventry University United Kingdom
Ivan Szekely Central European University Hungary
Joe CannataciSpecial Rapporteur on the right to 
privacy, University of GroningenNetherlands
Jorge BalladaresPontificia Universidad Católica del 
EcuadorEcuador
Maria Michalis University of Westminster United Kingdom
Marlyn Tadros Virtual Activism United States of America
Mauro Santaniello University of Salerno Italy
Nermine Mahmoud-Rifaat Abdel Aziz American University in Cairo Egypt
Patricia Morales Universidad de Lovaina Belgium
Pierre Gedeon Lebanese Canadian University Lebanon
Rolf H. Weber University of Zurich Switzerland
Rory McGreal Athabasca University Canada
Sana el Harbi Jeddah University Tunisia
Department of Journalism and Trans -
lation, University of TuranKazakhstan
176
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators  Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersJournalism/media
Iyad Alrifai Campaign Center - Sada Social Center Palestine
Nadezhda Azhgihina European Federation of Journalists Russia
Radhakrishnan Sivaraman Niche Media Consultants India
Individual capacity
Elke Thompson National Library of New Zealand New Zealand
Emilia CorreaConsejo de mujer de la provincia 
de Santiago del EsteroArgentina
Günther Cyranek Consultant Germany
Jeremy MillardSpecialist in the technology and 
communications sectorsUnited Kingdom
Laszlo Drotos National Széchényi Library Hungary
Paul West National Open Learning System South Africa
Radhakrishnan Sivaraman MD Niche Media Consultants India
Revi Pillai United Kingdom
Rigobert Kenmogne  France
Stephen Stillwell United States of America
177
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   Annex 3. Online Consultation SubmittersAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality Indicators
This annex identifies a subset of indicators taken from the complete set in Chapters 4 to 8 of the Internet 
Universality Indicators. This subset of indicators identifies core indicators which can be used to undertake less 
comprehensive assessments of Internet Universality where resources are insufficient for a full assessment. 
Where the phrase ‘aggregate and disaggregated’ appears in these indicators, disaggregation should pay 
particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
Category R • Rights
RA.1 Is there a legal framework for the enjoyment and enforcement of human 
rights which is consistent with international and regional rights agreements, 
laws and standards, and with the rule of law?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a constitutional or legal framework, including oversight arrangements, which is consistent 
with international and regional rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that it is respected 
and enforced by government and other competent authorities
RA.2 Is there a legal framework which recognises that the same rights that people 
have offline must also be protected online?
Indicator: 
 ▶Evidence that the principle of online/offline equivalence is accepted and implemented in law and practice
RB.2 Are any restrictions on freedom of expression narrowly defined, transparent 
and implemented in accordance with international rights agreements, laws 
and standards?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal restrictions on freedom of expression that are consistent with international and regional rights 
agreements, laws and standards, and evidence that these are respected by government and other 
competent authorities
RB.4 Under what conditions does the law hold platforms and other online service 
providers liable for content published or shared by users on them?
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework for intermediary liability and content regulation is consistent with international and regional 
rights agreements, laws and standards, and evidence concerning proportionality of implementation
178
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsRC.2 Does the government block or filter access to the Internet as a whole or to 
specific online services, applications or websites, and on what grounds and 
with what degree of transparency is this exercised?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework for blocking or filtering Internet access, including transparency and oversight arrangements
 ▶Evidence in government and court decisions, and from other credible and authoritative sources, concerning 
blocking or filtering of access
 ▶Incidence, nature and basis for shutdowns or other restrictions on Internet connectivity
 ▶Numbers and trend of content access restrictions, takedowns of domain names and other interventions 
during the past three years
RC.4 Are individuals, journalists or other online/media actors subject to arbitrary 
detention, prosecution or intimidation for accessing information online?
Indicators: 
 ▶Scope and nature of legal provisions and practice
 ▶Numbers of arbitrary detentions and prosecutions for access to content that is not illegitimate in terms of 
international agreements as to the circumstances and criteria for permissible restrictions.
RD.2 Can non-governmental organisations organise freely online?
Indicator: 
 ▶Evidence of online organisation, and absence of undue interference with such organisation
RD.3 Are there government policies for e-government and/or e-participation that 
encourage participation in government and public processes?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of government policies for e-government and e-participation, including use of the Internet for 
public consultation
 ▶Values/rankings in UNDESA’s e-participation index
RE.2 Is the protection of personal data guaranteed in law and enforced in practice, 
with respect to governments, businesses and other organisations, including 
rights of access to information held and to redress?
Indicators: 
 ▶Legal framework for data protection, including monitoring mechanisms and means of redress, and evidence 
that it is respected and enforced by government and other competent authorities
 ▶Legal framework concerning the commercial use of personal data and international data transfer/security, 
including monitoring mechanisms and means of redress
 ▶Existence and powers of an independent data protection authority or similar entity
179
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsRE.3 Are the powers of law enforcement and other agencies for the lawful 
interception of user data necessary, proportionate and limited to 
circumstances which are consistent with international and regional rights 
agreements, laws and standards? 341
Indicator: 
 ▶Legal framework for the lawful interception of data, including independent oversight and transparency, 
and evidence concerning implementation by government and other competent authorities
RF.1 Do government policies incorporate the Internet in strategies concerned with 
employment, health and education,3 with particular reference to ICESCR 
rights?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence of inclusion of a) the Internet, and b) respect for ICESCR rights, in sector strategies for employment, 
health and education
 ▶Evidence of analysis by government of the impact of Internet on employment, health and education
RF.2 Are all citizens and other individuals equally able to take advantage of the 
Internet to participate in cultural activity?
Indicators: 
 ▶Extent and nature of differences in Internet access and use between different communities/ethnicities
 ▶Existence of government policy concerning cultural heritage online
 ▶Constitutional or legal guarantee of freedom of artistic expression.
Category O • Openness
OA.2 Does the legal and regulatory framework for business, academia and civil 
society facilitate innovation on the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Evidence concerning the conduciveness of the legal and regulatory framework towards the establishment 
of new business ventures and innovation by academia and civil society
 ▶Perceptions of experience of the regulatory environment for business and ICTs by businesses, including 
Internet-enabled business
3  These have been selected as representative groups of ESC rights.
180
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsOB.3 Does the government promote the diversity of intellectual property licensing 
options including free and open-source software (FOSS)?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy towards FOSS and other licensing options
 ▶Extent to which software with diverse licensing options are used in government departments
OB.4 Does the government promote and adopt standards to facilitate accessibility 
to the Internet and e-government services for persons with disabilities?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy and practice towards ensuring accessibility for persons with disabilities
 ▶Perceptions of persons with disabilities concerning accessibility policy and practice
OC.1 Is there independent regulation of communications markets, undertaken in 
accordance with international norms and standards?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of an independent regulatory authority.ies 
 ▶Evidence concerning regulatory performance, including perceptions of the quality of regulation by 
communications businesses, consumer associations and other organisations
OC.4 Is there sufficiently effective competition in communications access networks 
to protect consumer interests?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of fixed and mobile broadband providers
 ▶Market shares of fixed and mobile broadband providers 
OD.4 Does the government encourage the use of open educational resources (OER) 
and facilitate open access to academic and scientific resources?
Indicators: 
 ▶Educational policy framework concerning OER
 ▶Arrangements for access to academic and scientific resources by higher education institutions and students
OD.5 Does the government require ISPs to manage network traffic in a way that is 
transparent, impartial and neutral, without discriminating against particular 
types of content or content from particular sources?
Indicator: 
 ▶Regulatory arrangements and practice concerning net neutrality and competition for online and network 
services
181
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsOE.1 Has legislation been enacted which requires open access to public and 
publicly-funded data, with appropriate privacy protections, and is that 
legislation implemented?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a legal framework for access to open data which is consistent with international norms342 and 
privacy requirements
 ▶Evidence concerning the extent to which open data resources are available and used online
OE.2 Do government departments and local government agencies have websites 
which are available in all official languages and through all major browsers?
Indicators: 
 ▶Government policy to ensure provision of websites with appropriate language and browser access, and 
evidence concerning effective implementation
 ▶Proportion of government services with websites (value/ranking in UNDESA online services index)
Category A • Accessibility to All
AA.1 Is statistical information concerning access and use of Internet regularly 
gathered by national statistical systems and/or other competent authorities, 
on a systematic basis?
Indicators: 
 ▶Arrangements for gathering aggregate and disaggregated statistical information, from diverse sources, 
including the inclusion of relevant questions in household surveys 
 ▶Availability of independent household surveys and other evidence concerning aggregate Internet access 
and use
AA.4 Does the government have a policy and programme to implement universal 
access to reliable, affordable broadband, and is this effectively implemented?
Indicators: 
 ▶Adoption of a universal access strategy and evidence of effective deployment of UA resources
 ▶Statistical evidence of progress towards universal access, aggregate and disaggregated4
4  With particular reference e.g. to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability
182
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsAB.1 What proportion of the population uses the Internet, with what frequency, and 
is this proportion growing?5
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of individuals who have ever accessed the Internet, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of households with Internet access343 
 ▶Number of Internet users per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated, by frequency of use344
 ▶Number of social media (social networks, microblogs, messaging, user-generated video streaming)6 users 
per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Number of visits to social media websites (defined as above) per hundred population
AB.3 What proportion of the population subscribes to communications/broadband 
services, and is this growing?7
Indicators: 
 ▶Percentage of individuals who own a mobile phone, aggregate and disaggregated345
 ▶Number of fixed broadband subscriptions per hundred population, aggregate and disaggregated346
 ▶Number of unique active mobile broadband subscribers per hundred population, by bandwidth, aggregate 
and disaggregated347
AB.4 What barriers to access are identified by users and non-users of the Internet?
Indicator:
 ▶Perceptions (by users and non-users) of barriers to their Internet access and use, aggregate and 
disaggregated,8 from household surveys and/or other sources. 
AC.1 Are mobile handsets capable of Internet connectivity affordable to all 
sections of the population?9
Indicators: 
 ▶Cost of a) entry-level348 mobile handset and b) smartphone as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
 ▶Perceptions of affordability by users and non-users, aggregate and disaggregated 
AC.2 Is broadband349 access and use affordable to all sections of the population?10
Indicators: 
 ▶Monthly cost of entry-level350 fixed broadband connection and use as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
5  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
6  It should be noted that the incidence of social media platforms varies between countries.
7  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
8  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
9  See endnote. Assessments should note different definitions of ‘entry level’ between countries and over time. Disaggregation should pay particular 
attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
10  See endnotes. Assessments should note different definitions of ‘broadband’ and ‘entry level’ between countries and over time.
183
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality Indicators ▶Monthly cost of entry-level351 mobile broadband connection and use as a percentage of monthly GNI p.c.
 ▶Availability or otherwise of zero-rated or low-cost access
AD.1 Are there significant differences in broadband access and use between 
regions and between urban and rural areas?
Indicators: 
 ▶Geographical coverage of broadband networks in urban and rural areas, by level of bandwidth
 ▶Numbers of mobile broadband subscribers and of Internet users, aggregate and where possible 
disaggregated between urban and rural areas and in different regions
AD.5 Do adults in all age groups make use of the Internet to the same extent?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of adults in different age groups who are using the Internet, and frequency and type of use11, 
including disaggregation by gender
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of Internet access and use to end-
users (where available), disaggregated by age and sex
AE.1 How many Internet domains and servers are there within the country?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of registered domains (including ccTLDs. gTLDs352 and IDNccTLDs) per thousand population, and 
trend where available
 ▶Number of secure webservers per million population, and trend where available
AE.4 Is there a substantial and growing volume of Internet content12 in diverse local 
and indigenous languages, including locally-generated content?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of population whose principal language and script are available on leading online services
 ▶Availability of content on government websites in all languages with significant user groups within the 
population
AF.1 Do school and higher educational curricula include training in ICTs and media 
and information literacy, focused on effective and safe use, and are these 
curricula implemented in practice?
Indicators: 
 ▶Policy concerning school curricula, including media and information literacy, intercultural dialogue and 
training in ICT skills
11  “Type of use” means the various activities that Internet users conduct online such as using social media, browsing web news, playing games, 
checking emails, etc.
12  This should include text, audio and video content.
184
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality Indicators ▶Evidence of appropriate educational curricula at primary, secondary and tertiary levels
 ▶Proportion of teachers in primary and secondary schools with training in ICTs or the use of ICTs in education
 ▶Proportion of schools with Internet access
 ▶Proportion of learners who have access to the Internet at school
AF.3 What proportion of the population and the workforce is skilled in the use of 
ICTs?13
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of Internet users with particular Internet skills, by skill type (basic, intermediate, advanced), 
aggregate and disaggregated353 
 ▶Proportion of the workforce using ICTs in the workplace, by skill type (basic, intermediate, advanced), 
aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Proportion of tertiary education students enrolled in STEM14 and ICT courses, disaggregated by sex, 
compared with global averages
Category M • Multistakeholder 
Participation
MA.1 Is there an overall policy, legal and regulatory framework for Internet 
development and policymaking which is consistent with international norms?
Indicators:
 ▶Existence of an overall framework consistent with relevant international norms354
 ▶Existence of legal and regulatory frameworks to enable e-commerce, digital signatures, cybersecurity, 
data protection and consumer protection
MB.2 Does the government actively involve other stakeholder groups in developing 
national Internet policies and legislation?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of arrangements for multistakeholder consultation and involvement in national policymaking 
institutions and processes concerned with the evolution and use of the Internet
 ▶Numbers of non-governmental stakeholders actively participating, by stakeholder group, disaggregated 
by sex
13  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to sex, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
14  i.e. science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
185
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsMB.3 Is there a national Internet Governance Forum and/or other multistakeholder 
forum open to all stakeholders, with active participation from diverse 
stakeholder groups?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of national IGF and/or other multistakeholder forum concerned with Internet governance
 ▶Participation data for national IGF or other fora, aggregate and disaggregated by sex and stakeholder 
group, with particular attention to participation by selected groups (e.g. education ministries, SMEs, NGOs 
concerned with children, trades unions), and including arrangements for remote participation
MC.2 Do government and other stakeholders from the country actively participate 
in major international fora concerned with ICTs and the Internet?
Indicators: 
 ▶Number of participants from different stakeholder groups participating in global and regional IGFs, per 
million population, aggregated and disaggregated by stakeholder group and sex
 ▶Participation or otherwise of non-government stakeholders in official delegations to ITU, aggregated and 
disaggregated by stakeholder group and sex
MC.3 Does the government and do other stakeholders participate actively in 
ICANN?
Indicators: 
 ▶Membership of and active participation in ICANN’s Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC)
 ▶Membership of and active participation in ICANN constituencies, working groups and other fora.
Category X • Cross-Cutting 
Indicators
XA.1 Are the interests and needs of women and girls explicitly included in national 
strategies and policies for Internet development, and effectively monitored?
Indicators: 
 ▶National strategies include explicit consideration of a) women’s needs relating to the Internet and b) the 
potential of the Internet to support women’s empowerment and gender equality
 ▶Numbers of women and men in senior policymaking positions in government concerned with ICTs/Internet
 ▶Extent of disaggregation of available data on ICT access and use by sex
 ▶Existence of national mechanisms to monitor women’s inclusion in strategies for Internet access and use
186
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsXA.2 Is there a gender digital divide in Internet access and use and, if so, is this 
gender divide growing, stable or diminishing? 
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportions of individuals using the Internet, disaggregated by sex, compared with gender gaps in income 
and educational attainment
 ▶Proportions of adult women and men with mobile broadband subscriptions disaggregated by sex, 
compared with gender gaps in income and educational attainment
 ▶Survey data on Internet awareness and on patterns of Internet use, disaggregated by sex
 ▶Perceptions of barriers to Internet access and use, and of the value of Internet access and use, disaggregated 
by sex
XA.5 Do the law, law enforcement and judicial processes protect women and girls 
against online gender-based harassment and violence?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of a relevant legal framework and judicial processes
 ▶Incidence of online gender-based harassment and violence experienced by women and girls
 ▶Evidence of government, law enforcement and judicial action to provide protection to women against 
online gender-based harassment and violence
 ▶Existence of online services which are intended to protect women against online gender-based harassment 
or support those affected by it
XB.3 How do children perceive and use the Internet?15
Indicators: 
 ▶Perceptions of the Internet among children derived from surveys, including barriers to use, value of use 
and fears concerning use, aggregate and disaggregated
 ▶Data on use of the Internet by children, aggregate and disaggregated, compared with other age groups 
(e.g. data on location, frequency and type of use)
XB.4 Is there a legal and policy framework to promote and protect the interests of 
children online, and is this effectively implemented?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a policy framework and legal protections consistent with the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC), and evidence that this is implemented by government and other competent authorities
15  Disaggregation should pay particular attention to gender, age, locality, ethnicity and disability.
187
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsXC.1 Do national and sectoral development policies and strategies for sustainable 
development effectively incorporate ICTs, broadband and the Internet?
Indicator: 
 ▶Existence of a recent, comprehensive policy for the development of ICTs, broadband and the Internet, 
which includes consideration of likely future developments in these fields
XC.7 What proportion of businesses, including small and medium sized businesses 
make use of the Internet and e-commerce?
Indicators: 
 ▶Proportion of SMEs using the Internet, by type of access
 ▶Perceptions of the value of Internet use by SMEs
XD.1 Is there a national cybersecurity strategy, with multistakeholder engagement 
and aligned with international human rights standards, including a national 
computer emergency response team (CERT) or equivalent?
Indicators: 
 ▶Existence of cybersecurity strategy, with multistakeholder involvement, which is consistent with international 
rights and norms
 ▶Establishment of national CERT or equivalent, and evidence concerning its effectiveness
XD.4 Have there been significant breaches of cybersecurity in the country within 
the last three years?
Indicators: 
 ▶Incidence and nature of breaches reported, and numbers of individuals and businesses affected
 ▶Perceptions of Internet security among users, businesses and other stakeholder groups
 ▶Data concerning phishing, spam and bots in national level domains
XE.3 How do individuals perceive the benefits, risks and impact of the Internet 
within the country?
Indicator:
 ▶Perceptions of the benefits, risks and impact of the Internet, derived from household or opinion surveys, 
disaggregated by sex
188
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsAnnex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsXE.4 Do Internet users report experiencing significant harassment or abuse at the 
hands of other Internet users which deters them from making full use of the 
Internet?
Indicators:
 ▶Availability of reporting mechanisms for online harassment or abuse, including reporting arrangements 
by online service providers
 ▶Data on the extent to which Internet users report harassment or abuse, with particular attention to specific 
demographic and social groups (including women, ethnic and other minorities, and civil activists) 
189
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators Annex 4. Core Internet Universality IndicatorsEndnotes
1   See UNESCO, Knowledge Societies Handbook , http:/ /en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/
knowledge_socities_policy_handbook.pdf 
2   See, among its outcome documents, the Geneva Declaration of Principles,  http:/ /www.itu.int/net/
wsis/docs/geneva/official/dop.html , and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society , http:/ /www.
itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html
3  http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/about-us/
4   The original concept was developed in 2013 in a UNESCO discussion paper which can be found at 
http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/news/internet_universa -
lity_en.pdf
5  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002340/234090e.pdf
6  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002325/232563E.pdf
7  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
8  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0016/001631/163102e.pdf
9   Seventeen national media development reports using these indicators can be found at http:/ /
www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/publications-and-com -
munication-materials/publications/publications-by-series/assessments-based-on-unescos-me -
dia-development-indicators/
10   https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000260893
11   http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002178/217831e.pdf
12   http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/unesco_mil_indicators_
background_document_2011_final_en.pdf
13   See http:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/intlcoop/partnership/post2015.aspx . The 
Partnership includes 14 United Nations and other international agencies.
14   Lists of these countries can be found at http:/ /www.unohrlls.org/
15   https:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.PP.CD . It is also one component of the Human 
Development Index, contextual indicator 3A.
16   Ibid.
17  https:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.SRV.TETC.ZS
18  https:/ /esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/  
19  http:/ /apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.688
20  http:/ /hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI
21  https:/ /esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/ .
22   These data require a subscription, but may be available through subscriptions held by researchers’ 
organisations, e.g. government departments and universities: https:/ /www.ethnologue.com/
browse/countries . See also UNESCO, Measuring Linguistic Diversity on the Internet , 2007, http:/ /
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001421/142186e.pdf
23  https:/ /esa.un.org/unpd/wup/
24   See successive ITU Measuring the Information Society reports, e.g. http:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
Statistics/Pages/publications/mis2016.aspx
25  http:/ /hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI
26   http:/ /data.uis.unesco.org/Index.aspx?queryid=242 . Mean years of schooling is also included in the 
Human Development Index, contextual indicator 3A.
27  http:/ /hdr.undp.org/en/composite/HDI
28  https:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS
29  http:/ /www.indexmundi.com/facts/indicators/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS
30  https:/ /www.indexmundi.com/facts/indicators/SI.POV.GINI/rankings
31  http:/ /hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-index-gii
32   http:/ /info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home  and http:/ /info.worldbank.org/governance/
wgi/#reports
33  https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index
34   https:/ /data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/doing-business-database . Latest data at the time of pu -
blication are in World Bank, Doing Business 2018 , http:/ /www.doingbusiness.org/~/media/WBG/
190
UNESCO’s Internet Universality IndicatorsDoingBusiness/Documents/Annual-Reports/English/DB2018-Full-Report.pdf
35  http:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis/methodology.aspx . 
36   https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/connected-society/mobile-connec -
tivity-index/
37   https:/ /www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/07/what-is-networked-readiness-and-why-does-it-mat -
ter/
38  http:/ /unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/tn_unctad_ict4d09_en.pdf
39  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld , para. 8
40  http:/ /www.un.org/en/udhrbook/pdf/udhr_booklet_en_web.pdf
41  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CCPR.aspx
42  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
43  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CERD.aspx
44  http:/ /www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/
45  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx
46  http:/ /ap.ohchr.org/documents/E/HRC/d_res_dec/A_HRC_20_L13.doc
47  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN96078.pdf , para. 43
48  https:/ /www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/basic3.american%20convention.htm
49   http:/ /www.humanrights.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/African-Charter-on-Human-and-
Peoples-Rights.pdf
50  http:/ /www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf
51  http:/ /www.un.org/en/udhrbook/pdf/udhr_booklet_en_web.pdf
52  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CCPR.aspx
53  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
54  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CERD.aspx
55  http:/ /www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/
56  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx
57  http:/ /ap.ohchr.org/documents/E/HRC/d_res_dec/A_HRC_20_L13.doc
58  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN96078.pdf , para. 43
59   https:/ /documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G16/156/90/PDF/G1615690.pdf?OpenEle -
ment
60   https:/ /treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume%20999/volume-999-i-14668-english.pdf
61  ibid.
62  http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/GC34.pdf
63   The relationship between the Internet and freedom of expression are explored in the 2011 report of 
the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/
bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf
64   The relationship between the Internet and freedom of expression are explored in the 2011 report of 
the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression, http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/
bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf
65   https:/ /treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume%20999/volume-999-i-14668-english.pdf
66   http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/GC34.pdf
67   The most recent report is that from 2017: https:/ /documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/
G17/086/31/PDF/G1708631.pdf?OpenElement . Other resolutions are cited below.
68   Issues concerning surveillance are addressed in the 2014 resolution of the UN General Assembly 
concerning ‘privacy in the digital age,’ http:/ /www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?sym -
bol=A/RES/69/166
69   Issues concerning encryption and anonymity are addressed in the 2015 report of the UN Spe -
cial Rapporteur on the Rights of Freedom of Opinion and Expression, https:/ /documents-dds-ny.
un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G15/095/85/PDF/G1509585.pdf?OpenElement
70  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
71  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
72   e.g. the African Union Declaration on Internet Governance. https:/ /www.afigf.africa/sites/default/
files/DeclarationonInternetGovernance_adoptedAUSummit2018.pdf  and OECD Internet Policy Ma -
king Principles for OECD countries, https:/ /www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd-principles-for-in -
ternet-policy-making.pdf
73  e.g. the Open Data Charter, https:/ /opendatacharter.net/#
74   See its Geneva Declaration of Principles , 2003, http:/ /www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/geneva/official/
191
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicatorsdop.html
75   See its World Development Report  for 2016 on Digital Dividends , http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/896971468194972881/pdf/102725-PUB-Replacement-PUBLIC.pdf
76  This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index
77  This indicator is included, at aggregate level, in the ITU ICT Development Index
78  This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index.
79   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018 (data from earlier editions of 
the Index is concerned with subscriptions to rather than ownership of mobile phones).
80   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index, with greater detail concerning band -
width from 2018
81   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index, with greater detail concerning band -
width from 2018
82  This indicator is included, at aggregate level, in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018
83  This indicator is included, at aggregate level, in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018
84  http:/ /www.itu.int/en/connect2020/Pages/default.aspx
85  http:/ /broadbandcommission.org/Documents/Targets-Separated/Target-2.pdf
86  http:/ /a4ai.org/1for2-affordability-target/
87   The definition of ‘entry-level’ may differ in different countries. The GSMA’s approach to this is in -
cluded in its Mobile Connectivity Index Handbook , at https:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/
widgets/connectivityIndex/pdf/Mobile_Connectivity_Index_Methodology_10072017.pdf . P.9
88   The definition of ‘broadband’ varies from place to place and time to time. Some indices still define 
broadband as downstream speeds equal to or greater than 256 kbps. However, this would not be 
considered broadband in most communications markets now. 
89  See endnote to previous question.
90  See endnote to previous question.
91   e.g. the Affordability Drivers Index of the Alliance for Affordable Internet, http:/ /a4ai.org/affordabi -
lity-report/data/?_year=2017&indicator=INDEX
92  These can be geolocated through the WHOIS database.
93  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001587/158723e.pdf
94  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002134/213475e.pdf
95   An overall indicator for this is included in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018 onwards. See 
also ITU, Digital Skills Toolkit, 2018, https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Digital-Inclusion/Documents/
ITU%20Digital%20Skills%20Toolkit.pdf
96  http:/ /www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html , articles 80 and 97
97  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN96078.pdf , paragraph 3
98  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld , paragraph 17.16
99   e.g. the African Union Declaration on Internet Governance. https:/ /afigf.org/sites/default/files/
DeclarationonInternetGovernance_adoptedAUSummit2018.pdf OECD Internet Policy Making Prin -
ciples for OECD countries, https:/ /www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd-principles-for-internet-poli -
cy-making.pdf
100  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
101   See Broadband Commission Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide, Recommenda -
tions for action: bridging the gender gap in Internet and broadband access and use , 2017, http:/ /
broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/WorkingGroupDigitalGenderDivide-re -
port2017.pdf
102  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN96078.pdf
103   ITU (2016). Facts and Figures 2016 . Geneva: ITU. www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/de -
fault.aspx . 
104  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/crc.aspx
105  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
106   For a discussion of these issues by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, see Annual Re -
port, 2013, http:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Opinion/SeminarRabat/Rabat_draft_outco -
me.pdf
107   https:/ /www.pearson.com/us/higher-education/product/Agresti-Statistics-The-Art-and-Science-
of-Learning-from-Data-4th-Edition/9780321997838.html . 
108   https:/ /in.sagepub.com/en-in/sas/the-sage-handbook-of-social-research-methods/
book228804 . 
109  https:/ /www.wiley.com/en-us/Survey+Methodology%2C+2nd+Edition-p-9780470465462. 
192
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators110  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/Human_rights_indicators_en.pdf . 
111  http:/ /www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
112  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx
113  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
114  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CERD.aspx
115  http:/ /www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/
116  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx
117  http:/ / www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/HRC/32/L.20
118   https:/ /documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/LTD/G16/131/89/PDF/G1613189.pdf?OpenEle -
ment
119  http:/ /www.oas.org/dil/treaties_B-32_American_Convention_on_Human_Rights.htm
120  http:/ /www.achpr.org/files/instruments/achpr/banjul_charter.pdf
121   http:/ /hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/loas2005.html?msource=UNWDEC19001&tr=y&auid=3337655
122   https:/ /www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/rms/0900001680063765
123   http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/outcome_document.pdf
124  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002325/232563E.pdf
125  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002245/224531e.pdf
126  https:/ /en.unesco.org/unesco-series-on-internet-freedom
127  https:/ /en.unesco.org/international_and_regional_instruments
128  https:/ /search.coe.int/cm/Pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectId=09000016806415fa
129  https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-net
130   http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/networked-readiness-in -
dex/ .
131  https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-net
132  https:/ /rsf.org/en/detailed-methodology.
133   https:/ /www.v-dem.net/media/filer_public/67/c8/67c8d893-bdf1-43c6-8c09-d8ab16469cf1/
structure_of_aggregations_v71.pdf.
134   http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/networked-readiness-in -
dex/ .
135  https:/ /www.internetjurisdiction.net/publications/retrospect#eyJ0byI6IjIwMTgtMDcifQ==
136  https:/ /observatory.mappingtheinternet.eu/
137  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
138   https:/ /www.ibanet.org/Human_Rights_Institute/HRI_Publications/Other-HRI-Publications.aspx# -
filter=.countryreport.
139   https:/ /www.ibanet.org/Human_Rights_Institute/HRI_Publications/Other-HRI-Publications.aspx# -
filter=.countryreport.
140  https:/ /www.unodc.org/cld/v3/cybrepo/.
141   https:/ /www.unodc.org/documents/organized-crime/UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_
STUDY_210213.pdf
142  http:/ /www.iap-association.org/GPEN/Home.
143  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
144   https:/ /www.akamai.com/us/en/multimedia/documents/state-of-the-internet/q3-2016-state-
of-the-internet-connectivity-report.pdf .
145  https:/ /www.article19.org/law-and-policy/ . 
146  https:/ /globalnetworkinitiative.org/policy-issues/legal-frameworks/
147  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
148  https:/ /rankingdigitalrights.org
149  https:/ /rsf.org/en/detailed-methodology.
150   https:/ /www.v-dem.net/media/filer_public/67/c8/67c8d893-bdf1-43c6-8c09-d8ab16469cf1/
structure_of_aggregations_v71.pdf.
151  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0016/001631/163102e.pdf
152  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
153  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
154   https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/reports/un-e-government-survey-2016 .
155  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/en/eparticipation .
156   http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/networked-readiness-in -
dex/ .
157   https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index/wjp-open-government-index-2015 . 
193
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators158   https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index/wjp-open-government-index-2015 . 
159  http:/ /opendatabarometer.org/doc/4thEdition/ODB-4thEdition-GlobalReport.pdf .
160  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/pages/home.aspx
161  https:/ /www.breachlevelindex.com.
162   Council of Europe (2016). Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)5 [1] of the Committee of Ministers to 
member States on Internet freedom. Available at: https:/ /search.coe.int/cm/Pages/result_details.
aspx?ObjectId=09000016806415fa . 
163  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
164  https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-net.
165  https:/ /www.privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/sopquestions.pdf .
166   http:/ /unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Data-Protection-Laws.
aspx.
167  http:/ /www.apc.org/en/pubs/internet-freedom-index-draft-checklist
168   http:/ /portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=31038&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
169   http:/ /portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=17716&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
170   http:/ /portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=49358&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
171   http:/ /portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=17717&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
172   http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/mow/charter_preserva -
tion_digital_heritage_en.pdf
173  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
174  http:/ /www.ilo.org/global/topics/future-of-work/lang--en/index.htm
175   http:/ /www.ilo.org/inform/online-information-resources/databases/stats/lang--en/index.htm
176  http:/ /www.who.int/goe/data/en/
177  http:/ /uis.unesco.org/
178  https:/ /www.opengovpartnership.org/open-government-declaration . 
179  http:/ /www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org . 
180  https:/ /sparcopen.org/what-we-do/popular-resources/page/2/ . 
181  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002466/246610e.pdf . 
182  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002311/231162e.pdf . 
183  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002344/234435E.pdf . 
184  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001915/191594e.pdf . 
185  https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/cybernorms
186   http:/ /unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Global-Legislation.
aspx
187  http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/
188  https:/ /stats.labs.apnic.net/dnssec
189  https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/cybernorms
190  https:/ /www.internetsociety.org/deploy360/dnssec/maps/
191  https:/ /www.internetsociety.org/deploy360/ipv6/statistics/
192   https:/ /www.networkworld.com/article/3114619/open-source-tools/which-countries-have-open-
source-laws-on-the-books.html
193  https:/ /index.okfn.org/
194  https:/ /open-stand.org/infographic-the-5-core-principles-of-openstand/
195  http:/ /oss-watch.ac.uk/
196  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
197  https:/ /index.okfn.org
198  https:/ /en.unesco.org/world-media-trends-2017/trends-media-pluralism
199  https:/ /www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-competitiveness-report-2016-2017-1
200  http:/ /www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/wct/summary_wct.html
201  https:/ /www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/intel2_e.htm
202  http:/ /www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/summary_berne.html
203   http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/Events/English_Paris_OER_
Declaration.pdf
204  https:/ /en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/ljubljana_oer_action_plan_2017.pdf
205  http:/ /www.theglobalipcenter.com/ipindex2017/
206  https:/ /www.thisisnetneutrality.org
207  https:/ /www.globalinnovationindex.org/gii-2018-report
194
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators208  https:/ /index.okfn.org/
209  https:/ /sparcopen.org/our-work/state-policy-tracking/
210  https:/ /sparcopen.org/our-work/oas-evaluation-tool/
211   https:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000215804?posInSet=1&queryId=2cf84424-fa8a-4218-
9287-7279eeaa930f
212  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/en/research/un-e-government-surveys
213  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/about/overview/e-participation
214  https:/ /www.opengovpartnership.org/about/independent-reporting-mechanism
215  https:/ /index.okfn.org/
216  https:/ /rankingdigitalrights.org
217  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/en/research/un-e-government-surveys
218  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/about/overview/e-participation
219  https:/ /www.waseda.jp/top/en-news/53182
220   https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index/wjp-open-government-index/
wjp-open-government-index-methodology
221  https:/ /opendatabarometer.org/?_year=2016&indicator=ODB
222  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld , Goal 9 Target c
223  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
224  e.g. https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/
225  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
226   http:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/NationalBBPolicies2017.pdf
227   e.g. A New Deal: Investing in our common future Policy recommendations to close the broadband gap , 
http:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/ExpertGroupReportFeb2018.pdf
228  http:/ /a4ai.org/affordability-report/
229  https:/ /www.budde.com.au/Research/Latest
230  http:/ /www.cetic.br/english/
231  http:/ /afteraccess.net
232  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
233  https:/ /www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/2016/06/mobile-connectivity-index/561/
234   https:/ /www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/policy-options-for-connecting-and-enabling-
the-next-billions-–-phase-iii-0
235  https:/ /www.itu.int/net4/ITU-D/idi/2017/index.html
236  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis2014.aspx
237  https:/ /www.oecd.org/sti/broadband/broadband-statistics/
238  https:/ /www.pch.net/ixp/dir
239   http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/networked-readiness-in -
dex/ .
240  https:/ /webfoundation.org/our-work/projects/womens-rights-online/
241  http:/ /a4ai.org/affordability-report/
242  http:/ /a4ai.org/policy-and-regulatory-good-practices/
243  http:/ /afteraccess.net
244  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
245  https:/ /theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com
246  https:/ /freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-net
247  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis2014.aspx
248   http:/ /reports.weforum.org/global-information-technology-report-2016/networked-readiness-in -
dex/ .
249  http:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.com
250  http:/ /afteraccess.net
251  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
252  https:/ /theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com
253  GSMA Intelligence 2018
254  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/wtid.aspx
255  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002197/219767e.pdf
256  https:/ /www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/
257  https:/ /webfoundation.org/our-work/projects/womens-rights-online/
258   Wikimedia publishes extensive data on Wikipedia at https:/ /stats.wikimedia.org/  and https:/ /ana -
lytics.wikimedia.org/
195
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators259  http:/ /afteraccess.net
260  http:/ /www.dw.com/en/dw-akademies-model-on-digital-participation/a-43657152
261   https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/wsisreview2014/WSIS2014_re -
view.pdf
262  https:/ /www.statista.com/statistics/266721/sales-of-cc-top-level-domains/
263  http:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.com
264   https:/ /www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/5kg0s294n9kf-en.pdf?expires=1525271710&id=id&acc -
name=guest&checksum=24B7D0C25AC20507EF177F7D937CD1AC
265  https:/ /www.pch.net/ixp/dir
266  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001870/187016e.pdf
267  https:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.SECR?view=chart
268   https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Digital-Inclusion/Documents/ITU%20Digital%20Skills%20Toolkit.pdf
269   http:/ /www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/publica -
tions-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/global-media-and-information-litera -
cy-assessment-framework/
270  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002256/225606e.pdf
271   https:/ /unevoc.unesco.org/go.php?q=TVETipedia+Glossary+A-Z&article=Glossary+article%3A+S -
TEM
272  http:/ /www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html
273  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN96078.pdf
274  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/en/eparticipation .
275  https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index/wjp-open-government-index-2015 . 
276  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002344/234435e.pdf .
277  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002597/259717e.pdf . 
278  http:/ /www.giswatch.org/2017-national-and-regional-internet-governance-forums
279  https:/ /www.ourinternet.org/report .
280  https:/ /www.gp-digital.org/publication/multistakeholder-framework/
281  https:/ /www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/igf-regional-and-national-initiatives
282  http:/ /netmundial.org/principles
283   https:/ /worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/wjp-rule-law-index/wjp-open-government-index-2015 . 
284   http:/ /www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx ; http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/Pro -
fessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
285  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
286  https:/ /sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
287  www.genderevaluation.net
288   http:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/documents/working-groups/bb-doubling-digital-2013.
pdf
289   http:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/WG-Gender-Digital-Divide-Re -
port2017.pdf
290   https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/GSMA_The_Mo -
bile_Gender_Gap_Report_2018_32pp_WEBv7.pdf
291   https:/ /www.genderit.org/resources/igf-best-practice-forum-gender-and-access-2016-overco -
ming-barriers-enable-womens-meaningfu
292  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/action/gender-equality/data/Pages/default.aspx
293  http:/ /unctad.org/en/pages/PublicationWebflyer.aspx?publicationid=875
294   https:/ /en.unesco.org/events/cracking-code-girls-and-women-s-education-science-technology-
engineering-and-mathematics-stem
295  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002178/217831e.pdf
296  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002343/234325e.pdf
297  http:/ /unctad.org/en/pages/PublicationWebflyer.aspx?publicationid=924
298  https:/ /www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-gender-gap-report-2017
299  https:/ /webfoundation.org/our-work/projects/womens-rights-online/
300  http:/ /www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx
301  http:/ /globalkidsonline.net/tools/
302  https:/ /www.coe.int/en/web/children/child-participation-assessment-tool
303  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002589/258993e.pdf
304  https:/ /www.unicef.org/publications/files/SOWC_2017_ENG_WEB.pdf
196
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators305   https:/ /www.unicef.org/csr/files/Guidance_Document_UNICEF_Child_Online_Safety_Assess -
ment_Tool_for_consultation.pdf
306  http:/ /ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=A/69/335.
307  http:/ /www.broadbandcommission.org/resources/Pages/default.aspx
308  http:/ /afteraccess.net
309  https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/sotir/
310   https:/ /www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2015/the-internet-and-sustainable-develop -
ment/
311   https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Climate-Change/Pages/Global-E-waste-Monitor-2017.aspx
312  https:/ /publicadministration.un.org/en/Research/UN-e-Government-Surveys
313  http:/ /workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN94615.pdf
314  https:/ /unstats.un.org/sdgs/ 
315  http:/ /www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016
316   https:/ /www.akamai.com/us/en/multimedia/documents/state-of-the-internet/q3-2016-state-
of-the-internet-connectivity-report.pdf .
317  https:/ /www.breachlevelindex.com.
318  https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/cybernorms
319   https:/ /www.europol.europa.eu/activities-services/main-reports/internet-orga -
nised-crime-threat-assessment-iocta-2016
320   https:/ /www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecurity-capacity/system/files/CMM%20revised%20edi -
tion_09022017_1.pdf
321  https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Pages/GCI.aspx
322   https:/ /read.oecd-ilibrary.org/governance/oecd-guidelines-on-measuring-trus -
t_9789264278219-en#page1
323   http:/ /unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Cybercrime-Laws.
aspx
324  https:/ /www.unodc.org/unodc/en/cybercrime/cybercrime-repository.html
325  http:/ /www.combattingcybercrime.org
326  https:/ /data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.SECR.P6
327  https:/ /www.genderit.org/onlinevaw/
328   https:/ /www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/connected-women/a-framework-
to-understand-womens-mobile-related-safety-concerns-in-low-and-middle-income-countries/
329   http:/ /www.intgovforum.org/cms/documents/best-practice-forums/623-bpf-online-abuse-and-
gbv-against-women/file
330  http:/ /www.iap-association.org/GPEN/Home.
331  https:/ /rankingdigitalrights.org
332  https:/ /www.takebackthetech.net/mapit/
333  http:/ /unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/tn_unctad_ict4d07_en.pdf
334   http:/ /unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Cybercrime-Laws.
aspx
335  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002332/233231e.pdf
336   http:/ /www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Opinion/SeminarRabat/Rabat_draft_outcome.pdf
337  https:/ /www.unodc.org/unodc/en/cybercrime/cybercrime-repository.html
338  https:/ /www.unodc.org/cld/v3/cybrepo/.
339  http:/ /www.combattingcybercrime.org
340  https:/ /webfoundation.org/our-work/projects/womens-rights-online/
341   Issues concerning surveillance are addressed in the 2014 resolution of the UN General Assembly 
concerning ‘privacy in the digital age,’ http:/ /www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?sym -
bol=A/RES/69/166
342  e.g. the Open Data Charter, https:/ /opendatacharter.net/#
343  This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index
344  This indicator is included, at aggregate level, in the ITU ICT Development Index
345   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018 (data from earlier editions of 
the Index is concerned with subscriptions to rather than ownership of mobile phones).
346   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index, with greater detail concerning band -
width from 2018
347   This indicator is included in the ITU ICT Development Index, with greater detail concerning band -
width from 2018
197
UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators348   The definition of ‘entry-level’ may differ in different countries. The GSMA’s approach to this is in -
cluded in its Mobile Connectivity Index Handbook , at https:/ /www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/
widgets/connectivityIndex/pdf/Mobile_Connectivity_Index_Methodology_10072017.pdf . P.9
349   The definition of ‘broadband’ varies from place to place and time to time. Some indices still define 
broadband as downstream speeds equal to or greater than 256 kbps. However, this would not be 
considered broadband in most communications markets now. 
350  See endnote to previous question.
351  See endnote to previous question.
352  These can be geolocated through the WHOIS database.
353   An overall indicator for this is included in the ITU ICT Development Index from 2018 onwards. See 
also ITU, Digital Skills Toolkit, 2018, https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Digital-Inclusion/Documents/
ITU%20Digital%20Skills%20Toolkit.pdf
354   e.g. the African Union Declaration on Internet Governance. https:/ /afigf.org/sites/default/files/
DeclarationonInternetGovernance_adoptedAUSummit2018.pdf OECD Internet Policy Making Prin -
ciples for OECD countries, https:/ /www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd-principles-for-internet-poli -
cy-making.pdf
198 UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators   
UNESCO Series on Internet 
Freedom
UNESCO has published 11 editions as part of flagship series on Internet Freedom since 2011. These series 
explore the changing legal and policy issues related to the Internet while providing Member States (and 
other stakeholders) with policy recommendations with the goal of fostering a conducive environment to 
freedom of expression on the net. These include:
• What if we all governed the Internet? Advancing multistakeholder participation in Internet governance 
(2017)
• Survey on Privacy in Media and Information Literacy with Youth Perspectives (2017)
• Protecting Journalism Sources in the Digital Age (2017)
• Human rights and encryption (2016)
• Privacy, free expression and transparency: Redefining their new boundaries in the digital age (2016)
• Principles for governing the Internet: A comparative analysis (2015)
• Countering online hate speech (2015)
• Building digital safety for journalism: A survey of selected issues (2015)
• Fostering freedom online: The role of Internet intermediaries (2014)
• Global survey on Internet privacy and freedom of expression (2013)
• Freedom of connection, freedom of expression: The changing legal and regulatory ecology shaping 
the Internet (2011)
All publications can be downloaded from the following link:  
http://en.unesco.org/unesco-series-on-internet-freedom
UNESCO indicators on media 
and communications
The Internet Universality Indicators draw on UNESCO’s previous experience with indicator frameworks 
concerned with media and communications:
The Media Development Indicators (MDIs) were adopted by the International Programme for the Development 
of Communication (IPDC) in 2008. By mid-2018, almost 30 MDIs had been completed or were underway in 
different countries, thereby enriching knowledge and understanding of national media landscapes.
Besides MDIs, there are also other indicator frameworks which are used, voluntarily, by interested Member 
States and other stakeholders to assess aspects of the communications environments in their countries and 
develop policy approaches to will enhance the quality of those environments: 
• IPDC adopted the Journalists’ Safety Indicators (JSIs) in 2013.
• Gender-sensitive Indicators for Media were put in place in 2012. 
• Indicators concerned with media and information literacy have also been published.
These can be downloaded from UNESCO’s IPDC webpage:  
https:/ /en.unesco.org/programme/ipdc/initiativesUNESCO’s Internet Universality indicators aim to assess levels of 
achievement, in individual countries, of the four fundamental ROAM 
principles included in the concept of ‘Internet Universality’ which 
supports an Internet that is based on human Rights (R), that is Open (O), 
Accessible to all (A) and nurtured by Multistakeholder participation (M).
The Internet Universality Indicators contain 303 indicators (including 109 
core ones) developed under 6 categories, 25 themes, and 124 questions. 
On top of the ROAM categories, 79 cross-cutting Indicators (category X) 
have been developed concerning gender and the needs of children and 
young people, sustainable development, trust and security, and legal 
and ethical aspects of the Internet. In addition, the framework includes 
21 contextual indicators concerned with the demographic, social, and 
economic characteristics of a country.
In November 2018, the 31st session of UNESCO’ Intergovernmental 
Council of the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC) has endorsed the use of the Internet Universality 
Indicators on a voluntary basis and as a useful resource available for 
Member States. The Council encourages interested Member States 
and all stakeholders to conduct national assessments of Internet 
development and use the research findings for evidence-based policy 
discussions and recommendations.UNESCO’s Internet 
Universality Indicators
A Framework for Assessing Internet Development
PROGRAMME INTERNATIONAL POUR 
LE DÉVELOPPEMENT DE LA COMMUNICATION
Organisation
des Nations Unies
pour l’éducation,
la science et la culture
AR
M XO
9789231 003141