This report is made possible by the support of the American People through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 
The contents of this report are the sole responsibility of Cardno Emerging Markets USA Ltd. and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID 
or the United States Government. 
 SECTOR ASSESSMENTS  
Wood Processing, Information and Communications 
Technology, and Food Processing 
USAID Kosovo Compete Activity USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY 
 SECTOR ASSESSMENTS  
Wood Processing, Information and Communications 
Technology, and Food Processing 
USAID Kosovo Compete Activity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUBMITTED BY: 
CARDNO EMERGING MARKETS USA, LTD. 
 
SUBMITTED TO: 
USAID MISSION IN KOSOVO  
 
CONTRACT NO.:   
72016720C00001 
 
USAID ACTIVITY OFFICE:   
ECONOMIC GROWTH OFFICE 
 
USAID COR:   
FLORA ARIFI  
 
ORIGINAL SUBMISSION DATE:  
JANUARY 21, 2021 
 
REVISION SUBMISSION DATE: 
FEBRUARY 15, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency for International Development 
or the United States Government.USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 1 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF FIGURES I  
1. INTRODUCTION TO THE USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY 2  
2. METHODOLOGY 2  
3. SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 3  
3.1 WOOD PROCESSING 3  
3.1.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW 3  
3.1.2 EXTERNAL MARKET OVERVIEW 5  
3.1.3 CURRENT EXTERNAL MARKETS IN THE WOOD PROCESSING SECTOR 5  
3.1.4 DIASPORA DEMAND 8  
3.1.5 TRENDS IN THE END MARKET SIZE AND PREFERENCES 9  
3.1.6 COMPETITIVENESS OF KOSOVO WOOD PROCESSORS IN EXPORT END 
MARKETS 10  
3.1.7 ROLE OF DIASPORA 10  
3.1.8 IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 12  
3.2 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY 14  
3.2.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW 14  
3.2.2 MARKET LINKAGES AND END MARKETS 22  
3.2.3 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT MARKETS 23  
3.2.4 DIGITAL SERVICES MARKETS 24  
3.2.5 BUSINESS PROCESS OUTSOURCING MARKETS 25  
3.2.6 ROLE OF DIASPORA 26  
3.2.7 IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 27  
3.3. FOOD PROCESSING 29  
3.3.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW 29  
3.3.2 EXPORT TRENDS AND STATISTICS 34  
3.3.3 EXPORT DESTINATIONS OF AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD PRODUCTS 35  
3.3.4 INDUSTRY PERCEPTIONS ON THE COMPETITIVENESS OF THE FOOD 
PROCESSING INDUSTRY 40  
3.3.5 ROLE OF DIASPORA 41  
3.3.6 IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC 43  
 
 
 
 
 USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS i LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Top export destinations of select Kosovo wood products, by nominal € value ...............6  
Figure 2: Top export destinations of select Kosovo wood products, by share of total exports in 
those categories ..................................................................................................................................................6  
Figure 3: Export of selected wood-related products, by destination, in nominal € value .................7  
Figure 4: Export of selected wood-related products, by destination, in % ...........................................7  
Figure 5: Export of selected wood and articles of wood, by destination, in € value ..........................8  
Figure 6: Export of wood and articles of wood, by share in top destinations, in % ...........................8  
Figure 7: Number of high school graduates in ICT .................................................................................. 16  
Figure 8: Number of businesses registered in the ICT sector within 10 years ................................ 16  
Figure 9: Average monthly salary in ICT sector 2018-2019 .................................................................. 17  
Figure 10: Comparison of ICT companies in municipalities by activity ............................................... 18  
Figure 11: CBK data on ICT services exports .......................................................................................... 20  
Figure 12: Internet penetration in EU candidate and potential candidate countries ....................... 21  
Figure 13: Number of university graduates in ICT................................................................................... 21  
Figure 14: : Overview on the analysis on high-potential market segments, incl. industries, company 
sizes, geographies and services/products ................................................................................................... 23  
Figure 15: Channels of doing business in export markets ...................................................................... 24  
Figure 16: Share of 38 surveyed companies indicating which horizontal markets they provide 
services to .......................................................................................................................................................... 26  
Figure 17: Share of agricultural crops to total crop production in 2018 ............................................ 32  
Figure 18: Turnover (€000s) by agricultural activities, 2018 ................................................................. 32  
Figure 19: Number of employees by agricultural activities, 2018 ......................................................... 33  
Figure 20: Kosovo agri-food exports to the EU in 2019 ........................................................................ 35  
Figure 21: Top country export destinations of Kosovo prepared food exports, by share ............ 36  
Figure 22: Top country export destinations of Kosovo prepared food exports, by value ............ 36  
Figure 23: Top export destinations of total cereal products exports , as % .................................. 37  
Figure 24: Top export destinations of coffee, tea and herbs, in € value ............................................ 37  
Figure 25: Top export destinations of alcoholic drinks and vinegars, in € value .............................. 38  
Figure 26: Top export destinations of fruits, edible nuts, melon & nut peels, in € value ............... 38  
Figure 27: Top export destinations of meat and meat products, in € value...................................... 39  
Figure 28: Top export destinations oily fruits et al , in € value ......................................................... 39  
Figure 29: Top export destinations of vegetables, fruit or other plant parts, in € value ................ 40  
Figure 30:  Top export vegetables, roots, in € value............................................................................... 40  
 
 
 
 
  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 2 1. INTRODUCTION TO THE USAID KOSOVO COMPETE 
ACTIVITY 
USAID Kosovo Compete Activity (hereinafter referred to as “Compete” or “Activity”) is a five-
year activity that began on August 11, 2020. The purpose of the Activity is to promote resilient, 
self-sustaining market systems, and to facilitate the private sector’s improved competitiveness in 
local, regional, and global markets. The Activity utilizes a market systems approach aligned with 
USAID’s Private Sector Engagement Policy.  
Compete focuses on three key export-oriented sectors—Wood Processing; Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICT); and Food Processing—to sustainably increase 
competitiveness. By working to address constraints across the system, the Activity will enable 
scalable and systemic change, stimulate job creation, and foster the private sector’s increased 
ability to engage in local, regional, and international markets. The expected results of the Activity 
across all three sectors are: 1) market systems are strengthened to increase sector 
competitiveness; and 2) market actors within those market systems are more productive and 
competitive. 
2. METHODOLOGY   
Compete synthesized information from several sources to develop the assessments of the three 
focus sectors. This proceeded as follows: 
 As a starting point, Compete used the initial analyses submitted during the proposal 
stage with key information on main industry players, estimated number of jobs, key 
export markets, and opportunities for growth and exports. 
 During the drafting of the Market System Constraint Analysis (MSCA), Compete 
collected additional information – where available – on export trends in key segments 
of its focus sectors. This included Kosovo Customs data on exports through the end of 
2019. 
 Also, during the drafting of the MSCA, Compete consulted with key companies and 
industry associations in the focus sectors concerning the scope of the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on their respective industries. Although little quantifiable data 
exists concerning pandemic impacts, these consultations offered a qualitative  accounting 
of industry perceptions  by key market players and respective associations. 
 In January 2021, Compete reviewed the latest published Kosovo Customs data on 
indicators related to export of wood and food processing products for 2020 (data not 
available for ICT service exports). This additional data allowed Compete to update its 
assessment of the focus sectors.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 3 3. SECTOR ASSESSMENTS  
3.1 WOOD PROCESSING  
3.1.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW  
The wood processing industry in Kosovo is an important economic sector with a growing ability 
to serve local and international markets. The wood industry’s competitiveness has been improving 
due to the growing adoption of modern production technologies by key industry participants. This 
has translated into substantial growth in sales in both domestic and export markets. Based on 
interviews with two of the country’s largest machinery suppliers, Compete estimates that wood 
processors in Kosovo invested close to €30 million in technology adoption over the past five 
years. 
Technological upgrading has also been accompanied by growth in the number of companies in the 
sector, an expansion of employment in response to growing market opportunities, and an upward 
trend in the growth of exports. Exploiting price differentials, Kosovo’s exports of wood products 
to Switzerland, Germany, Belgium, and the Scandinavian countries increased at an estimated 
Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 31.9% over the period 2015 – 2019. Importantly, 
the already existing and established linkages with export markets have acted as a cushion for many 
businesses in the sector to absorb the shocks of the COVID-19 pandemic, although no data is 
currently available to make a concrete assessment of the magnitude of this effect. 
The economic potential of the industry is significant. The wood processing sector is comprised of 
a large number of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), with an increasing number of 
medium-sized firms. Leading exporting companies include BINNI (furniture, exports to Europe), 
Ciao Berto (furniture, exports to Europe), PALMA (furniture, exports to Europe), Elnor 
(furniture, exports to Germany through Producers Sales Agent), and SHEHU (furniture, exports 
to Europe). A prior USAID activity (EMPOWER Private Sector) supported and partnered with 16 
medium-sized firms1 in the sector. Several smaller firms2 are also close to becoming medium-sized 
(exceeding €1million per year in export sales). This increasing capacity is enhancing Kosovo’s 
ability to scale production to meet future demand.  
There are three other critical factors that add to the industry’s growing competitiveness potential, 
namely: 1) proximity to EU and Swiss markets; 2) the presence of a sizable Albanian diaspora 
which is heavily engaged in the construction and renovation industry in those markets; and 3) an 
established but growing local base of skilled designers and architects who are feeding the growth 
of the “contract furniture” subsector of the industry.  
Important segments of the wood processing sector have shown business dynamism and vibrancy, 
manifested in part through a growing interest and capacity by industry firms to participate in 
                                                
1 Palma, BINNI, Sela Impex, Elnor, Ukaj, Albed, TC, Ciao Berto, Mob Prishtina, Lumi, Te Naseri, Euro-Modeli, Graniti, 
Tiki, Mob Idrizi, and Loni Dekor 
2 Including Dekoriti, Doni, Dekra, Hoti, and Greenhouse USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 4 leading international fairs (e.g., IMM, MOW and SwissBau), and an increased frequency in the 
presentation of sector opportunities by companies in various B2B events in the EU market.  
Export opportunities have been critical for spurring collaboration within the wood processing 
industry as well as between wood processing and other industries. Kosovo wood processors have 
continued to increase their competitiveness through supplying Swiss and German markets with 
finished wood products. Producers in the sector are entering a new era of inter- and intra-
sectorial cooperation and coordination across all actions related to exports. For instance, there 
are growing firm collaborations between wood processing companies and also with metal, glass, 
and leather (apparel) companies. Intra-sectorial collaboration is growing, especially in tackling 
issues in logistics and transportation, addressing gaps in skills availability, improving coordination 
for joint presentations in international markets (including international fairs), and greater 
participation in and communication through the industry association (the Association of Wood 
Processors of Kosovo). 
There is a strong commitment and interest by industry actors to collaborate to overcome sector 
constraints and challenges. The industry’s main sector association, the AWPK, is regarded as one 
of the most consolidated and proactive business associations in Kosovo, representing over 100 
companies, around half of which pay regular membership fees. Over the past decade, the sector 
has made progress addressing several significant challenges. These include improved product 
quality, technology upgrades across all chains of production, improved working conditions and 
facility maintenance, including the slow but gradual adoption of lean management, improved 
promotion and marketing (in the domestic market only), and strengthening skills upgrading in 
critical technological processes such as computer numerical control (CNC) and machine usage. 
Many of the challenges addressed by the industry were often the result of individual initiatives and 
business acumen of its entrepreneurs, aided considerably by the support of key international 
donors.  
With respect to the industry’s level of employment, there is an evident lack of verifiable data, with 
estimates varying significantly. According to estimates developed by Compete’s subcontractor 
Recura (and confirmed by AWPK), there are about 6,000 workers in the industry, inclusive of 
production, installation, sales, and showrooms. Other more optimistic estimates discussed with 
industry representatives put the employment figures at between 8,000 and 10,000 workers. 
Despite significant inroads and its still-untapped potential, the wood processing industry continues 
to face challenges in improving its access to export markets. Such challenges and constraints 
include: a) the lack of a visa liberalization regime with the Schengen zone which is complicating 
the process of visiting potential and actual buyers regularly; b) challenging delivery and installation 
of Kosovo-made products in the EU and Switzerland, especially due to challenges facing Kosovo 
workers to legally work in such markets (made worse during the COVID-19 pandemic); c) lack 
of promotion of the industry in export markets (besides fairs); d) limited direct links between the 
industry and international buyers and supply chains; e) limited understanding of consumer behavior 
and trends in international markets; and f) lack of skilled labor, and systemic failures in the skill 
provision system in Kosovo. 
Additionally, there are challenges related to inclusiveness, as the sector is traditionally male-
dominated (only an estimated 10.3% of employees are women) and has a low level of inclusion of USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 5 minorities. Men generally own wood processing companies, whereas women face significant 
challenges securing collateral for bank financing.  
3.1.2 EXTERNAL MARKET OVERVIEW 
Companies in the wood processing industry continue to struggle in operating at the frontiers of 
technological optimization. Foreign counterparts are much better consolidated to operate at the 
bottom end of their cost curves, in part due to their larger size and leveraged economies of scale. 
Local wood producers’ competitive advantage lies in tailored production , supply of small-scale 
custom orders, and in the proximity of Kosovo to the regional and EU markets. Part of the 
competitiveness of some local wood processors therefore is their ability to produce and deliver 
products faster than some of their larger competitors. For example, customized producers of 
kitchen cabinets in Kosovo are able to ship to Switzerland in three weeks following the order; 
this is often not possible for IKEA and other larger sellers. 
Kosovo has several free trade agreements and related instruments, including the Stabilization and 
Association Agreement with the EU, the bilateral free trade agreement with Turkey, and 
preferential treatment with Switzerland. These could facilitate the wood processing industry 
increasing its presence in international markets and gradually build its capacities to serve as a 
growing manufacturing supplier of wood/furniture products such as kitchens, cabinets, windows, 
and bedrooms. This is especially the case for the Swiss and German markets, which jointly 
represent a market of more than 90 million people. To take advantage of this potential, the sector 
will require improved coordination and cooperation at all levels by public and private actors in 
the wood processing sector’s wood sector market system. This will only happen if these actors 
jointly address gaps that currently prevent the industry from taking full advantage of its growth 
potential in export markets.  
3.1.3 CURRENT EXTERNAL MARKETS IN THE WOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
Based on the review of selected Kosovo Customs data, in 2019, Kosovo exported over €22.5 
million in product categories classified as “wood and articles of wood, and wood charcoal” and 
“furniture, beds, mattresses, mattress holders, pillows and bedding, lamps and lighting fixtures.” 
Under these broad categories, the top export markets in 2019 (by export value) were Switzerland, 
Germany, Albania, North Macedonia, Serbia, and Belgium. Put in percentage terms, the In 2019, 
Swiss and German markets accounted for over half of all wood-related exports in the above-
mentioned categories. In 2020, the exported value of the same categories rose to €32.4 million, 
while the top export markets remained Switzerland, Germany, Albania, and North Macedonia.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 6 Figure 1: Top export destinations of select Kosovo wood products, by nominal € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs  
 
Figure 2: Top export destinations of select Kosovo wood products, by share of total exports in those categories 
 
Top export markets for Kosovo wood furniture products and related articles are Switzerland and 
Germany, which also show a positive growth trend. Kosovo Customs data shows that exports of 
“furniture, beds, mattresses, mattress holders, pillows and bedding, lamps and lighting fixtures” to 
Switzerland were over €6 million in 2019, up from €5.6 million in 2018, and €4.1 million in 2017. 
In 2020, these exports rose further to €9 million. Similarly, exports of the same category in 2019 
were €3.5 million in Germany, up from €1.8 million the previous year, and €1.5 million in 2017. 
5 
2 2 
1 1 0 0 0 7 
2 2 
1 1 0 0 0 7 
4 
2 
2 1 
1 1 1 11 
6 
5 
3 
2 
1 1 1 1 
 - 2 4 6 8 10 12
 CH -
Switzerland DE - Germany  AL - Albania  NMK - North
Macedonia CA - Canada  XS - Serbia  BE - Belgium  SE - Sweden  SI - Slovenia€MillionsWOOD PRODUCT EXPORTS - VALUE (TOP 10 DESTINATIONS IN 2020)
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
42%
17%
14%
4%
0%4%
0% 0%2%44%
14% 14%
4%
0%5%
2%1%2%33%
19%
11%
8%
0%7%
3% 3% 3%34%
18%
15%
8%
5%
3%3% 2%2%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%
 CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany AL - Albania  NMK - North
Macedonia CA - Canada  XS - Serbia  BE - Belgium  SE - Sweden  SI - SloveniaWOOD PRODUCT EXPORTS - % OF TOTAL (TOP 10 DESTINATIONS IN 
2020)
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 7 In 2020, exports of this category in Germany rose to €5.8 million. In general, the share of the 
Swiss and German demand constituted close to half of the total demand for this category in 2020. 
Figure 3: Export of selected wood-related products, by destination, in nominal € value  
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 4: Export of selected wood-related products, by destination, in % 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
According to Kosovo Customs data, exports of “wood and articles of wood, and wood charcoal” 
amounted to €5.7 million in 2019, up from €4.3 million in 2017. However, such exports dropped 
to €5.4 million in 2020. Under this category, Switzerland, Germany, Serbia, and Albania are the 
top export destinations. In 2019, exports to Switzerland under this category constituted 23% of 
total exports, followed by 18% to Albania 12% to Germany, and 11% to Serbia. In 2020, exports 
4 
2 1 0 0 0 0 0 6 
2 1 0 0 0 0 0 6 
4 
1 2 1 0 0 0 9 
5 4 
2 2 1 1 0 0 
 (1) 4 9 14 19
 CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany AL - Albania NMK - North
Macedonia CA - Canada  BE -
Belgium SE - Sweden  NL -
Netherlands HR - Croatia€MillionsEXPORTS OF FURNITURE, MATTRESSES, MATTRESS HOLDERS, PILLOWS, 
LAMPS AND LIGHTING FIXTURES, BY TOP DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € 
VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
50%
19%
9%
3%
0% 0% 0% 0% 0%51%
16%
8%
4%
0%3%
1% 1% 0%36%
21%
8%9%
0%4%
1% 0%2%34%
18%
15%
9%
6%
3% 3%2% 1%
-5%5%15%25%35%45%55%
 CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany AL - Albania  NMK - North
Macedonia CA - Canada  BE - Belgium  SE - Sweden  NL -
Netherlands HR - CroatiaEXPORT OF FURNITURE, MATTRESSES, MATTRESS HOLDERS, PILLOWS, 
LAMPS AND LIGHTING FIXTURES, BY TOP DESTINATION, IN %
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 8 to Switzerland were close to a third of the total under this category (31%), followed by 16% into 
Germany, 14% into Serbia, and12% to Albania.  
Figure 5: Export of selected wood and articles of wood, by destination, in € value  
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 6: Export of wood and articles of wood, by share in top destinations, in %  
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
3.1.4 DIASPORA DEMAND  
A critical source of foreign demand for Kosovo wood products and furniture rests with the large 
Albanian diaspora community in the EU and Swiss markets. Members of the Kosovo diaspora, 
especially in Germany and Switzerland, often visit Kosovo and order furniture from the local 
producers. Often, the Kosovo diaspora community consider end consumer prices for the types 
12 
7 
4 10 
3 2 
0 1 2 
0 17 
5 7 14 
3 2 1 1 1 0 13 
7 6 10 
6 
2 
1 1 0 0 17 
9 
7 
6 6 
3 
2 
1 1 1 
 - 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
 CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany XS - Serbia  AL - Albania  SI - Slovenia  NMK - North
Macedonia GR - Greece  FR - France  AT - Austria  HR - Croatia€x 100000EXPORT OF WOOD AND ARTICLES OF WOOD, WOOD CHARCOAL, BY 
DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € VALUES
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
27%
15%
9%22%
7%
5%
1%2%4%
1%31%
9%12%25%
5%
3%2% 2%1%1%23%
12% 11%18%
11%
4%
1% 1% 1% 1%31%
16%
14%
12%
10%
5%
3%
1% 1% 1%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%
 CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany XS - Serbia  AL - Albania SI - Slovenia  NMK -
North
Macedonia GR - Greece  FR - France  AT - Austria HR - CroatiaEXPORT OF WOOD AND ARTICLES OF WOOD, WOOD CHARCOAL, BY 
DESTINATION, IN %
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 9 of products that are of interest to them to be bargains in Kosovo compared to Germany and 
Switzerland. Part of this relates to the fact that annual travel to Kosovo to visit their families is 
leveraged as an opportunity to also purchase locally produced furniture (a process which in 2020 
was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic).  
Expanded serial production is possible for solid wood furniture and upholstered products as a 
way to compete in export markets, but flat furniture producers are competing based on tailored 
products and designs. This also means that certain smaller-scale buyers are willing to pay a 
premium to get flexibility for products that are attuned to their individual needs, which is part of 
the reason there is diaspora-based foreign demand for tailored products and designs. Customized 
products by foreign producers in the EU market can be accessed at a much greater premium, 
hence, this is part of the reason behind the fueling diaspora-based demand for small-scale, 
customizable orders from Kosovo producers. Contract furniture is price competitive, including 
the quality of the production, since all projects are unique, require attention to detail, and are 
more flexible with timing and responding to continuous changes/modifications of the projects 
during implementation. The presence of Kosovo wood processors in the EU and Swiss markets 
with large diaspora communities is limited to the processors’ showrooms or sales agents. This 
results in significant loss of demand opportunity, which is an area that requires attention and 
support in the future.  
3.1.5 TRENDS IN THE END MARKET SIZE AND PREFERENCES  
Typically, by virtue of their adopted technology, serial production companies are focused on mass 
production and not on tailored production. New designs that Kosovo wood processing companies 
are offering in domestic and export markets appear to be correlated with a greater frequency of 
furniture replacements in apartments located in EU residences, especially those owned by 
diaspora. In past years, diaspora’s acquisition of apartments and real estate was accompanied by 
the purchases of Kosovo-made furniture. Additionally, the majority of foreign buyers of Kosovo-
made furniture and wood products are diaspora companies in export markets that are engaged 
in the construction industry and in the renovation of older apartments.  
Another important factor that adds to foreign demand for Kosovo-made furniture is the presence 
of key Kosovo Albanian diaspora members in top managerial positions in EU-based and Swiss 
companies. Such individuals play an important role in positioning Kosovo and its producers across 
many sectors, not just wood processing.  They serve as great advocates for Kosovo-made 
products. These individuals conduct economic diplomacy on behalf of Kosovo and bring their 
teams and business partners to Kosovo to visit and analyze potential opportunities.  
Kosovo wood processors have limited information about end market trends in the wood 
processing industry. Local producers are currently implementing projects that are either 
developed by designers or are simply based on the preferences of the buyers when they visit 
showrooms in Kosovo. At the industry and company level, there is a lack of awareness of design 
and sourcing trends.  
In interviews, wood processing sector companies expressed their strong belief that designs, 
technology and proximity to the EU and Switzerland are strengths of the industry. These strengths 
however, are dampened by the lack of installation capacity and infrastructure, including lack of USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 10 permanent presence and limited capacity to prepare and compete for large contracts in these 
markets. These weaknesses prevent the sector from accessing export markets. For instance, it is 
estimated that a large share of local producers and companies currently do not have the requisite 
administrative resources to prepare procurement-related documentation to compete for large 
bids in the EU and Switzerland. This is relevant for the biggest wood processing companies in 
Kosovo, who would likely invest further in installation and administrative resources if faced with 
concrete opportunities. The latest investment expansion of Kosovo wood processing company 
Ciao Berto, happened exactly when their biggest buyer in Switzerland, Lika Group (a diaspora 
construction company), offered Ciao Berto an opportunity to furnish their apartments and houses 
that they built in Switzerland. Lika Group is procuring directly from Kosovo producers, as they 
have their installation teams in Switzerland. Local producers are able in some cases to serve as 
subcontractors, but lack of official registration with branches in EU markets hampers their 
inclusion in bidding consortia by larger companies. 
3.1.6 COMPETITIVENESS OF KOSOVO WOOD PROCESSORS IN EXPORT END MARKETS  
Kosovo wood processors are becoming increasingly competitive in the segment of tailored 
furniture and wood products. The majority of the solid wood subsector products are exported 
with an estimated €5 million of exports annually, including wooden houses. The local tradition of 
treating solid wood and the quality of the raw material is the key to success. Kosovo solid wood 
products are also price competitive in the EU markets. Competitiveness also stems from access 
to quality raw materials, pockets of trained workforce inherited from ex-Yugoslavia times, and 
geographic proximity. The possibility for small and often custom-made orders is another reason 
for the selection of Kosovo for present and future supply.  
3.1.7 ROLE OF DIASPORA  
Diaspora is the driving force behind the foreign demand for Kosovo wood and furniture products 
and is the backbone of the Kosovo wood-processing sector. The sizable Albanian diaspora 
community in the EU and Switzerland presents a significant source of foreign demand for Kosovo 
wood processors. There are a number of reasons for this demand, listed below.  
First, a significant part of the demand stems from the individual orders diaspora members place 
while visiting their family in Kosovo, usually in the summer. This particularly applies to articles of 
home furnishings that are often a much better bargain in Kosovo than in EU countries, even when 
accounting for shipping costs.  
Second, flat furniture producers often compete based on tailored products and designs, which sell 
at a premium price. This allows local Kosovo producers to substitute their limited ability to 
produce at scale with their ability to produce custom-made products cheaper, given the much 
lower labor costs. With cultural links to Kosovo, diaspora community members are willing to pay 
a premium to get the necessary flexibility for a product that is attuned to their individual needs 
and taste.  
Customized products by foreign producers in the EU market are much more expensive, which is 
part of the reason fueling diaspora-based demand for small-scale, customizable orders from 
Kosovo producers. Such contract furniture production is price competitive, including the quality USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 11 of the production, since all projects are unique, require attention to detail and are more flexible 
with timing and response to continuous changes/modifications of the projects during 
implementation. The challenge is that, with exception of few larger producers, Kosovo wood 
businesses lack access to these markets through either showrooms of sales agents. This results in 
significant loss of demand opportunity, which is an area that requires attention and support. 
There is an opportunity to further explore diaspora investment in existing Kosovo businesses and 
joint investment in establishing new export-focused businesses. However, for such opportunities 
to materialize, Kosovo wood companies need to undergo a painful process of company 
restructuring, including eliminating the semi-formal parts of the business that are done for smaller 
buyers, primarily in cash. Having Kosovo companies gradually embrace modern management tools, 
including an increased willingness to move toward modern corporate governance would send an 
important signal of trust and credibility that is needed to lure in investment interest by diaspora 
in the form of joint ventures. Currently, Albanian diaspora members who embark on materializing 
their business ideas in Kosovo typically undertake investments by themselves, while also struggling 
to understand and navigate the locally inefficient bureaucracy that poses significant regulatory 
hurdles.  
A good example of many opportunities in the wood sector involving diaspora is the production 
of modular houses. A productive relationship between diaspora and local businesses (i.e. the 
Greenhouse company) resulted in successful investment that improved local knowledge and 
stimulated further investments in such businesses in Kosovo. This group of businesses is now 
becoming a new export driver and is expected to significantly increase its exports within the next 
five years. Also, there is a sufficient supply of diaspora members in the EU and Swiss markets who 
have acquired skills in the installation of the houses, including installation of electricity, water, 
roofs and garden works. Such increased know-how and skill upgrading has created a foundation 
for further expansion and investment in diversifying to other products for such businesses in 
diaspora. The modular houses business is having a significant positive impact on other smaller 
producers in Kosovo that are part of the value chain, including producers of kitchens, doors, 
windows and staircases.  
The fastest way for cooperation with the diaspora is their direct presence in EU and Swiss markets 
through sales points/showrooms, which can be individual or a combination of collaborating 
companies in Kosovo. This model has already proven successful. USAID EMPOWER Activity 
supported Mahagoni company from Peja through a joint investment to open its first showroom in 
Zurich, Switzerland, and after only two years, the company has already opened another 
showroom in Vienna, Austria. Particularly important for this segment are tailored products, 
especially kitchens. Another option for accessing these markets is through utilization of sales 
agents and greater digitalization. 
Kosovo producers of doors and windows are already present through sales partners in the EU 
and Swiss markets, but not at the desired level. Unlike kitchen producers, this group is producing 
products that are less sensitive to customization demands, since many of them use standardized 
dimensions. The participation of these companies in trade fairs and direct presentation of this 
group in mainstream media, social media, and direct presentation to construction companies in 
EU and Switzerland is crucial for increasing export and the greater involvement of diaspora.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 12 Contract furniture business in Kosovo is already dependent on diaspora demand. Although this 
segment is growing slow, there are significant opportunities in the EU and Swiss markets since 
Albanian diaspora is heavily involved in the HoReCa businesses in targeted countries. Cooperation 
between Kosovo producers and architects/interior designers in the targeted countries is 
increasing and the presentation of their projects in social media, in particular, is generating more 
interest. Also, their finished projects (hotels, restaurants and bars) in the EU and Switzerland are 
the best promotion of their work since the architects/interior designers can visit and check their 
quality and products before deciding to engage Kosovo producers.  
Most importantly, famous diaspora-based designers and architects are regularly promoting their 
work by emphasizing that a crucial part of the design and production is based in Kosovo. This type 
of work can be a great marketing and promotion tool for Kosovo producers. A notable example 
in this regard is that of the renowned, London-based diaspora member, Perparim Rama, an 
architect and designer, whose projects are winning awards across Europe and beyond. Most of 
Mr. Rama’s projects are produced and to some extent also designed in Kosovo.  
3.1.8 IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
Most of the companies in the wood processing sector stopped production during the initial 
months of the COVID-19 lockdown. Following the first few weeks of the lockdown, during which 
all companies were closed, some exporting companies resumed work with limited resources. 
Gradually, all companies started resuming production, initially with small and limited capacities.  
Most of the country’s borders were closed during initial lockdown. After three weeks of 
lockdown, the first trucks with wood products were dispatched to export countries. This 
constituted a promising signal for local producers who could at least count on a limited but open 
export channel, especially since the domestic market had ground to a complete halt following the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Delays in raw material sourcing had a short-term effect on 
wood processing companies, but based on discussions with companies, this did not appear to 
constitute a major problem, since many companies had already secured sufficient storage for up 
to three months. This, in itself, indicates a degree of inventory planning throughout the industry 
that bodes well for the industry’s adaptability and resilience in the long-term. 
When industry realized that the transportation and shipment of goods was possible during the 
initial months of the pandemic, exporting companies in the wood processing sector started 
developing plans to resume exports immediately. The Activity’s knowledge of the industry 
indicates that some wood processing companies were loading trucks for exports on a fairly 
frequent basis. Reduced EU imports from China and Asia, a result of the pandemic, is believed to 
have created more demand for some Kosovo wood products and a few exporting companies 
increased their production and exports.  
Another segment that experienced a positive trend during the COVID-19 pandemic was online 
sales and demand. People were spending the majority of their time at home due to movement 
restrictions, and thus online purchasing was the safest (and sometimes only) option. Therefore, a 
few companies from Kosovo that were exporting and selling online were not as affected by the 
situation created by COVID-19.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 13 The biggest challenge faced by the companies in the initial weeks of the pandemic was the 
hesitation of employees to resume work in factories due to safety concerns. Employee absence 
affected productivity immediately and companies started reorganizing production with a smaller 
group of workers and in some cases with workers who were younger and felt safe and fit to 
resume production. Companies were forced to apply measures for protecting workers and 
disinfecting the workplace regularly.  
Some companies reportedly took additional operational measures aimed at improving workplace 
safety, including increasing the distance between workers on the factory floor. Additionally, 
several companies reportedly decreased their workforce, especially companies that were more 
heavily reliant on the domestic market.  
Another aspect that affected productivity was the closure of kindergartens and schools. This 
disruption manifested itself in the inability of some workers to dedicate time to their jobs, as they 
had to care for their children. Architects, sales staff, designers, and even factory floor workers 
were directly affected by lockdown measures. Even though no concrete data exists, it is believed 
that the situation had a major negative impact on the income of this segment of the workforce, 
considering the fact that their engagement was occurring on a limited and part-time basis. 
As a direct result of the pandemic, reduced or cancelled orders were another challenge faced by 
wood processing companies, particularly those focused in the domestic market. This situation was 
expected to improve by summertime, when members of the diaspora usually visit Kosovo and 
generate demand for furniture due to the acquisition of new apartments or renovation of existing 
dwellings. However, given the prolonged pandemic – including a summer spike in COVID-19 cases 
in Kosovo that required diaspora visitors to self-quarantine when returning to their country of 
residence – limited arrivals by diaspora further strained demand and production.  
It was only in June 2020 that the domestic market was beginning to return to some level of 
normality, but demand remained limited and the pandemic situation remained precarious. 
Currently, most companies report an average estimated 25% drop in demand. Notably, the 
Government of Kosovo’s economic rescue package was limited to the initial measures adopted in 
the early stage of the pandemic, with a follow-on support package just recently receiving approval 
in parliament. Many wood processing companies appear willing to retain the majority of workers 
if the government were to step in and institute a publicly subsidized retention scheme, especially 
for the period December 2020 – March 2021, which it is assumed will be hard on the domestic 
economy.   
In the initial stage of the pandemic, most of the wood processing companies encountered an 
immediate pause on both international and domestic payments for both completed and ongoing 
work. During March – May 2020, the pandemic was particularly affecting the construction industry, 
including renovation and HoReCa in targeted export markets. Shipments initially halted, which in 
turn started impacting cash turnover. In general, this led to problems with having sufficient 
liquidity, with banks remaining as the only option. Most of the companies postponed loan 
repayments to banks and a few wood processing companies reportedly were forced to take new 
obligations (loans) to overcome liquidity constraints.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 14 From July 2020, the export market recuperated to some extent. The improved prospects were 
coupled with the restarting of work in the construction industry in Kosovo. Both of these external 
and internal developments supported the improvement the otherwise dire conditions across the 
Kosovo economy. 
The months of December 2020 through to March 2021, are expected to be the most challenging 
for the industry. There is expectation that there will be support from the government and other 
international donors to help serve as a bridge, especially for companies oriented towards the 
domestic market, until the pandemic is brought under control through pharmaceutical 
interventions.  
Many wood processing companies express significant dissatisfaction with the government’s lack of 
proactive measures to support the private sector. The private sector is particularly dismayed at 
what it considers as failures to support the business community, which is critical in contributing 
to state budgets through taxes. Importantly, the perceived neglect is often contrasted with the 
public sector, whose staff is regarded to have stable salaries during the pandemic-induced 
recession. Recently, AWPK, and other associations initiated an advocacy initiative to amend 
certain bylaws and give priority to domestic producers in all government procurements, even if 
bidding prices were to be higher. Similar actions have been implemented by some countries in the 
region, including Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
The pandemic has led to significant problems related to travelling to meet new and existing buyers. 
Due to the travel ban and border lockdowns, all pre-agreed timelines for meeting buyers and 
taking measurements for installation projects in the EU were either canceled or postponed. Such 
a situation exacerbated a long-running challenge for local producers and exporters who have 
already had to contend with the lack of visa liberalization regime.  
More specifically, until July 2020, few if any of the company representatives had a chance to travel 
to the EU or Switzerland. Even when travel took place, they were limited and with a lot of risks. 
EU and Switzerland instituted strict measures for travelers from countries listed as “red” zones, 
in which Kosovo was included during the summer of 2020. Wood processing company 
representatives reportedly face daunting procedural challenges to travel by plane to Europe. Most 
travel reportedly occurs either through transportation trucks, cars, or buses, with the latter two 
taking place on a limited basis. The only event in the last six months that the wood processing 
industry participated in and traveled to was in Turkey in September 2020, for a furniture fair.  
3.2 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY  
3.2.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is transforming economies, public sector 
service provision, and society at large globally. The trend towards digital transformation has made 
the ICT sector, startups, entrepreneurship, innovation, and digital economy promotion a top 
priority on the agendas of many governments. The market for ICT services is huge – global ICT 
spending reached €3.94 trillion in 2019 and is expected to grow to €4.66 trillion by 2023. Ranking 
as one of the largest industries in the world, the ICT market’s continuous growth serves as a USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 15 testament to the ever-increasing prevalence and importance of technology in modern life. With 
its technology enabling its own innovation while spurring innovation in all other sectors, ICT is a 
central driver of economic growth and innovation in all advanced economies.  
Similarly, ICT has started to play an increasing role in Kosovo’s economic growth. As stated in 
the Kosovo IT Strategy,3 the ICT sector in Kosovo, despite its relatively limited share of overall 
economic output, is one of the most developed and promising sectors for generating economic 
growth. Given its potential, the Government of Kosovo has recognized and listed the ICT sector 
among the top six priority sectors that contribute to economic development. The sector offers 
strong promise for generating new jobs for young men and women entrepreneurs, as well as for 
increasing the overall level of the country’s exports. As such, the ICT sector, including the full 
range of electronic communications and information society services, is poised for immense 
growth and is likely to become one of the most important service sectors in Kosovo’s economy. 
The ICT sector can, and should, play a vital role in helping Kosovo develop a dynamic, knowledge-
intensive, and globally connected economy. 
Today, despite its challenges, the ICT industry in Kosovo generally constitutes a vibrant sector of 
the economy in its own right, providing a major source of employment, contributing a significant 
share of the Gross Domestic Product (8%-11% of GDP over the last 6 years), and serving as a 
catalyst for the creation of a highly skilled “knowledge economy” workforce.4 
For the purposes of this analysis, the ICT market system in Kosovo consists of three separate 
sub-systems, oriented around three distinct functions:  
1. Software development : including the design and creation of software applications, 
mobile applications, related processes, and management of networks and computer 
centers; 
2. Digital services : including building web and mobile presence, design, 3D, video, 
CAD/CAM, digital marketing, credit rating, market intelligence collection and other 
services; and 
3. Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) : including call centers and support desks, 
financial transaction processing, and human resource management. 
The ICT industry is of strategic importance for Kosovo’s economic and social development for 
several reasons: 
 Contributes to economic growth:  Several countries, such as Bulgaria, Estonia, 
Serbia, India and Costa Rica have shown the significant potential of the ICT industry as 
a trigger for economic development, job creation, and income generation. Considering 
the structure and the competitive advantages of Kosovo’s ICT industry (such as 10-15 
people agile teams, competitive pricing, quality, language skills, and technical know-how), 
the country has the potential to follow the example of these countries by using the ICT 
industry as a catalyst for economic growth. 
                                                
3 https://stikk.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Kosovo_IT_Strategy_V01-00_29-06-2016.pdf  
4 Republic of Kosovo – Government of Kosovo - Ministry of Economic Development – Electronic Communication 
Sector Policy – Digital Agenda for Kosovo 2013 – 2020.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 16 Figure 7: Number of high school graduates in ICT  
 
Source: Open Data Kosovo  
 Generates  significant employment:  The positive effect of the ICT industry on job 
creation is amplified by the fact that ICT is both a labor-intensive and skill-intensive 
industry. In the ICT industry (particularly in software development and BPO), scale is 
achieved by qualifying and hiring more people. In terms of employment, the ICT sector 
development has two positive effects: a quantitative one by increasing the number of 
jobs (more than 1,000 companies registered per year, on average, in Kosovo Business 
Registry Agency over the last several years) and a qualitative one by generating higher 
paying employment for higher skilled people (average monthly salary in the ICT sector 
in 2018 was €717 Euros). 
Figure 8: Number of businesses registered in the ICT sector within 10 years5 
 
Source: Open Data Kosovo  
                                                
5 This graph shows the number of businesses registered within the ICT sector within the last 10 years. For example, it 
shows the number of businesses in the ICT sector registered per year i.e. 1086 ICT businesses were registered in 2017. 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 17  Sector association STIKK estimates that the sector employs around 3,000 workers, but 
when considering the BPO sector, the overall estimates can reach as high as 10,000 
employees. According to NGO Open Data Kosovo, by the end of 2018, there were a 
total of 7,762 businesses registered in the ICT sector. Most of the firms, roughly 88%, 
are Kosovo-owned; approximately 3% are in equal partnership with foreign partners; 
and about 8% are foreign-owned. Most owners are younger than 50 years old. Kosovo’s 
ICT sector could play an important role in reducing unemployment, especially among 
youth. 
 Figure 9: Average monthly salary in ICT sector 2018-2019 
 
Source: Kosovo IT barometer 2019 - STIKK 
 Promotes export of services:  The global market for ICT is projected to grow rapidly 
in the next few years, thus providing significant export growth potential for Kosovo. 
Severe skill shortages in the ICT industry, particularly in northern Europe, will translate 
into additional demand for ICT outsourcing, largely to nearshoring destinations such as 
southeast Europe. Increasing exports is especially important for Kosovo, due to its 
negative trade balance and comparatively small, underdeveloped domestic market. 
Growth of ICT exports will provide several long-term benefits for Kosovo, such as 
speeding up the transformation to a knowledge-based economy through technology 
transfer and creating better, higher-paid jobs. 
 Promotes  competitiveness of other sectors within Kosovo : A significant 
economic benefit of the ICT industry is its positive impact on the efficiency and 
productivity of other (cross) industries through spillover effects. Thus, even traditional 
sectors of Kosovo’s economy such as manufacturing, agriculture, or tourism could 
improve their international competitiveness by using modern software applications and 
ICT services. By adopting the latest technologies and providing modern software 
applications, Kosovo ICT companies can support the integration of SMEs into 
international markets and supply chains. Hence, in this view, ICT becomes an enabler 
for other industries. Furthermore, the ICT industry can induce growth effects in related 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 18 industries through multiplier effects and provide opportunities for so-called hybrid 
business models, combining products with specialized services. Given the ongoing digital 
transformation of national economies and the emergence of Industry 4.0,6 ICT will have 
a major impact on the international competitiveness of Kosovo’s economy. 
Figure 10: Comparison of ICT companies in municipalities by activity7 
 
       Source: Open Data Kosovo  
 Promotes  innovation and knowledge-intensification within Kosovo : As a 
crosscutting technology, ICT is a driver of product and process innovation. 
Furthermore, ICT plays a key role within the knowledge-based economy, where its 
strategic importance will substantially increase due to mega-trends such as Internet of 
Things (LoT) and the so-called Industry 4.0. Accordingly, IT could play a crucial role in 
increasing the capacity for innovation of Kosovo’s economy. In addition to that, the IT 
sector could also serve as a catalyst for entrepreneurship and the establishment of a 
vibrant start-up scene. A case in point is the Innovation Center Kosovo (ICK), which 
impressively demonstrates the potential of the ICT industry for entrepreneurship and 
innovation. 
 Builds Kosovo’s international image : Promoting its ICT industry could help Kosovo 
to further improve its international visibility and position itself as a center of digital 
excellence, ICT entrepreneurship, and innovation, following the example of small, yet 
highly innovative and competitive nations such as Estonia, Lithuania, or Singapore. 
Kosovo would then be able to diversify its “industrial image” in terms of technology, 
capabilities, and quality. In addition to that, the Kosovo ICT industry would serve as a 
brand ambassador for the Kosovo economy. 
                                                
6 https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/09/02/what-is-industry-4-0-heres-a-super-easy-explanation-for-
anyone/#52bf27c9788a 
7 This graph shows the percentage of ICT businesses that are engaged in different activities categorized by Municipalities. One block represents the 
percentage of businesses that are engaged in one specific activity in a specific Municipality.  
 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 19  Attracts investment : Emerging countries with strong national ICT industries usually 
do better at attracting foreign direct investment (FDI). Thus, promoting the Kosovo ICT 
industry could help boost the country’s appeal to foreign investors and attract more FDI 
by improving its image, its technical and skill base, and its business climate. 
 Other strategic benefits : Improving the international competitiveness of the Kosovo 
ICT industry would also have a positive impact on Kosovo’s economy and society at 
large in areas such as good governance (e-government, open government, and open 
data), social development (information society), education and science (IT skills 
development, e-learning, IT R&D), health (e-health), and sustainable energy (e-energy). 
The available data on Kosovo’s ICT sector is mainly produced by STIKK, KBRA (MTI), KSA and 
donor funded projects covering the Western Balkans. However, these data do not provide 
sufficient information on the overall impact of the ICT industry on economic growth and 
employment, exports and imports, products and/or services, expenditures in the ICT sector, or 
public funding. So far, the following sources of data are available in Kosovo: 
 IT barometer Kosovo8 
 Survey on usage of ICT in Kosovo9 
 Eurostat data10 
 Statistics published by Open Data Kosovo11 
 International donor project assisted surveys and analysis 
Lack of qualified and validated data sources and information makes it difficult for all relevant 
stakeholders to have reliable and accurate information on the current and past state of the ICT 
sector in Kosovo.  
According to the 2019 Kosovo IT barometer,12 61% of ICT companies reported exports of their 
services and products. However, it is not only the growth of exports in the ICT sector (ICT 
service exports in Kosovo were reported at nearly €60 million in 2017, according to the World 
Bank development indicators,13 compiled from officially recognized sources) itself that will lead to 
sustainable economic growth, but also the application of digital solutions (digital transformation, 
digitalization, and automation of processes) in the wider economy (e.g., energy supply, finance, 
agriculture, retail, hospitality).  
                                                
8 The IT barometer aims to collect basic information only on ICT companies. It focuses on exploring the following issues 
related to the IT sector in Kosovo  
9 KSA - In 2019 KAS published second publication with the results of the ICT 22 Survey for 2018. The focus of this 
survey is rather narrow because it collects information on the use of ICT throughout the territory of the Republic of 
Kosovo by households and individuals of the age group 16-74 years old.  
10 Eurostat in 2019 published a leaflet “Basic figures on enlargement countries “. This leaflet presents the most recent 
Eurostat data on a small number of key indicators in the economic and social fields for the enlargement countries.  
11 In October 2019 “the Future Workplace16” is lunched, which is a data-driven digital tool developed to declutter the 
ICT market in Kosovo, which has powered by Millennium Foundation Kosovo and is implemented by Open Data 
Kosovo and Kosovo Chamber of Commerce.  
12 https://stikk.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/IT-Barometer-2019.pdf. It should be noted that this survey consists of 
a sample of only 38 companies, so this data should be taken as illustrative but not precise. The lack of reliable data on 
Kosovo’s ICT industry is a significant constraint to improving policy, donor and association support.  
13 https://tradingeconomics.com/kosovo/ict-service-exports-bop-current-us$-wb-data.html  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 20  
Figure 11: CBK data on ICT services exports14 
 
Source: MTI, Kosovo 
Organic growth of the ICT export sector could help create an additional positive edge in the 
business model of Kosovo’s economy, and contribute to economic growth. The World Bank’s 
Kosovo Digital Economy (KODE) project is an initiative that tackles the issue of applying digital 
solutions in the wider economy, through support for internet connectivity and skills. According 
to the 2019 edition of Eurostat's "Basic figures on Enlargement countries" publication, in 2018, 
Kosovo had the highest percentage of households with home-based Internet access in the region 
(93%). 
                                                
14 https://mti.rks-gov.net/desk/inc/media/4F5998B0-0FD5-497D-94B7-301B73A7F647.pdf  Balance Exports Imports
2009 56.83 €                   72.47 €                    15.64 €                        
2010 45.36 €                   79.67 €                    34.31 €                        
2011 76.78 €                   96.86 €                    20.08 €                        
2012 47.40 €                   70.40 €                    23.00 €                        
2013 32.05 €                   59.76 €                    27.70 €                        
2014 19.46 €                   77.68 €                    58.22 €                        
2015 (1.00) €                    54.82 €                    55.82 €                        
2016 2.57 €                     48.44 €                    45.87 €                        
2017 (4.77) €                    46.57 €                    51.33 €                        
2018 (5.28) €                    55.84 €                    61.11 €                        
2019 20.00 €                   68.10 €                    48.10 €                        
2020 (Q1+Q2) 21.20 €                   37.20 €                    16.10 €                        CBK Data on Computer Services, Information Technology and 
Telecommunications Services Export and Imports
 (in millions of Euro's)USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 21 Figure 12: Internet penetration in EU candidate and potential candidate countries15 
  
       Source: Eurostat 
The Kosovo ICT sector faces a shortage of skilled and qualified workers. when asked about the 
need for skilled/qualified workers, 83% of companies declared that they face a deficit of 
skilled/qualified workers and 92 % claim that their businesses are affected by brain drain.  
Figure 13: Number of university graduates in ICT16 
 
       Source: Open Data Kosovo 
The absence of a consolidated institutional framework for an ICT-based economy (i.e., an umbrella 
strategic document coordinating actions of the public sector within the ICT area), makes it 
increasingly difficult for the ICT sector to grow. It also makes actions of public institutions (and 
also coordination with donors) disparate and lacking harmonization, with significant overlaps and 
inefficiencies, therefore undermining the creation of a favorable environment for private 
investment within the sector. 
                                                
15 Basic figures on enlargement countries 2019 edition – Eurostat-  www.t.ly/ENeN  
16 https://thefutureworkplace.org/en/stats 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 22 3.2.2 MARKET LINKAGES AND END MARKETS 
By 2019, the global business process outsourcing (BPO) industry has grown into a €489 billion 
global industry, with significant emphasis on three broad areas:   
1. Logistics, sourcing, and distribution services; 
2. Information technology services, including the creation of software and the management 
of computer centers; and  
3. BPO areas such as call centers, financial transaction processing, and human resources 
management. 
In 2018, turnover in the IT-outsourcing market in Europe was projected to be €76 billion. This is 
expected to grow to approximately €83.1 billion by 2021, representing a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 3.4%. Some industry experts even expect a bigger growth rate of 8% to 
12% per year during the coming years.  
According to CBI,17 the biggest (in export volume and services requested and contracted) 
outsourcing markets are in Western Europe, led by the United Kingdom, Germany, and France. 
The fastest growing markets are in northern Europe, with Norway showing the fastest growth 
and Sweden being the biggest market in this region. Based on Statista, a leading statistics database, 
companies in the UK close the highest number of ICT outsourcing deals in Europe, and of the 
highest values, closely followed by companies in Germany. 
Western, northern, and parts of southern Europe are continuously facing a shortage of skilled IT 
experts and are increasingly demanding outsourced services. While traditional IT services are 
declining (approx. by 4% per year), the use of disruptive technologies (such as -artificial 
intelligence, virtual reality, Internet of Things, and machine learning) is growing. Due to these new 
technologies, the market is very dynamic and innovation driven, but is in desperate need of a 
skilled workforce and/or business process and software development outsourcing services and 
nearshoring companies.18 
Companies in the UK, France, and the Netherlands already show strong ICT collaboration 
experience with outsourcing servicing companies. Software development and programming 
segments are demanded throughout Europe, and specifically in niche technologies and segments 
(such as cutting-edge technologies, artificial intelligence, virtual reality, Internet of Things, and 
machine learning). 
Collaboration with small- and medium-sized companies abroad offers the best potential for 
market entry for Kosovo firms. European companies prefer to work with smaller, specialized 
companies. Smaller projects, pilots, and free trials offer strong potential for networking and 
building up references. Collaboration with local middlemen (diaspora) or intermediating teams, 
bridge geographic distances and create a feeling of trust and needed proximity. 
                                                
17 Centre for the Promotion of Imports from developing countries  
18 https://www.cbi.eu/market-information/outsourcing-itobpo  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 23 The figure below shows an analysis of high-potential market segments, including industries, 
company sizes, geographies, and services/products. 
Figure 14: : Overview on the analysis on high-potential market segments, incl. industries, company sizes, geographies and 
services/products 
 
Source: Centre for the Promotion of Imports from developing countries (CBI) 
3.2.3 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT MARKETS  
The biggest software development markets served by Kosovo companies are in Europe – primarily 
the DACH countries (Germany, Austria, and Switzerland), Norway, and Sweden – and North 
America. The demand from DACH buyers and Netherlands/Turkish/Scandinavian buyers is mostly 
focused on resource augmentation, as well as building small pieces (modules) of specialized 
software solutions. In some cases, these services are linked to a specific service in the overall 
lifecycle of the solutions provided to a certain industry/client. In the US and Canadian markets, 
most Kosovo companies deliver services related to custom software development projects, such 
as development of customized software solutions for different industries (e.g., healthcare, security 
and safety, logistics, operations and management, real estate, ed-tech). Also, this market has high 
demand for resource augmentation and body leasing.  
The key resources needed to conduct business in software development are: 
 Middle-tier management capacity  
 Software engineers  
 UI and UX engineers 
 Digital project managers  
 System engineers and quality assurance staff 
 Internal training programs 
 Business development and sales  
 Tech business development partners  
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 24  Office space  
 Digital infrastructure, security services, and reliable internet 
For Kosovo businesses trying to enter this market segment, it is important to have access to 
information on the specific staffing requirements, so that firms can find and recruit required 
resources. This information includes key competencies, language, and technical skills of the 
potential employees. They also need to have a good understanding of the clients’ business models, 
channels of communication, and knowledge of key companies in the specific markets requiring 
software development services.  
Kosovo ICT companies engage multiple methods for doing business with international companies. 
By far, the most popular method is direct exports from Kosovo to client abroad (68%). Other 
firms are doing business through a subsidiary/branch office in the target market (26%), through a 
distribution partner/local partner (sales agent) of another firm (26%), with a representative office 
(18%), or as part of a joint venture (8%). 
Figure 15: Channels of doing business in export markets  
 
  Source: Kosovo IT Barometer 2019 - STIKK  
3.2.4 DIGITAL SERVICES MARKETS  
Similar to software development, the main markets for digital services are in Europe (most 
commonly DACH countries, Norway, and Sweden), North America, and, on a smaller scale, South 
America. The services provided include web design, webpages and portals, e-commerce portals 
and solutions, mobile app development, design templates, widgets and plugins, digital marketing 
services, social media management and advertising, video and animation production, and digital 
solutions.  
The key resources needed to conduct business in digital services are: 
 Middle-tier management capacity  
 System engineers and quality assurance staff 
 Designers / video / animators 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 25  Digital project managers  
 Brand managers 
 Content writers and editors 
 Translators 
 Internal training programs 
 Business development, operations, and sales  
 Tech business development partners   
 Office space  
 Digital infrastructure, security, and reliable internet 
For Kosovo businesses trying to enter this market segment, it is important to have access to 
information on key resources required, key companies in the market, and an understanding of the 
business models and channels of communication.  
3.2.5 BUSINESS PROCESS OUTSOURCING MARKETS  
The main BPO markets for Kosovo firms are in Europe, primarily in DACH countries. North 
American clients are mostly in Customer and Technical support, as well as in infrastructure 
consultancy and client support. The services being offered include network infrastructure support, 
project management, technical and customer support, telemarketing, and call centers.  
The key resources needed to conduct business in BPO are: 
 Middle-tier management capacity  
 Call center operators 
 Software engineers 
 Digital project managers  
 System engineers 
 Networking engineers 
 Internal training programs 
 Business development and sales  
 Tech business development partners   
 Office space  
 Digital infrastructure, security and reliable internet 
Similar to the other areas, the information most useful to Kosovo businesses trying to enter this 
market include information on staff skills needed to perform contracted duties, information on 
key companies seeking BPO services, and information on business models and channels of 
communication.  USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 26 Figure 16: Share of 38 surveyed companies indicating which horizontal markets they provide services to  
~ 
Source: Kosovo IT Barometer 2019 – STIKK  
3.2.6 ROLE OF DIASPORA 
While the ICT sector in Kosovo is less capital-intensive than other sectors, knowledge transfer 
from diaspora is very important for the development of the industry. This is reflected in the 
prominence of diaspora in high technology industries of several countries. In addition, diaspora 
can play an important role in the improvement of business and marketing practices.  
Diaspora often act as ambassadors of goodwill for Kosovo, their home country. This can raise the 
reputation of goods and services from Kosovo. There is evidence, for example, that successful 
ICT specialists among Kosovar diaspora were important in projecting positive images of Kosovo 
as a reliable center for ICT services and BPO. 
Experts in the European ICT outsourcing sector agree that working with a sales representative 
or a matchmaker is one of the efficient ways to enter the European market. Personal contacts 
(through diaspora) and one-to-one selling have proven to be the most effective. Many companies 
from developing countries (DCs) that are doing business in Europe work with a strategic partner 
(usually an ICT company or consultancy in Europe with an existing client base). Matchmakers and 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 27 sales representatives (again diaspora) can help IT companies from DCs to find a strategic partner. 
Therefore, economic diplomacy and diaspora engagement are of crucial importance as seen and 
identified by stakeholders.  
Kosovo has a strong diaspora in Europe and US/UK, and beyond, and they are involved in ICT 
research and development, as well as employed in several medium- to large-sized corporations at 
the global level. Being themselves decision makers, or working closely with ones, is seen as an 
important factor for building bridges and collaboration with local ICT industry especially in 
outsourcing, digital services and BPO sector.  
Kosovar diaspora plays a critical role in accelerating technology exchange and foreign direct 
investment in the Kosovo economy. In addition to utilizing ICT to enhance remittance services, 
diaspora are helping to bridge the digital divide in country origin by incorporating technology 
transfer into social, economic, and political assistance activities. There are already numerous 
successful projects initiated or developed by diaspora in collaboration with Kosovar 
entrepreneurs, engineers, and businesspersons.  
Diaspora plays an important role in access to finance as they are frequently the buyers of services, 
solutions, and products from Kosovo ICT sector. Diaspora also plays an important role as 
potential investors and partners in Kosovo ICT companies, and establishment of new start-ups. 
The feasibility of launching a “Diaspora Investment Funds” should be assessed as a means of 
concentrating and channeling investment sources of Kosovars abroad interested in contributing 
to development and investing in Kosovo. 
As with other sectors, there is a lack of available information about the investment opportunities 
in the ICT sector in Kosovo and establishment of new information channels is needed. Establishing 
international network of Kosovar business owners in ICT industry (and beyond) and top-level 
executives/professionals (and not only in ICT) living abroad, who have an interest in contributing 
to Kosovo’s economic development can be one of many solutions to address this challenge. The 
collaboration with a local middlemen (diaspora) or intermediating teams bridge geographic 
distances and create a feeling of trust is another approach.  
3.2.7 IMPACT OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting all industries and sectors, including the ICT sector. The 
impact is not limited to human health; the pandemic has affected every industry economically, and 
the global ICT sector is no exception. 
According to the International Data Corporation (IDC), global IT spending is expected to contract 
by 3-4% by the end of 2020, considering the “pessimistic scenario,” due to the COVID-19 
pandemic. While the major impact is expected to be on hardware businesses, including devices, 
the software and services businesses are also expected to slow down as COVID-19 continues to 
spread widely. However, the adoption of collaborative applications and cloud services has seen a 
positive turn followed by technologies such as security, telecommunications, big data, AI, IoT, 
where the impact seems relatively small. USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 28 Even though businesses are grappling with current losses, in the long run, many analysts believe 
once the world is through the worst of this pandemic, the ICT industry may be stronger than 
before. Globally, certain aspects of the ICT industry are benefitting from health concerns and 
social isolation. Some of the more obvious immediate ICT opportunity areas are telework, 
telemedicine, food delivery and logistics, online and contactless payments, remote learning, and 
entertainment.  
In Kosovo, most of the ICT companies’ shareholders, management, operations, and finances were 
not prepared for what has happened and how the situation with the pandemic evolved from mid-
March 2020 onwards. Most of this is due to the lack of quality management standards and practices 
in place, risk identification, business continuity, and contingency planning. Some of the issues ICT 
technology companies are facing in Kosovo are not different from what similar companies are 
facing around the world: 
 Companies were forced to meet their existing deadlines with limited workforce, and 
hence were not concentrating on setting new targets and projects. This, in turn, slowed 
the growth of the sector and stunted the previously steady and optimistic industry 
growth. 
 Some ICT sector outsourcing companies rely on overseas consumption and 
development of services and solutions, which has slowed since the outbreak. 
 Customers are delaying purchases because the pandemic has impaired an already 
uncertain global economy. 
 A raft of cancellations of industry events, gatherings, and conferences meant fewer 
business development opportunities. Such events and gatherings offer vital business 
opportunities to ICT companies to showcase their products and solutions. Cancellation 
of such events affected forthcoming opportunities for Kosovo ICT companies. 
 Sudden loss of demand and revenue induced by the containment measures led to severe 
cash-flow problems. This threatened and endangered small SMEs’ survival, given their 
limited financial resources to withstand a long-lasting crisis. 
 SMEs working in the box-moving and hardware supply sector, dependent on imported 
equipment, components, and parts required to assemble final products, have 
encountered and are facing constant supply-chain disruptions. 
 SMEs have experienced shortages in labor, having a lower capacity to shift to 
teleworking and digital work processes in the context of movement restrictions. 
 Vastly diminished business travel (meeting prospective clients) resulted in fewer client 
interactions. 
 Technology support (and maintenance) struggles to keep up with increased customer 
needs on applications and solutions. 
 As companies seek business solutions to address remote work, social distancing, and 
the need for in-store alternatives (e-commerce, web presence, mobile apps, and social 
media channels), the demand for developers and engineering talent increased. Retaining 
top talent is becoming an issue and is essential for business continuation. USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 29 With the unfolding COVID-19 crisis, Kosovo will need to accelerate digital transformation for 
private sector development to increase resilience and optimize business processes.19 The impact 
of the crisis in the short term—but probably also in the long term—will be shifting the Kosovo 
economy towards the digital economy. The pandemic has also changed the way organizations 
manage, communicate, and grow. 
In the meantime, the COVID-19 crisis has also contributed to a shift in mindsets of some Kosovo 
companies. One example, is how it motivated public and private education providers to develop 
digital trainings. The education and training ecosystem, teaching, and learning have all undergone 
a fast and immediate transformation showing the importance of blended learning. Education and 
training providers – formal and non-formal, public and private – have already or are in the process 
of transition to online training. Most of them are already campaigning for online courses and new 
delivery formats.  
The COVID-19 pandemic has also forced change and adaptation to new business models. Job 
portals began seeking alternative online revenue models. Online research emerged as a new player 
in traditional industries. The COVID-19 crisis pushed the research market to think and move 
towards technology and use more market tools to conduct research. 
Recruitment and matching services have immediately adopted new changes in their business 
models and rapidly adapted to digital human resource services. Affected by government 
restrictions and new social distancing rules, companies are becoming increasingly dependent on 
technology to make sure their teams work efficiently. The workforce has changed and continues 
to change, and employers are changing their “modus operandi,” working remotely, and looking to 
hire more remote or freelance workers. 
3.3. FOOD PROCESSING  
3.3.1 SECTOR OVERVIEW 
Food processing in Kosovo is a relatively untapped sector with significant growth potential, both 
domestically and externally. Additionally, agricultural output accounts for a relatively small share 
of the economy’s output. According to the World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI), 
the net output of the “agriculture, forestry and fishing” sector in Kosovo stood at 9.1% of GDP 
in 2017, declining to 7.2% of GDP in 2018, and 6.9% of GDP in 2019. Moreover, based on the 
WDI data, the annual net output growth rate of “agriculture, forestry and fishing” was -10.6% in 
2018, and -0.7% in 2019. According to Kosovo Agency of Statistics (KAS) data, agricultural and 
food-related exports constituted 17% of all exports in 2018 and 2019 (although it should be noted 
that the official available statistics in Kosovo are notoriously unreliable).  
The food processing sector’s competitiveness potential is demonstrated by the fact that it is one 
of the biggest manufacturing sectors in Kosovo, and the third largest exporter, with a CAGR of 
9.4% during the years 2015-2019. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Kosovo government 
projected the sector to grow by an annual rate of 12%. The growth was expected to be driven by 
                                                
19 https://www.helvetas.org/en/switzerland/how-you-can-help/follow-us/blog/inclusive-systems/Digital-Economy-and-COVID USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 30 beverages and packaged foods, including mineral and carbonated soft drinks, beer, wine, vegetable 
spreads, jams, marmalades, purées, and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAP).  
Demand from the EU, particularly from Austria, Germany, Sweden, and Belgium, for products 
such as sweet peppers, ajvar, and sauerkraut, has been steady. There is also potential to meet 
growing EU demand for organic, ethical, sustainable, and “natural” products, particularly frozen 
fruit and vegetables; ready-made foods (cleaned, diced, and potentially fresh), vegetarian and vegan 
products; and MAP products, especially if they are gathered in the wild or organically-produced. 
There are also several successful examples of exports to the Middle East, with products designed 
to replace brand-name EU products at a lower price.  
As large international retail chains enter the Western Balkans, the demand for private label 
processed food is growing. Companies like LIDL in the Serbian market, and SPAR in the Albanian 
and Kosovo market are looking for options to source their private label products. Recently, Uje 
Rugove, M-Silosi, and Prince Café have been approved to supply fast food chain KFC, and have 
the potential to expand to other restaurant chains. Kosovo food processors are well suited to 
meet these opportunities. 
It is estimated that the Kosovo food sector consists of over 1,300 companies  employing up to 
50,000 full-time employees, including farmers who supply the raw materials. The sector has a 
strong potential for indirect impact on agricultural supply chains. In terms of scale, processed fruits 
and vegetables have over a dozen large or medium companies that process 9,000 tons of products 
annually (80% vegetables and 20% fruits). 
The sector has a high participation rate by women, and the potential to hire more as it expands. 
About 62% of employees are women, with smaller firms hiring proportionally more women than 
men. In addition, many firms are located in minority enclaves, and represent an opportunity for 
inclusion in the sector and the job market overall.  
Food processing association, PePeKo, was registered in 2015 and works to strengthen local 
processors, access new markets, promote local products locally and internationally and provide 
analytical support. It has 20 members. It is estimated that it member companies employ 1,284 
employees, including 562 full-time employees, 336 female and 226 male, as well as 722 seasonal 
employees (424 female and 298 male). It is also estimated that the processing capacity of 
associated companies is ten thousand tons a year. In 2018 the companies processed 5,160 tons, 
which is at 50% of processing capacities. Key exporting companies include: Frutomania (juices, 
exports to Europe, and in the Region), Agroproduct (medicinal and aromatic plants exporter), 
Fungo FF (mushroom producer/processor), Fluidi/Floil (beverage producer, oil processor, exports 
to Europe), Frutex (energy drinks, fruit and vegetables’ export to Balkan countries, EU countries,  
Middle East, Africa and USA), Eurofood (processing and production of food products: ketchup, 
marmalade, mayonnaise, preserved vegetables exports to Balkan countries, Germany, Switzerland, 
and other EU countries, Kamila (confectionary products, export to thirty countries in five 
continents), Liri (different processed foods, regional exports), and Pestova (potato 
processor/potato chips). Leaders in the sector are eager to improve competitiveness and reach 
new export markets. 
 USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 31 Another association, ORGANIKA, on medicinal and aromatic plants was established in 2013 and 
has 34 members. As per a recent study (Birgitt Boor, 2019) there are 7,500 collectors of MAPs 
and berries, around 700 cultivated farmers and 50 collection centers and ten companies engaged 
in export. More than 50 species of MAPs and berries come from the wild and from the cultivation. 
This sector is estimated to employ 315 full-time workers (50% women) and 794 seasonal 
employees. This also includes an estimated 271 minority employees. This subsector is more than 
90% export-oriented with export of €6.3 million in 2018. 
According to a 2014 UNDP-commissioned study on food processing, the food processing and 
packaging sector is mainly comprised of micro enterprises with fewer than nine employees (65%), 
followed by small companies of 10-49 employees (24%) and medium size companies of 50-249 
employees (10%). Micro and small firms employ only 10% of their staff full-time, while medium-
sized companies employ 40% of their staff full-time. Large firms employ 60% of their employees 
on a full-time basis. Eighty percent (80%) of businesses declared to be registered as individual 
businesses, 9% as partnerships, 8% as Limited Liability Companies, and less than 1% registered as 
shareholders or international companies.  
Based on the so-called Green Report produced by the Kosovo Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Rural Development (MAFRD), in 2018 alone, 626 new enterprises were registered in the 
economic activities section of agriculture, forestry, and fisheries , accounting for 6.4% of the total 
number of registered enterprises that year. The table below presents the data on the monetary 
turnover of the registered agro-business enterprises for 2014-2018, clearly showing an upward 
trend.  
Table 1: Registered agribusiness enterprises, 2014-2018, by turnover and employees 
 
According to official government data, out of the total crop production in 2018, vegetables and 
garden crops, cereals, and fruits are the most dominant by level of crop output. Vegetables and 
garden crops accounted for 25% of all crop production in 2018, followed by cereals with a share 
of 22% of the total annual crop output, and fruits which accounted for 17% of total crop 
production in 2018. 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 32 Figure 17: Share of agricultural crops to total crop production in 2018 
 
Source: KAS – Economic Accounts for Agriculture 2008 
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, some positive trends were noticed in the agricultural sector. 
The MAFRD Green Report for 2019 indicated that in 2018, financial turnover by agricultural 
activity was the highest in the processing of food products, which amounted to €231 million, 
followed by production of beverages, amounting to €108 million.  
Figure 18: Turnover (€000s) by agricultural activities, 2018 
 
Source: KAS, processed by DEAAS –MAFRD 
Similarly, according to the MAFRD Green Report, the total number of employees in the 
agricultural sector stood at 13,156 in 2018. From this total, he highest number of employees by 
type of agricultural activity was in the food processing products at 6,470, or nearly 50%. This is 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 33 followed by beverage processing with the second highest share of employees of 2,335 in 2018, or 
nearly 18% of total employees in the agri-business sector.  
Figure 19: Number of employees by agricultural activities, 2018 
 
Source: KAS, processed by DEAAS-MAFRD 
Notwithstanding the clear competitiveness potential of the sector, food processors need to 
strengthen linkages with farmer producers to ensure a steady supply of market-quality raw 
materials. Currently, only 4% of cultivated land produces fruits and vegetables, and farmers 
generally produce fresh market varieties. PePeKo needs to expand its membership to improve 
sector representation, particularly for legislative and regulatory reforms. Generally, processors 
lack information about new export market opportunities, particularly for niche markets, for which 
the Kosovo production system is well-suited. Few companies have Quality Management Systems 
(QMS) and small companies need to find ways to gain some level of certification and internal QMS.  
Different food products are required to comply with different standards. Fresh food products 
usually should fulfill GlobalGap requirements, but also GMP (Good Manufacturing Practices), GHP 
(Good Hygienic Practices), GTP (Good Transport Practices), and for more specific markets 
companies have to comply with Organic Certification and Fair Trade certification, as well as MRL 
requirements (maximum residual levels for pesticides, food additives, antibiotics, heavy metals 
GMO, etc.). Depending on market requirements, food processors usually should have in place 
different national and supra-national standards like:  GHP, GMP, ISO 2200 HACCP, IFS, BRS MRL 
requirements. Even though some food processing companies in Kosovo have adapted their 
products to target market requirements, they struggle to demonstrate compliance due to many 
reasons, such as lack of domestic competent certification authorities that are recognized in the 
export market, and the high cost of using foreign certification bodies. On the other hand, public 
and private sectors are still weak to provide conformity assessment services (accredited 
laboratories, certification bodies etc.). Food exporting companies cannot use certificates or 
laboratory testing documents from domestic laboratories if they are not internationally 
recognized. Food exporting companies have to obtain internationally recognized certifications 
from abroad, which adds additional costs. 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 34 The food processing sector is in need of a more skilled workforce, including, industrial mechanics, 
food technologists, trained warehouse managers, agricultural technicians, and food safety, 
marketing, and sales experts. Universities and vocational educational centers in Kosovo lack 
programs in food technology. While there are several organic and food standard certification 
bodies represented in Kosovo, demand for their services is low. The sector has received extensive 
donor support, and as a result, input suppliers have improved their offerings, collection centers 
have been established, and advisory services have improved. For example, Agroproduct has 45 
collection centers and hundreds of contracted suppliers across Kosovo.  
3.3.2 EXPORT TRENDS AND STATISTICS  
According to official government data (MAFRD Green Report 2019), the value of agricultural 
exports increased from nearly €40 million in 2014 to €64 million in 2018. Over the same period, 
the coverage ratio of agricultural imports by agricultural exports increased by 2.6% (from 6.4% in 
2014 to 9% in 2018). Even more notably, agricultural product exports increased as a share of total 
goods’ exports, from roughly 12% in 2014 to 17.4% in 2018.  
CEFTA countries were the most popular export destinations for Kosovo agricultural products in 
2018, constituting over 60% of total agricultural exports for the year. This was followed by EU 
countries as the second largest destination, with over 30% of total agricultural exports in 2018 
(MAFRD Green Report 2019). Within CEFTA, the largest export market by share of total 
agricultural exports is Serbia, followed by Moldova, North Macedonia, Albania, and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. 
Exports of agricultural products to EU countries have doubled from €10.2 million in 2014 to 
€20.9 million in 2018 (MAFRD Green Report 2019). Likewise, the share of EU-destined 
agricultural exports to total goods exports increased from 25.3% in 2015 to 32.7% in 2018. Based 
on the MAFRD Green Report 2019, Germany was the top export destination of Kosovo 
agricultural exports, with nearly 40% share of the total Kosovo agricultural exports in 2018. The 
category referred to as “other EU countries” constituted 32.5% of the total share of Kosovo 
agricultural exports in 2018. In 2018, 8.5% of agricultural exports went to Bulgaria, and nearly 7% 
to Croatia.  
According to official government data, of the nearly €64 million in agricultural product exports in 
2018, €27.5 million, or over 40%, were beverages, spirits, and vinegar. Edible fruits and nuts, peel 
of citrus fruits and melons constituted around 13% of all agricultural good exports in 2018, 
followed by export of vegetables and certain roots and tubers at nearly 9% of the total agricultural 
exports. Additionally, processed vegetables, fruits, nuts or other parts of plants constituted 7% of 
total agricultural product exports in 2018 (MAFRD Green Report 2019). 
Soft fruits (raspberries, strawberries, and blueberries) represent an important cluster of Kosovo’s 
agriculture and food processing sector. Production of soft fruits in Kosovo has intensified during 
the last decade. According to a market study on soft fruits (“Market Study on Soft fruits in Serbia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and North Macedonia, 2016 ”), raspberries are the main soft fruits 
in Kosovo, having had a very high growth average rate of 2000%, followed by strawberries, which 
also show a high percentage of growth, and blueberries. There is a trend for organic production 
of soft fruits in Kosovo. The USAID AGRO Activity, in close cooperation with the national USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 35 association for raspberries “Mjedra e Kosovës,” has worked on the introduction and 
implementation of modern production practices and standard certifications. In 2019, Kosovo’s 
agriculture ministry registered over 1,637 hectares of land cultivated with raspberries, with 7,206 
tons of fruit harvested in Kosovo. The export value of Kosovo’s raspberries has grew rapidly in 
recent years. In 2016, Kosovo exported €6.4 million worth of raspberries (28.7 times more than 
in 2011). It is estimated that current exports of soft fruits is over €16 million. Kosovo’s frozen 
soft fruits (mostly raspberries) are exported mostly to the EU countries and are price competitive.   
The EU comprises a significant export market for Kosovo’s agricultural exports. Germany and 
Switzerland are particularly important markets, in part due to the diaspora communities in the 
two countries. Figure 20 shows Kosovo agri-food exports to the EU in 2019.  
Figure 20: Kosovo agri-food exports to the EU in 2019 
 
Source: EU - Agri-food trade statistical factsheet (2020) 
3.3.3 EXPORT DESTINATIONS OF AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD PRODUCTS 
Compete analyzed the most recent Kosovo Customs data for 2020. Based on the review of 
selected product codes,20 Albania remains a top export destination, comprising 30% of all 
agricultural exports in 2020 (under the categories specified in the footnote), down from 34% a 
year before. Germany comes second with 16%, North Macedonia with 12%, and Serbia with 8% 
                                                
20 Animal Origin Products; Cereal products, malt, corn starch, inulin, wheat gluten; Coffee, tea, and herbs; Drinks, 
alcoholic drinks and vinegars; Essential oils and resins, preparations of perfumes, cosmetics and toiletry; Food products 
from meat, fish, crustaceans, mollusks or other non-vertebrate aquatic animals; Food preparations from cereals, flour, 
corn starch or mi, bakery products or dough products; Fruits, edible nuts, melon and nut peels; Meat and Meat products; 
Milk Products, bird eggs and natural honey; Oily fruits and nuts, various fruits and nuts, industrial or medicinal herbs, 
hay; Preparations from vegetables, fruit or other parts of plants; Sugars or confectionery thereof; Various edible 
preparations;  Vegetables, roots, etc. 
USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 36 in 2020. In terms of the western countries, Switzerland and Germany lead other markets 
presumably due to strong diaspora communities. A potentially important issue for the mid-term 
is potential EU accession of Albania and North Macedonia, which will put further pressure on 
quality infrastructure improvement and enforcement in Kosovo. 
Figure 21: Top country export destinations of Kosovo prepared food exports, by share 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs  
Figure 22: Top country export destinations of Kosovo prepared food exports, by value 
 
34%
14%
7%11%
2%3% 3%
2%2%2%34%
14%
12%
10%
2%3% 3%2%2% 2%34%
12%13%
10%
2%3% 3%3%2%2%30%
16%
12%
8%
4%4%3%
3%2% 2%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%
 AL - Albania  DE -
Germany NMK - North
Macedonia XS - Serbia  IT - Italy  BG -
Bulgaria CH -
Switzerland HR - Croatia  SE - Sweden  NL -
NetherlandsFOOD EXPORT DESTINATIONS - % OF TOTAL (TOP 10 DESTINATIONS IN 2020)
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
15 
6 
3 5 
1 1 1 1 1 1 20 
8 
7 6 
1 2 2 1 1 1 20 
7 8 
6 
1 2 2 2 1 1 21 
11 
9 
6 
3 3 2 2 2 1 
 - 5 10 15 20
 AL - Albania  DE -
Germany NMK -
North
Macedonia XS - Serbia  IT - Italy  BG -
Bulgaria CH -
Switzerland HR - Croatia SE - Sweden  NL -
Netherlands€MillionsFOOD EXPORT DESTINATIONS - VALUE (TOP 10 DESTINATIONS IN 
2020)
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 37 Source: Kosovo Customs 
The following charts present top destinations of selected Kosovo agricultural and prepared food 
exports, by specific Kosovo Customs codes and chapters as noted in the prior page’s footnote.  
Figure 23: Top export destinations of total cereal products exports , as % 
 
Malt, corn starch, inuline, wheat gluten | Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 24: Top export destinations of coffee, tea and herbs, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
95%
3%1%0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%91%
3% 3%1% 1% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%61%
11%10%12%
2%0% 0% 1% 1% 0%65%
10%8% 7%5%
2% 2% 1% 1% 0%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
 AL -
Albania CF -
Central
African
Republic ML - Mali  NMK -
North
Macedonia DE -
Germany IQ - Iraq  GB - Great
Britain US - United
States of
America SE -
Sweden BE -
BelgiumEXPORT OF CEREAL PRODUCTS, MALT, CORN STARCH, INULINE, WHEAT 
GLUTEN, BY TOP EXPORT DESTINATION, IN %
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
2 15 
8 
6 
1 1 2 
1 2 
0 14 
6 7 
1 3 
1 1 2 2 14 
12 
7 
3 3 3 2 2 2 2 
 - 5 10 15 20
 NMK -
North
Macedonia DE -
Germany AL -
Albania IT - Italy  CH -
Switzerland SE -
Sweden ME -
Montenegro US - United
States of
America BG -
Bulgaria SI -
Slovenia€x 100000EXPORT OF COFFEE, TEA AND HERBS BY TOP COUNTRY DESTINATION, BY 
NOMINAL VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 38 Figure 25: Top export destinations of alcoholic drinks and vinegars, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 26: Top export destinations of fruits, edible nuts, melon & nut peels, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
7 
1 1 1 1 
0 0 1 0 0 13 
3 
1 1 2 
1 0 1 1 1 14 
4 
1 1 2 
1 1 1 1 1 14 
5 
2 2 
1 1 1 1 1 0 
 - 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
 AL - Albania  NMK - North
Macedonia BG -
Bulgaria HR - Croatia  XS - Serbia  CH -
Switzerland DE -
Germany BA - Bosnia
and
Herzegovina SE - Sweden  ME -
Montenegro€MillionsEXPORT OF DRINKS, ALCOHOLIC DRINKS AND VINEGARS, BY TOP 
DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
3 
3 
0 4 
3 
0 3 3 
0 
0 3 3 
1 
1 
 - 1 2 3 4
 DE - Germany  XS - Serbia  NL - Netherlands  TR - Turkey€MillionsEXPORT OF FRUITS, EDIBLE NUTS, MELON AND NUT PEELS, BY TOP 
DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 39 Figure 27:  Top export destinations of meat and meat products, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 28: Top export destinations oily fruits et al , in € value 
 
 Oily fruits & nuts, various fruits & nuts, industrial or medicine herbs, hay | Source: Kosovo Customs 
94 88 127 277 
56 246 
58 
33 
 - 50 100 150 200 250 300
 AL - Albania  NMK - North Macedonia  ME - Montenegro  KW - Kuwait€ThousandsEXPORT OF MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS BY DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € 
VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
8 
1 3 
0 11 
1 7 
1 22 
3 6 
0 25 
9 
5 
1 
 - 10.0 20.0
 DE - Germany  AL - Albania  AT - Austria  CH - Switzerlandx 100000EXPORT OF OILY FRUITS AND NUTS, VARIOUS FRUITS AND NUTS, AND 
INDUSTRIAL OR MEDICINAL HERBS, HAY, BY DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL €
VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 40 Figure 29: Top export destinations of vegetables, fruit or other plant parts, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
Figure 30:  Top export vegetables, roots, in € value 
 
Source: Kosovo Customs 
3.3.4 INDUSTRY PERCEPTIONS ON THE COMPETITIVENESS OF THE FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRY 
The Activity team interviewed a dozen companies from various subsectors of the food processing 
industry as part of the Market System and Constrain Analysis assessment. The local market share 
of those interviewed ranged from an estimated 5% to as large as 50%. Industry insights from these 
interviews suggested a growing interest to continue expansion in EU markets, Switzerland, and 
466 633 637 
362 
131 326 
14 146 355 
283 696 763 
587 
290 
117 493 
10 183 
144 167 813 
418 777 
259 245 373 
61 235 
113 171 1,033 
977 
817 
414 380 
344 323 
278 
205 
160 
 (100) 100 300 500 700 900 1,100
 NMK - North
Macedonia DE -
Germany XS - Serbia  CH -
Switzerland SE - Sweden  AL - Albania  IT - Italy  BG -
Bulgaria IQ - Iraq  HU -
Hungary€ThousandsEXPORT OF PREPARATIONS FROM VEGETABLES, FRUIT OR OTHER PARTS 
OF PLANTS, BY DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL € VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020
4 4 14 
6 
0 2 
0 1 2 2 6 7 15 
6 
1 1 1 1 1 5 8 16 
3 
2 
1 3 
1 20 
18 
17 
7 
5 4 3 3 3 2 
 - 5 10 15 20 25
 IT - Italy  DE -
Germany AL - Albania  NMK - North
Macedonia FR - France  RO -
Romania BG -
Bulgaria XS - Serbia  ME -
Montenegro CH -
Switzerland€x 100000EXPORT OF VEGETABLES, ROOTS, BY EXPORT DESTINATION, IN NOMINAL €
VALUE
2017
 2018
 2019
 2020USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 41 some markets in Africa and Asia. Two companies operating in the beverage industry export to 
Senegal, Togo, Guinea, Liberia, Mauritania, Kuwait, Oman, Jordan, and United Arab Emirates.  
Interviewed industry actors believe they can compete based on quality, price, and trust. The 
majority of them characterized their competition in respective markets as strong, and noted about 
the fact that informal economic activities are a strong impediment to strengthening their 
competitiveness. Companies use different strategies to compete in their markets and to improve 
their competitiveness, including focusing on improving quality and identifying market gaps. Some 
use additional strategies to raise their reputation and consumer standing, such as corporate social 
responsibility initiatives and sponsorships, and increasing visibility of those efforts among 
consumers. Marketing plays a big role in the improvement of domestic competitiveness. Many 
companies promote to customers through social networks, paid media advertisements, buying 
primary positions in retail for better visibility, brochures, and promotion activities.     
3.3.5 ROLE OF DIASPORA 
In the food-processing sector, diaspora from Kosovo is mostly engaged in purchasing of home-
country products, a practice known as “nostalgia trade”. Such trade entails the purchase of goods 
produced in the ancestral country. Consumption of goods such as food are often distinctive to 
the country of origin and help diaspora community to nurture and maintain their sense of cultural 
identity. Such purchases are not driven by economic value or impact, as long as their consumption 
enables diaspora to gain a sense of familiarity linked to their ancestral roots.  
Although there is limited data about the volumes of Kosovo food products purchased by diaspora 
in their host countries, it is well accepted that such trade flows provide an opportunity for local 
food processing companies to enter new markets. The main food products that Kosovo’s diaspora 
purchase in their host countries are processed fruit and vegetables, cheese, ajvar, different types 
of jams, paprika prepared with cheese or milk cream, spices, dried fruits, different types of teas, 
and wine. There is a large community with a migration background and cultural identity in the 
DACH countries. According to some data there are about 4 million people who migrated to 
DACH countries from former Yugoslavia, Albania, or Eastern Europe, including Turkey. This is a 
good potential for the presently produced fruit and vegetable preserves. Currently, Kosovo does 
not have trade barriers for exports to DACH market, except for products of animal origin. 
According to processing companies and migrants from Kosovo, food products from Kosovo are 
imported, distributed and sold by small businesses owned by Kosovo’s migrants themselves, but 
more often by other businesses owned by migrants from other Balkan countries and by Turkish 
migrants. With little improvement in labeling the range of qualitative vegetable preserved as 
pickled and stuffed peppers, cucumbers, pepperonis, red beet, tomatoes, vegetable preserved as 
Ajvar and dried spices could be exported to targeted DACH markets. With changes in packaging 
size, natural fruit preserves and juices could be also exported in DACH countries. Fresh organic 
products especially berries from wild collection also have good chances to succeed in DACH 
markets. 
 USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 42 When asked about available sales channels, food processors from Kosovo say that they have food 
distributors in countries where Kosovo’s diaspora is concentrated. There are no available data 
about demand for food products from Kosovo, distribution networks, businesses and 
marketplaces offering food products from Kosovo. According to processing companies and 
migrants from Kosovo, in many cases, food products from Kosovo are imported, distributed and 
sold by small businesses owned by Kosovo’s migrants themselves, but more often by other 
businesses owned by migrants from other Balkan countries and by Turkish migrants.  
The challenges of obtaining accurate information about diaspora role in the Kosovo food-
processing sector are in many ways representative of the current state of the industry, which is 
plagued by issues related to informality, quality control, shipping, labeling and diversification. These 
challenges also lead to difficulties for diaspora to establish a sustainable supply of Kosovo-made 
products and also often lead them to have to go to great lengths to find authentic food products 
from Kosovo.  
Albanian diaspora from Kosovo is believed to typically purchase specific food products from their 
homeland. However, in order to have more insights in this phenomenon, it is important to more 
precisely quantify the size and impact of this kind of trade. In this regard, migrant survey data like 
a mapping of businesses or market places (i.e. EU countries, USA, etc.) offering food products 
from Kosovo and collection of export records would serve as an important tool in better 
understanding and further development of this promising value chain. It is also important to know 
the level of information the diaspora from Kosovo has on the availability of food products from 
Kosovo, including their level of satisfaction with regards to products’ quality and variety.  It is also 
important to have a clear picture about businesses in Kosovo that are part of this value chain, 
market size, varieties, labeling and quality of such products.   
What is clear is that food processing sector presents good opportunities for investment, which is 
supported by a number of studies and demonstrated by several prominent examples. One good 
example is Etlinger, a company run by a Kosovar, who returned to Kosovo after living in Austria. 
This company processes thousands of tons of canned vegetables each year, including different 
types of paprika, cucumbers etc. The owner of this company, Mr. Kokollari, returned to Kosovo 
with experience and knowledge of food processing industry in Austria. Currently, over 80% of 
products from Etlinger are exported to Austria and his company has established sustainable 
partnerships with Austrian companies. Similar opportunities exist in a number of other diaspora 
markets. 
The lack of data on investment opportunities in the Kosovo food sector creates uncertainty 
amongst potential investors, which is one of the main issues in the sector that needs to be 
addressed. Kosovo institutions, in cooperation with the donor community, can initiate 
interventions in strengthening such value chains: information on market research on migrant 
consumers and demand for Kosovo’s food products; identification of food processing businesses 
producing on–demand food products; offer business training for food processors (diaspora value 
chain focus) on foreign market requirements; support trade fairs and sales missions in countries 
with high diaspora concentration; support diversification and product branding, etc.  
Some concrete measures which could promote the food sector in Kosovo as an investment 
destination include the following:  provide information to diaspora business about food processing USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 43 potential in Kosovo, strengthening the partnership between food businesses in the diaspora with 
the food processing businesses in Kosovo, creation of investment funds as a part of future financial 
market, improve regulatory framework with regard to investment in food sector, diversification 
of products with focus on exports etc.  
3.3.6 IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC  
Companies interviewed for the Activity’s MSCA largely retained their wholesale and individual 
buyers following the onset of the pandemic, but reported a noticeable slowdown in their ability 
to attract new clients. They also experienced a number of new challenges related to movement 
restrictions, more time-consuming logistics, and a decrease in demand from the HoReCa sector.   
The association of fruit and vegetable processors of Kosovo, PEPEKO, also conducted a limited 
assessment of pandemic effects on their members. Twelve companies that participated in the 
PEPEKO interviews reported that sales were most negatively affected, followed by distribution, 
while production was reportedly less affected. The main declared reason for the decrease in sales 
among the interviewed companies is the assumption that consumers concentrated on buying 
essential products. Restrictions imposed by some EU countries also affected exporting companies. 
When companies were asked about recovery time to return to relative normalcy after the 
pandemic, most of the companies reported needing at least 4-6 months, but there were also 
companies that reported needing more than 10 months to recover from the effects of the 
pandemic. Companies were also asked about the government’s emergency fiscal package in the 
early stages of the pandemic and whether it was adequate for their needs. Companies reported 
to PEPEKO that it was somewhat adequate at the time but not sufficient to cover their operational 
losses (salaries, rents, revenue shocks, etc.) caused by the situation. The main concern raised by 
processors was their need for cash flow in order to source raw material supplies.  
In Kosovo’s case, sales of food products have reportedly declined because large sections of the 
diaspora community did not travel to Kosovo during the summer of 2020. Apart from this, sales 
also declined due to opening restrictions on restaurants and cancelations of weddings and other 
large parties. Even though no data is available, it is assumed that the food processing sector in 
Kosovo was also affected because food demand is usually linked to income, and loss of income 
earnings had an impact on consumption.      
Taking into consideration the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a need to support 
the food processing sector to overcome its lingering effects. Food processors usually contract 
their supply during winter months, and due to a liquidity crunch they expect to face struggles in 
contracting and securing sufficient supplies of raw materials. This is likely to further affect their 
processing capacities in the coming period.  
Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, food processing companies in Kosovo faced significant 
challenges related to availability of working capital. The pandemic is believed to have made this 
worse. There has been no attempt by the central government to come up with a temporary 
solution to ease working capital constraints faced by food processing companies. Moreover, no 
movement has been noted on the part of the government to work with the financial industry to 
temporarily subsidize interest rates. In the initial months of the pandemic, the government 
undertook some measures to defer tax payments. USAID KOSOVO COMPETE ACTIVITY—SECTOR ASSESSMENTS 44 Consumer behavior related to the food processing sector has been affected by the pandemic. 
Though in the food sector there is no discernable pattern as yet, in general, consumers appear to 
have increased their reliance on online shopping. For food processing companies in Kosovo, the 
impact may well be that they will likely gradually accelerate their adoption of digital marketing, 
online platforms and online sales. Companies should consider this change in consumer behavior, 
as online shopping and marketing is likely to continue to grow even after the pandemic. Food 
processing companies may need to restructure their supply chain designs and build online sales 
infrastructure in order to complement their traditional sales.  
 The pandemic is also having an impact on consumer preferences. Because of home quarantine 
and lock-down measures, people are becoming more health-conscious and will probably increase 
their demand for healthy and safe foods with traceable origins. This is potentially a good 
opportunity for food processors in Kosovo to upgrade and strongly implement food quality and 
safety standards. As COVID-19 seems to be more severe among people with pre-existing health 
conditions (e.g., diabetes and obesity), it may impact consumption patterns. In short, certain 
segments of the food processing industry may benefit from such consumption behavioral changes 
and diversify their products and offerings according to new food consumption preferences.  
 