ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 14 May 2021
doi: 10.3389/fgwh.2021.670494
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Editedby:
BethPayne,
UniversityofBritishColumbia,Canada
Reviewedby:
BilalAhmedUsmani,
AgaKhanUniversity,Pakistan
CatherineSanders,
VancouverCoastalHealth,Canada
*Correspondence:
BasseyEbenso
b.e.ebenso@leeds.ac.uk
orcid.org/0000-0003-4147-0968
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
MaternalHealth,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinGlobalWomen’sHealth
Received: 21February2021
Accepted: 19April2021
Published: 14May2021
Citation:
EbensoB,OkusanyaB,OkunadeK,
AkejuD,AjepeA,AkabaGO,
YalmaRM,DirisuO,TukurJ,
AbdullahiMK,OkuzuOandAllsopMJ
(2021)WhatAretheContextual
EnablersandImpactsofUsingDigital
TechnologytoExtendMaternaland
ChildHealthServicestoRuralAreas?
FindingsofaQualitativeStudyFrom
Nigeria.
Front.Glob.WomensHealth
2:670494.
doi:10.3389/fgwh.2021.670494What Are the Contextual Enablers
and Impacts of Using Digital
Technology to Extend Maternal and
Child Health Services to Rural Areas?
Findings of a Qualitative Study From
Nigeria
BasseyEbenso1*,BabasolaOkusanya2,KehindeOkunade2,DavidAkeju3,
AdegbengaAjepe4,GodwinO.Akaba5,RamseyM.Yalma6,OsasuyiDirisu7,
JamiluTukur8,ManirK.Abdullahi8,OkeyOkuzu9andMatthewJ.Allsop10
1NufﬁeldCenterforInternationalHealthandDevelopment,Uni versityofLeeds,Leeds,UnitedKingdom,2Departmentof
ObstetricsandGynecology,CollegeofMedicine,Universit yofLagos,Lagos,Nigeria,3DepartmentofSociology,Universityof
Lagos,Lagos,Nigeria,4DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,LagosUniversity TeachingHospital,Lagos,Nigeria,
5DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,UniversityofAbu ja,Abuja,Nigeria,6DepartmentofCommunityMedicine
UniversityofAbuja,Abuja,Nigeria,7PopulationCouncil,Abuja,Nigeria,8AminuKanoTeachingHospital,Kano,Nigeria,
9InstratGlobalHealthSolutions,Abuja,Nigeria,10AcademicUnitofPalliativeCare,UniversityofLeeds,Leed s,
UnitedKingdom
Background: Strengthening health systems to improve access to maternit y services
remains challenging for Nigeria due partly to weak and irreg ular in-service training and
deﬁcient data management. This paper reports the implement ation of digital health
tools for video training (VTR) of health workers and digitiz ation of health data at
scale, supported by satellite communications (SatCom) tec hnology and existing 3G
mobile networks.
Objective: To understand whether, and under what circumstances using d igital
interventions to extend maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH) services to remote
areas of Nigeria improved standards of healthcare delivery .
Methods: From March 2017 to March 2019, VTR and data digitization inte rventions
were delivered in 126 facilities across three states of Nige ria. Data collection combined
documents review with 294 semi-structured interviews of st akeholders across four
phases (baseline, midline, endline, and 12-months post-pr oject closedown) to assess
acceptability and impacts of digital interventions. Data w as analyzed using a framework
approach, drawing on a modiﬁed Technology Acceptance Model to identify factors that
shaped technology adoption and use.
Results: Analysis of documents and interview transcripts revealed t hat a supportive
policyenvironment,andtrackrecordofprivate-publicpar tnershipsfacilitatedadoptionof
technology.Thedeterminantsoftechnologyacceptanceamo nghealthworkersincluded
ease of use, perceived usefulness, and prior familiarity wi th technology. Perceptions of
impact suggested that at the micro (individual) level, repe ated engagement with clinicalEbenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
videos increased staff knowledge, motivation and conﬁdenc e to perform healthcare
roles. At meso (organizational) level, better-trained sta ff felt supported and empowered
to provide respectful healthcare and improved management o f obstetric complications,
triggering increased use of MNCH services. The macro level s aw greater use of reliable
and accurate data for policymaking.
Conclusions: SimultaneousandsustainedimplementationofVTRanddatad igitization
at scale enabled through SatCom and 3G mobile networks are fe asible approaches
for supporting improvements in staff conﬁdence and motivat ion and reported MNCH
practices. By identifying mechanisms of impact of digital i nterventions on micro, meso,
and macro levels of the health system, the study extends the e vidence base for
effectiveness of digital health and theoretical underpinn ings to guide further technology
use for improving MNCH services in low resource settings.
Trial Registration: ISRCTN32105372.
Keywords: digital health technology, eHealth, video-base d training, digitization of healthcare data, maternal and
child health, theoretical underpinnings, Nigeria
INTRODUCTION
Strengthening health systems to improve access to and quality
of primary health care (PHC) services remains challenging fo r
African countries like Nigeria that are characterized by ch ronic
infrastructuredeﬁcits,weakandirregularstaﬀtraining, deﬁcient
data management and low health spending ( 1). Studies show
that over 50% of women regard limited ﬁnancial accessibilit y as
a signiﬁcant barrier to utilizing skilled maternal, newborn , and
child health (MNCH) services ( 2,3). These inherent challenges
in African countries suggest the need to rethink how health
systems are organized and ﬁnanced. In response, there has bee n
growing global consensus that information and communicati on
technologies (ICTs, also called digital health technologi es) can
oﬀer innovative ways to strengthen health systems in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs) ( 4–6). The World Health
Organization deﬁnes digital health technologies as the prac tice
of employing routine and innovative forms of information and
communications technology (ICT) to address health needs ( 6).
The 71st World Health Assembly (WHA) resolution of May
2018 demonstrated this recognition through endorsing digi tal
innovationsasakeyhealthsystemstrengtheningstrategyt ohelp
countriesachievetargetsofuniversalhealthcoverage(UHC ).
Nigeriahasimplementedseveralgovernment-ledinitiative sto
assess the role of digital technologies for improving the qua lity
of maternity services. This includes a recent scoping review of
ICTs for health implemented across Nigeria ( 7) which identiﬁed
over 100 ongoing ICT projects aimed at strengthening diverse
health systems functions, with 65 projects targeted at MNCH,
36 projects directed at improving health information systems ,
13 projects on training and education of health workforce,
and six projects on health ﬁnancing. This growing interest
in ICT projects followed the Federal Government of Nigeria’s
prioritization of ICTs as a strategy for achieving the target s of a
“SavingOneMillionLives”initiative(ICT4SOML)implemented
toincreaseaccesstoessentialhealthcareservicesformot hersandchildren ( 8). In our view, this government-led ICT coordination
mechanismdeployedthroughtheSOMLinitiativeisanexample
ofnational-levelinstitutionalizationofdigitalhealth( 9).
The expanding implementation of ICT projects in the health
sector has the potential to improve the cost-eﬀectiveness of car e
delivery ( 10) and extend the reach of MNCH services to remote
locations. However, the huge cost of providing mobile network
infrastructure in rural areas and of constructing road netwo rks
to further broaden access to healthcare services has constra ined
government investment in mobile network infrastructure.
Consequently, <55% of the population have access to 3G
network coverage ( 11), thus restricting the chances for using
eHealthapproachesforhealthcaredelivery.Apromisingstrat egy
for addressing such low connectivity and extend the coverag e
of healthcare services to rural populations is the use of satell ite
communication (SatCom) with no requirement for investing i n
infrastructure such as masts and cables ( 12,13). However, there
is a lack of empirical evaluations of the impact of digital heal th
approachesingeneral( 14),andofSatComprojectsimplemented
inLMICsinparticular.
This study addresses this knowledge gap through reporting
the evaluation of a digital health project that deployed video
training (VTR) of health workers and digitization of health
data at scale, supported by SatCom and existing 3G mobile
networks. The development of digital health tools has been
reported elsewhere ( 1,15). This paper aims to report whether
and under what circumstances using digital interventions to
extend health services to remote areas of Nigeria improved th e
standard of MNCH services. Secondary objectives were to: (i)
identify contextual drivers of acceptability and use of VTR an d
data digitization interventions, and (ii) assess the impact s of the
interventions on the individual, organizational and policy levels
ofthehealthsystem.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report on
deploying video training and data digitization interventio ns at
scale using SatCom in an LMIC context. This paper deﬁnes
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
TABLE 1 | Key PHC indicators by State (in 2018) compared to national av erage*.
Primary health care indicators FCT Kano state Ondo state National average
Proportion of physicians per 10,000 people 0.75 0.08 0.71 3.8
Proportion of nurses and midwives per 10,000 people 1.4 0.7 2.3 12
Proportion of CHEWs per 10,000 people 1.43 0.33 0.5 17
Women who received Antenatal care from skilled provider (%) 87.7% 65.3% 92% 67%
Proportion of births delivered in a health facility (%) 63.2% 19.2% 85.6 39%
Proportion of births assisted by skilled personnel (%) 71.6% 21.5% 82% 43%
Women who attended postnatal care within 2 days of birth (%) 61% 23% 49% 42%
Proportion of children age 12–23 months who receive all vacc ination (%) 50% 34.3% 39% 31%
Infant mortality rate per 1,000 live births 40 62 49 67
Maternal mortality ratio per 100,000 live births 700 1,549 170 512
Proportion women in paid employment (%) 63 33 56 74%
Proportion of women that participate in household decision -making (%) 56 5 50 44%
*NigeriaDemographicandHealthSurvey2018( 18);WHOhealthworkforcestatistics( 19).Red,indicatorscoreisworsethannationalaverage;green,indicatorscor eisbetterthanthe
nationalaverage.
successfulscaleindigitaltechnologyastheembeddingofa digital
health product into each level of the health system as opposed
to regrading it as a separate activity ( 9,16). In this regard, the
integration of VTR and data digitization into policy, practic es,
workﬂows, and daily lives of health staﬀ in multiple states of
Nigeriarepresentssuccessfulscalingofdigitaltechnolog y.
The Context of MNCH in Nigeria
Nigeria operates a 3-tier healthcare system: primary, second ary,
and tertiary. Healthcare provision is an overlapping, concurre nt
responsibility of the three tiers of government in the countr y–
federal, state, and local government ( 17). These operational
levels have diverse but sometimes overlapping roles and
responsibilities. The Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH)
developshealthpolicies,providestertiaryhealthcareservi ces,and
technicalsupporttoandregulatesthestateandlocalgovernm ent
levels. State Ministries of Health (SMOH) are tasked with
providing secondary healthcare services, technical support f or
andregulationofprimaryhealthcare(PHC)serviceswhileLo cal
government authorities implement primary healthcare servic es
(7). The key categories of health workers at the primary health
care (PHC) level in Nigeria include doctors, nurse/midwive s,
community health extension workers (CHEWs) and laboratory
staﬀ. However, data is lacking on actual numbers of health
workers and salaries of health care workers in the three
participating states in this research—Kano, Ondo states, and the
Federal Capital Territory. Table1indicates that the expected
numbers of health workers per 10,000 population in the three
states are lower than the national average (highlighted in r ed).
Whilstskilledantenatalcareprovidersandbirthattendant sexist
in most health facilities, they lack essential drugs, and ba sic
tools and equipment to provide high-quality MNCH services.
The lack of material resources and dilapidated infrastructu re at
PHCfacilitiesadverselyaﬀectinfantandmaternalmortalit y(see
Table1).
Despite the huge reductions in maternal and infant mortality
in Nigeria by 56 and 33% respectively since 2000, these indice sremain unacceptably high at 512 deaths per 100,000 live births
and 67 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2018, respectively ( 18,19),
with variations in the levels of mortality between regions o f the
country.Thenorthernstates(representedbyKanoState)hav ethe
highest maternal mortality ratio (with 1,549 deaths per 100, 000
livebirthsin2015)comparedtootherregionsofthecountry( 20).
Table1further shows that Kano State has the lowest
proportions of: (i) women who received antenatal care from
skilled staﬀ, (ii) births delivered in health facilities ass isted by
skilled personnel, and iii) those who attended postnatal care.
Concerning indices of women’s empowerment, Kano state has
the lowest proportion of women in paid employment and those
who participated in household decision-making (33 and 5%,
respectively,in2018).
Theabovecontextprovidedjustiﬁcationforaddressinghealt h
systemschallengesinthethreestates.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Setting and Design
While the eHealth project aimed to use digital technology to
increase the reach and quality of MNCH services in remote
areas of Nigeria, the selected states contained both rural a nd
urban centers with variations in the rural-urban divide. On do
state and the FCT had a 70% rural and 30% urban split while
Kano state was more rural with 85% rural and 15% urban split.
The three states also diﬀered in terms of religious practices—
Christianity and Islam. The population in Ondo State is mostly
Christian–65% ( 21). In the FCT, Christianity and Islam are
practiced equally by about 50% of the population, while Islam is
widely practiced in Kano–85% ( 22). We used a mixed-method
design to evaluate the acceptability, feasibility, and impac ts of
implementing novel eHealth tools on MNCH service delivery,
as well as understand which contextual factors enabled or
constrained implementation of digital interventions in thr ee
states of Nigeria. Data collection combined documents revi ew
with 279 semi-structured interviews of stakeholders acros s four
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
FIGURE 1 | Theory of change model for eHealth project in Nigeria.
phases—at baseline, midline, endline, and legacy evaluatio n 12-
months post-project closedown—to understand: (i) processes
and impacts of eHealth tools on standard of MNCH care; and
(ii) contextual factors that aﬀected implementation. A legac y
evaluation aimed to assess the extent to which project beneﬁt s
and results were sustained beyond the project’s lifetime. As
part of the study design, we selected states from diﬀerent
regions of Nigeria (Ondo in west, FCT in central region,
and Kano in the north) to facilitate examination of diﬀerent
contextual factors that aﬀected implementation and project
outcomes.TheeHealthprojectinvolvedincrementallysupplyin g
126PHCfacilitiesininterventionlocalgovernmentareas( LGAs)
across the three states with tablet computers loaded with dat a
plans to enable the eLearning and health data digitization
interventions. Health workers in the 126 facilities were the n
trained by InStrat (local technology company that implemente d
theeHealthsolutionsinNigeria)staﬀtousethetablets.Se venty-
ﬁve of 126 PHC facilities (59.5%) lacked access to 3G mobile
network and were supplied with a broadband global area
networklink-basedsatellitecommunication(SatCom)hard ware
to facilitate internet connectivity in remote rural facilit ies.
The remaining 51 facilities (40.5%) were connected via the
regular 3G mobile network and so did not require linking
viaSatCom.Conceptual Frameworks
The Theory of Change (ToC) model for the eHealth project
[seeFigure1], was co-produced with policymakers and project
implementers ( 1), to conceptually evaluate how project inputs
and processes created outputs and how outputs subsequently
generated outcomes and impacts ( 23). The ToC also outlines
a program theory (see the upper part of Figure1) of how the
project was intended to generate change, along with contextu al
factorsthatcaninﬂuencechange.
Key assumptions underlying the project’s success, extracted
fromdocumentreviewsandstakeholderdiscussions,wereth at:
•Financial support will be secure for the project’s 2-year
duration (2017–19) and will be extended for another 2 years
thereafter(upto2021)
•Healthworkersinparticipatingfacilitieswillnotberedeplo yed
duringtheprojectperiod.
•Implementing health systems interventions will stimulate
technologyacceptanceanduse.
Given the importance of context to achieving project outcomes ,
we assessed the role of SatCom, VTR Mobile, and data
digitization interventions in achieving project results wi thin
a wider context (politics, national ﬁnancial situation, cul ture,
etc.) instead of attributing changes in outcomes to the eHea lth
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
TABLE 2 | Distribution of participating health facilities by their l ocations in Nigeria.
Participating
statesRegion Population (2006
census ﬁgures) [17]Participating local
government areasFacility type distribution by state
Primary health
centerComprehensive
health centerHealth
postBasic health
centerTotal
Ondo state Western
Nigeria3,460,877 (18th/37) Akoko South, Idanre, and
Odigbo58 4 0 0 62
Kano state Northern
Nigeria9,401,288 (1st/37) Dawakin Tofa and Sumaila 7 0 21 7 35
Federal Capital
TerritoryCentral
Nigeria1,406,239 (37th/37) Gwagwalada 26 2 1 0 29
Total facilities 91 6 22 7 126
project alone. To achieve this, we integrated ﬁndings of
analysis of documents review with insights from in-depth
interviewswithstakeholderstounderstandwhetherandhow the
“implementation context” inﬂuenced project results, includ ing
the inﬂuence of competing/concurrent health programs on
projecteﬀectsandoutcomes.
To complement the above ToC model, we drew on the
modiﬁed technology acceptance model (mTAM) to explain
stakeholders’ acceptance and use of digital health interven tions
in the three participating states ( 24). The classic technology
acceptance model ( 25) proposes that two primary factors
inﬂuence an individual’s intention to use a technology: (i)
perceived usefulness or the extent to which the technology wi ll
enhance job performance, and (ii) perceived ease of use or the
extenttowhichusingthetechnologywillbeeﬀortless.Aperso n’s
motivation to use an emerging technology is believed to be
higher if that technology is easy to use. In addition to the cl assic
technology acceptance model categories, the mTAM proposes
thatfactorsdownstreamfromthetechnology(e.g.,factors within
the setting in which a technology is deployed) can shape the
perceptionofusefulnessandadoptionofatechnology( 26).
Study Participants
Three groups of participants were included in this study were:
(i) FHWs and facility heads at intervention health facilitie s; (ii)
pregnant women attending the participating facilities, and (ii i)
policy-makers at LGA and state levels. All participants were
at least 18 years of age. Frontline health workers comprised
nurses/midwives, laboratory technicians and community he alth
extension workers (CHEWs). Years of experience was not a
factorinFHWselection.Withineachstate,interventionfa cilities
were purposively selected across LGAs. The 126 health faciliti es
includedinthisstudyaresub-categorizedfollowingtheNat ional
Primary Health Care Development Agency criteria as Primary
Health Care (PHC) facilities, Comprehensive Health Centers
(CHCs), Health Posts, and Basic Health Centers, and were
unequally distributed in number and type across the three stu dy
states(Table2).
PHC facilities, Health Posts and Basic Health Centers all
provide primary-level care and serve as the ﬁrst point of
contactforserviceusers,whereasComprehensiveHealthCen tersprovide secondary level care and serve as referral centers fo r
PHC facilities, health posts and basic health centers. Primar y
level facilities are mostly staﬀed by community health extens ion
workers (CHEWs), but no midwives or medical doctors, while
secondary-levelfacilitiesarestaﬀedbyCHEWs,medicaldoct ors,
nurses, and midwives. In Nigeria, CHEWs are usually trained
for 2–3 years in the Schools of Health Technology to provide
basic public health services at primary level facilities as we ll as
assist nurses and midwives in their duties [18]. The eHealth
interventions reported in this paper targeted CHEWs who are
found in all four types of health facilities, and nurses/midw ives
whoareonlyfoundinPHCfacilitiesandComprehensiveHealth
Centers. In Health Posts and Basic Health Centers, there was
typically one FHW available for the study (often the facility
manager), whereas PHC facilities and Comprehensive Health
Centers had at least two FHWs available, as they are usually
staﬀedbyamixedcadreofstaﬀ.
Members of the research team recruited all selected FHWs
after receiving the facility manager’s permission, explainin g the
objectives of the study to FHWs and obtaining their consent
to participate (see SupplementaryMaterial1 ), followed by an
orientation and training to prepare FHWs to embrace and
use tablet computers and the eHealth interventions. Beyond
training health workers to use tablet computers, the InStrat s taﬀ
and members of the research team provided ongoing technical
and programmatic support, respectively, to ensure that tablet
computers and the SatCom infrastructure continued to functi on
and that FHWs remained engaged to using eHealth tools in
spite of potential attrition. Health facility managers speciﬁ cally
helped to ensure that trained staﬀ were not redeployed to non-
participatingsitesduringtheperiodoftheproject.
eHealth Interventions
The digital health interventions involved providing 126 fac ilities
with a tablet computer containing a video training application
(VTRMobile)andadatadigitizationapplication.
It is important to clarify contextual factors that informed
the disparity in the population size of participating states and
the number of primary health facilities included in the study
(Table2). Kano State, the largest state with over 9 million
people had the lowest number of primary health centers (i.e., 7).
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
Ondo state with ∼3.5 million population had 58 primary health
centers. In the FCT with ∼1.5 million population, all the 24
primary health centers available in the intervention LGA wer e
included in the study. The driving factor behind the very low
numbers of primary health centers in Kano is related to volati le
security situation. Frequent kidnapping and armed banditry
in Kano led to a decision by the wider eHealth program to
reduce the exposure of research personnel to security risks by
reducing the numbers of primary health centers in areas of
Kano aﬀected by the insecurity. Ondo state and the FCT were
comparatively more stable in terms of security. The numbers
of health posts ( n=21) and basic health centers ( n=7)
in Kano were thus increased to enable researchers to gather
perspectivesfromstaﬀattheprimaryhealthfacilitylevel,lea ding
to the largest representation of other primary health faciliti es in
KanoState.
VTR Mobile Application
Enabled users to access video, audio, and text-based MNCH
materials through the internet. The eLearning videos used i n
our study were developed by Medical Aid Films (27) and the
Global Health Media Project (28) and accessed via the ORB
Platform (29), which was developed by mPowering Frontline
Health Workers Partnership (30). The ORB platform hosts high
quality medical content that can be used under a Creative
Commons License to train front line workers via the internet or
downloads to mobile devices. The educational videos provide d
cleareducationalcontentandengagingclinicalscenarios focused
on MNCH care, speciﬁcally antenatal care, basic obstetric car e,
perinatal care, and postnatal care. The contents of the videos
were selected in consultation with the relevant state Minist ries
of Health. The videos were delivered to users via the structu red
VTRMobileprogram.
Data Digitization Application
Was a tablet computer-enabled point-of-care data capture and
decision support tool that enabled users to capture patient-
level health information and send appropriate data to remote
servers through mobile networks. The software provided an
electronic medical record (EMR) that incorporates data on
patient registration, demography, vital signs, clinical dia gnosis,
treatment, case review, and administrative task support. The
software triggers immediate alerts for at-risk patients, an d
referrals to secondary health systems and on-demand reporti ng
to enable health administrators to increase productivity an d
improvethepatientclinicalexperience.Thesoftwareandcont ent
were developed and is owned by Vecna Cares Charitable Trust,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. The application uses locally
available technologies and infrastructure to transfer med ical
records to remote computer servers while making data availab le
fordecisionsupportandprojectmanagement.
The staﬀ of the e-Health interventions provider [InStrat
Global Health Solutions] created user logins and provided th e
same to study participants to enable them to log into and use
the VTR Mobile and data digitization Applications, which also
trackedusageoftheApps.Data Collection
We used a combination of document reviews and semi-
structured qualitative interviews with 98 service users, 63 h ealth
workers, 90 facility managers, and 43 policymakers across 4
time periods (at baseline, midline, end-line, and 12 months
post-project closedown) to assess the acceptability, feasibi lity
and impact of digital interventions. Purposive sampling was
used to ensure that all four groups (service users, health
staﬀ, facility managers, and policymakers) were represented i n
interviews. Interviews were conducted by two social scient ists
[DA, MKA] and ﬁve medical doctors [KO, JT, OD, RMY, and
GOA], trained in qualitative interviewing and the use of the
most signiﬁcant change techniques. Data collectors provide d
potentialparticipantswiththestudyinformationsheettoexpl ain
study objectives and help participants decide whether (or not )
to partake in the study. Participants were given at least 24h
to express an interest in participating in the study. Interview
guideswerepre-testedbeforetheywereadministeredontheﬁ eld.
SeeSupplementaryMaterial2 for an example of an interview
guide. Interviews lasted 20–30min and were conducted in a
private setting in a health facility, audio- recorded, trans cribed
verbatim, and where appropriate translated into English for
analysis.Documentsreviewedaspartofdatacollectioninclu ded:
reproductive health policies, ICT policies at national and
state levels, and reports of State MNCH programs identiﬁed
through discussions with program implementers and examined
to understand how the eHealth project was meant to work and
the assumptions held by stakeholders. Table3shows the key
features of each phase of the study and data collection method s
adoptedduringthephase.
Data Analysis
Data analyses during baseline, midline, end-line and legacy
evaluations were conducted by seven authors who conducted
interviews across all stakeholder groups (KO and DA for Ondo
state; OD, GOA and RMY for the Federal Capital Territory;
and MKA and JT for Kano State). Following analyses at the
baseline phase of the study, the researchers produced state-l evel
reports that formed the dataset for the country-level evalua tion
report for each phase (written by BE and MA and approved
by all authors) to make sense of the eﬀectiveness and impacts
of eHealth interventions and contextual factors that inﬂue nced
project results. Framework approach was used for data analysis
while allowing for the emergence of new themes. Framework
analysis involves the stages of familiarization with data, c oding,
indexing, charting, mapping and interpretation ( 31). Analysis
was conducted manually. The seven authors read and re-read
the transcripts for each state to be thoroughly immersed in th e
data. Six transcripts (representing the four stakeholder gro ups)
were then randomly selected across the three states, from wh ere
acodingframewascreatedanddeﬁnedbyDA,OD,andBE,who
met virtually (via Zoom) to compare similarities and diﬀerences
and to agree on which categories to use in further coding of
data.Theprocesswasthenrepeatedtillallremainingtranscr ipts
(for FHWs, facility managers, patients, and policymakers)
were coded, necessitating expansion of the coding framework
with new categories to accommodate data from stakeholder
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
TABLE 3 | Features of and methods adopted for data collection during p hases of study.
Phase and dates of
evaluationFeatures of phase Methods of data collection
Baseline
23 May to 30 June 2017a) Developed a working theory of how the project is intended
to function.
b) Ascertained status of key performance indicators before
implementation of project
c) Ascertained how PHC facilities generated and transmitte d
health data to the national health management information
system (NHMIS)
d) Ascertained service users’ motivation for using
PHC facilitiesa) Review of ICT and reproductive health policies
b) Literature review of effectiveness of digital health too ls
c) Literature review of models of technology acceptance
d) Semi-structured interviews with 73 stakeholders across
three states:
- Service users ( n=31)
- Health workers ( n=0)
- Facility managers ( n=31)
- Policymakers ( n=11)*
Midline
19 February to 9 March 2018a) Compared performance of KPIs with baseline
b) Assessed acceptability and effectiveness of digital
health interventionsSemi-structured interviews with 84 stakeholders across th ree
states:
- Service users ( n=24)
- Health workers ( n=24)
- Facility managers ( n=24)
- Policymakers ( n=12)
Endline
02–11 January 2019a) Compared performance of KPIs with baseline
b) Assessed acceptability and effectiveness of digital hea lth
interventions and
c) Assessed extent of achievement of health outcomesSemi-structured interviews with 90 stakeholders across th ree
states:
- Service users ( n=27)
- Health workers ( n=27)
- Facility managers ( n=23)
- Policymakers ( n=13)
Legacy evaluation
02–19 March 2020a) Compared performance of KPIs with baseline
b) Assessed the extent of longevity of achieved project
outcomes
c) Assessed the impact of digital health toolsMost signiﬁcant change interviews with 47 stakeholders in
two of three states (Kano state was dropped due to budget
constraint):
- Service users and community members ( n=16)
- Health workers ( n=12)
- Facility managers ( n=12)
- Policymakers ( n=7)
*PolicymakerswithoversightforICTand/orMNCHwereinterviewed atLocalGovernmentAreaandstatelevels.
transcripts. Additional to the above process of inductive cod ing,
we used the mTAM model as a thematic framework to guide
deductive analysis by moving from codes to themes to identif y
individual, organizational and wider contextual drivers, and/or
barriers of acceptance and use of technology by FHWs. The
ﬁndings reported in this paper describes the responses of study
participants using the themes and subthemes identiﬁed. Our
reporting aligns with the Consolidated criteria for reportin g
qualitativeresearch—COREQ( 32).
Ethics Approval
Approval for the study was granted by the University
of Leeds School of Medicine Research Ethics Committee
(MREC16-178), the Ondo State Government Ministry of Health
(AD.4693 Vol. II/109), the Kano State Ministry of Health
(MOH/Oﬀ/797/T1/350)andtheFederalCapitalHealthResearch
EthicsCommittee(FHREC/2017/01/42/12-05-17).
RESULTS
Characteristics of Stakeholders
Interviewed
A total of 294 stakeholders were interviewed over the four
phases of data collection for this study, 98 of whom (or 33% of
stakeholders)werepregnantwomenandnewmothersattendingTABLE 4 | Respondents interviewed by stakeholder group and phase of d ata
collection.
Respondent group Baseline Midline End-line Legacy
evaluationTotal (%)
Service users 31 24 27 16 98 (33%)
Health workers 0 24 27 12 63 (21.4%)
Facility managers 31 24 23 12 90 (30.6%)
Policymakers 11 12 13 7 43 (14.6%)
Total 73 (24.8%) 84 (28.6%) 90 (30.6%) 47 (16%) 294 (100%)
healthcare facilities for MNCH services; 63 people (or 21.4%
of stakeholders) worked at health facilities as nurse/midw ives
and CHEWs. Ninety people (or 30.6% stakeholders) were
facility heads while the remaining 43 people (or 14.6% of
stakeholders) were policymakers. The ﬁrst three stakeholde r
groups were interviewed at the facility level while policymake rs
were interviewed at LGA, state and national levels. See Table4
fordetailsofstakeholdergroupsinterviewedbyphaseofstud y.
Main Themes
Five main themes emerged from the analysis of documents
and interview transcripts: ( 1) contextual enablers of technology
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
adoption by governments, ( 2) drivers of technology acceptance,
(3)barrierstotheuseoftechnology,( 4)eﬀectivenessandimpacts
of digital interventions, and ( 5) increased adoption of eHealth
innovationsinthehealthsector.
Contextual Enablers of Technology Adoption by State
Governments
Two contextual enablers of technology adoption by state
governments in Nigeria are: (i) a supportive policy environmen t
and (ii) a private-public partnership approach to developing
and delivering digital innovation. Concerning policy conte xt,
documents analysis showed that the Federal Government of
Nigeria adopted ICTs in 2013 as a priority strategy for achievi ng
targets of the “Save One Million Lives” (SOML) initiative
(33) that aimed to broaden access to essential PHC services
for vulnerable mothers and infants. In support of the SOML
initiative,stategovernmentsacrossNigeriadeployedseve ralICT
apps including eLearning and data digitization apps to improve
thequalityofMNCH.
Analysis further showed that the three participating states
of Kano, Ondo, and the FCT had veriﬁable ICT policies at
the time of endline assessment (March 2019), compared to
baseline assessment (June 2017) when only Kano state had an
ICT policy. Kano state was the ﬁrst state in Nigeria to develop
an ICT policy (in 2009), whereas Ondo state and the FCT
launched their ICT policies in 2017 and 2018, respectively. The
supportive policy context in the states facilitated the adoption
of digital technologies (VTR, data digitization, and SatCo m)
mainly because the objectives of the eHealth project were
aligned to the Federal Government’s commitment to achievin g
targets of the “Save One Million Lives” initiative. The beneﬁ ts
of implementing digital technology in the healthcare sector
inﬂuenced the governments of Ondo State and the FCT to
developandlaunchtheirICTprojects.
Regarding private-public partnerships ( 34), analysis revealed
that this eHealth project was a promising example of public-
private partnerships (PPP) between local technology companies
and the governments in Nigeria for designing and delivering
digital health initiatives for public beneﬁt. The PPP approach
provided a viable chance of success for sharing resources,
capabilities and project risks. In this case, the local techno logy
company provided funding, ICT capability and digital health
solutions including hardware, software and content, while
State Governments provided healthcare infrastructure and
the population reach to make the project a success. The
implementing company for the project (InStrat Global Health
Solutions) has over 7 years of PPP involvement with State and
Federal Governments to improve innovation and eﬃciency in
thegenerationandperformanceofhealthcareservicesinNig eria.
ThisICT-focusedPPPstartedduringtheEbolaCrisisof2015 /16
when InStrat supported the Ondo State Government to develop
anddeployanEbola-relatedeLearningAppfortrainingfrontl ine
health workers ( 35), which involved initial ﬁnancial inputs,
technical know-how, and operational eﬃciency. The successf ul
testing of the Ebola eLearning App in Ondo state led to the
adoptionofVTRanddatadigitizationinterventionsintheth ree
statesofKano,Ondo,andFCT.Drivers of Technology Acceptance Among Health
Workers
Semi-structured interviews with FHWs, facility managers an d
policymakers demonstrated wide acceptance of video training
and data digitization interventions as essential tools for
improvingqualityoftraining,datamanagementandstandardo f
healthcaredelivery.
Consistent with the classic technology acceptance models,
stakeholders cited two principal drivers of technology
acceptance: (a) perceived ease of use of Apps and digital
platform, and (b) perceived usefulness of video training and
data digitization Apps for improving individual performance
and facility-level decision-making, respectively. However , given
the signiﬁcance of contextual factors in shaping technology
acceptance, participants also described four organizational a nd
two wider contextual factors downstream from the technology
that shaped the use of VTR and data digitization tools.
Organizational factors described were (a) accessibility t o tablet
computers in workplace, (b) prior training, (c) technical and
programmatic support throughout the duration of the project,
and(d)workloadissuesinhealthfacilities.Twowiderconte xtual
factorswerepoorinternetaccessandthelackofmainselectr icity
supplyinremoteareas.
It was common for stakeholders across the three states
to cite multiple drivers of technology acceptance (with some
mixing technology-related and contextual factors) in thei r
responses. Some of the quotes below therefore refer to more
than one determinant of technology acceptance and use in the
samenarrative.
PerceivedEaseofUseIsAssociatedWithAccess
toTechnology
Healthworkersandfacilityheadsfounditeasytousetechnolo gy.
They reported how access to tablet computers in health
facilities facilitated acceptability and use of both VTR Mobile
and data digitization Apps. Regarding VTR mobile, a health
workerclaimed:
“Seriously the videos [on tablets in the facility] are helping us
to carry out our task, because we no longer call on FHWs from
other facilities...we don’t need many complex equipment. These
videos just put us through [guide us] with what procedure we
want...It is saving lives of women and infants and our own lives
too. The clients are now having more conﬁdence in us” ( FHW in
Gwagwalada,FCT ).
This is supported by another FHW who narrates the ease of
using VTR for improving staﬀ knowledge compared to face-to-
facetraining:
“Theuseofvideotrainingismorebeneﬁcialthantheface-to-face
trainingbecauseweuseittogetherwithallthestaﬀinthisfacility .
Theuseofthevideoiseasiertoustoupdateourknowledgethan
face–to-facetraining”( FHWinDawakinTofa,KanoState ).
In the next quote, a policymaker summarizes how the ease of
understandingofthedatadigitizationAppshapedperceivedea se
of use of the technology by health workers irrespective of the ir
levelofeducation.
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
“The successes in the eHealth project are ﬁrst, the ease of data
collection and second, they [health workers] don’t need to be
experts in terms of knowledge [or training] to use the App to
capture data. That is the main diﬀerence between this tablet
[supplied by the eHealth project] and other tablets [supplied by
competinghealthprograms].Thatisbecause,fortheothertablets,
you will have to go through a lot of processes, but this one
[suppliedbytheeHealthproject]isstrictlyfordatacollection.So,
Ithinkthemostimportantpartistheeaseofuse.Inotherwords ,
somebody that is not a health management oﬃcer is able to use
the tablet supplied by the eHealth project. Even our Ad hocstaﬀ
areusingittocollecthealthdatanow,providedtheyknowhowto
read, count numbers and count ﬁgures. I think those are the two
mostcriticalsuccesses”( PolicyMaker,OndoState ).
For this policymaker, the remarkable user-friendliness of t he
digitaldevicesandApps(whencomparedtodevicessuppliedby
competing health programs) increased acceptance and usabilit y
bynon-expertsand Adhochealthworkers.
Whereas the last two quotes emphasized the importance of
accessibility to and user-friendliness of technology in sh aping
perceived ease of use of technology, it is equally important
to stress that acceptance and use of digital technology were
also shaped by: (i) prior training of FHWs provided at the
beginning of the project to increase familiarity with techno logy
and(ii)ongoingsupporttosolvetechnicalproblems(seesecti on
StudyParticipants).
PerceivedUsefulnessofTechnologyforImproving
IndividualPerformance
A central driver of acceptability reported by FHWs across the
threestateswastheusefulnessofVTRMobileforimprovingthe
quality of health care provision. Participant narratives illu strate
the utility of computer-optimized videos for improving staﬀ
knowledge, boosting their capability to manage birth-relat ed
complications and prevent avoidable deaths in pregnant women
andtheirinfants.
“You know sometimes when you don’t know something [about
a topic], and when you continue to receive cases related to that
topic, you will be discouraged and doubtful, because you don’t
knowwhattodo.Butwhenyoualreadyhavethesolutioninyour
hands [as is the case with VTR], then, you will be conﬁdent in
what you do, and in the answers, you provide to your clients”
(FHWinOnikokodiya,Ondostate ).
Although we had expected the introduction of VTR Mobile to
increase staﬀ knowledge and conﬁdence to provide life-savin g
care, an unexpected ﬁnding was the resourcefulness of FHWs
to integrate video viewing sessions into patient health educ ation
slots during ante-natal (ANC) clinics. This unintended but
creative use of clinical videos, in turn, inspired pregnant wo men
totellothersaboutnewtechnologiesatthestudysites,lea dingto
increased patient attendance at ANC clinics—a sign of positiv e
care-seeking behavior. Two service users corroborated the use
andusefulnessofvideosforimprovingthequalityofcare:
“There was a video that they [the eHealth project] brought here
that most of the health workers watch during the project. Thevideos show how to manage and how to even prevent bleeding
duringpregnancy.Whenyoucannotpreventit,itshowsyouwhat
you can do to manage it...since they started watching it, that
kind of bleeding is not a problem here anymore” ( Service User,
inGwagwalada,FCT ).
“Ihavewitnessedthestaﬀusinganewequipment[i.e.,computer
tablet] most of the times I visit the facility. I used to see him [the
FHW] touching something that looks like a big handset when he
is seeing patients, but I cannot really say what they use it for”
(Serviceuser,inKanostate ).
The above quotes illustrate the variation in service users’
awarenessoftheintroductionanduseoftechnologyacrossst ates
dependingontheirregionallocation.ServiceusersinKanost ate
were seemingly uncertain of why FHWs used tablet computers
while their peers in the FCT understood that FHWs watched
clinicalvideostoguideand/orimprovetheirpractice.
Thenexttwoquotesexplainwhyserviceusersinotherregions
of Nigeria understood the implemented digital technology by
capturing how watching clinical videos motivated pregnant
womenintheFCTtoattendANCclasses.
“Before this project, for someone like me, I wasn’t that active in
coming to this place [i.e., ANC classes] but when I came for the
ﬁrsttime6monthsago,Ifounditencouragingbecauseofthekind
of health education I was given. I listened to the video that day,
and that made me to be coming to this facility regularly during
pregnancy”( ServiceUserinKutunku,FCT ).
To reinforce the beneﬁts of videos for service users, Mrs Buba
(not her real name) from Ondo state narrated how watching
videos during ANC classes deepened her understanding of self -
care and nutritional requirements during pregnancy. Accord ing
to Mrs Buba: “ When we come here on clinic days and after we
ﬁnishsingingandexercising,thenurseswilltellustowatc hvideos
of pregnant women, to see the type of food they prepared for them
andhowpregnantwomengavethemselvesplentyofrest.Orift hey
are having pains in their tummy, how they rushed down to the
clinic to see the nurse. ” Mrs. Buba also recounted how learning
about food hygiene and better eating habits during pregnancy
helped her to adopt better eating behavior. Mrs. Buba went on
to have a successful delivery and brought her 6-month-old bab y
tothehealthfacilityforregularimmunization.
ConvenienceofOﬄineVideosasAide-mémoirefor
ClinicalPractice
Linked to using digital technology for improving healthcare
delivery, once the eLearning videos were downloaded from
the VTR Mobile platform onto tablet computers, participants
were able to watch the training content repeatedly at no
additional cost. The convenience of oﬄine access to clinical
videos stimulated habitual use of clinical videos as referenc e
materialtoguidelive-savingprocedures.
“I think some staﬀ are beginning to look at this thing [clinical
videos on tablets] as an important, err, aspect of work. The video
helps us...it makes the work easier. If we are in any diﬃculty,
we just go to that particular video and watch it many times.
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
And now, we know what to do for clients” ( Facility manager in
Gwagwalada,FCT ).
This extract demonstrates frontline health workers’ relia nce on
clinical videos for increasing understanding and for proble m
solving. Staﬀ met in groups to watch clinical videos on tablet
computers as video viewing sessions enhanced knowledge
exchange,peersupportandtroubleshooting.
Three External Barriers to the Uptake and Use of
Digital Technology
Despite widespread positivity toward VTR and data digitizatio n
interventions, three external (structural) barriers aﬀect ed the
use of these technologies: (i) workload issues associated w ith
technology introduction, (ii) poor internet connection, an d (iii)
poorelectricitysupply.
DimensionsofWorkloadIssuesAssociatedWith
TechnologyIntroduction
Two aspects of workload issues were identiﬁed from analysis
of interview transcripts: (i) Lack of time to watch all clinic al
videos on the VTR platform, and (ii) workload associated with
maintaining two health data registers—hardcopy registers a nd
dataentryintothedatadigitizationApp.
While the VTR intervention provided 40–60h of video
training to ensure FHW access to reliable MNCH information,
however,mosthealthworkersinterviewedinOndoandtheKan o
states reported diﬃculty with ﬁnding time to watch all VTR
clinical videos in the workplace due to increasing workload an d
tight scheduled associated with the introduction of the eHe alth
project. State policymakers and the local technology company
addressed workload issues by providing alternative access t o the
VTR Mobile App, e.g., installing the App on personal mobile
phonesofFHWstofacilitateself-studyathome.
“[For staﬀ struggling to access the videos] ... they [local
technology company] have made it so easy for them to upload
VTR on their phones [of FHWs]. During the pilot study, we
encouraged them [FHWs] to get it. Those who have android
phones can have it on their phones, so that it is not only when
theygettothehealthfacilitywheretheyhaveonlyonetabletthat
theycanwatchthevideos”( PolicymakerinOndostate ).
Regarding the second dimension of workload issues, FHWs
in Ondo and Kano States cited increasing workload associated
with entering data into the data management App, as well as
maintaining hardcopy/paper registers and patient records card s
inhealthfacilities.Atypicalcommentaboutexperiencesofu sing
thedatadigitizationAppis:
“Yes, it [i.e., data management App] helps although it has added
to our work in the sense that, before [introducing the App],
we were ﬁlling only hardcopy registers. So, it will better, if they
[policymakers]stoppedtheuseoftheregistersandgaveus[health
staﬀ] tablets for data collection and submission. But we are
expected to ﬁrst ﬁll the registers, and then open tablet and input
data from the register to the tablet one after the other. So, it has
addedtoourwork”( FacilityManager,Onikokodiya,OndoState ).While this facility manager thought that the workload issues
could be resolved by stopping the use of hard copy registers,
conversely, the State Ministry of Health opted to train more
FHWs in health facilities to use the data digitization App rathe r
than stop the use of paper registers. It is unclear whether State
MOHhavetrainedmoreFHWstousethetechnology.
InternetConnectivityandElectricitySupply
A few participants in health facilities served by 3G mobile
networks reported diﬃculty with accessing both the VTR and
datadigitizationAppsduetopoorinternetconnectivityandpoo r
electricitytopowercomputertablets.Thenarrativesbelowfr om
FHWscapturethissentiment:
“Data entry and transmission from the App goes fast except for
days when there is no internet connectivity. We’ve actually been
experiencing that for the past 2 months... those are the periods
we actually have down times but aside from that, it’s been okay.
There are times when I have to turn on my private Wiﬁ, but if I
don’t have data, then we have to wait till other members of the
team come around and then they help us send data to the LGA”
(FHWinGwagwalada,FCT ).
“Patientswerehappy,andtheywerepatronizingthisfacility.The
only problem we have is that we don’t have electricity in the
facility to power the tablets to watch videos. Secondly, at night,
there is no security man here, so we can’t stay back to take
deliveries. You know, due to the security issue...we can’t. Only
onepersoncannotstayhere[atnightwithoutelectricity]”( FHW
inGwagwalada,FCT ).
Itisimportanttomentionthatinternetaccesswasnotinﬂuen ced
byaﬀordabilityissuesastabletcomputersinhealthfaciliti eswere
loaded with pre-paid data plans to enable seamless access to
bothApps.Theﬁrstquoteaboveindicatesthatduringperiodsof
poorinternetconnectivity,FHWssometimesusedtheirpersona l
pre-paid data plans to transmit organizational data from table t
computers in facilities to the LGA headquarters. Regarding
electricity supply, the second quote illustrates the inabilit y of
FHWs to charge devices when the rechargeable solar batterie s
installed at participating health facilities were drained/ﬂ at. The
quote also introduces an alternative dimension of the lack o f
electricity. Unavailability of electricity at night made th e largely
female FHWs concerned about their personal safety, thereby
preventing FHWs from providing needed services to service
users(36).
Taken together, the foregoing six drivers/facilitators of
acceptance and three barriers to use of new technology broadly
aﬀected the eﬀectiveness of digital health interventions in
Nigeria. Regardless of barriers to technology use, stakeholde rs
reﬂected views that VTR and data digitization Apps are
promising tools for: (a) providing high-quality and reliable
training, (b) enhancing FHWs skills, (c) improving data
management, and (d) increasing service uptake by pregnant
womeninNigeria.
The next section assesses the extent to which the central
program theory outlined in the Theory of Change ( Figure1)
was borne out after 2 years (March 2017–2019) of project
implementation. The central proposition of the eHealth project
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
was that: “Participation of Frontline Health Workers, combi ned
with health system interventions (VTR, digitization of dat a and
availability of satellite communication infrastructure) deployed
withinafavorableenvironmentatindividual,organization al,and
system levels, will improve standards of healthcare provisio n,
utilizationofMNCHservicesandhealthoutcomesinNigeria.
We will highlight the extent to which implementation
of health systems interventions (of SatCom, VTR and data
digitization technologies) generated project outcomes and
impacts, and which other factors inﬂuenced the outcomes and
impact. Five outcomes outlined in the project’s ToC: (i) staﬀ
motivation and satisfaction, (ii) increased staﬀ conﬁdenc e to
performhealthcareroles,(iii)improvedstandardsofcarele ading
to increased attendance at PHC facilities and utilization o f
MNCH services, (iv) greater use of accurate and reliable data
for health systems management and decision-making, and (v)
increased adoption of eHealth innovations in health and non-
health sectors. We drew on ﬁndings of the legacy evaluation
(conducted12monthsafterprojectclosedown)comparedagain st
ﬁndings of the end-line, midline and/or baseline evaluatio ns to
assessthe(non-)achievementofprojectoutcomes.
Effects, Outcomes, and Impact of Digital
Interventions
EﬀectivenessofDeployingSatComTechnology
Findings of the midline and end-line evaluations demonstra ted
the viability of using Satcom technology to extend healthca re
services to technologically disadvantaged regions of Nige ria.
Over the 2-year period of the project, SatCom provided
uninterrupted connectivity that enabled simultaneous and
sustaineddeploymentofVTRanddatadigitizationin75facili ties
(about 60%) of 126 health facilities in the FCT, Kano, and
Ondo states that lacked access to existing 3G mobile network.
Without SatCom, the delivery of these interventions would b e
unattainableinhealthfacilitieslocatedinruralareas.
Notwithstanding the success of the SatCom approach,
ﬁndings of the legacy assessment ( 37) revealed that the SatCom
infrastructure was disabled in 40 health facilities (37 in On do
and 3 in the FCT) after the closedown of the project in March
2019. From September 2019 onwards SatCom technology was
replaced by Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSATs) technology
in health facilities that lacked access to 3G mobile network.
This entailed deploying a VSAT at a central location to serve
multiple health facilities over a wide geographic area, with a
plan for State Governments to scale up the VSAT solution. This
plan was however disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The
disruptionhasimplicationsforthesustainabilityofresult softhe
eHealthprojectgivenbudgetpressuresonstategovernmentsf or
managingtheCOVIDpandemic.
AvailabilityofAccurateandReliableDatato
SupportDecision-Making
Evidence from the midline and end-line assessments ( 38,
39) showed that implementing SatCom and data digitization
interventionssubstantiallyincreasedthecapacityofinte rvention
healthfacilitiestogenerateandtransmittimelyandaccur atedatavia the InStrat server to health planners and policymakers, in
summaryform,tosupportpolicymakingatLGAandstatelevels.
Unexpectedﬁndingsofthisstudywerethat,comparedtotheir
peers in the FCT and Kano State, facility heads in Ondo State
leveraged the availability of reliable and accurate data at facility-
level to inform: (i) disease surveillance and health promoti on
activities, and (ii) human resource management. While we ha d
expected that policymakers would use health data to inform
decision-making, we had not foreseen facility-heads using t he
digitization App in such ways. The quote below explains the
processofusingfacility-leveldatafordecision-making:
“Ifwecollectdataonmalaria[usingthisApp]anditshowsahigh
rateofmalaria,thenweconsiderwhatwecando,e.g.,givehealth
educationordistributebednetsandgoouttothecommunityand
tell the people that during the rainy season, they should dispose
of all containers that may gather water and mosquitoes. Then, if
thereisanoutbreakattheendofthemonthandmaybewenever
used to see more than 5–6 malaria cases on our register, and we
discover [from computer tablet] that it has increased to about 13
cases, we will act based on what we are seeing. So, we now take
measures to prevent more spread in the community” ( Head of
FacilityinOndoState ).
The remarkable ﬁnding about facility heads in Ondo state was
thatbesidesusingthedatadigitizationApptotransmitheal thcare
data,theyadaptedtheAppfortransmittingurgentadministra tive
and human resource information to the LGA headquarters.
For instance, they used the App to apply for short-term leave
forFHWs.
However,accessibilitytothedatadigitizationAppand/oru se
available data for facility-level decision making was interr upted
from June 2019 onwards, after project funding was withdrawn.
The withdrawal of funding also aﬀected electricity supply to
power the tablets (which had been provided by solar panels
duringtheproject)andinternetconnectivity(previouslyen abled
through SatCom) to transmit data to LGAs. Constrained acces s
to the data digitization App has caused most health facilitie s to
revert to manual data management using paper and hardcopy
registers for data capture and reporting. The quote below
highlightsthissentiment:
“...We cannot send [data] with the iPad anymore, that is it.
You know, the advantage of using the data digitization App far
outweighstheburdenthatcomeswithusingit...Ha,wenowhave
tocarrythoseregisterssir,itisthe‘BAGCObag’thatweareus ing
tocarrythemo(laughs)youknow.Andwecarrymanyregisters,
including the ANC register that is smaller, all these ones they are
verybiggerregisters.So,itisnoteasyforustobecarryingallthe se
bagstoLGAsforveriﬁcation”( FacilityHead,inOndoState ).
SustainedStaﬀMotivationandConﬁdence
Findings of the legacy evaluation ( 37) suggest that accessibility
to eLearning training content and clinical videos were neith er
aﬀected by the discontinuation of SatCom infrastructure nor
the withdrawal of project funding. Testimonies from FHWs
identifytheVTRinterventionasthemostsigniﬁcantchange seen
in the 12 months following project closedown. They explained
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
how continuing access to clinical videos has sustained FHWs ’
knowledge and skills, and boosted their self-esteem, motiv ation
andconﬁdencetomanagepregnancies,monitorwomeninlabor
andpreventdeathsinbabies:
“It [i.e., clinical videos] has certainly aﬀected the level of staﬀ
conﬁdence, I will like to use myself as an example. As nurse-
midwife and most of these things [about maternity care] were
obvious to me...but having watched them again in the videos,
when I ask questions to clients now, I ask them as a conﬁdent
professional, I don’t ask like a novice anymore. It has increased
my conﬁdence. It has aﬀected my motivation strongly, because
each day I report to work, I want to learn new things and there
is always something, [a topic] to watch, and it’s motivated me to
want to do something., I now tend to assist in other things when
helpisneeded”( FrontlineHealthWorkerinGwagwalada,FCT ).
The above stories of the sustained impact of VTR on staﬀ
motivation and conﬁdence to perform clinical roles and take o n
newtaskshaveimplicationsforthestandardofMNCHservices.
LongevityofImprovementinStandardofCareWith
IncreasedPatientAttendance
In narrating the most signiﬁcant changes they experienced ov er
the lifetime of the project and beyond, FHWs and facility heads
across the three states cited sustained improvements in the
standard of healthcare provision following the introductio n of
the VTR intervention in 2017. In the stories below, a facility
head combines the themes of improved monitoring of pregnant
womenduringlaborwithimprovedneonatalcaretocorroborat e
the impact of VTR on clinical care. The stories detail: (i)
how and when the facility manager learned vital life-saving
skills from clinical videos, (ii) her decision to introduce group
video sessions for training more junior staﬀ, and (iii) how t he
process contributed to increased standards of healthcare in her
healthfacility.
“I will start with, erm, the use of partograph. Before this project
started, we were not using it [partograph]. Even if we picked
up the partograph, it was so confusing to us. But when the
eHealth project brought this tablet [loaded with videos], I learnt
how to use the partograph through the tablet. We watched the
video together and I stepped down what I learnt to my staﬀ.
I photocopied the partograph and we started the practical [use
of the partograph] here, so now every staﬀ taking delivery here
knows when to use the partograph. So we know that, as we are
charting [events on the partograph], it will be telling you when
there are danger signs or to refer at the correct time so that
you won’t be late [in referring]. Even the LGA oﬃcials gave us
“thumbsup”forusingthepartographtosavethelivesofwomen.”
“Second, is about helping babies to breathe well. When these
videos wereintroduced, we watched them and saw what we were
supposedtodo[whenusingAmbubags].Nowwhenawomanis
on a delivery couch, my staﬀ will be ready here with their sterile
Ambu bag waiting in case newborn baby needs to be helped. So,
this video has helped us. We have saved so many lives, of these
very small babies... I am very happy because even if I am not
around, my staﬀ will do it correctly. So, we are now equipped to
helpthesebabiestobreathe”( FacilityHead,GwagwaladainFCT ).These stories demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of continuing
engagement with clinical videos for heightening the skills ,
alertness, and staﬀ capability to detect early signs of
complications and prevent needless deaths among women
and infants. An alternate dimension of improved standard
of care is staﬀ-patient relations, which is captured in the
nextextract:
“For me particularly, [I like] the friendliness of the staﬀ, the way
they talk to you, the way they receive you, they pet you when
you are pregnant, or when you are in labor or when you are a
breastfeeding mother. If you did something that was not correct ,
e.g., if you breastfeed your baby in a way that is not proper, they
will correct you gently. They will show you like...this is where
you are supposed to put the nipple to the mouth of your baby,
or one of them will come [to you] and... [explain that] it has
happened to them when they were pregnant. So that makes you
realize that they care about you, you understand? I love that, it is
encouraging”( ServiceUserinZuba,FCT ).
Patientsattributedthereportedchangesinhealthcaredeli veryto
theintroductionofclinicalvideosinhealthfacilitiesan dtheiruse
forpatienteducationatANCclasses,whichsubsequentlyshape d
patient attendance and use of MNCH services (already reported
in section Perceived Usefulness of Technology for Improving
IndividualPerformance).
Increased Adoption of eHealth Innovations in the
Health Sector
Despite the closedown of the project, evidence from the legacy
evaluation suggests that the eHealth project has seemingly
generated signiﬁcant interest in government and from other
stakeholders in the health sector to adopt the eHealth project
approach. Key examples include: (i) Ondo State’s adoption
of digital technology to support the implementation of a
new Contributory Health Insurance Scheme . In a public-
private partnership with InStrat, the Ondo State Government
has (in December 2019) adopted a package of inter-related
digital health innovations (including digitization of hea lth
data and an electronic health insurance platform) to facilit ate
equitable access to essential healthcare services as a pathw ay to
achieving universal health coverage. This new project, curr ently
implementedinninegeneralhospitalsintheOndoState,isbei ng
incrementally expanded to 203 PHC facilities in the state; (i i)
partnershipbetweenInStratandthemultipleStateGovernment s
using an adaptation of the VTR Application to develop a
COVID-19trainingApp toprovideFHWswithaccurateandup-
to-date information about COVID-19 to enable them to quickl y
identify,screenandmanageCOVID-19suspectsacrossmultiple
statesinNigeria( 34).
In summary, this section identiﬁed four tangible impacts of
digitaltechnologyonmicro,mesoandmacrolevelsofthehea lth
system in Nigeria. There is suﬃcient evidence from analysis of
multipledatasetstodemonstratethatsustaineddeploymentV TR
and data digitization interventions successfully: (i) inc reased
staﬀ motivation and satisfaction (micro level), (ii) incre ased
staﬀ conﬁdence to perform healthcare roles (micro level), (i ii)
increased the standard of MNCH care (meso level), and (iv)
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
generated interest among government agencies (policy level ) to
increase adoption of eHealth innovations in the health secto r.
Although SatCom technology originally provided uninterrupt ed
connectivity that stimulated greater use of accurate and re liable
data to support policymaking, nevertheless, this impact was
reversedafterthewithdrawalofprojectfundinginMarch201 9.
DISCUSSION
Digital health technologies are infrequently brought to sca le
despite widespread enthusiasm about their potential to
strengthen health systems by broadening access, improving
quality of healthcare provision and developing essential ICT
infrastructure [30]. This study aimed to assess if and how us ing
digital interventions to extend health services to remote a reas of
Nigeria improved the standard of maternal, newborn and child
health (MNCH) services. Speciﬁc objectives were to: (i) ident ify
contextual drivers of acceptability and use of video trainin g and
data digitization interventions deployed at scale in Nigeri a, and
(ii) assess the impacts of digital interventions on diﬀerent l evels
ofthehealthsystem.
Analysis identiﬁed two broad environmental factors that
shaped adoption of technology at policy level in Nigeria
(section Contextual Enablers of Technology Adoption by Stat e
Governments).First,asupportivepolicyenvironmentatFeder al
Government level inspired the adoption in 2013, of ICTs as
a priority strategy for saving the lives of vulnerable women
and children in Nigeria, coupled with the implementation of
state-level ICT policies in the three participating states of t he
project. Second, a thriving private-public partnership betwee n a
localtechnologycompanyandStateGovernmentsprovidedboth
fundingandtechnicalexpertisefordevelopingandimplementi ng
digitalinterventions.
Using a modiﬁed technology acceptance model (mTAM) to
guide data analysis we also identiﬁed six drivers of acceptan ce
and use of digital technology by health workers. The six driv ers
of acceptance are: (i) perceived ease of use of technology, (ii )
perceived usefulness of technology to enhance job performanc e,
(iii)oﬄineaccesstoclinicalvideos,(iv)accesstotablet computers
in the workplace, (v) prior training to increase familiarity w ith
technology, and vi) ongoing technical support to ensure the
functionality of digital technology. The ﬁrst two facilitat ors of
acceptance support the tenets of classic technology acceptance
models (TAMs) that regard perceived ease of use, and perceived
usefulness of technology as the key drivers of acceptance ( 26),
whilethelatterthreefacilitatorsofacceptancehelptoext endthe
classic TAMs by acknowledging and incorporating the inﬂuence
of contextual factors in shaping acceptance of new technology
(40). Consistent with this, three contextual facilitators (or
organizational support factors) that shaped the use of VTR and
data digitization tools were prior training to prepare FHWs to
embracetechnology,accesstotechnologyinhealthfaciliti es,and
availability of technical support throughout the eHealth proj ect.
On the other hand, three contextual barriers that inhibited
the use and eﬀectiveness of digital technology in Nigeria wer e:
(i) increasing workload following technology introductio n thatprevented FHWs from watching all clinical videos on the VTR
platform, (ii) poor internet connection, and (iii) poor electr icity
supply that prevented access to the digital platform and re-
chargingoftabletdevicesininruralareas.
Regarding impacts, ﬁndings within this study identiﬁed four
tangibleimpactsofdigitaltechnologyonmicro,mesoandmac ro
levels of the health system in Nigeria (sections Eﬀectivenes s
of Deploying SatCom Technology, Availability of Accurate
and Reliable Data to Support Decision-Making Sustained Staﬀ
Motivation and Conﬁdence, and Longevity of Improvement in
StandardofcareWithIncreasedPatientAttendance).Theim pact
of sustained deployment of multiple technologies (SatCom,
video training and data digitization interventions) over a 2-year
period on the health workforce building block of the health
system highlighted the pivotal role of uninterrupted/oﬄine
access and reference to clinical videos for increasing FHW
knowledge, that then generated increased motivation and
conﬁdence (individual level) to perform healthcare roles wh ich
together led to improved clinical skills. For the service deli very
buildingblock,better-trainedandskillfulFHWsfeltempowe red
to provide high-quality MNCH services, that manifested as
improved staﬀ-patient relations, improved client engagement
during ANC classes that led to improved ANC attendance,
early detection of high-risk pregnancies and management of
birth complications (institutional level). This emphasizes t he
signiﬁcance of organizational readiness to provide essenti al
materialandhumanresourcesforachievingthedeliveryofh igh-
qualitycare,eventhoughthisisnotalwayspresentinLMICs[40 ].
Finally, ensuring uninterrupted connectivity via the combi ned
SatCom and 3G mobile network approach during the project
period strengthened information and data management system s
thatinspiredtrustandgreateruseofaccurateandreliableda tato
inﬂuence policy decisions and governance (macro level), whi ch
manifested as increased adoption of eHealth innovations in
the health sector. Unfortunately, some of the tangible beneﬁts
of SatCom and data digitization interventions were gradual ly
reversed after withdrawal of project funding in the second
quarterof2019.
Comparison With Other Studies
The ﬁndings of this study align with previous studies that
implemented digital technology at scale in Nigeria and other
LMICs, which found that: (i) widespread support for computer-
enabled eLearning and data management, (ii) prior training t o
prepareworkerstoincreasefamiliaritywithtechnologyimpro ved
usability, (iii) digital innovations were eﬀective for enha ncing
workers’ skills, attitudes and conﬁdence, and client uptake
of MNCH services, and (iv) health workers felt empowered
insituationswheretechnologyboostedtheirneedsandimprov ed
service delivery ( 16,41,42). These ﬁndings have implications
forimplementingstrategiesthatensureadequateorientati onand
continuing technical support for FHWs to adopt and utilize
digital technology to achieve both individual and organiza tional
goals. Furthermore, these ﬁndings increase the evidence ba se of
theeﬀectivenessofdigitaltechnologyforimprovingthestan dard
ofMNCHservicesinLMICs[4].
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
While many studies focused on the eﬃcacy of single ICT
strategies for improving single health service problems, e.g .,
sending reminders to women to attend ANC appointments,
and/or having children return for vaccinations ( 43,44), our
study assessed the eﬀectiveness of implementing multiple
digital interventions to address multiple health systems
problems (limited access to training opportunities, deﬁcient
datamanagement,andpoorservicedelivery).Giventhebread th
of health systems building blocks impacted by digital health
tools deployed in the eHealth project in Nigeria (SatCom
to provide connectivity, VTR to train health workforce, and
data management tools to improve information and data
systems),ourﬁndingsprovideconﬁdencetosupportthevalueof
simultaneous implementation of multiple digital healthtool s for
strengtheningthehealthsysteminLMICs.
Similar to studies in Ghana and Indonesia ( 45,46) we
found that adequate training and simplicity of functionalit y of
technology empowered the health workers to use technology
irrespective of their level of education. Training often inc ludes,
but not limited to, introducing FHWs to how digital devices
function, visual instructions for using new technology, an d
technical support for addressing problems. Besides improving
usability, evidence from Ethiopia and South Africa indicate that
suﬃcient prior training and regular technical support, for e.g .,
digitizing registries in MNCH improve the timeliness of data
collection, reduce error rates, and increases data completen ess
(47,48).
Despitegrowingrecognitionthattechnologyusecanimprove
FHWs’ motivation and performance ( 41,49), few studies have
explained the underlying reasoning ( 50) for how technology
interacts with FHWs, health systems and the implementation
context to shape FHW motivation, performance, and quality
of MNCH care ( 42). Our study identiﬁed ﬁve mechanisms by
which digital technology generated impact which showed that
access to tablet devices that were simple to use, and continuo us
engagement with clinical videos, led to increased knowledg e,
based on which FHWs: (i) felt conﬁdent, better trained and
(ii) motivated to do their work. Better trained FHWs, in turn ,
(iii) felt supported with material resources, and (iv) empower ed
with enhanced skills that generated improved performance
(individually and collectively) and ultimately improved MNC H
services provision within institutional contexts of manage able
workload, uninterrupted internet access, and electricity s upply.
Finally, improved data management systems inspired: (v) trus t
and greater use of accurate and reliable data for policy decis ions
and governance which led to increased adoption of eHealth
innovationsinthehealthsector.
Study Strengths and Limitations
Threedistinctivefeaturesofthisstudyareitsidentiﬁcat ionof:(i)
contextualenablersoftechnologyadoptionatpolicylevelby State
GovernmentsinNigeria,(ii)driversofandbarrierstoacce ptance
anduseoftechnologybyhealthworkers,and(iii)mechanism sof
impactofdigitaltechnologyonmicro,meso,andmacrolevels of
thehealthsystem.
There are two limitations of the study. First, although it
identiﬁed plausible mechanisms of impact of deploying multipledigital technologies at the individual, organizational an d policy
levels, this paper excludes a comparison of factors (individual ,
technology-related, and contextual factors) that motivat ed
technology use among diﬀerent stakeholders—CHEWs, nurses,
and facility managers. This would have unraveled similaritie s
and diﬀerences in motivations for using technology by diﬀerent
stakeholders, including for example, how years of experience
of FHWs shaped technology use among stakeholders. Second,
the study ﬁndings are based on FHWs self-reported responses
drawn from semi-structured interviews conducted over four
time periods (baseline, midline, end-line, and 12 months aft er
project closedown). As the study adopted a qualitative resear ch
design, we did not include psychological assessments of the
potentialinteractionsbetweendiﬀerentmechanismsofimpact of
identiﬁedandtheircombinedeﬀectsonperformance.
CONCLUSIONS
The range of interventions implemented by the eHealth project
in Nigeria led to tangible and reported beneﬁts across all
stakeholder groups. This study demonstrates that simultaneo us
and sustained implementation of multiple digital technologie s
at scale enabled via SatCom and 3G mobile networks are
viable approaches for strengthening multiple health systems
building blocks (in this case, human resources, service deli very,
information systems, and governance) to achieve the overal l
goals of the health system that includes improving the health
and wellbeing of people of ages. Our ﬁndings extend the
evidence base for the eﬀectiveness of digital health technol ogies
and for theoretical underpinnings to guide further technolo gy
use to support improvements in MNCH services in low
resourcesettings.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are includ ed
in the article/ SupplementaryMaterial , further inquiries can be
directedtothecorrespondingauthor/s.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the University
of Leeds, School of Medicine Research Ethics Committee
(MREC16-178), the Ondo State Government Ministry of
Health (AD.4693 Vol. II/109), the Kano State Ministry of
Health (MOH/Oﬀ/797/T1/350), and the Federal Capital Health
ResearchEthicsCommittee(FHREC/2017/01/42/12-05-17).Th e
patients/participantsprovided theirwritteninformed consent to
participateinthisstudy.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
BE and BO jointly conceived the study. BE and MJA developed
the manuscript and led the writing of this paper with
contributions from BO, GOA, AA, JT, KO, DA, OD, RY, OO,
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
and MKA. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal version of
themanuscript.
FUNDING
This article presents independent research funded by the
UK Space Agency International Partnership Program (Grant
reference number IPPC1-30). The sponsor, funders and the
company that implemented the technologies were not involved
in the study design; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of data; writing of the report; and the decisio n to
submitthereportforpublication.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors also wish to acknowledge the contributions
of staﬀ at the Federal and the States Ministry of Health
in Ondo State, Kano State and FCT, and Abuja to the
studydesign.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fgwh.
2021.670494/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
1. EbensoB,AllsopMJ,OkusanyaB,AkabaG,TukurJ,OkunadeK,e tal.Impact
of using eHealth tools to extend health services to rural areas of Nig eria:
protocolforamixed-method,non-randomisedclustertrial. BMJOpen. (2018)
8:e022174.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022174
2. Onwujekwe O, Ezumah N, Mbachu C, Obi F, Ichoku H, Uzochukwu B, et al.
Exploring eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent health ﬁnancing mechanisms in N igeria;
whatneedstochangeandhowcanithappen? BMCHealthServicesRes. (2019)
19:661.doi:10.1186/s12913-019-4512-4
3. Kress DH, Su Y, Wang H. Assessment of primary health care system
performance in Nigeria: using the primary health care performance
indicator conceptual framework. Health Syst Reform. (2016) 2:302–
18.doi:10.1080/23288604.2016.1234861
4. Willcox M, Moorthy A, Mohan D, Romano K, Hutchful D, Mehl G,
et al. Mobile Technology for Community Health in Ghana: is maternal
messaging and provider use of technology cost-eﬀective in improvin g
maternal and child health outcomes at scale? J Med Internet Res. (2019)
21:e11268.doi:10.2196/11268
5. Labrique AB, Vasudevan L, Kochi E, Fabricant R, Mehl G. mHealth
innovations as health system strengthening tools: 12 common
applications and a visual framework. Global Health Sci Pract. (2013)
1:160–71.doi:10.9745/GHSP-D-13-00031
6. WHO. WHOGuideline:RecommendationsonDigitalInterventionsfor Health
SystemStrengthening .Geneva:WorldHealthOrganization(2019).
7. FMoH. Assessing the Enabling Environment for ICTs for Health in Niger ia
Abuja.FederalMinistryofHealth(2014).
8. The World Bank . Saving One Million Lives Project (Federal Ministry of
Health).(2016).Availableonlineat:http://documents.worldbank.org/cu rated/
en/910491526905973918/pdf/Saving-One-Million-Lives-Proj ect.pdf
9. Wilson K, Gertz B, Arenth B, Salisbury N. The Journey to Scale: Moving
Together past Digital Health Pilots . Seattle, WA: Program for Appropriate
TechnologyinHealth(PATH)( 2014).
10. Cost-Utility and cost-eﬀectiveness studies of telemedicin e, electronic, and
mobile health systems in the literature: a systematic review. Telemed J E
Health.(2015)21:81–5.doi:10.1089/tmj.2014.0053
11. Forenbacher I, Husnjak S, Cviti ´c I, Jovovi ´c I. Determinants of
mobile phone ownership in Nigeria. Telecommun Policy. (2019)
43:101812.doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2019.03.001
12. Srivastava S, Pant M, Abraham A, Agrawal N. The technological
growth in eHealth services. Comput Math Methods Med. (2015)
2015:894171.doi:10.1155/2015/894171
13. Fullman N, Barber RM, Abajobir AA, Abate KH, Abbafati C, Abbas KM,
et al. Measuring progress and projecting attainment on the basis of pas t
trends of the health-related Sustainable Development Goals in 188cou ntries:
an analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet.(2017)
390:1423–59.doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32336-X
14. Nigeria Federal Ministry of Health. Assessing the Enabling Environment for
ICTsforHealthinNigeriaAbuja .FederalMinistryofHealth(2014).15. Ebenso B, Allsop M, Hicks J, Mirzoev T, Newell J. Deliverable 110.4: Report
of Baseline Assessment for Extending Nigerian Health Service s to Rural
Populations using SatCom to Strengthen Health Systems and Imp rove Health
Outcomes .IPPNigeria,UniversityofLeeds,Leeds(2017).
16. Labrique AB, Wadhwani C, Williams KA, Lamptey P, Hesp C, Luk
R, et al. Best practices in scaling digital health in low and middle
income countries. Global Health. (2018) 14:103. doi: 10.1186/s12992-018-
0424-z
17. Onwujekwe O, Uguru N, Russo G, Etiaba E, Mbachu C, Mirzoev T,
et al. Role and use of evidence in policymaking: an analysis of case
studies from the health sector in Nigeria. Health Res Policy Syst. (2015)
13:46.doi:10.1186/s12961-015-0049-0
18. National-Population-Commission 2018. Nigeria DHS Key Findings. Abuja:
NPCandICF(2019).
19. WHO. Global Health Workforce Statistics: Aggregated Data. Geneva: World
Health Organization (2013). Available online at: https://apps.who .int/gho/
data/node.main.HWFGRP_0040?lang=en
20. Meh C, Thind A, Ryan B, Terry A. Levels and determinants of materna l
mortality in northern and southern Nigeria. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth.
(2019)19:417.doi:10.1186/s12884-019-2471-8
21. Nolte I, Jones R, Taiyari K, Occhiali G. Research note: explorin g survey
data for historical and anthropological research: Muslim-Christia n relations
in south-west Nigeria. Afr Aﬀairs. (2016) 115:541–61. doi: 10.1093/afraf/
adw035
22. Pierri Z, Barkindo A. Muslims in Northern Nigeria: between challeng e and
opportunity. In: Mason R, editor. Muslim Minority-State Relations: Violence,
Integration,andPolicy .NewYork,NY:PalgraveMacmillanUS(2016).p.133–
53.
23. Rolfe S. Combining Theories of Change and Realist Evaluation i n practice:
Lessons from a research on evaluation study. Evaluation. (2019) 25:294–
316.doi:10.1177/1356389019835229
24. Portz JD, Bayliss EA, Bull S, Boxer RS, Bekelman DB, Gleason K, et al.
Using the technology acceptance model to explore user experience, in tent to
use, and use behavior of a patient portal among older adults with multi ple
chronic conditions: descriptive qualitative study. J Med Internet Res. (2019)
21:e11604.doi:10.2196/11604
25. Lah U, Lewis JR, Šumak B. Perceived usability and the modiﬁed
technology acceptance model. Int J Hum Comput Interact. (2020) 36:1216–
30.doi:10.1080/10447318.2020.1727262
26. CampbellJI,AturindaI,MwesigwaE,BurnsB,SantorinoD,Habere rJE,etal.
The Technology Acceptance Model for Resource-Limited Setting s (TAM-
RLS): a novel framework for mobile health interventions targeted t o low-
literacy end-users in resource-limited settings. AIDS Behav. (2017) 21:3129–
40.doi:10.1007/s10461-017-1765-y
27. Medical-Aid-Films. Medical Aid Films. (2020). Available online at: https://
www.medicalaidﬁlms.org.
28. Global-Health-Media. Global Health Media. (2020). Available online
at:https://globalhealthmedia.org
29. ORB.(2020).Availableonlineat:http://www.health-orb.or g
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 15 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494Ebenso et al. Enablers and Impact of Technology
30. USAID. Mpowering Frontline Health Workers. (2020). Available online
at: https://partnerships.usaid.gov/partnership/mpowering-frontli ne-health-
workers/
31. RitchieJ,SpencerL.Qualitativedataanalysisforappliedpolic yresearch. Qual
ResCompanion. (2002)573:305–29.doi:10.4135/9781412986274.n12
32. Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative
research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focu s groups. Int J
QualHealthCare. (2007)19:349–57.doi:10.1093/intqhc/mzm042
33. The-World-Bank. Nigeria - Programme to Support Saving One Million Lives.
Washington, DC: The World Bank Group (2017). Available online at: h ttp://
projects.worldbank.org/P146583?lang=en
34. Otu A, Okuzu O, Ebenso B, Eﬀa E, Nihalani N, Olayinka A, et al.
Introduction of mobile health tools to support COVID-19 training and
surveillance in Ogun State Nigeria. Front Sustain Cities Health Cities. (2021)
3:638278.doi:10.3389/frsc.2021.638278
35. Otu A, Ebenso B, Okuzu O, Osifo-Dawodu E. Using a mHealth tuto rial
application to change knowledge and attitude of frontline health wo rkers to
Ebola virus disease in Nigeria: a before-and-after study. Hum Resour Health.
(2016)14:1–9.doi:10.1186/s12960-016-0100-4
36. Etiaba E, Manzano A, Agbawodikeizu U, Ogu U, Ebenso B, Uzo chukwu
B, et al. “If you are on duty, you may be afraid to come out to attend
to a person”: fear of crime and security challenges in maternal acute c are
in Nigeria from a realist perspective. BMC Health Services Res . (2020).
20:903.doi:10.1186/s12913-020-05747-9
37. Ebenso B, Allsop M. Report of Legacy Assessment for Extending Nigerian
Health Services to Rural Populations using Satcoms to Streng then Health
Systems and Improve Health Outcomes. Deliverable DM110.8, IPP Nigeria,
Leeds(2020).
38. Ebenso B, Allsop MJ. Report of Endline Assessment for Extending Nigerian
Health Services to Rural Populations using Satcoms to Streng then Health
SystemsandImproveHealthOutcomes .ContractNo.:DeliverableDM110.7.1,
UniversityofLeedsandIPPNigeria,Leeds(2019)
39. Allsop M, Ebenso B. Report of Midline Assessment for Extending Nigerian
Health Services to Rural Populations using SatCom to Strengt hen Health
Systems and Improve Health Outcomes. Deliverable DM110.6, IPP Nigeria,
UniversityofLeedsandIPPNigeria,Leeds(2018).
40. Jimoh L, Pate MA, Lin L, Schulman KA. A model for the adoption
of ICT by health workers in Africa. Int J Med Inform. (2012) 81:773–
81.doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.08.005
41. Agarwal S, Perry HB, Long L-A, Labrique AB. Evidence on feasibi lity
and eﬀective use of mHealth strategies by frontline health workers in
developing countries: systematic review. Trop Med Int Health. (2015)
20:1003–14.doi:10.1111/tmi.12525
42. Abejirinde I-OO, Ilozumba O, Marchal B, Zweekhorst M, Dielema n M.
Mobile health and the performance of maternal health care workers in low-
and middle-income countries: a realist review. Int J Care Coord. (2018)
21:73–86.doi:10.1177/205343451877949143. OmoleO,IjadunolaMY,OlotuE,OmotosoO,BelloB,AwoniranO,etal. The
eﬀectofmobilephoneshortmessageserviceonmaternalhealthinsout h-west
Nigeria.IntJHealthPlannManage. (2018)33:155–70.doi:10.1002/hpm.2404
44. Ngabo F, Nguimfack J, Nwaigwe F, Mugeni C, Muhoza D, Wilson
DR, et al. Designing and Implementing an Innovative SMS-based
alert system (RapidSMS-MCH) to monitor pregnancy and reduce
maternal and child deaths in Rwanda. Pan Afr Med J. (2012) 13:31.
doi:10.11604/pamj.2012.13.31.1864
45. Andreatta P, Debpuur D, Danquah A, Perosky J. Using cell phones to collect
postpartum hemorrhage outcome data in rural Ghana. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
(2011)113:148–51.doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2010.11.020
46. Chib A, Lwin MO, Ang J, Lin H, Santoso F. Midwives and mobiles: using
ICTstoimprovehealthcareinAcehBesar,Indonesia. AsianJCommun. (2008)
18:348–64.doi:10.1080/01292980802344182
47. Little A, Medhanyie A, Yebyo H, Spigt M, Dinant G-J, Blanco R. M eeting
community health worker needs for maternal health care service delive ry
using appropriate mobile technologies in Ethiopia. PLoS One. (2013)
8:e77563.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0077563
48. Tomlinson M, Solomon W, Singh Y, Doherty T, Chopra M, Ijumba P,
et al. The use of mobile phones as a data collection tool: a report from
a household survey in South Africa. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. (2009)
9:51.doi:10.1186/1472-6947-9-51
49. Atinga RA, Abor PA, Suleman SJ, Anaba EA, Kipo B. e-health usag e and
health workers’ motivation and job satisfaction in Ghana. PLoS One. (2020)
15:e0239454.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0239454
50. Kabongo EM, Mukumbang FC, Delobelle P, Nicol E. Explaining the i mpact
of mHealth on maternal and child health care in low- and middle-
income countries: a realist synthesis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. (2021)
21:196.doi:10.1186/s12884-021-03684-x
Disclaimer: Allviewsexpressedinthispublicationareoftheauthorsonly.
Conﬂict of Interest: OO is Co-Founder and CEO of InStrat Global Health
Solutions, the company that implemented the digital technologies us ed in the
outlinedstudy.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in t he absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂictofinterest.
Copyright©2021Ebenso,Okusanya,Okunade,Akeju,Ajepe,Akaba, Yalma,Dirisu,
Tukur, Abdullahi, Okuzu and Allsop. This is an open-access ar ticle distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotco mplywiththeseterms.
Frontiers in Global Women’s Health | www.frontiersin.org 16 May 2021 | Volume 2 | Article 670494