 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 79  
 
Aadhaar -Led Identification 
and Datafication Among 
Informal Workers in South 
India : A Data -Justice 
Perspective  
 
SHYAM KRISHNA  
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac. uk 
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Literature  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 3 
B1. IDENTIFICATION AND DATAFICATION  ................................ ................................ .............  3 
B2. SURVEILLANCE AND RECOGNITION  ................................ ................................ ................  4 
B3. ABNORMAL JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 5 
C. Case Backgr ound and Methods  ................................ ................................ . 7 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 10 
D1.  MISRECOGNITION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 10 
D2.  MALDISTRIB UTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 12 
D3.  MISREPRESENTATION  ................................ ................................ ...............................  15 
E. Discussion  ................................ ................................ ...............................  17 
E1. JUSTICE UNDER DATAFICATION  ................................ ................................ ...................  17 
E2. STAKEHOLDERS OF DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ................  18 
F. Conclusions and Recommendations  ................................ ........................  19 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  21 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 26 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 26 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
1 
 Aadhaar -Led Identification and Datafication 
Among Informal Workers in South India:  
A Data -Justice Perspective  
 
 
Shyam Krishna  
Royal Holloway, University of London  
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Aadhaar – India’s national biometric digital identity program me through its unique 12 -digit 
number for every Indian resident – has been intricately linked to daily aspects of living in 
recent years. The program me aims to enable digital linkage to governmental and no n-
governmental services and through that achieve digital financial inclusion of groups like 
unbanked informal workers into the mainstream economy. This paper focuses on the 
Aadhaar experiences of two groups of informal workers in an Indian urban setting – cab-
drivers and domestic workers.  These informal workers access digital platforms like online 
recruitment portals and gig -economy apps which are aimed at employment of urban ‘blue 
collar’ workers , using Aadhaar as an identity for verification through its c omplex 
technological ecosystem.  
 
Based on this evidence base,  the paper provides two contributions. First, it presents a novel 
theoretical lens of social justice by operationalising ‘abnormal justice’ in a way that is 
synergistic with elements of surveilla nce and datafication inherent to digital identification . 
This results  in a framework of data  justice , enabling analysis along cultural, economic and 
politi cal dimensions.  Second, using this  framework the paper deconstructs empirical 
evidence collected usin g semi -structured interviews and field observations. Ultimately it 
argues that while Aadhaar identity and the data -flow it enables has become critical in 
enabling digital participation of informal workers, digital identity is intimately related to 
inequali ty experienced by urban marginalised groups  in three ways: current use of digital 
identities re ifies extant cultural inequalities  experienced by marginalised workers ; 
unprotected datafication c reates new  economic inequalities  that exploit  new -found digital 
participatio n enabled by digital identities;  and unfair barriers continue to exist for the 
marginalised under digital identity to voice ‘informed co nsent’ or to access redressal of  
security issues.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Strong identification systems, reliable databases, and the surveillant visibility of the citizen 
to the state have been presented as a prerequisite to build ‘a social contract between 
governments and citizens’ (Breckenridge 2014, Diop 2017). An acknowledged issue  of the 
socio -economically disadvantaged population is that they fall into under what Gilman & 
Green (2018) have called the ‘surveillance gap’ – the ‘systemic invisibility’ of certain classes 
within society. Based on this, particularly in the global South,  identification program mes are 
seen as a necessity to enable hitherto disadvantaged groups to participate in socio -
economic transactions (Koops et al. 2009, Bennett & Lyon 2013, Lyon 2013 ). Countries 
including India, Brazil, Ghana, Malaysia, Indonesia and China are in the active phase of 
implementing a digital identity infrastructure (Nanavati et al. 2002, Madanapalle 2017, 
Swearingen 2018).  
 
Born out of a similar justification, Aadhaar – India’s national biometric and digital identity 
program me – works usi ng iris scans and fingerprints. These biometrics are used as the 
means of bodily verification of the individual specifically to prevent duplication of the 
individual’s records across the national database of residents. This results in a random 12 -
digit dig ital unique identity number for the individual. Personal information like 
demographic data, address, mobile phone numbers and email addresses of citizens are 
linked to this Aadhaar number. This infor mation is also printed on paper documents for 
offline use , alongside the other option of using downloaded XML data -files and QR codes 
which encode personal information – shared using purpose -built mobile a pp or through USB 
thumb drives.  
 
This positions Aadhaar such that while biometric data itself is not shared beyond Aadh aar’s 
database,  verification using Aadhaar enables sharing of personal information necessary to 
prove one’s identity. Alongside this, advanced technical capabilities of  Aadhaar’s 
architecture espouse  the ‘ big d ata’ paradigms of ‘openness’ to int eroperability and 
‘scalability’ to achieve high volumes of data (Varma 2014), and using ‘application 
programming interfaces’ (API s) that enable digital verification. Consequently, Aadhaar 
functions at the core of a complex ecosystem where the digital ident ity verification is used 
by both governmental and commercial systems. Ultimately, the personal information shared 
via the paper document or XML data -file can be confirmed as being genuine using the 
Unique Identity Authority of India ( UIDAI ) website directl y or by software integration of 
governmental and commercial systems that consume the UIDAI API (Viswanathan 2019).  
 
Given such capabilities , Aadhaar and its linkages create  a need to understand the impact of 
‘datafication’ and its relation to digital ident ity. Datafication, defined as the transformation 
of social actions or outcomes into data through online quantification (Mayer -Schoenberger 
& Cukier 2013, Van Dijck 2014), carries the impact of identification forward in relation to the 
data -driven context o f use of Aadhaar as digital identity. This means that despite the state 
not collecting vast quantities of  data directly with a motive of surveillance, a move towards 
datafication creates data -flows that cause social impacts beyond the original intention fo r 
which data was collected (Nayar 2012). It is acknowledged that marginalised groups within 
India especially face a situation where their newly found digital participation makes them 
vulnerable to risks due to unethical practices of data use (The Wire 2017 ). Even when the Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
3 
 state seeks to address  such concerns, its benefits do not always apply to the disadvantaged 
population due to factors like data -literacy, absence of awareness , or lack of access to 
redressal (Abraham et al. 2017, ET 2018a). This presents a  knowledge gap of understanding 
issues like ethics, fairness and inequality – encapsulated as  the meta -issue of justice, in 
relation to the use of complex surveillance ecosystem of digital identity on those who are 
already marginalised and are seeking a me ans to participate in the wider society.  
 
The focus of this paper is in understanding the impact of datafication through the study of 
two aspects. First, this paper places the use of digital identity within its complex ecosystem 
of use and its consequent i mpact. Secondly, this paper contextualises the use of digital 
identity and its surveillance capability among the experiences of the marginalised 
population. To achieve this the paper studies the daily -life experiences of informal workers 
in south India usi ng the lens of social justice to understand how they navigate the effects of 
surveillant visibility and datafication.  The research question that this paper ultimately 
answers can be presented as: What is the social justice impact of a digital identity and the 
datafication enabled by it?  
 
The paper is structured to first discuss the relevant literature from which a conceptual 
framework of data  justice is identified. Following a brief description of the case study 
background and the research methods, the empi rical findings  from the analysis of the case 
are presented. Finally, the wider implications of the paper and its findings are discussed 
before concluding with its specific recommendations.  
 
 
B. Literature  
 
This section will briefly introduce recent scholarship on datafication, and its relation to 
surveillance and social justice. Building further on this a conceptual framework is developed 
that is to be used for the analysis of the case study under focus.  
 
B1. Identification and Datafication  
 
‘National identity’ systems develo ped under electronic governance  utilise digital 
technologies to deliver an open and multi -purpose identification infrastructure and enabling 
linkages to other systems , adding complexity  to their social impacts (Whitley & Hosein 
2010). With the lack of data -protection framework s in the global South (Arora 2016), there 
is a strong potential for data -led discrimination and breach of ethics in use of data where 
linkages of open surveillant -capable identification systems enable data -flow between the 
state and private entities.  This has been acknowledged as an area of concern in recent 
scholarship calling for critical understanding of datafication and its context (Boyd & 
Crawford 2012, Gangadhara n 2012, Lyon 2014, Van Dijck 2014, Zuboff 2015, Dalton et al. 
2016, Broeders et al. 2017, Roth & Luczak -Roesch 2018). Research by Taylor & Broeders 
(2015) has specifically called for a new ethical approach in understanding surveillant 
visibility and datafi cation specifically anchored in the global South.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
4 
 The growing corpus of work on ‘data justice’ – including by Johnson (2014), Dencik et al. 
(2016) and Heeks & Renken (2018) – brings together the varying strands of theorisation 
related to datafication and surveillance, using a critical and an ethical lens. Mainly – as both 
Johnson (2014) and Dencik et al. (2016) present outright (Heeks & Renken 2018 allude to it)  
– surveillance is centrally placed in theorising the ‘justice’ paradigm. Most relevantly Taylor  
(2017) has extended this to include theorisation of ‘visibilities’ in relation to data justice.  
This can also be read in the empirical works of Gangadharan (2012), who suggests the need 
to invoke ‘social justice’ as a means to understand inclusive partici pation predicated on 
digital technology and the ‘complexity of what participation and incorporation into online 
worlds entail’. Echoing this , the section that follows conceptualises identification and 
datafication wi thin surveillance theorisation.  
 
B2. Surveillance and Recognition  
 
Surveillance has bee n conceptualised by David Lyon  (2010) as being ‘liquid’ – terming it 
‘liquid surveillance’ – which in turn is rooted in readings of Zygmunt Bauman’s (2000, 2013, 
and also Bauman & Lyon, 2013) notion of ‘liq uid modernity’. Liquid surveillance presents an 
argument which helps conceptualise ‘identification’ within contemporary society as a means 
of individualisation and of seeking legitimate identity through digital technologies. These 
core ideas are to be enga ged within the experiences of the surveilled individuals. Presenting 
surveillance as a concept of visibilities as Lyon (2010) summarises:  
Liquid surveillance describes well today’s regimes of in ⁄ visibility and is characterized 
by data -flows, mutating sur veillance agencies and the targeting and sorting of 
everyone. (Lyon 2010: 325)  
Surveillance is thus intricately connected to datafication enabled through technological 
artefacts like mobile phones, codes and passwords, digital identities and online profile s, 
working together to enable participation within the network (Bauman & Lyon 2013).  
 
Under such a theorisation the social function of surveillance can be probed further as 
‘recognition’ (Taylor 1997, Brighenti 2010, Lyon 2016). Recognition here is the mea ns of 
establishing one’s identity and categorisation  as a demonstration of one’s  position within 
society. This notion of recognition has been co -opted by Bauman & Lyon (2013) (also see 
Bauman 2001, Lyon 2016) as the starting point of liquid surveillance. L egitimate 
identification sought by disadvantaged groups to be seen, to belong and to be counted by 
the state through programmes of welfare, of financial inclusion, and even of citizenship is 
subsumed in such a theorisation. Brighenti (2010) presents this a s the need for ‘individual 
recognition’ sought by the previously disadvantaged and undocumented individual to be 
‘seen’ by the state using regimes of identification including the use of identity cards, 
technological artefacts (like smart cards), and digita l artefacts (like biometrics or identity 
numbers). This relation between identity and recognition thus presented as a socio -political 
notion is intertwined with issues of inclusion and marginalisation (Taylor 1997, Lister 2004) 
and also of visibilities and  surveillance (Brighenti 2010, Boellstorff 2013, Lyon 2016). 
Further , the most relevant theorisation that uses ‘recognition’ as a core notion in relation to  
social justice is of ‘abnormal justice’ by Fraser (1998, 2000, 2009). The next section presents 
this as a framework within which the need for legal identity is conceptualised as 
‘recognition’ and is a key dimension of justice alongside other contextual social factors.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
5 
 B3. Abnormal Justice  
 
Bauman (2001) invoking Fraser (1998) argues that ‘recognition’ must be understood with its 
allied economic or distributive justice factors. Fraser (2000, 2009) presents the same 
argument to understand complex ideas of justice with underlying dimensions as ‘abnormal 
justice’. Here justice is achieved by equitable parti cipation in society or ‘parity of 
participation’ – which depends on achieving parity in specific intertwined dimensions of 
distributive justice and recognition , echoing Bauman (2001).  
 
Since economic subordination in a society in many cases can cause cultu ral subordination 
and vice versa, Fraser (2000) deems that considering the social role of identity as the  result 
of a freestanding ‘cultural’ component in society would miss  the economic component of 
seeking fair ‘redistribution’ of resources – or ‘distributive’ justice. To further contextualise 
claims to justice, Fraser extended redistribution and recognition as dual dimensions of 
justice by adding a third dimension of ‘repr esentation’ and positing further that we live in an 
era of ‘abnormal justice’ as opposed to normal justice. Here normal justice presupposes 
‘parity of participation’ according to normative ‘social arrangements that permit all to 
participate as peers in soc ial life’ (Fraser 2008: 405). The parity establishes clear common 
understanding of the critical nodes of justice: the ‘what’, the ‘who’, and the ‘how’ justice 
can be achieved in a society. While studying participation of an already disadvantaged 
population  within a society, this parity is not present and is sought. Under abnormal justice 
the ‘what’ of the justice  is then profoundly changed. It i s not just the fair distribution of 
resources or recognition in society. Here the ‘what’ is a wider conceptualisat ion of that 
which needs to overcome three societal injustices (Fraser 2009):  
 Misrecognition – injustice in the cultural domain of existence where respect or 
esteem is unequal due to embedded cultural hierarchies. Disparity here results in 
unequal social st anding where some individuals or groups face barriers due to 
cultural markers such as gender or caste.  
 Maldistribution – injustice in the economic domain where the distribution of 
resources is unequal. Disparity in aspects like lower income,  wealth, or oth er 
intrinsically -economic value markers define an economic structure of inequality 
between actors in society.  
 Misrepresentation – injustice in the political domain where rules of participation in 
politico -spatial society are unequal. Disparity here creates  a political voice -lessness 
and unequal democratic and procedural access to participation.  
 
Overcoming the ‘subordination’ across cultural recognition, economic redistribution and 
political representation dimensions , the core objective of justice, which is  ‘parity’, would be 
achieved as per Fraser (2000,  2009). These three dimensions as discussed below are 
presented as central to probing the impacts of digital identity and their social justice 
impacts.  
 
The first two dimensions of recognition and redistribu tion were proposed initially by Fraser 
(2000). Recognition specifically ze roes in on the impetus to seek  digitally enabled 
participation within society through surveillance artefacts (Bauman 2001, Lyon 2016), and 
can be read in a way that is coherent with Fraser’s (2000) argument. Here the provision  of 
an individual identity helps overcom e extant cultural subordination and attain social Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
6 
 ‘recognition’ (Brighenti 2010, Lyon 2016a). This understanding of identity and its role in 
recognition is synergistic with  the role of surveillance as understood by Bauman & Lyon 
(2013) and Brighenti (2010) (also see Lyon 2016). But , as noted above from  Fraser ’s (2000) 
work,  economic subordination in a society can cause cultural subordination and vice versa. 
This is presented  as the inevitable entwinement of the cultural and economic mode of 
participation, that is of recognition and redistribution – the first two dimensions of parity in 
‘abnormal justice’ theorisation.  
 
This entwinement of recognition and redistribution has be en acknowledged by other 
authors. F or instance , in relation to surveillance , Cinnamon (2017) argues that economic 
value  varies  due to the differing status hierarchy or ‘data -class’ (Manovich 2012, Andrejevic 
2014) one occupies in a data -driven society. The  lower class that produces data relinquish es 
control of personal data and face s status inequality where direct economic value is derived 
from their data by higher classes in the status hierarchy – those who can collect and analyse, 
making data extractable for its economic value. Taking a cue from this, the dimensions of 
recognition and redistribution can be employed to understand status subordination leading 
to and resulting from use of digital identity , and possible inequalities in cultural and 
economic d omain formed due to impacts of identification and consequent datafication.  
 
The third dimension seeks out fair political representation and equal voice in proce sses that 
define rules and make  decision s within society. Injustice is the lack of political ‘voice’ in 
being able to participate in determination of the rules of the society that individuals 
ultimately live under. Fairness in procedural aspects , especially in relation to data , falls 
under this d imension , particularly  relating to  those which determine control of an 
individual ’s data. For instance, the tenet of ‘information disclosure’ has been considered the 
means to provide ‘voice’ to users to be heard by decision makers (Bier 1993). In the more 
recent datafied condition a ‘fair’ means of giving voice and control of one’s data has been 
presented in relation to procedures of ‘informed consent’ and options for ‘opt -in’ or ‘opt -
out’ (Ashworth & Free 2006, Fuchs 2011).  
 
These three dimensions of parti cipatory parity operate within the same politico -spatial 
‘frame’ , which is to say a typification of a societal setting not necessarily limited by 
geographical boundaries. The frame then defines the rules and in turn the boundary 
conditions of being accepte d for participation, including in relation to a non -state or 
international entity. Any injustice in defining the boundary can exclude individuals from 
participation itself.  In case of non -state participation like online services this can be 
understood as b eing defined by the ‘terms and conditions’ agreed. As the terms are dictated 
outside a ‘normal’ framework of justice there is potential for the frame to be set on 
‘exploitative terms of interaction [which ] then exempt [service providers ] from democratic 
control’ (Fraser 2010). This complex political nature of justice particularly lend s itself to 
study  of surveillance and datafication run through private, non -state actors and also can 
help query the heavy involvement of private platforms and firms  in technol ogical 
infrastructures (Cinnamon 2017).  
 
In summary, the conceptual fram ework  (Figure 1) is used for analysis of the case study. The 
three aspects of ‘abnormal justice’ will in this view be used to query injustice in relation to 
digital identity. The dimen sions will query: ‘misrecognition’ in the use of identity in seeking Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
7 
 to overcome cultural aspects of subordination, ‘maldistribution’ due to resulting 
datafication and its relation to enabling to unequal economic value creation , and 
‘misrepresentation’ wil l deal with the loss of voice of individuals  under surveillance 
mechanisms.  
 
Figu re 1: Data -Justice Framework – developed  from Fraser (2000, 2008, 2009)  
 
 
C. Case Background and Methods  
 
Aadhaar , as undertaken by the Unique Identity Authority of India , works using biometric 
data – iris scans and fingerprints. These are linked to personal information like demographic 
data, address, mobile phone numbers and email addresses of citizens resulting in a random 
12-digit digital unique identity number. Aadhaar the n is used for a variety of services like 
opening bank accounts, receiving subsidies,  or direct benef it transfer (Sarkar 2014, UIDAI 
2014a, 2014b ). Enrolment is ‘non -mandatory’ and is to be demand -driven (UIDA I 2014a). 
One of the key services enabled is ‘Electronic Know You r Customer’ (e -KYC) . This  offers 
electronic authentication and verification of individuals with its linkage to a bank account 
made mandatory for governmental subsidy, and mobile number  linkage  to Aadhaar made 
mandatory as the channel for communication of information by text messages in relation to 
subsidy by the state ( MoF  2016). An ‘open’ architecture of digital infrastructure under 
Aadhaar was evangelised by proponents1 furthering adoption of  Aadhaar across public and 
private sector services as the basis for digitally driven financial inclusion. Based on this there 
has been growth of Aadha ar-enabled digital payment services including mobile applications 
and digital payment gateways, with the s ervices developed, delivered and consumed by 
multiple private sector players.  
 
Using Aadhaar , the state focuses on the financial inclusion of the informal sector which 
accounts for 81% of India’s  working population with most of this informality concentrate d in 
rural and agricultural jobs (The Wire 2018). Given this focus a case study has been chosen 
with the city of Chennai (the capital of the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu) as the urban 
setting to explore the experiences of two sets of informal workers – cab-drivers and 
                                                      
1 India Stack – a non-state collective of technologists whose expertise and knowledge exchange furthered 
adoption of Aadhaar across pub lic and private sector services : http://indiastack.org/aadhaar/  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
8 
 domestic workers (CMDA 2008). The total working population in the Chennai Metropolitan 
Area (CMA) is estimated at 6.8 million in 2016 of which 1.2 million are deemed informal 
workers. In the state of Tamil Nadu – in which CMA is the larges t urban area – urban in -
migration  has led to  an increase in marginal settlements like slums and  has driven the 
growth of urban informal labour in the last decade (TNGov 2014). Further , the choice to  
study domestic workers and cab -drivers was done due to th eir long -standing visible 
presence as traditional urban informal workers and the prominence of these jobs in the 
narratives of informality targeted by Aadhaar as a program me (UIDAI 2008).  
 
An ecosystem of technologies (see Figure 2 below) provided by priva te sector companies 
and their eventual relation to Aadhaar are of interest for this case study.  
 The f irst group of interest are the online recruitment portals that started catering 
specifically to ‘blue -collar’ workers in Indian cities. One of the earliest  of the portals 
started in 2007 but with the bigger players joining after the advent of Aadhaar. 
These portals enabled job seekers to create online profiles detail ing their skills and 
applying for  jobs listed by potential employers as ads. Jobs listed incl ude domestic 
workers, drivers, couriers and delivery personnel, ‘handym en’, restaurant workers 
etc. The focu s of study here was of domestic workers who use these portal s – e.g. 
Babajob, Quikr, Aasaanjobs – to seek employment . 
 The s econd group of interest a re mobile apps and platforms that cater to informal 
gig-based work specifically in urban areas . In recent years, these  have grown with 
the advent of smartphones and location -base d services. The focus here is on  cab-
drivers ’ use of ride -hailing apps which  have supplement ed and then fast replace d 
online recruitment portals as the source of employment opportunities. The drivers 
under study here use their own car, or leased cars via these apps , e.g. Ola, Uber.  
 
In both recruitment portals and apps, the informal worker provides identity documents – in 
many cases a copy of Aadhaar as a paper document – to signal their legitimate identity as a 
potential worker.  
 
Other than the above digital platforms there is the pr esence of digital trust platforms ( e.g. 
BetterPlace, Yoti ) which are used by recruitment portal and gig -work apps as a business -to-
business service to ‘verify’ informal workers. This verification works by using their 
governmental identity information inclu ding p hoto and personal details cross -verified using 
digital scans against information provided by the informal workers on these digital 
platforms. With Aadhaar these work in two modes. First , online verification using Aadhaar 
e-KYC2 where the UIDAI  API with its open, vendor -neutral architecture (UIDAI n.d.), helps to 
confirm validity of personal information . Second,  offline verification using XML data -files 
and QR code images encoding Aadhaar -related personal data. As part of informal worker 
onboarding the se digital trust platforms use these e -KYC, XML or QR codes to do faster and 
bulk validation of information provided by the workers. The role of these digital trust 
platforms within the ecosystem has not been probed in detail, but it is acknowledged here 
as they provide a basis for the faster scaling up of digital identity use among informal worker 
population s. 
 
                                                      
2 This has been limited after a recent Supreme Court ruling disallowing private sector use.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
9 
  
Figure 2: Ecosyste m of Technologies  
 
The case study is built by thematically analysing mainly interviews  (see Table 1)  using the 
data -justice fr amework described earlier (see F igure 1). Semi -structured interviews3 of 
informal workers and worker group  leaders were done between January to March 2019 
focused on the daily -life experience of using technologies of Aadhaar and its ecosystem. 
Additionally, interviews of digital platform creators (management of a leading ‘blue -collar’ 
recruitment portal interviewed as part of a pilot in Bangalore during April 2017) were used 
to contextualise the d ata. Data was further triangulated by field observations and 
interactions, and by the author’s use of digital platforms as a customer on ride -haling apps 
and by the author signing -up as a prospective employee on a recruitment portal. Secondary 
sources used  included  mass media content, government  white papers and policy reports, 
technical blogs and documents, and websites of the platforms under study. All these are 
cited where appropriate . 
 
Type (number of interviews/observation instances)  Anonymised referen ce  
Domestic workers without online recruitment engagement (8)  DWA1 to DWA8  
Domestic workers with online recruitment engagement (8)  DWB1 to DWB8  
Domestic workers gr oup and NGO leaders (3)  DWL1, DWN1, DWN2  
Domesti c workers self -help g roup (2)  DWM1, DWM2  
Cab-drivers using ride -hailing apps (15)  CDA 1 to CDA15  
Cab-drivers union le aders (2)  CDL1, CDL2  
Digital  platform creator s – management -level employees from 
one of the leading blue -collar recruitment p ortals  (2) DPL1, DPL2  
Cab-drivers union me etings (1)  CDM1  
Cab-drivers prot est (2)  CDP1, CDP2  
Table 1: List of I nterviews and Field Observations  
 
 
                                                      
3 When this paper in the later parts refers to ‘interviewees’, this broadly means the informal workers 
interviewed, relating to a finding emerging across multiple interviews. Interviews of leaders and digital 
platform creators are specifically referenced wh ere used.  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
10 
 D. Findings  
 
This section is structured based on the data -justice framework discussed in earlier sections. 
The injustice s arising due to cultural, economic and political subordination are presented 
respectively as per the ‘abnormal justice’ dimensions.  
 
D1. Misrecognition  
 
Asymmetry of Recognition  
 
Aadhaar opens new  avenue s for informal workers to seek employment on digital platforms 
as cab -drivers and domestic workers. Prominently the slogan that the program me is 
branded with, is ‘My Aadhaar. My Identity/Recognition’4 . It is reinforced by government 
advertisement strategies that project use of Aadhaar as the digital means t o claim 
recognition for disadvantaged groups – particularly domestic workers. The narratives with 
which Aadhaar has been presented thus plays on the need for recognition in gaining 
employment as an informal worker (Aadhaar UIDAI 2018). Before the Supreme C ourt ruling 
in late 2018 disallowed private sector use of Aadhaar, digital recruitment  and trust 
platforms partnered with UIDAI in enabling e -KYC-based authentication of job seekers, 
showing  the ‘Aadhaar verified’ tag on profiles as a signal of trust to re cruiters, and to 
incentivise verification through Aadhaar for other job seekers (DPL1, ILO 2017). But clients – 
the private household employers on the recruitment portals and cab -riding customers on 
ride-hailing apps – who would employ the services of info rmal workers are not verified.  
 
The digital verification here mainly works to signal trust by enabling the clients to gauge 
their risk in engaging services of a new employee. But a similar function is not available to 
the workers as the clients themselves are not verified digitally , resulting in an asymmetrical 
one-way formalisation of surveillance and recognition. Digital verification here replaces 
urban local -area informal referral networks which are traditionally used to seek 
employment  (DWA8). There is a loss of these  ‘mutual trust’ networks  – sometimes in place 
for decades – which help  informal workers recognise potential ‘good’ employers referred via 
word -of-mouth by their peers in both the cases of cab -drivers and domestic workers (DWL1, 
CDM1). Inform al workers highlight this asymmetry  as an issue of safety which  hinders their 
easy recognition of potential employers  and in not knowing their local work conditions, as 
the traditional peer networks provided a possibility to informally vet households of po tential 
employers. Similarly, this asymmetry manifests again when cab -drivers highlight a need for 
assurance of their on the job safety. Citing recent crimes against cab -drivers by cab -riding 
customers (TOI 2017, HT 2018a, The Hindu 201 9), the drivers sugg est Aadhaar -based 
verification of cab -riding customers as a possible solution that mirrors their own verification 
on digital platforms (CDM1). Asymmetrical verification practices deem the informal workers 
only to be trusted after a formal mechanism of veri fication, even when they are provided no  
avenues for formal knowledge of  their working conditions and employers.  
 
                                                      
4 In Hindi – Mera Aadhaar, mera pehchaan  – the word ‘pehchaan’ has a technical meaning of identity with 
recognition as the broader meaning.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
11 
 Absence of Worker Legitimacy  
 
The drivers argue that the stringent identity verification using Aadhaar while joining a  digital 
platform – made  mandat ory for all practical purposes – uses their verification only to signal 
safety to cab -riding customers and enable participation in digital payment. Operationally the 
digital identity does not help them gain recognition as legitimate drivers during t heir daily 
work on the road due to lack of institutional support from the digital platforms , irrespective 
of the driver’s verification status. This is especially evident when issues of customer dispute 
arise or when drivers need to engage with the police ( CDL2). Traffic or beat p olice , as 
reported by cab -drivers , use their prior disposition of domination against informal workers. 
As a result, instances are report ed where police use their petty power to verbally abuse and 
intimidate cab -drivers, and in some cases seek bribes (Thozhilalar Koodam 2019). Cab -
drivers protest this as ‘police harassment’ and seek a means to gain  legitimacy of their role 
as a driver (CDP1).  Ultimately while a digital identity helps the drivers gain work through 
digital platforms it does  not lend itself to signal legitimacy for such purposes on the road.  
 
The fragmented nature of work on digital platforms is also related to how such issues of 
identity affect the cab -drivers. Consider the case of the long -running transport option of 
auto-rickshaws (also known in other countries as tuk -tuks) where an organised and formal 
unionising of drivers and collective efforts has long existed through ‘auto stands’ (local area 
parking spaces that act also as meeting spots) (Transparent Chennai 2012) . In many cases 
these organised efforts also have the advantage of strong political party patronage.  Auto -
rickshaw drivers resort to their union or auto -stands for institutional support when for 
example they gain negative attention from the police in claiming their legitimacy as drivers. 
Cabs on the other hand are a recent phenomenon in Chennai, with a strong dependence on 
digital platforms as a basis for atomised self -employment. While digital platforms have 
reduced the infamous ability of drivers (bo th auto and cab) to set exorbitant rates and 
engage in undue haggling,  the atomised existence of platform -based work  leaves  drivers  – 
cab-drivers particularly – to their own devices to contend with the lack of recognition of 
their urban role as a driver. T o get over this issue, fledgling efforts have begun on 
unionising. One cab-drivers’ union now is sues paper identity cards that they seek to use to 
signal their union membership. These collective efforts of the drivers are directed to claim 
their legitimacy  given the lack of support on this front from the digital platforms, especially 
when stopped on the road by the police or when challenged by customers (CDM1, CDL1).  
 
In summary, while Aadhaar provides increase d employment opportunities, as a social 
impact the push for digital verification is seen to be based on the status subordination of 
informal workers , with the ir extant social subordination ostensibly extended into the digital 
realm. Here Aadhaar -based verification in its social role is directly used to  assuage security 
anxieties of the clients of digital platforms who hail from middle and higher socio -economic 
classes. But as an identity Aadhaar and it s uses on digital platforms is not set  up to help 
claim legitimate recognition of the informal workers’  role in their workplace and it does not 
address security and safety concerns of the informal workers. Ultimately Aadhaar works  
mainly  as a tool of recognition asymmetrically through routine surveillance of the already 
culturally -subordinated groups – digitally reifying the socially extant inequity of recognition.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
12 
 D2. Maldistribution  
 
Limited Digital Financial Inclusion  
 
Aadhaar is directly related to two aspects of financial inclusion of informal workers into the 
wider economy – as verification for bank a ccounts and to enable digital payments. The easy 
opening of bank accounts for previously unbanked population s like the informal workers has 
been the main agenda of Aadhaar in driving financ ial inclusion. The interviewees’ expected 
benefits and reasons why they signed up to Aadhaar  are tied to narratives of seeking 
economic betterment. These include the possibility to participate in  the wider economy 
through the opening of bank accounts, and through the ease of accessing government 
subsidies  and getting cash  benefit transfers directly to their accounts. Specifically, they also 
mention th e possibilities to access loans from both public and private lenders (various 
interviewees, DWL1, DWN2). These ideas presented by the workers themselves are 
congruent with the  governmental narrative of  Aadhaar -enabled  financial inclusion.  
 
While such Aadhaar uses ha ve driven an increase in number of bank accounts, it is 
acknowledged widely5 that in practice Aadhaar mainly  acts as yet another paper document 
to prove individuals’  identity,  as was the case for  most of the interviewed domestic workers. 
Such Aadhaar linkages are done mainly due to the state push to make these verified bank 
accounts a channel for receiving government subsidies. Digitally -enabled financial inclusion 
beyond this is limited as further formal economic participation using bank accounts does 
not occur easily. This echoes the World Bank finding (Demirgüç -Kunt et al. 2017) on financial 
inclusion where almost half of all accounts o pened under the recent governmental efforts 
see them being inactive in the last year. This is true particularly for domestic workers whose 
wages are transacted in cash and their bank accounts only wo rk to receive government 
subsidies . With the wider econom y that the informal workers engage with being still cash -
oriented, cash is still king for their livelihood (various interviewees).  
 
In this context Aadhaar also enables digital financial transactions – like mobile payments or 
digital wallets based on  linke d bank accounts. But there is not yet a widespread use among 
the informal workers to undertake daily economic transactions using digital means, beyond 
that which is imposed by digital platforms as in the case of cab -drivers. Even the digital 
financial tran sactions integrated on ride -hailing apps present some challenges. Digital 
paym ents are clearly presented as a  convenience and attraction to cab -riding customers to 
increase demand of platform usage. To match this customer demand, during the initial 
marketi ng phase , digital platforms ramped up the supply of cab -drivers and focused on 
enabling the m to accept digital payments fro m customers. Drivers were incentivised to join 
with full verification using Aadhaar which w as required for their use of digital payme nts. The 
initial promise was one of a lower commission taken by the digital platforms with the drivers 
promised higher income (CDL1). Drivers’ experiences in Chennai echo reports from other 
Indian cities where drivers expected and were promised an income around  Rs.100,000 per 
month ( c.US$%1,500 ). But they saw their income fall to 20% of this promised amount. As 
                                                      
5 Both from interviewees and from a report ‘State of Aadhaar’ from the Omidyar Network based on a large -
scale survey for 2017 -18 – see Abraham  et al. (2018).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
13 
 the market matured there was  increased competition for passengers but also  an increased 
share of income taken as commission by the digital platforms  (HT 2018c).  
 
Further specific tactics across the board from major ride -hailing apps cut into driver’s 
income. In 2015 the platforms started levying a fixed fee per week from the drivers over and 
above the per -ride commission. This was designed as a bid to  discourage drivers from 
switching between apps and  to lock them in – as the fixed costs are payable even if the 
driver logs  in just once a week. So, a driver using two apps will be charged by both platforms 
and is better off using only one of them to avoi d double fixed costs.  Such factors have 
brought about a decreasing share of cab -driver share of booking revenue (in one report a 
decrease from 60% to 24%) (ET 2018c). This lowering of income has also pushed some 
drivers into further financial difficulties,  especially as some of the drivers  purchase a  car 
(and in some cases other items such as phones ) via the platform  financed through loans tied 
to their contract as a self -employed partner. Their income from the digital platforms then is 
deducted to the tune  of the expected regular loan payment amounts, levied directly 
through the driver’s bank account . All these factors lock such drivers to the platform for 
employment with declining earnings with them stuck with the major ongoing liability of a 
car loan with  additional payment processing fees payable to digital payment providers 
which cut into the cab -driver ’s profit margin.  
 
Impacts of Digital Payment  
 
The adoption of Aadhaar is related to the increase in digital payments within the last few 
years which spec ifically has impacted informal workers. The Indian government, driven by 
Aadhaar as a core technology has pushed for a ‘state -of-the-art’ digital payment system (RBI 
2019 a). Digital identification plays the central role in the long -term strategy of th e Ind ia 
central bank to ensure availability of  ‘aggregate data’ about credit across the country and to 
drive formal economic participation (RBI 2019 b). The culmination of these efforts was the 
demonetisation of currency notes that happened in 2016, which dispro portionately affected 
those within the informal sector (Gupta & Auerswald 2019). Nearly 80% of currency in use in 
the economy was taken out of circulation by the Government of India – citing control of 
corruption and ‘black money’, and as a bid to force fo rmalisation of financial transactions 
within the sizable informal part of the Indian economy.  Informal work ers saw the immediate 
necessity to participate in the digital economy for their livelihoods and encountered rapid 
changes in employment and their inc ome governed by the digital platforms. The cash 
crunch not only affected the livelihood s of cash -dependent informal workers, but also the 
informal part of the economy that they depend on , due to the inability of small businesses 
like micro traders who stru ggled to adapt to digital payments (Unni 2018).  
 
Meanwhile, there has been an acceleration in the Indian economy with cashless and digital 
transaction becomi ng prevalent bringing in a near -exponential increase in the digital 
payments market. Cab -drivers are increasingly dependent on the digital platform’s 
integrated payment solutions such as digital wallets or card payment interfaces. Though 
these solutions have been reported to have frequent operational delays in transferring 
customer fare payments into the bank accounts of the cab -drivers (various interviewees). 
Even as the Indian government pushed for the spread of digital payments and reduced the 
transaction costs of taking card payments  – which were at 1 to 2% – the digital platforms Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
14 
 have not passed o n this reduction in costs to the driver. Due to these factors lowering their 
income, drivers sometimes see a situation of daily cash crunch. Most of them depend on the 
turnover of cash to manage their mostly cash -based daily living and working conditions 
including  paying for petrol  (CDL1, CDL2, various interviewees).  To counter this effect of 
digital payments it has been observed that some drivers call potential riders , after accepting 
rides and ahead of pick -up, to agree on cash payments (CDL1, author observation). Though 
not all can undertake this work around due to platform -imposed revenue targets.  
 
Thus, the imposition of digital payments affects informal workers disproportionately  
compared to upper and middle socio -economic classes who have access to formal and 
regulated banking. This , as an increased benefit to the already formalised section of the 
economy , reinforces existing economic inequality driven by increasing dependence on 
digital payments. With the di gital platforms and the gig -economy remaining largely 
unregulated, the workers face exploitative terms of work and uncertainties even when they 
do participate in digital payment transactions.  
 
Monetisation of Data  
 
At its core , digital verification is pres ented as a direct economic benefit to informal workers 
with them handing over their personal data and sometimes engaging with biometric 
surveillance in the process. This results in a direct loss of control o f their personal data in the 
absence of actual le gal data protection and defined privacy assurance on digital platforms. 
The platforms derive economic value through monetisation of this data which is available 
without any legitimate guidelines of data -use. An analysis of recruitment portals show that 
mon etisation is sought by sale of premium services and subscription s to both recruiters and 
job seekers alike. The recruiters are able to ‘buy’ contact information in tranches which 
includes personal information of the job -seeker. Additionally, data -driven ma rketing 
elements like advertisement revenue and cross -selling using data -analytics are  made 
possible. The observed case was of ‘special offers’ for jobs seekers seemingly targeting 
‘verified’ job -seekers using their profile data which advertised opening a bank account using 
‘easy’ identity verification.  
 
The accumulated data due to increasing datafication and new -found digital participation of 
informal workers is available to the platforms as a  user -base  and dataset  which in turn 
forms an economic asset that makes up  a core part of the ir business model (DPL1, DPL2). 
This is seen in the growing economic performance of the platforms – with  ride-hailing app 
valuations driven by verified driver numbers  (Traxcn 2016), and an ongoing consolidation in 
the recruitme nt portal market based on  their  ‘blue -collar’ worker user -base (Modgil 2017) . 
The state has also bolstered increasing datafication by policies like the National Career 
Service (NCS) government portal which makes Aadha ar mandatory (NCS n.d.) for 
registrati on for job search. The government portal includes listing of urban informal worker 
opportunities and works with direct integration to online recruitment portals and ride -
hailing apps.  
 
Thus, Aadhaar -enabled verification of the previously digitally excluded  population driven by 
existing economic inequality is the basis on which these business models see a direct 
increase in their user -base enabling extraction of economic value of user data through the Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
15 
 monetisation practices on these platforms. This echoes ar guments of ‘informational 
capitalism’ (Andrejevic 2015) – of parting with one’s personal data not necessarily providing 
economic value to the individual but extracted for value in the aggregate by platforms. The 
main issue of equity arises due to the syner gy of technology companies’ business models 
and the state push for ostensible mandatory digital securitisation of society under Aadhaar. 
While the workers find new avenue s for job-seeking via  the digital technologies, enabling 
digital participation in this  mode without due protection has helped platforms gain the most 
economic value with clients following next in gaining advantage due to digital provision of 
services. The state to a lesser extent gains the ability to enact digital surveillant control on 
the previously invisible informal workers. Ultimately informal workers themselves gain the 
least in such an environment where the  absence of regulation and data protection directly 
places them in an emerging form of economic subordination.  
 
D3. Misrepresentat ion 
 
Informed Consent Issues  
 
Aadhaar’s proce dures for ‘informed consent’ have  been contested legally and in practice. 
This is especially because the law that ratified Aadhaar and its defined process of consent 
emerged in 2016 but biometric and other data had been  collected since 2010 (ET 2018d). 
Mass collection of consent was done in what has been referred to as ‘consent camps’ (ET 
2017) with a rather bureaucratic approach to getting consent by rote ‘retroactively’ after 
the wider roll -out. Echoing this th e interviewed informal workers acknowledge routine 
signing and filling up of forms during enrolment and linkages; undertaken without time or 
capacity to fully understand what is being signed. Moreover, many of the online forms and 
printed terms which colle ct consent are in English, the dominant language of governance in 
India (author observation). This is true of commercial digital platforms as well. Yet English -
language literacy among informal workers is low.  These issues position the surveilled 
individua ls facing a lack of information while giving consent, particularly so for informal 
workers who are disadvantaged in data -literacy and language (Kaur 2018 ); a systemic issue 
faced by marginalised groups. As one of the domestic workers puts it linkages are d one as 
‘the government says so and we do it. We don’t question it’ (DWA7).  
 
This has enabled seemingly ‘mandatory’ Aadhaar linkages pushed by private players like 
telecom companies. With the absence of clarity on whether  Aadhaar was mandatory or 
voluntary,  during the early months of 2018 banks and telecom companies sent continuous 
and officious notifications forcing customers to link Aadhaar to their bank accounts and 
mobile numbers (Manzar 2018). This practice continued until a clear direction on the 
disal lowance of private use of Aadhaar authentication came in by September 2018. The 12 -
digit Aadhaar numbers collected by such mechanisms still reside in the databases of the 
private sector agencies (HT 2018b). This and the pervasive linkages of Aadhaar number s to 
multiple databases presents a possibility for cross profiling by the state and private entities; 
again without the explicit or valid informed consent of the individuals who have been 
recorded.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
16 
 Disparity in Procedural Redressal  
 
Following the Supreme Court ruling  in late 2018,  the sharing of Aadhaar numbers and 
linkages to certain private sector services like telecom companies or mobile digital payment 
providers w as deemed a security issue  that needed to be addressed . In response , specific 
solutions were devised including Aadhaar de -linkage requests  (Business Standard 2018)  
using online forms or emails directed to private sector providers, and a solution of a 
temporary ‘Virtual Identity Number’ generated online that would mask the actual Aadhaar  
number (ET 2018b, IE 2018). The identified issues of security were independent of the kind 
of users of Aadha ar and cut across all different classes of the society. However,  since the 
redressal presented for these issues was mainly depended on online solut ions and use of 
the internet . These solutions thus  have an unequal reach putting vulnerable groups like 
informal workers at a disadvantage.  
 
In fact, there has been a dearth of promotion and wide communication of the solutions to 
security issues, compared to how strongly and in an accessible manner the linkages were 
pushed in the first place using mobile text alerts. This too affects the vulnerable population 
disproportionately. Interviewees  mentioned that while some aspects of the Supreme Court 
ruling  and the media conversation around that are known to them, none of them have used 
a Virtual Identity Number or sought de -linking as they have not been informed 
authoritatively by telecom companies or the state  about these things . Even the cab -drivers 
who are mo re data -literate relative to the domestic workers group, mention that while they 
use mobiles apps and services like Facebook (CDL1), the engagement with online 
governmental processes is limited and time consuming.  
 
The inequity of these redressal processes  being primarily online or smartphone -based is 
compounded by two other factors – kiosk -driven services and mobile -based ‘one -time -
passwords’ (OTPs) for  security. Firstly, government  Aadhaar kiosks are expected to serve 
those who canno t access  the internet directly. This creates a disparity for the marginalised 
groups who need to pay to access kiosk services as opposed to someone who can access 
these free services on the internet. F urther, due to delays or higher demand at regulated 
governmental kiosks, the informal workers recount being forced to use unregulated and 
potential ly corrupt private internet browsing centres which char ge higher fees that are hard 
for these workers  to afford.  
 
Secondly, the safety of Aadhaar transactions is dependent mainly on a ‘s ecret’ mobile text -
based OTPs (LiveMint 2018). These OTPs are routinely shared with others – especially due to 
absence of clear information  about their usage  and because of data -literacy challenges as 
experienced by informal workers, wh ich directly affects  their data security. Domestic 
workers – almost all of whom  using feature phones  rather than smartphones – reported it 
difficult to engage with the OTP process. They depend on an intermediary such as a family 
member or acquaintance  to read text messages, with many such alerts reported by some as 
having been left unread for a long period of time. In one case it resulted in delay of subsidy 
reaching the domestic worker ’s bank account (DWL1). Further , In case of cab -drivers they 
report  submitting Aadhaar paper copies at the time of signing up to be a ride -hailing app 
driver and receiving multiple OTPs on their mobile which were then asked for by customer 
care agents over  the phone (CDL1, CDL2). These  were effectively used to set up the cab-Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
17 
 drivers with digital payment options related to the apps. The cab -drivers in their 
subordinated position find it obligatory to share the OTPs and without any opportunity for 
provision of informed consent. Loopholes like this have  been highlighted as the basis for  
financial scams where impostors pretending to be officials call up asking for Aadhaar -related 
OTPs (Ganjoo 2018).  
 
Thus, procedural  aspects around Aadhaar present  a subordination based on digital access 
and data -literacy to create undue dispari ty based on both information present ed and of 
recourse to redressal . Marginalised communities under Aadhaar who are pushed to 
mandatorily use digital identity are unable to voice consent in practice due to an 
ineffectiveness or absence of information prese nted to them. This is further exacerbated 
when procedural solutions as corrective action also create disparity due to varying levels of 
digital access.  
 
 
E. Discussion  
 
Under abnormal justice Nancy Fraser presents a ‘frame’ as the rules of participation ac ross 
the three dimensions of justice. Here the ‘frame’ is the basic societal rules of Aadhaar -led 
inclusive participation of informal workers driven by data and identity. This in practice is a 
heterogeneous  assemblage of laws, processes and technologies, w hich have been queried in 
the above discussion.  Taken as a whole the understanding of the ‘what’ of justice emerges – 
as equitable participation overcoming subordination in attaining fair recognition, 
distribution and representation. This also presents a m eans to connect justice to the wider 
context of marginalisation, digital identification and  the datafication of livelihood at large.  
This alongside a further discussion on the data -justice framework follows in this section.  
 
E1. Justice under Datafication  
 
Culturally, justice can be formulated as fair access to legitimacy, as sought by marginalised 
groups in their use of digital technology in a bid to overcome the existing social imbalance of 
recognition that acts a gainst them. Additionally, data justice al so needs to incorporate  the 
impact of participation in the digital economy. Justice then can be queried ; asking  if 
technology help s overcome cultural subordination or in a negative sense technology acts 
exploitatively to cement existing inequities.  Much as  Cummings & O’Neil (2015) 
commented , here technology is a ‘mirror’ of the society, in that it can replicate the extant 
class -based and cultural issues related to marginalisation. Going by the case evidence, data  
justice has to account for the risk that subordination – which existed in cultural and social 
practices experienced by marginalised groups – is digitally reified onto their datafied 
representation and the technological processes they engage with.  
 
Economic ally, digital identity is intimately connected to economic development and poverty 
reduction program mes as evident in agenda s such as  ‘identity for development’ (ID4D 2016, 
Beduschi et al. 2017). But these program mes do not account for the impact of datafi cation 
that inevitably follows the provision of digital identity. Data in such a case has been seen to 
be intrinsically connected to economic value production for commercial players. Clearly, Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
18 
 enough evidence exists that imperfect protection of an already m arginalised community can 
further exacerbate their economic condition. But an additional distributive aspect of justice 
then emerges where technology helping fair participation of the economically subordinated 
can also enable unfair exploitation of the per sonal data of the marginalised. Injustice here as 
shown can lead to even further economic subordination based on the newfound digital 
participation of marginalised groups.  
 
Finally, in the political domain, justice as an aspect of representation is intimat ely connected 
to the wider political voice -lessness of marginalised groups  – the solution to which is 
devised through digital technologies and by datafication by recent governmental policies 
and program mes (Gurumurthy et  al. 2016). Digital identity is clea rly adopted globally under 
such a tenet. Two aspects of datafication form the focus of political justice. Unjust rules for 
consent under processes of datafication deny vulnerable communities a voice in 
participating equitably , putting them at further disad vantage. Redressal efforts to 
technological problems also can be procedurally unfair , aggravating existing marginalisation. 
Justice then is conceptualised as equal ‘voice’ through informed consent and as a fair 
procedural means to question any vulnerabilit y arising due to digital technology.  
 
E2. Stakeholders of Data Justice  
 
The case study also provides insights into subordination through the ‘who’ of justice – the 
second node. As Fraser (2009) noted, cultural and economic subordination can feed of f one 
another – with  middle and higher socio -economic groups who already enjoy dominance 
reifying that pos ition in the digital realm. People  can be understood as disparate classes 
within society with digital technology clearly benefitting some over others. This presents an 
opportunity to theorise the role of those who are affected by technology and data under 
the data -justice lens. Existing discussion of inequalities related to data (Manovich 2012, 
Andrejevic 2014, Cinnamon 2017) present s the  analytical cate gory of users related to 
datafication based on personal data production. For instance , Manovich (2012) present s 
three division s of the ‘data -classes’ – the ones who create  data , who collect data, and who 
anal yse data. But the ‘who’ of data justice based on  the above discussion can extend 
analytical categories beyond data production. Especially to contextualise the impact of data  
after its production and use, one can propose a data -class based analysis of stakeholders to 
study effects of datafication and who  it benefits.  This will invoke the three dimensional 
cultural, economic or political subordination in categorising stakeholders. From the case 
study, we can ascertain that Aadhaar as a means of digital participation unjustly 
subordinates informal workers i n relation to other entities : 
 Culturally, informal workers continue to be subordinated to clients who engage 
services using digital platforms. These are the private household employers on the 
recruitment portals and cab -riding customers on apps. Additionally, the state 
through the actions of the police continue s to exert local power on informal workers.  
 Economically, data is accumulated by digital platform s for extraction of economic 
value,  presenting an unjust distribution of economic value that is based on the 
newfound and unprotected datafied existence of informal workers.  
 Politically, the sta te and private entities create disparities  based on informed 
consent and recourse to procedural solutions that create further digital -led 
vulnerability for informal workers.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
19 
 F. Conclusions  and Recommendations  
 
The intricate entwinement of surveillance and datafication under digital identity has been 
explored in this paper with a case study of Aadhaar,  India’s biometric digital identity  
programme . The paper m akes specific contributions in theorisation and through 
presentation of empirical analysis. The paper presents an adapt ation of the social justice 
theorisation that works synergistically with notions of surveillance  and datafication to 
present a data -justi ce framework. Using a rich empirical analysis, the paper has 
demonstrated the viability of such a framework derived from Nancy Fraser’s (2009) work on 
‘abnormal justic e’ and its constituent dimensions – cultural recognition, economic 
distribution and polit ical representation.  
 
Empirically , by analysing the emerging surveillant technology of Aadhaar and its networked 
ecosystem , the paper sheds light on the social impact of such a program me. While 
surveillance using a digital identity is aimed at an agenda of  inclusive participation of the 
disadvantaged in society, the use of a social justice lens points to the  complex nature of its 
impacts. Via study of cab -drivers and domestic workers and their use of digital identity and 
platforms, this paper engages with d igital identity and its complex networked ecosystem to 
understand consequent datafication , data -flows  and their impacts . 
 
Digital identities, it is found, do produce benefits to marginalised communities like informal 
workers in providing a legal identity b oth digitally and on paper – as a means of recognition, 
and in helping them participate in the mainstream economy through subsidy disbursement 
and by providing access to formal bank accounts. But there are downsides to these benefits 
across the three domai ns of justice. It is found that digital identity in its current form largely 
prioritises cultural and economic benefits for middle  and higher  socio -economic class es. 
Culturally , lower socio -economic classes do not see an improvement in their social standin g 
as claimed by the wider identity agenda, while also being affected in the economic domain 
due to personal data being prone to extraction for value by commercial digital platforms. 
This is further impacted politically by inequity in voicing needs and due to unfair procedural 
aspects, both of which inordinately affec t lower socio -economic classes.  
 
These findings point to an exacerbation rather than narrowing of inherent inequalities 
between marginalised communities like informal workers and the more formal  entities of 
Indian society: commercial businesses including digital platforms, and their middle -class 
clientele. Particularly it presents a complex synergy between governmental and private 
sector s: the data -flows between them and the impact on an already vulnerable population. 
Thus, the implication of the finding s would be on both domains of data -subject rights and 
citizen rights. Although the discussion in the paper is based on the Indian case study , by 
engaging with the contestations for justice under surveillance and datafication, this paper 
has sought to more -widely contextualise the experience of marginalised communities under 
datafication. The paper also proposes understanding data -justice stake holders using an 
extended ‘data -class’ notion incorporating the complex nature of cultural, economic and 
political interactions enabled by data.  
 
The findings and the theorisation presented here contribute to the research agenda by 
addressing a specific kn owledge gap. The social justice approach used  here specifically Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
20 
 answers the call to move away from the top -down technological approach prominently 
taken in presenting digital solutions that seek to enhance  equitable participation in society 
(Eubanks 2014).  In light of this , the paper  has sought to understand everyday routines 
through which individuals use technology and data, and engage with digitally -delivered 
participation and its resultant social impacts. This argument has found favo ur with authors 
writi ng on data justice (Taylor 2017, Heeks & Renken 2018). Thus, the theorisation 
presented subsumes aspects of marginalisation, inequality, datafication and surveillance all 
under a lens of justice.  Building further on this the research also seeks to understa nd the 
wider impact of data and technology in the global South in a way that goes beyond the 
individualistic -centric paradigms of privacy and rights which have been acknowledged as a 
gap in research (Marwick 2018).  
 
Building on this paper, a future researc h area that needs closer inspection would be the 
effects of ongoing platformisation of work and wider datafication on informal workers. This 
paper particularly has laid the groundwork to understand the global South context in two 
specific ways which need  to be prioritised for future research, especially using the lens of 
social justice. First, this paper has briefly explored the ways in  which  digital technologies like 
identity and gig -work platforms are intricately connected to collective and individual rig hts 
of informal workers in a datafied employment landscape. A detailed study of this is 
warranted with focus on the role of formal labour unions and other informal entities, and 
their efforts such as protests, collective bargaining and membership drives. S econd, this 
paper has discussed specific details of how daily practices of informal workers are affected 
due to newfound digital participation on platforms. A wider exploration of the existing 
informality and marginality of such  global South workers is nee ded, with a possible 
longitudinal study of informal  workers transitioning into gig work. This can shed light on the 
expectation and needs of marginalised users such as informal workers before they transition 
onto digital platforms and provide insights into the impact , both positive and negative, once 
they take up gig work.  
 
Finally, the following recommendation s for practice can be garnered from the analysis of 
this paper:  
 There is a need to determine the boundaries of datafication – with particular focus 
on limits of open -architecture systems.  
 Promoting advocacy of data  rights among vulnerable population s is needed 
alongside data -literacy improvement s. 
 Transparency needs to be demanded from governmental data -sharing arrangements 
especially in the global Sou th. 
 Mechanism s of accountability for monet isation of personal data from governmental  
and private players alike need  to be established including its impact on vulnerable 
populations.  
 Advocacy is needed for hybrid -artefact solutions like smart card s, that can work 
stand -alone or when connected, and that can enable digital participation of 
vulnerable population s while mitigating risks of open architecture and multi -purpose 
digital identity.  
These serve to engage with the rampant datafication in the global South in the absence of a 
data -protection law – an issue in a number of countries, including the case of India under 
study.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
21 
  
References  
Aadhaar  UIDAI.  (2018).  Aadhaar  - The Most  Trusted  ID in India . YouTube , 21 May . 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nHUgnK68cUQ  
Abraham,  R., Bennett,  E. S., Bhusal,  R., Dubey,  S., Li, Q., Pattanayak,  A., & Shah,  N. B. (2018).  
State  of Aadhaar  Report  2017 -18. New Delhi: IDinsight . http://stateofaadhaar.in  
Abraham,  R., Bennett,  E. S., Sen,  N., & Shah,  N. B. (2017).  State  of Aadhaar  Report  2016 -17. 
New Delhi: IDinsight . http://stateofaadhaar.in  
Andrejevic,  M. (2014).  The Big Data  Divide.  International  Journal  of Communication , 8, 1673 -
1689.  
Andrejevic,  M. (2015).  Personal  Data:  Blind  Spot  of the “Affective  Law of Value”?  The 
Information  Society,  31(1), 5-12. 
Arora,  P. (2016).  Bottom  of the Data  Pyramid:  Big Data  and The Global  South.  International  
Journal  of Communication , 10, 1681 -1699 . 
Ashworth,  L., & Free,  C. (2006).  Marketing  Dataveillance  and Digital  Privacy:  Using  Theories  
of Justice  to Understand  Consumers’  Online  Privacy  Concerns.  Journal  of Business  Ethics , 
67(2), 107-123.  
Bauman,  Z. (2000) . Liquid  Modernity . Cambridge:  Polity  Press.  
Bauman,  Z. (2013).  Legislators  and Interpreters:  On Modernity,  Post -Modernity  and 
Intellectuals . Cambridge:  Polity  Press.  
Bauman,  Z., & Lyon,  D. (2013).  Liquid  Surveillance:  A Conversation . Cambridge:  Polity  Press . 
Beduschi,  A., Cinnamon,  J., Langford,  J., Luo,  C., & Owen,  D. (2017).  Building  Digital  
Identities:  The Challenges,  Risks  and Opportunities  of Collecting  Behavioural  Attributes  
for new  Digital  Identity  Systems.  Exeter: University  of Exeter.  
https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/bitstream/handle/10871/28297/Buiding%20Digital
%20Identities%20Report -FINAL.pdf  
Bennett,  C. J., & Lyon,  D. (2013).  Playing  the Identity  Card:  Surveillance,  Security  and 
Identification  in Global  Perspective . New  York:  Routledge.  
Better Place.  (2019).  Blue  Collar  Jobs  and Migration  Trends  Report . Bengaluru: Better Place.  
https://www.betterplace.co.in/betterplace -blue -collar -jobs-and-migration -trends -
report/  
Bier,  R. J. (1993).  Privacy  and Procedural  Justice  in Organizations.  Social  Justice  Research , 
6(1), 69-86. 
Bloomberg  Quint.  (2018).  UIDAI  Restricts  Digital  Wallets  from  Accessing  Aadhaar  Database.  
Bloomberg  Quint , 4 Jun.  https://www.bloombergquint.com/aadhaar/uidai -restricts -
digital -wallets -from -accessing -aadhaar -database  
Boellstorff,  T. (2013).  Making  Big Data,  in Theory.  First  Monday,  18(10).  
Boyd,  D., & Crawford,  K. (2012).  Critical  Questions  for Big Data:  Provocations  for A Cultural,  
Technological,  and Scholarly  Phenomenon.  Information,  Communication & So ciety,  
15(5), 662-679.  
Breckenridge,  K. (2014 ). Biometric  State.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press.  
Brighenti,  A. M. (2010).  Visibility  in Social  Theory  and Social  Research . London:  Palgrave  
Macmillan . 
Broeders,  D., Schrijvers,  E., van der Sloot,  B., van Brakel,  R., de Hoog,  J., & Ballin,  E. H. 
(2017).  Big Data  and Security  Policies:  Towards  A Framework  for Regulating  the Phases  
of Analytics  and Use of Big Data.  Computer  Law & Security  Review , 33(3), 309-323.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
22 
 Business  Standard.  (2018).  Here's  How  to Delink  Aadhaar  from  Digital  Wallet,  Bank:  Step -By-
Step  Guide.  Business  Standard , 2 Oct.  https://www.business -
standard.com/article/current -affairs/how -to-unlink -aadhaar -num ber-from -bank -
accounts -paytm -mobile -sim-digital -wallets -118092600417_1.html  
Cinnamon,  J. (2017).  Social  Injustice  in Surveillance  Capitalism.  Surveillance  & Society  15(5), 
609-625.  
CMDA.  (2008).  Second  Master  Plan  for Chennai  Metropolitan  Area,  2026 . Chennai: Chennai  
Metropolitan  Development  Authority.  http://www.cmdachennai.gov.in/smp_main.html  
Cummings,  C., & O’Neil,  T. (2015).  Do Digital Information and Communications Technologies 
Increas e the Voice and Influence  of Women And Girls: A Rapid Re view  of the Evidence . 
London: Overseas  Development  Institute . 
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org. uk/files/odi -assets/publications -opinion -
files/9622.pdf  
Dalton,  C. M., Taylor,  L., & Thatcher,  J. (2016).  Critical  Data  Studies:  A Dialog  on Data  and 
Space.  Big Data  & Society , 3(1), 1-9. 
Demirgüç -Kunt,  A., Klapper,  L., Singer,  D., Ansar,  S., & Hess,  J. (2017).  The Global  Findex  
Database  2017:  Measuring  Financial  Inclusion  and the Fintech  Revolution . Washington, 
DC: World  Bank. https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/  
Dencik,  L., Hintz,  A., & Cable,  J. (2016).  Towards  Data  Justice?  The Ambiguity  of Anti-
Surveillance  Resistance  in Political  Activism.  Big Data  & Society , 3(2), 1-12. 
Diop,  M. (2017).  Making  Everyone  Count:  How  Identification  Could  Transform  the Lives  of 
Millions  of Africans.  Washington, DC: World  Bank.  
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2017/05/24/making -everyone -count -
how -identification -could -transform -the-lives -of-millions -of-africans  
ET. (2017).  Government  Starts  Mega  Drive  to Link NREGS  Accounts  with  Aadhaar.  The 
Economic  Times , 26 Jul . 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/59762569.cms  
ET. (2018a).  No Question  of Deleting  Aadhaar  Data:  UIDAI  CEO Ajay  Bhushan  Pandey.  The 
Economic  Times , 1 Oct . https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/opinion/interviews/no -
question -of-deleting -aadhaar -data -uidai-ceo-ajay-bhushan -
pandey/articleshow/66027536.cms  
ET. (2018b).  DoT Asks  TELCOs  to Offer  Aadhaar  Number,  Virtual  IDs for New  SIMs  from  July 
1. The Economic  Times , 12 Jun . 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/telecom/telecom -news/dot -asks-
telcos -to-offer -aadhaar -number -virtual -ids-for-new -sims -from -july-
1/articleshow/64561419.cms  
ET. (2018c).  Uber,  Ola Strike  Hits Delhi  and Mumbai  Riders . The Economic  Times , 23 Oct . 
https://m.economictimes.com/small -biz/startups/newsbuzz/uber -ola-strike -hits-delhi -
and-mumbai -riders/articleshow/66325573.cms  
ET. (2018d).  Clause  in Aadhaar  Act Badly  Drafted,  Says  Supreme  Court.  The Economic  Times , 
11 Apr . https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/articleshow/63706883.cms  
Fraser,  N. (1998).  From  Redistribution  to Recognition?  Dilemmas  of Justice  in a 'Post -
Socialist'  Age.  New  Left Review , 212, 68-93. 
Fraser,  N. (2000).  Rethinking  Recognition.  New  Left Review , 3, 107-120.  
Fraser,  N. (2008).  Abnormal  Justice.  Critical  Inquiry , 34(3), 393-422.  
Fraser,  N. (2009).  Scales  of Justice:  Reimagining  Political  Space  in a Globalizing  World  (Vol.  
31). New  York:  Columbia  University  Press.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
23 
 Fraser,  N. (2010).  Who  Counts?  Dilemmas  of Justice  in a Post -Westphalian  World.  Antipode,  
41, 281-297.  
Gangadharan,  SP. (2012).  Digital  inclusion  and data  profiling.  First  Monday , 17(5). 
Ganjoo,  S. (2018).  Ex-Banker  Warns  About  Growing  Aadhaar  Scams,  Here's  How  You Can 
Save  Yourself  from  Being  Tricked.  India  Today , 25 Dec . 
https://www.indiatoday.in/technology/news/story/how -to-save -yourself -from -aadhaar -
scams -1416910 -2018 -12-25 
Gilman,  M., & Green,  R. (201 8). The Surveillance  Gap:  The Harms  of Extreme  Privacy  and 
Data  Marginalization.  NYU  Review  of Law & Social  Change , 42, 253-307.  
Gupta,  A., & Auerswald,  P. (2019).  The Ups and Downs  of India’s  Digital  Transformation . 
Harvard  Business  Review , 6 May . https://hbr.org/2019/05/the -ups-and-downs -of-indias -
digital -transformation  
Gurumurthy,  A., Chami,  N., & Bharthur,  D. (2016).  Democratic  Accountability  in The Digital  
Age.  Brighton:  Institute  of Development  Studies.  
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstream/handle/123456789/13010/Research -
Brief -India -1.pdf  
Heeks,  R., & Renken,  J. (2018).  Data  justice  for development:  What  would  it mean?  
Information  Development , 34(1), 90-102.  
HT. (2018a).  Ola, Uber  Drivers  Continue  to Strike  in Mumbai  Over  Fares.  The Hindustan  
Times , 23 Oct . https://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai -news/ola -uber -drivers -
continue -to-strike -in-mumbai -over -fares/story -RCBy1DgkVgqPDJ55lg99HN.html  
HT. (2018b).  After  Supreme  Court  Order,  Confusion  Over  Telecom  Service  Providers  Deleting  
Aadhaar  Data.  The Hindustan  Times , 23 Oct . https://www.hindustantimes.com/india -
news/after -supreme -court -order -confusion -over -telecom -service -providers -deleting -
aadhaar -data/story -FwTSDdiZRdBfBmpSAPNvGK.html  
HT. (2018c).  High  Margins  Vs Driver  Incentives:  The Ola, Uber  Business  Model.  The 
Hindustan  Times , 21 Mar . https://www.hindustantimes.com/business -news/high -
margins -vs-driver -incentives -the-ola-uber -business -model/story -
gCKPwKHQcBqCcvvg3FtjcI.html  
ID4D . (2016).  Identification  for Development:  Strategic  Framework . Washington, DC: World  
Bank.  http://pubdocs.worldbank.orgen/179901454620206363/Jan -2016 -ID4D -Strategic -
Roadmap.pdf  
IE. (2018).  Submit  Plan  to Delink  Aadhaar  in 15 Days:  UIDAI  to Mobile  Firms.  Indian  Express , 
2 Oct . https://indianexpress.com/article/india/submit -plan -to-delink -aadhaar -in-15-
days -uidai -to-mobile -firms -5381885/  
ILO. (2017).  Employment  Policy  Department  - Employment  Working  Paper  No. 233. Geneva: 
International  Labour  Organisation.  https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ ---
ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_614389.pdf   
Johnson,  J. A. (2014).  From  Open  Data  to Information  Justice.  Ethics  and Information  
Technology , 16(4), 263-274.  
Kaur,  N. (2018).  Right  to Privacy.  The Leaflet , 28 May . 
https://theleaflet.in/specialissues/none -of-the-problem s-in-the-implementation -of-
nrega -can-be-fixed -by-aadhaar -on-the-contrary -aadhaar -is-the-source -of-some -
problems -says -reetika -khera/  
Koops,  B-J., Leenes,  R., Meints,  M., van der Meulen,  N., & Jaquet -Chiffelle,  D-O. (2009).  A 
Typology  of Identity -Related  Crime:  Conceptual,  Technical,  and Legal  Issues.  Information,  
Communication  & Society , 12(1), 1-24. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
24 
 Lister,  R. (2004).  A Politics  of Recognition  and Respect:  Involving  People  with  Experience  of 
Poverty  in Decision -Making  That  Affects  Their  Lives.  In: The Politics  of Inclusion  and 
Empowerment , J. Andersen & B. Siim (eds), 116-138.  London:  Palgrave  Macmillan.  
LiveMint.  (2018).  You Must  Not Share  Aadhaar  and its OTP with  Anybody . LiveMint , 27 Mar . 
https://www.livemint.com/Money/wwxe6Mw4V8uR0kdAld2CpN/You -must -not-share -
Aadhaar -and-its-OTP-with -anybody.html  
Lyon,  D. (2010).  Liquid  Surveillance:  The Contribution  of Zygmunt  Bauman  to Surveillance  
Studies.  International  Political  Sociology , 4(4), 325-338.  
Lyon,  D. (2014).  Surveillance,  Snowden,  and Big Data:  Capacities,  Consequences,  Critique.  
Big Data  & Society , 1(2), 1-13. 
Lyon,  D. (2016).  Surveillance,  Liquidity  and The Ethics  of Visibility.  Revue  Internationale  de 
Philosophie , 277(3), 365-379.  
Madanapalle,  A. (2017).  How  Aadhaar  compares  to Other  Biometric  National  Identification  
Systems  Around  the World.  First  Post , 5 Apr . https://www.firstpost.com/tech/news -
analysis/how -aadhaar -compares -to-other -biometric -nation al-identification -systems -
around -the-world -3700543.html  
Manovich,  L. (2012).  Trending:  The Promises  and the Challenges  of Big Social  Data . In: 
Debates  in the Digital  Humanities , M.K.  Gold  (ed), 460-475.  Minneapolis:  University  of 
Minnesota  Press.  
Manzar,  O. (2018).  Aadhaar:  Issues  and Implications.  New Delhi: Speaker's  Research  
Initiative.  http://sri.nic.in/workshop -aadhar -issues -and-challenges  
Marwick,  A. E. (2018).  Privacy  at the Margins|  Understanding  Privacy  at the Margins —
Introduction.  International  Journal  of Communication , 12, 9. 
Mayer -Schoenberger,  V., & Cukier,  K. (2013).  The Rise of Big Data:  How  It's Changing  the 
Way  We Think  About  the World.  Foreign  Affairs , 92, 28. 
Modgil,  S. (2017).  Quikr  Acquires  Babajob  To Cement  Position  In Blue  Collar  Jobs  Segment . 
Inc42 , 21 Jun . https://inc42.com/buzz/quikr -babajob -acquisition/  
MoF. (2016). Spreading Jam Across India’s Economy. Economic Survey 2015 -16 Vol. I . New 
Delhi: Ministry of Finance. https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/budget2016 -2017/es2015 -
16/echapvol1 -03.pdf  
Nanavati,  S., Thieme,  M., & Nanavati,  R. (2002).  Biometrics:  Identity  Verification  in a 
Networked  World  (Vol.  20). New  York:  John  Wiley  & Sons.  
Nayar,  P. K. (2015).  Citizenship  and Identity  in the Age of Surveillance . Cambridge:  
Cambridge  University  Press.  
NCS.  (n.d.).  National  Career  Service  Porta l: Local  Services.  New Delhi: National  Career  
Services, Government  of India.  
https://www.ncs.gov.in/User%20Manuals/Local%20Service%20Provider%203.0.pdf  
OECD.  (2014).  India  Policy  Brief . Paris: OECD.  https://www.oecd.org/policy -briefs/India -
Improving -Quality -of-Education -and-Skills -Development.pdf  
RBI. (2019 a). Payment  and Settlement  Systems  in India:  Vision  - 2019 -2021.  Mumbai: 
Reserve  Bank  of India.  
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationVisionDocuments.aspx?Id=921  
RBI. (2019 b). Public  Credit  Registry  and Goods  and Services  Tax Network:  Giant  Strides  to 
Democratise  and Formalise  Credit  in India.  Mumbai : Reserve  Bank  of India.  
https://rbi.org.in/SCRIPTs/BS_ViewBulletin.aspx?Id=17758  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
25 
 Roth,  S., & Luczak -Roesch,  M. (2018).  Deconstructing  the Data  Life-Cycle  in Digital  
Humanitarianism.  Information,  Communication  & Society , advance online publication, 1-
17. 
Sarkar,  S. (2014).  The Unique  Identity  (UID)  Project,  Biometrics  and Re-Imagining  
Governance  In India.  Oxford  Development  Studies , 42(4), 516-533.  
Swearingen,  S. (2018).  The Role  of Biometric  Authentication  in The Pursuit  of Global  
Financial  Inclusion.  Biometric  Update , 26 Oct . 
https://www.biometricupdate.com/201810/the -role-of-biometric -authentication -in-the-
pursuit -of-global -financial -inclusion  
Taylor,  C. (1997).  The Politics  of Recognition.  New  Contexts  of Canadian  Criticism,  98, 25-73. 
Taylor,  L. (2017).  What  is Data  Justice?  The Case  for Connecting  Digital  Rights  and Freedoms  
Globally.  Big Data  & Society , 4(2), 1-14. 
Taylor,  L., & Broeders,  D. (2015).  In the Name  of Development:  Power,  Profit  and the 
Datafication  of the Global  South.  Geoforum , 64, 229-237.  
The Hindu.  (2019).  Taxi driver’s  death:  probe  on. The Hindu , 2 Feb . 
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/chennai/taxi -drivers -death -probe -
on/article26156784.ece  
The Wire.  (2017).  It's Time  to Disentangle  the Complex  Aadhaar  Debate . The Wire . 
https://thewire.in/government/aadhar -privacy -analysis   
The Wire.  (2018).  Nearly  81%  of the Employed  in India  Are in the Informal  Sector:  ILO. The 
Wire , 20 Apr . https://thewire.in/labour/nearly -81-of-the-employed -in-india -are-in-the-
informal -sector -ilo 
Thozhilalar  Koodam.  (2019).  Who  Killed  Rajesh?  - Taxi Driver’s  Death  Raises  Important  
Concerns  on Working  Conditions  and Police  Harassment.  Thozhilalar  Koodam , 8 Feb . 
https://tnlabour.in/news/7959  
TNGov.  (2014).  Employment  - Chapter  XI. Tamil  Nadu  - An Economic  Appraisal  2011 -12 to 
2013 -14. Chennai:  Department  of Evaluation  and Applied  Research,  Government  of 
Tamil  Nadu.  http://www.tn.gov.in/dear/Employment.pdf  
TOI. (2017).  Cab driver  kidnapped  and murdered.  Times  of India , 4 Aug . 
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/59905530.cms?utm_source=contentofi
nterest&utm_medium=text&utm_campaign=cppst  
Transparent  Chennai.  (2012).  Fight  for Fair Fare:  A Study  of Autorickshaws  in Chennai.  
Chennai: Transparent  Chennai.  http://www.transparentchennai.com/wp -
content/uploads/downloads/2013/07/Fight%20for%20a%20Fair%20Fare.pdf  
Traxcn.  (2016).  Research  on Tran sport  Tech  Startup  Valuations.  Bengaluru: Traxcn.  
https://tracxnblog.s3.amazonaws.com/wp -content/uploads/20 16/03/Tracxn -Startup -
Research -Transport -Tech -India -Landscape -March -2016.pdf  
UIDAI.  (2014a).  Aadhaar  Technology  and Architecture:  Principles,  Design,  Best  Practices  and 
Key Lessons.  New Delhi: Unique  Identification  Authority  of India.  
https://uidai.gov.in/images/AadhaarTechnologyArchitecture_March2014.pdf  
UIDAI.  (2014b).  Aadhaar  Technology  Strategy:  Ecosystem,  Technology  and Governance . New 
Delhi: Unique  Identification  Authority  of India.  
https://uidai.gov.in/images/AadhaarTechnologyStrategy_March2014.pdf  
UIDAI.  (2018).  Aadhaar:  Frequently  Asked  Questions.  New Delhi:  Unique  Identification  
Authority  of India.  https://uidai.gov.in/images/recently_asked_ques_13012018.pdf  
UIDAI.  (n.d.).  Features  of Aadhaar . New Delhi: Unique  Identification  Authority  of India.  
https://uidai.gov.in/my -aadhaar/about -your -aadhaar/features -of-aadhaar.html  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 79  
26 
 Unni,  J. (2018).  Formalization  of the Informal  Economy:  Perspectives  of Capital  and Labour.  
The Indian  Journal  of Labour  Economics , 61(1), 87-103.  
Van Dijck,  J. (2014).  Datafication,  Dataism  and Dataveillance: Big Data  Between Scientific 
Paradig m and Ideology.  Surveillance  & Society , 12(2), 197-208.  
Varma,  P. (2014).  Architecting  World's  Largest  Biometric  Identity  System  - Aadhaar  
Experience . Strata + Hadoop World , New  York , 15-17 Oct . 
https://cdn.oreillystatic.com/en/assets/1/event/119/Architecting%20World_s%20Large
st%20Biometric%20Identity%20System%20 -
%20Aadhaar%20Experience%20Presentation.pdf  
Viswanathan,  V. (2019).  How  to Integrate  Aadhaar  Auth  API?  Bengaluru: Veri5digital.  
https://veri5digital.com/veri5 -blog/how -to-integrate -aadhaar -auth -api/ 
Whitley,  EA., and Hosein,  G. (2010)  Global  Identity  Policies  and Technology:  Do We 
Understand  The Question?  Global  Policy , 1(2), 209-215.  
Zuboff,  S. (2015).  Big Other:  Surveillance  Capitalism  and The Prospects  of An Information  
Civilization.  Journal  of Information  Technology , 30(1), 75-89. 
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional  financial support from Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . The author would like to thank  the School of Management, 
Royal Holloway, University of London and particularly Dr Yingqin Zheng and Dr Philip W u for 
their support in developing this paper as part of his PhD research project.  
 
About the Author  
Shyam Krishna is a doctoral candidate  in the  School of Management, Royal Holloway, 
University of London . 
 