This publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.1www.ifc.org/thoughtleadership NOTE 91  •  SEPT 2020
Artificial Intelligence and Healthcare in 
Emerging Markets
By Monique Mrazek and Felicity O’Neill
Half of the world’s population remains without access to essential health services, with many individuals 
driven into poverty each year by out-of-pocket health expenses.1 UNCTAD estimates that to meet health-
related Sustainable Development Goal objectives, over $140 billion in private sector finance is required 
annually between 2015 and 2030.2 Significant investments in health technology, including those using digital 
health and artificial intelligence, are expected to contribute to bridging the health service gap in emerging 
markets, given the potential of these new innovations to reach underserved patients. Many health-tech 
innovators are integrating AI into their product solutions, with early examples showing promise in improving 
diagnoses, reducing costs, and enabling access to remote health services. COVID-19 has accelerated the pace 
of transition to digital health applications, including those that integrate AI. On a system-wide level, much 
remains to be done by all healthcare stakeholders to create sustainable ecosystems that facilitate these 
innovations in achieving scale while beneficially reaching the lowest-income patients in emerging markets.
Improving access to healthcare is critical to achieving the 
World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty 
and boosting shared prosperity in all countries. Healthy 
individuals have higher levels of human capital, enabling them 
to realize their potential as productive members of society and 
raising output in the countries where they reside.3
Technology has always played an important role in the delivery of 
healthcare. The use case for artificial intelligence, or AI, in health 
dates to the late 1990s, when machine learning was first used 
to help doctors identify cancers in medical images.4 The more 
widespread diffusion of AI into health businesses over the past 
decade has been facilitated by general improvements in computing 
power, machine processes such as natural language processing, 
and robotics, combined with the exponential accumulation 
of health-related data from sources such as electronic medical 
records (EMRs), the proliferation of health data tracking devices 
such as smart phones, digital images, and genomic data.
The confluence of AI and other digital technologies has 
enormous potential to improve health outcomes globally. For example, patient data can be aggregated and assessed to 
improve risk analytics, radiology imaging solutions can assist 
specialists to more efficiently and effectively assess images, and 
machine learning platforms can reduce the unit costs of health 
administration through automated scheduling functions and 
triage chatbots, freeing up specialists to spend time on patient 
care. Some of these AI health applications have been accelerated 
in the response to COVID, including in emerging markets; AI 
has been applied broadly, from drug and vaccine research and 
patient triage to contract tracing and surveillance systems, and 
predicting severe COVID cases. 
Achieving true scale in the use of AI, however, will require 
building trust with health consumers, including through 
collaboration between data providers, health-tech companies, 
regulators, governments, and the public, to agree on principles 
and frameworks for constructing and managing patient data 
sets, governing and monitoring algorithm performance, and 
safeguarding personal data, among other issues. 
About the Authors
Monique Mrazek , Senior Health Tech Industry Specialist, Disruptive Technologies and Funds. Her email is mmrazek@ifc.org.
Felicity O’Neill , Associate Operations Officer, Partnerships and Multilateral Engagement, IFC. Her email is foneill1@ifc.org.
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedThis publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.2What is AI?
This note adopts the definition of AI set out in EM Compass 
Note 69, as a broad term for computer systems that can 
continuously scan their environment, learn from it, and take 
action in response to what they are sensing and human-
defined objectives.5 This means that AI is not one type of 
machine or robot, but a series of approaches, methods, and 
technologies that display intelligent behavior by analyzing 
their environments and taking actions—with some degree of 
autonomy—to achieve specific targets that can improve the 
provision of health services.6 Though AI was established as a 
discipline more than a century ago, AI techniques have seen 
rapid progress over the past decade, supported by an evolution 
in machine learning as well as improvements in computing 
power, data storage, and communications networks.7
Investment in Health Businesses Using AI is Growing 
The broad scope of digital health applications and the 
potential size of the healthcare market is driving significant 
investment flows in health technology (health-tech). Because the 
distribution of venture capital (VC) investments into AI-specific 
technologies closely tracks the flow of overall VC flows, the 
latter can be used as a proxy for interest in AI by country. The 
number of health-tech deals and total funding have increased 
rapidly over the past decade, approaching 800 deals and $15 
billion in funding in 2018 before falling slightly in 2019 (Figure 
1). Investment flows are concentrated in the United States, 
though flows to China and India are increasing.8
AI-specific investments account for an increasing portion of 
total health-tech funding. U.S.-based health-tech companies 
aiming to integrate AI technologies received over $2 billion in 
funding in 2018.9 The intended application of these investments 
ranged from digital diagnosis to clinical decision support and 
precision medicine. Accenture estimates the health AI market 
in the United States will grow at a 40 percent annual rate, 
reaching $6.6 billion by 2021.10 AI health is projected to grow in China by an annual rate of 52.8 percent between 2019 and 
2025.11 Since health AI is in a nascent stage in most emerging 
markets, comparable data is not available, however growth is 
expected in certain applications, particularly post-COVID.
The Integration of AI into Health Businesses Will 
Help Deliver and Scale Development Impact
As Figure 2 illustrates, health-tech businesses are finding 
applications for AI across the health ecosystem, from innovations 
such as drug discovery, imaging and diagnostics technology, and 
genomics, to delivering health system efficiencies and enhanced 
customer relationship management. The integration of AI into the 
health sector is changing both the structure of the market and the 
nature of services. At a structural level, non-traditional players 
such as digital-tech giants are leveraging their extensive databases 
to compete with traditional providers. For example, Google, 
through its subsidiary Verily, is focused on using data to improve 
healthcare via analytics tools, interventions, and research, among 
other things. And Apple’s focus in healthcare builds on the vast 
amount of data it captures daily from users of its products, with 
the potential of eventually becoming a “portable health record” 
for users, as well as leveraging that data for health research or 
even to help develop medical devices. At a service level, AI is 
being applied to diverse data-sources—including patient images, 
prescription information, clinician notes, and wearable device 
activity logs—to personalize healthcare advice, generate probable 
diagnoses, and increase access to affordable consultations. 
Current investment activity in AI for healthcare, particularly 
in developed markets, is focused on operational or system 
efficiencies such as automating booking systems and patient 
records.12 In emerging markets, where significant health-
system supply and access gaps are pervasive, there is a wider 
scope for leveraging data, where such data is available and 
well structured, and applying AI to deliver innovative services 
across the ecosystem. Yet there are both risks and challenges 
to scaling these applications and business models across 
emerging markets to achieve widescale development impact. 
Unlocking data for health research 
Health data is amassed from a range of sources, such as 
electronic medical records (EMRs), payer records, wearables 
and mobile phones, genomic sequencing, medical research, 
and mandated government records. The volume of this health-
related data is increasing exponentially. According to Dell 
EMC’s Global Data Protection Index, healthcare organizations 
saw an annual growth rate in health data of 878 percent 
between 2016 to 2018, to an average of 8.41 petabytes across 
organizations (equivalent to 8.4 million gigabytes).13 There is 
enormous potential to mine and analyze this data using AI, to 
facilitate better and more personalized care, to reduce medical 
errors, and to enable earlier diagnoses of disease. The challenge, FIGURE 1   Global Funding in Health-Tech Companies
Source: StartUp Health Insights, data as of Dec 31, 2019.$0$5.0$10.0$15.0
2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010/dollar.pln/seven.pln./one.pln
/dollar.pln/one.pln./one.pln/dollar.pln/two.pln./one.pln /dollar.pln/two.pln./two.pln/dollar.pln/two.pln./eight.pln/dollar.pln/six.pln./two.pln/dollar.pln/eight.pln./two.pln/dollar.pln/one.pln/one.pln./seven.pln/dollar.pln/one.pln/four.pln./seven.pln
/dollar.pln/one.pln/three.pln./seven.pln
/six.pln/one.pln/zero.pln
/one.pln/five.pln/two.pln/two.pln/eight.pln/seven.pln/four.pln/seven.pln/five.pln/six.pln/four.pln/three.pln
/five.pln/six.pln/eight.pln/six.pln/eight.pln/eight.pln/eight.pln/eight.pln/one.pln
/seven.pln/eight.pln/nine.pln/seven.pln/two.pln/seven.plnMonthly Issuance
Deal CountUS $ Billion sThis publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.3however, particularly in emerging markets, is to have enough 
quality and well-structured data for assessment. 
Some companies are helping to tackle the weakness in data 
interoperability by cleaning and structuring data and overlaying 
analytics to make meaningful predictions to improve health. 
For example, China-based Linkdoc Technology Ltd. has 
partnerships with over 500 oncology hospitals across China, 
applying machine learning and human language processing 
to structure millions of clinical EMRs into research grade 
data for government bodies, insurers, and pharmaceutical 
and research companies in over 30 Chinese provinces.14 In 
addition to structuring data for research, machine learning 
can also be applied to big data to match patients to clinical 
trials, to speed-up drug discovery, and to identify effective 
life-science therapies.15 For example, SOPHiA Genetics’ AI 
technology computes one genomic profile every four minutes 
and has analyzed hundreds of thousands of genomic profiles, to 
facilitate the matching of patients to clinical trials across their 
research community of more than 980 leading hospitals in 81 
countries.16 Through IFC’s TechEmerge program, SOPHiA 
Genetics completed a pilot in Brazil with DASA, a leading 
diagnostics company in the country.Focusing on prevention
Using data to move the dial on the global health system from 
treatment to prevention will be critical to mitigating the 
growing cost of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which 
are the largest cause of mortality and disability in developing 
countries, estimated to cause a cumulative loss to global output 
of $47 trillion between 2011 and 2030.17
AI can be applied to big data to provide personalized and 
responsive ancillary health services that ‘nudge’ consumers 
toward preventative behaviors. For example, South African 
health insurance company Discovery is using a ‘shared value’ 
business model, applying machine learning to data accrued from 
its partners—supermarkets, fitness firms, and health providers—
to determine what financial rewards each customer receives 
for positive health behaviors. These include meeting ‘in-range’ 
health outcomes in annual checks, undertaking preventative 
checks such as pap smears, purchasing healthy food, and 
exercising regularly.18 The shared value is created as customers 
receive financial rewards for beneficial health decisions while the 
insurer reduces the average risk of its customer pool.
AI technology also allows Discovery to scale its products 
across markets by tracking a variety of data—images, spending 
FIGURE 2   Healthcare AI Startups
Source: CB Insights, 2019. “From Drug R&D to Diagnostics: 90+ Artificial Intelligence Startups In Healthcare.” https://www.cbinsights.com/research/
artificial-intelligence-startups-healthcare/.
This publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.4records, health reports—across currencies, languages, and time 
zones. As of mid-2018, Discovery was serving over 19 million 
customers globally through its primary market in South Africa, 
as well as in the United Kingdom, China, and the United States, 
and through partnerships with existing insurers in 15 other 
countries.19 Of course, innovations like Discovery’s platform are 
yet to reach lower-income emerging market consumers where 
an insurance gap is pervasive.20
Improving healthcare efficiency and effectiveness
Software-as-a-service providers are now leveraging a wide 
variety of data sources to automate systems, driving more 
effective services and addressing system inefficiencies. For 
example, data including patient history, consultation notes, 
diagnostic images, public information, and pharmaceutical 
prescriptions can be assessed by AI-enabled software 
to automate workflow (follow-up appointments, patient 
records, triage, etc.), freeing doctors to spend more time with 
patients.21 These software solutions drive impact in emerging 
markets by addressing a number of pain points such as 
difficulties finding an appropriate provider or specialist, a lack 
of transparency regarding the quality of service provision, and 
underdeveloped medical record systems.
China’s Ping An Good Doctor, one the largest online platforms 
in the world, had 346 million registered users as of June 
2020, a growth of 10 percent over the previous year, with 
26.7 percent growth in consultations over the year previous 
(831,000 consultations in the first half of 2020) in response to 
the need arising from COVID.22 The company’s application 
uses AI technologies to pre-triage patients to facilitate 24/7 
online consultation services via its in-house medical team. By 
integrating its online medical appointment services with its 
offline partnerships, Ping An Good Doctor has established 
a closed-loop healthcare ecosystem. That is, a one-stop shop 
for convenient, quality-vetted, and efficient access to medical 
consultations, pharmaceuticals, and wellness services (Chinese 
medicine, dental, oral, and cosmetic health). 
Machine learning can also be used to assist clinicians in 
delivering more effective or personalized patient care. 
Clinicas del Azucar is a specialty diabetes clinic chain in 
Mexico (and an IFC client) that analyzes its database to 
drive improved health outcomes and operational efficiencies. 
In 2018, Clinicas launched its Diabetes Nudge Lab, which 
leverages its patient database and applies behavioral analytics 
and AI to segment patients by behavioral archetypes. The 
Lab then personalizes a treatment strategy for each patient 
tailored to their unique characteristics.
Reaching underserved communities
Consumers in emerging markets who have, on average, a lower 
supply of healthcare services, have expressed a higher willingness to engage with digital healthcare. A 2016 YouGov survey found 
that 94 percent of consumers in Nigeria would be willing to talk 
to a chatbot to answer health questions, diagnose a condition, 
and recommend a treatment, as compared with only 54 percent 
for the broader Europe, Middle East and Africa region.23 This 
greater openness to digital health engagement means that there is 
a huge market for digital health solutions that reduce the cost of 
reaching patient segments, particularly in rural areas, that were 
too costly using traditional business models.
Virtual care has applications across the healthcare ecosystem, 
from remote consultations to dispensing pharmaceuticals. 
Indian platform DocsApp has developed a clinical AI 
platform called CLARA that connects patients to specialists 
and facilitates remote diagnoses and treatment.24 Potential 
patients enter personal details and health concerns into the 
app. Machine learning is then applied to this information and 
to public data sources to generate a probable diagnosis and 
recommend a specialist. The patient then has the option to 
review the user ratings and credentials of the specialist and 
pay a fee online if they wish to proceed to consultation via 
chat or call. The doctor can provide a prescription or referral 
for lab tests, if required, which can be delivered to the user 
for an additional fee.25 
Babylon is another health-tech company—operating in the 
United Kingdom, Rwanda, and more recently Canada– 
leveraging AI to provide 24/7 remote appointments and 
treatment advice. The company’s chatbot ‘Ask Babylon’ applies 
natural language processing to interpret users’ symptoms 
and combines this information with public information and 
the patient’s medical history to provide relevant health and 
triage information, including whether further care should be 
sought.26 The application then facilitates users in consulting 
with a doctor via video, phone calls, and text messages. Having 
the opportunity for users to receive advice via SMS is a game-
changer in lower-income and rural areas where the 3G-4G 
connectivity and smart-device penetration required for video 
consultations are missing or inadequate. 
Reaching truly underserved segments often requires business 
models that go beyond the commercialization of phone 
applications or automation of clinical systems to more direct 
outreach. For example, Salauno, Mexico’s largest eye care 
chain (and an IFC client), leverages an AI algorithm, developed 
with Microsoft, to detect diseases such as diabetic retinopathy 
for patients in marginalized areas. Through outreach camps, 
done in collaboration with a local partner (a nongovernmental 
organization, government entity, private company, etc.), 
Salauno’s mobile application is assisted by the AI algorithm 
to detect diabetic retinopathy, with patients needing more 
specialized care referred to a hub facility. To date, the company 
has provided eyecare services to more than 340,000 patients in 
Mexico City at more accessible prices.27This publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.5Clinician support to better use scarce medical resources
It will not always be appropriate for AI-enabled diagnostics to 
replace human decision-making. There is, however, a strong 
case for diagnostics using AI to aid specialists, especially 
where healthcare systems are hampered by a scarcity of health 
infrastructure such as laboratories and imaging centers, and 
a shortage of specialized professionals such as pathologists, 
radiologists, and cardiologists. 
Although many use cases are still at early or trial stages, AI 
technology can be integrated into imaging and diagnostics 
processes to allow physicians and technicians to spend time 
where it matters—on complex cases, clinical interpretation, 
and patient communication. Aidoc is an Israeli company 
developing advanced healthcare-grade AI-based decision 
support software aimed at: increasing the efficiency and 
quality of the acute radiology workflow; detecting critical 
findings in CT exams (including hemorrhages, fractures, and 
aneurysms); and highlighting the findings for radiologists 
to help them prioritize urgent patients. IFC’s TechEmerge 
program has facilitated a pilot for Aidoc’s software with 
Grupo Fleury, a leading diagnostic chain in Brazil, resulting in 
a commercial partnership to scale the solution.  
Another example is Israel-based Zebra Medical Vision, whose 
AI technology helps radiologists by drawing on millions 
of imaging and correlated clinical records to automatically 
detect medical conditions faster and help radiologists provide 
more comprehensive, accurate outcomes—faster and without 
compromising quality of care.28 Zebra guarantees the delivery 
of AI solutions at a flat rate of up to $1 per scan as part of its 
mission to provide high quality, affordable care to the world’s 
population.29 In June 2020, Zebra partnered with IFC portfolio 
company Apollo Hospitals Group in India to deploy its software 
to improve the speed and reliability of COVID diagnosis.30
Another pain point being addressed by decision-support 
software is inadequate access to ICT infrastructure. Tricog is 
a software-as-a-service business that uses machine learning 
algorithms to remotely analyze electrocardiograms to 
facilitate faster responses to heart attacks. The technology 
is cloud-based and enabled by a combination of 2G, 3G, 
and wireless connectivity, which means it can be used in 
rural areas with lower connectivity. Today, Tricog operates 
across 510 clinics and 24 hospitals in both rural and urban 
locations. It has been used on 300,000 patients and has 
prevented 15,000 heart attacks. 
U.S.-based Zenysis, an interoperability platform, has been 
offering its data analytics and AI-driven solutions to help 
tackle population-level health problems in some of the world’s 
most challenging markets, including several countries in 
Africa and Asia. In response to the COVID crisis, Zeynsis 
has been working with emerging countries to establish virtual control rooms that provide governments with real-time 
analytics on such areas as COVID test results, availability of 
tests, personal protective equipment and ventilators, human 
resources data, and patient mobility data. Going forward, 
Zenysis expects that by training machine learning algorithms 
on historical data, important improvements in predicting 
public health needs in the future should yield better drug and 
vaccine procurement for global health.31
The evolution of precision medicine
Applications of genomic medicine, such as oncology diagnosis 
and management,32 have been facilitated by technological 
innovations that reduce the cost and improve the speed 
and accuracy of testing. The cost of whole human genome 
sequencing in the United States fell from $4,000 to $1,500 
between mid and late 2015 alone and has since fallen 
further.33 The cost-effective application of genomic testing 
is facilitating the development of “precision medicine,” a 
data-driven approach to medicine that accounts for variability 
in genes, environment, and lifestyle factors to personalize 
medical care.34 AI technologies that can assess and learn 
from a wide range and structure of data inputs are central to 
facilitating the growth of precision medicine. For example, 
Medgenome, a U.S.-Indian personalized medicine company, 
leverages its bioinformatics capacity to support human 
genetics research that leverages patient data from over 500 
hospitals in India, providing insights into the genetic diversity 
of over 4,500 population groups in India.35 For now, the 
still relatively high cost of genomics and an underdeveloped 
regulatory environment for the commercialization of genomic 
solutions in many countries will restrict use cases to higher-
income populations.
Constraints and Risks to Achieving Scale for True 
Development Impact
While the bulk of the investments and applications of AI 
in health are largely targeted to developed markets, there is 
an increase in applications being developed for use cases in 
emerging markets. This is particularly true in the response to 
the COVID pandemic. Nevertheless, technological barriers 
such as access to and affordability of smart devices, digital 
connectivity gap (access and quality), and digital literacy 
remain important impediments in this early phase of rolling 
out AI-enabled tools in emerging markets. Over time, given 
the potential of digital-enabled solutions and AI to improve 
the affordability of healthcare and reach underserved 
communities, these solutions are expected to become more 
pervasive, including in lower-income settings. However, digital 
inclusion will be key for AI-enabled health-tech solutions to 
reach scale in emerging markets. There are constraints that 
require alignment, as well as risks that must be managed for 
AI-driven health solutions to scale. This publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.6Regulatory friction in commercializing health 
innovations
Healthcare is a high-stakes game, which means there are good 
reasons for rigorous regulatory frameworks. One barrier to 
commercialization of new innovations is uncertainty created 
by gaps in regulatory frameworks. Governance and legal 
frameworks for virtual care or the remote prescription of 
pharmaceuticals are untested or underdeveloped in many 
countries. COVID led several countries to temporarily waive 
limits on telehealth, while others turned a blind eye given 
the urgency and necessity for remote care options during the 
pandemic. Yet not all digital-health technologies require high 
levels of scrutiny, particularly for applications that allow users 
to track their own NDC-related health metrics, which is why 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is developing a pilot 
program to allow low-risk digital health products on to the 
market without regulatory review.36 
AI innovations are fed by data, which means the 
commercialization of technologies must also navigate a plethora 
of data regulations, from storage to security and interoperability. 
In the United States, for example, FDA regulatory guidance on 
genomics will soon extend to cybersecurity.37 There is a trade-off 
in balancing high standards for patient consent, data privacy, and 
data protection—such as through data localization laws38—with 
the need for large structured datasets to design and train new 
AI applications to make healthcare more personalized, efficient, 
and preventative.39 This trade-off is likely to play out differently 
across markets, depending on context-specific cultural, 
socioeconomic, and institutional factors.
Non-representative AI: potential bias and misdiagnosis
Given the sensitivity of health data, there are several challenges 
to constructing big data sets needed to apply AI technologies. 
Nonsynchronous data formats and privacy restrictions within 
healthcare organizations and across systems limit the size of 
structured datasets that can be constructed to train algorithms. 
Even if companies like Linkdoc can construct sizeable datasets, 
the resulting technology cannot always be scaled across 
markets, as populations with different ethnic origins may have 
different predispositions for disease. To date, genomic medicine 
has largely been developed from populations with European 
ancestry, limiting clinical applications of precision medicine in 
regions largely composed of other ethnicities.40
In addition to data-related barriers, the use of machine learning 
in clinical diagnostic applications carries several inherent risks 
that researchers continue to grapple with. A useful framework 
for considering clinical AI quality and safety issues in medicine 
has been developed by Robert Challen (of the EPSRC Centre 
for Predictive Modelling in Healthcare, University of Exeter) 
and other colleagues.41 Some of the risks in applying machine 
learning to clinical medicine that they highlighted include: • distributional shift caused by a mismatch between the data 
a system is trained on and the data used in operation, which 
may be caused by disease patterns changing over time;
• black-box decision making, where a system’s predictions 
are not open to inspection or cannot be interpreted by 
the clinicians that rely on its judgements, resulting in 
misdiagnosis that is only apparent after prolonged use;
• insensitivity to impact, where a system is designed to make 
accurate decisions at the cost of either missed diagnoses or 
overdiagnosis, a dilemma that human clinicians are trained 
to address with judgment; and
• negative unintended consequences caused by a system 
trained only on historical data or using irrelevant 
datapoints that miss important predictive factors, resulting 
in missed or inaccurate diagnoses or overdiagnosis.
Appropriateness of using AI across the health-ecosystem
Given the risks outlined above, there are legitimate questions 
about when AI technologies are appropriate for use in patient 
diagnosis and treatment. Ethical grey areas include the use of 
chatbots to replace clinicians in diagnosing some illnesses, and 
allowing algorithms to make triage decisions in critical care. 
There are also grey areas regarding privacy, such as whether 
AI can unlock patient anonymity—by accident or design—
with unintended consequences for the use of patient records 
via third-parties like health-insurers, resulting in social 
discrimination and stigmatization.42 These grey areas will rely 
on robust clinical trials to show that, on average, algorithms 
make better decisions than clinicians in some cases and that 
these decisions are governed by appropriate regulatory and 
clinical frameworks to justify their use in assisting or replacing 
human clinicians. 
Institutional Inertia
Many health-tech innovations are a result of rigorous 
academic research. Commercialization of these innovations 
requires regulatory and institutional ecosystems that facilitate 
collaboration among academia, venture capitalists and 
angel investors, and entrepreneurs, and aligning policy and 
industry frameworks. Taking cities that have raised more than 
$200 million in health start-up funding in 2018 as a proxy, 
these ecosystems are concentrated in the United States—San 
Francisco, New York, Boston, and Chicago—with only Beijing 
and Paris attracting comparable investment flows. Though, 
cities outside the United States are catching up, with Tel Aviv, 
Bangalore, Guangzhou, and Hangzhou each receiving over 
$100 million in health start-up investment in 2018.43
These geographically concentrated investment flows mean that 
countries with the greatest health gaps have the largest hurdles 
to developing and diffusing locally appropriate solutions for This publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.7some healthcare needs. Additionally, start-ups require time 
to build trust with consumers, regulators, clinicians, and 
payers before innovations can be scaled. Consequently, new 
business models, including small innovators partnering with 
large digital platforms as well as shared-value models like 
Discovery’s, can be used to leverage existing technological 
innovations and reputations to foster the diffusion of health-
tech innovations across emerging markets.
Businesses can also help accelerate trust by having terms-of-
use and consents that can be easily understood by customers 
or patients, and being transparent in the intended use of 
data, particularly where business models achieve feasibility 
through the sale of data to third parties. Development finance 
institutions, impact investors, and governments can play a 
role in diffusion by encouraging best-practice governance 
arrangements and investment in the human capital needed to 
embed AI within new and existing healthcare organizations.
IFC is Playing a Role in Mobilizing Capital Toward 
Health Solutions Using AI in Emerging Markets
IFC invests in healthcare ventures that improve access to 
quality and affordable healthcare. These include direct and indirect exposures through fund investments to a number 
of companies using AI, including China-based oncology 
big-data company Linkdoc; India-based Niramai, which is 
developing an AI-enabled software solution to detect breast 
cancer at a much earlier stage than traditional methods or 
self-examination; and Brazil-based TNH Health, which builds 
AI-powered chatbots to monitor patient populations at scale. 
In response to COVID, TNH launched a chatbot to facilitate 
access to COVID treatment and surveillance that was rolled 
out for free in Brazil’s Amazon State. The chatbot also 
provided information for pregnant women about COVID and 
tools to mitigate anxiety and stress.44
Conclusion
The importance of digital technologies, including AI, in 
promoting equitable, affordable, and universal access to health 
for all was recognized by the World Health Assembly in May 
2018; and the current pandemic has only served to highlight 
the potential beneficial application of such technologies in 
healthcare.45 Applications of AI technologies in healthcare are 
beginning to move the dial on these objectives by supporting 
the speed and accuracy of diagnostics, improving service 
affordability by delivering system efficiencies and new business 
BOX 1   IFC and its TechEmerge Program—Accelerating Health-Tech Deployment in Emerging Markets 
IFC also facilitates acceleration of health-tech deployment in emerging markets through its TechEmerge program. 
TechEmerge looks to accelerate the adoption of innovative health technologies in emerging markets to drive improved 
healthcare delivery and patient outcomes. It does this by identifying the core needs of healthcare providers and 
matching them with best-in-class solutions from health-tech companies from around the world to conduct local pilot 
projects and build commercial partnerships.
IFC’s TechEmerge inaugural health-tech program, launched in 2016, matched 17 health-tech innovators with 15 Indian 
providers (hospitals, clinics, labs, and home healthcare), to conduct 20 pilot projects at 70 clinical sites across India. 
Technologies, several of which included AI, enabled greater reach, increased affordability, and improved operational 
efficiency. Examples of solutions include India-based Tricog’s AI-enabled ECG diagnostic aid for cardiologists based 
remotely; Israel-based Mobile ODT’s AI-supported portable cervical cancer screening tool; and U.S.-based Welldoc, with 
an AI-based virtual coach to support diabetes care. To date, 22 commercial contracts worth almost $1 million have been 
signed by TechEmerge innovators for broader deployment of their technologies in India, which are expected to benefit 
more than 300,000 people each year. During the program, innovators raised more than $14.5 million in financing, and 
one innovator was acquired for $102 million.
Subsequently, IFC launched TechEmerge Health Brazil in late 2017. From 295 applications, 21 innovators were selected 
for 27 pilots with 16 Brazilian healthcare providers. Again several of the pilots were with health-tech companies offering 
AI-enabled solutions: Brazil’s TNH Health piloted its AI-driven virtual nurse assistant with two Brazilian health providers; 
and Israel-based Aidoc undertook two pilots with leading Brazilian providers, supporting their radiologists with AI-
supported diagnostic aids. The program is now being implemented in East Africa and AI-enabled solutions are expected 
to be part of the health-tech solutions piloted to the benefit of local patients.
In 2020, IFC initiated TechEmerge Health East Africa.  Among more than 415 tech companies from 50 countries, 53 tech 
companies across multiple categories were identified to have market-relevant solutions that may meet the needs 
of participating East Africa healthcare providers. There are ca. 25 leading providers in Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia 
participating in the program, serving over 6.5 million patients across mor than 285 facilities, with 2,850 beds. Selected 
innovators receive funding and guidance from the TechEmerge team to pilot their tech solutions in the East African 
market, with the ultimate goal of wider commercial deployment. The selected innovators from around the world offer 
a range of solutions including tools in artificial intelligence/machine learning, point-of-care diagnostics, maternal and 
child health, patient engagement, quality management, and operational efficiency. Please see for more details:  
https://www.techemerge.org/country/tech-emerge-east-africaThis publication may be reused for noncommercial purposes if the source is cited as IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.81 World Bank Group. 2019. “The Human Capital Project: Frequently Asked Questions.”
2 UNCTAD. 2014. “World Investment Report 2014: Investing in the SDGs, an Action Plan.”
3 World Bank Group. 2019. “The Human Capital Project: Frequently Asked Questions.”
4 KPMG. 2018. “Investment for Healthcare Soars, Insights Report.”
5 Strusani, Davide and Georges Vivien Houngbonon. 2019. “The Role of Artificial 
Intelligence in Supporting Development in Emerging markets.” EM Compass Note 69 , 
IFC, July 2019, pp. 1-2.
6 Collier, Matt, Richard Fu, and Lucy Yin. 2017. “Artificial Intelligence: Healthcare’s New 
Nervous System.”
7 European Parliamentary Research Service (EPRS). 2019. PE 635.609.
8 StartUp Health. 2019. “StartUp Health Insights Q3 2019: A Year-To-Date Report on 
Health Innovation and the Health Moonshots Transforming the World.”
9 Rock Health. 2019. “2018 Funding Part 2: Seven More Takeaways from Digital Health’s 
$8.1B year.”
10 Collier, Matt, et al. 2017.
11 https://www.omrglobal.com/industry-reports/china-ai-in-healthcare-market.
12 KPMG. 2018. “Investment for Healthcare Soars, Insights Report.” 
13 Dell EMC. 2019. “Dell EMC Global Data Protection Index.” See also Donovan, 
Fred. 2019. “Organizations See 878% Health Data Growth Rate Since 2016.” HIT 
Infrastructure 8 May 2019. 
14 Sturman, Catherine. 2018. “LinkDoc Receives $151mn in Series D Funding.” Healthcare 
Global, July 5, 2018.
15 Kuan, Roger. 2019. “Adopting AI in Health Care Will be Slow and Difficult.” Harvard 
Business Review, 18 October 2019.
16 SOPHiA, 2019. “SOPHIA for Clinical Trials.”
17 Bloom, D, et al. 2011. “The Global Economic Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases.” 
A report by the World Economic Forum and the Harvard School of Public Health, 
September 2011.
18 Discovery. 2019. “Get-Healthy.”
19 Peverelli, Roger and Reggy de Feniks. 2018. “Discovery is All About Ecosystems. 
Ecosystems are All About Discovery.” Digital Insurance Agenda. August 2, 2018.
20 Lloyd’s. 2018. “A World at Risk: Closing the Insurance Gap.” Joint research report by 
Lloyd’s and CEBR.
21 Yarin, David. 2018. “RPA in Health Care Can Improve Outcomes for All.” Deloitte-
sponsored article in The Wall Street Journal , October 17, 2018.
22 “Ping An Healthcare and Technology Company Limited Reports Revenue of RMB 2.747 
billion for H1 2020.” 2020. PR Newswire, August 20, 2020.
23 PwC. 2017. “No Longer Science Fiction, AI and Robotics are Transforming Healthcare.” 
Data from 2016 YouGov online survey.
24 DocsApp. 2019. “About DocsApp.” https://store.docsapp.in/pages/about-docsapp.
25 Chavati, Krishna. 2019. “DocsApp AI — How We Use Data Science for Improving 
Consultation Quality and Doctor Productivity.” Medium, February 15, 2019. 26 CBInsights., 2019. “From Drug R&D To Diagnostics: 90+ Artificial Intelligence Startups 
In Healthcare.” CBInsights 12 September 2019.
27 MIT Solve. 2019. “Salauno: Solution Overview.” 
28 Zebra. 2019. https://www.zebra-med.com/.
29 Munford, Monty. 2017. “Zebra Takes Healthcare to Next Level With $1 Image Scans.”
30 Dotmed. 2020. “Apollo Hospitals Group Integrates Zebra Medical Vision’s AI for COVID 
19 Detection and Disease Progression Tracking.” Dotmed Healthcare Business News, 
June 1, 2020.
31 GAVI. 2020. “Q&A with Jonathan Strombolis, CEO of Zenysis Technologies.” https://
www.gavi.org/vaccineswork/qa-jonathan-stambolis-ceo-zenysis.
32 Luh, Frank and Yun Yen. 2018. “FDA Guidance for Next Generation Sequencing-Based 
Testing: Balancing Regulation and Innovation in Precision Medicine.” NPJ Genomic 
Med3, 28 (2018).
33 National Human Genome Research Institute. 2019. “The Cost of Sequencing a Human 
Genome.”
34 US National Library of Medicine. 2019. “What is Precision Medicine?”
35 Medgenome. 2020. “About Medgenome.” https://research.medgenome.com/about/.
36 Duggal, Rishi, Ingrid Brindle, and Jessamy Bagenal. 2018. “Digital Healthcare: 
Regulating the Revolution.” BMJ 2018, 360, Jan 15, 2018.
37 Luh, Frank and Yun Yen. 2018.
38 Urbiola, Pablo. 2019. “Data Flows Across Borders: Overcoming Data Localisation 
Restrictions.” Institute of International Finance.
39 Rigby, Michael. 2019. “Ethical Dimensions of Using Artificial Intelligence in Health 
Care.” AMA Journal of Ethics, 21(2): 121-124.
40 Bylstra, Yasmine, Sonia Davila, and Weng Khong Lim, et al. 2019. “Implementation of 
Genomics in Medical Practice to Deliver Precision Medicine for an Asian Population.” 
NPG Genomic Medicine. 4,12 (2019).
41 Challen, Robert, Joshua Denny, Martin Pitt, Luke Gompels, Tom Edwards, and Krasimira 
Tsaneva-Atanosova. 2019. “Artificial Intelligence, Bias, and Clinical Safety.” British 
Medical Journal, Qual Saf 2019 (0):1–7.
42 Price, W. Nicholson. 2019. “Risks and Remedies for Artificial Intelligence in Health 
Care.” Brookings Institute, November 14, 2019.
43 StartUp Health. 2019.
44 Grand Challenges Canada. 2020. “Innovators Mobilize to Help Developing Countries 
Combat COVID-19.” 
45 World Health Organisation. 2018. “Digital Health: Draft Resolution.” Proposed by 
Algeria et alia.” WHO 71st World Health Assembly, Agenda Item 12.4.
46 Agrawal, Anurag. 2019. “Harnessing the Power of AI for Global Health.” Financial Times.  
October 31, 2019.
47 Guo, Li. 2018. “The Application of Medical Artificial Intelligence Technology in Rural 
Areas of Developing Countries.” Health Equity 2:1, pp 174–181.models, guiding consumers in preventative behaviors, and 
improving transparency in the quality of services. 
However, the game-changing potential of AI technologies 
in improving the speed, affordability, remote access, and 
preventative focus of health-tech innovations requires an 
ecosystem in which investors, regulators, technologists, 
medical and research professionals, and consumer advocates 
develop consensus on regulatory frameworks to govern 
these technologies and agree on the ethical boundaries of 
their applications. The recently launched Lancet and FT 
Commission initiative to develop recommendations on the 
implementation and governance of digital health over the next 
two years is a welcome initiative toward achieving the clarity 
required to scale up AI health-tech innovations.46 Additionally, 
public and private investments in ICT infrastructure, human 
capital, data infrastructure, and interoperability are required 
for widespread diffusion of heath-tech innovations across 
markets.47 Although aligning stakeholders, values, objectives, 
and investments across jurisdictions is a difficult and time-
consuming task, doing nothing would be a tragic missed opportunity for achieving impactful disruption to the global 
health system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank the following colleagues 
for their review and suggestions: Christopher M. McCahan, 
Chief Investment Officer, and Charles William Dalton, Senior 
Health Specialist, both Global Manufacturing, Agribusiness 
& Services, Health & Education, IFC; Lana Graf, Principal 
Industry Specialist, and Xiaomin Mou, Senior Investment 
Officer, both Disruptive Technologies and Funds, IFC; Andrew 
Myburgh, Senior Economist, Manufacturing, Agribusiness & 
Services, IFC; Georges Houngbonon, Economist, Telecom, 
Media, Technology, Sector Economics and Development 
Impact; and Thomas Rehermann, Senior Economist, Thought 
Leadership, Economics and Private Sector Development, IFC.
Please see the following additional reports about the 
role of artificial intelligence and technology in emerging 
markets:  Artificial Intelligence in Emerging Markets—Opportunities, 
Trends, and Emerging Business Models (September 2020); Reinventing 
Business Through Disruptive—Sector Trends and Investment 
Opportunities for Firms in Emerging Markets (March 2019).