Copyright © 2017 GSM AssociationBlockchain for Development: 
Emerging Opportunities for Mobile, Identity and AidThe GSMA represents the interests of mobile operators worldwide, uniting nearly 800 operators with more than 300 
companies in the broader mobile ecosystem, including handset and device makers, software companies, equipment 
providers and internet companies, as well as organisations in adjacent industry sectors. The GSMA also produces industry-
leading events such as Mobile World Congress, Mobile World Congress Shanghai, Mobile World Congress Americas and the 
Mobile 360 Series of conferences. 
For more information, please visit the GSMA corporate website at www.gsma.comFollow the GSMA on Twitter: @GSMA
The GSMA Digital Identity programme thanks Margie Cheesman of the Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, for her 
contributions to this research. AcknowledgementsThis document is an output of a project funded by UK
aid from the Department for International Development
(DFID), for the benefit of developing countries. The views
expressed are not necessarily those of DFID.
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTContents
I Introduction 2
II What is Blockchain? 4
III The Mobile Industry and Blockchain 8
IV Blockchain for Development 11
 Use Case 1: Blockchain and Self-Sovereign Identity  12
 Use Case 2: Blockchain and Aid Transparency  19
 Use Case 3: Blockchain and Humanitarian Cash Payments  22
V Evaluating Blockchain for Development Projects 27The GSMA Digital Identity Programme is uniquely positioned to play a key role in advocating and raising 
awareness of the opportunity of mobile-enabled digital 
identity and life-enhancing services. Our programme works 
with mobile operators, governments and the development 
community to demonstrate the opportunities, address the 
barriers and highlight the value of mobile as an enabler of 
digital identification. 
For more information, please visit the GSMA Digital 
Identity website at www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/
programmes/digital-identity
Follow GSMA Mobile for Development on Twitter:  
@GSMAm4dGSMA Digital IdentityIntroduction Introduction2 3
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
To put it simply, blockchain is a secure platform that 
lets people and organisations share information 
with each other with an unprecedented degree of 
trust and transparency. This might sound mundane, 
but early blockchain projects are starting to 
transform the way people and institutions are able 
to collaborate, exchange value, share information, 
track assets and deliver vital services. The most 
interesting ‘blockchain for development’ use-cases 
are almost certainly still to be discovered, but 
many sectors (governmental, corporate, activist) 
and domains (benefits payments, medical records, 
performance rights, food chains and more) have 
started to explore the benefits of blockchain-
enabled security, veracity and efficiency in 
distributed record-making. 
A good starting point for evaluating how 
blockchain technology could continue to impact 
the development sector is to understand what 
a ‘blockchain for development’ use-case looks like. In this report, we provide short case studies that highlight how four blockchain platforms are 
currently being used to improve people’s access 
to self-sovereign identities, bring new levels of 
transparency to the distribution of international 
aid, and improve the efficiency of humanitarian 
cash transfers. In these early days, it is still not 
entirely clear how MNOs will be able to support 
and derive value from future ‘blockchain for 
development projects’, or how their current role in 
the development space could soon be enhanced 
by blockchain technology. The case studies offer 
a starting point for addressing this knowledge 
gap, with early evidence showing that they could 
provide MNOs with new opportunities to support 
development partners, create new revenue 
streams, reduce their Know-Your-Customer 
(KYC) compliance costs and related barriers, and 
contribute to the UN’s Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).IntroductionI.
1. Ford, F. and Lobo, I. (2017). Digital disruption: Development unleashed Multiply innovation, collaboration and impact through digital in international development. Available 
at: https://www.accenture.com/t20170601T083538Z__w__/us-en/_acnmedia/PDF-40/Accenture-Digital-Disruption-Development-Unleashed.pdf#zoom=50
2. Pisa, M. and Juden, M. (2017). ‘Blockchain and Economic Development: Hype vs. Reality’. CGD Policy Paper. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. Available at: 
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/blockchain-and-economic-development-hype-vs-reality.A 2017 report from Accenture has found that the velocity and intensity of 
change in the development sector has reached an unprecedented level, with new players, businesses and funding models, societal expectations, 
demographic shifts, globalisation and digital technologies rapidly changing 
the face of the sector
1. This research suggests that by investing in new 
digital technologies such as blockchain, Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI), development organisations will be able to 
strengthen the efficiency of their programmes, reach a wider audience 
with fewer resources, and create new digital channels that optimise and personalise the experiences of their donors. 
Of all the emerging technologies that are likely to shape the future of 
international development, perhaps none is getting more attention today 
than blockchain. But for many mobile network operators (MNOs) and their partners within the development sector, it has been difficult to judge whether the significant hype around this technology is justified. ‘While excitement is understandable,’ writes the Center for Global Development, 
‘it also creates a risk that organisations embrace and begin to rely on the 
technology before they fully understand it
2.’ Certainly, some use cases are 
beginning to emerge that blockchain technologies are uniquely qualified to 
address, but like any other enabling technology we should not expect it to 
become a silver bullet for every development challenge.What is ‘Blockchain’? What is ‘Blockchain’?4 5
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTIn 2009, an author (or authors) using the 
pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto published a 
paper titled, ‘Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic 
Cash System’3, which outlined a vision for a new 
kind of digital currency. According to Nakamoto, 
commerce between two willing parties on the 
Internet had come to rely almost exclusively on 
financial intermediaries – such as banks, credit card 
companies or third-party payments portals like 
PayPal – to authenticate and process payments. 
These intermediaries are necessary because all 
economic exchanges require trust; at the most 
basic level, we must have a reasonable expectation 
that the individuals or institutions with whom we 
transact will not take advantage of us, regardless 
of our ability to monitor their actions4. Financial 
intermediaries have built complex systems, processes and databases to help reduce our 
uncertainty when we buy or sell online, but these 
add time, cost and inconvenience to our digital 
transactions without fully eliminating the risk  
of fraud.To enable this digital currency, Nakamoto argued 
that a new system was needed where trust was built 
on the basis that every transaction had to follow 
a set of rules, or ‘protocols’, that were governed 
by cryptographic proofs. Furthermore, rather 
than relying on a trusted financial intermediary, 
the transactions made on this system would be 
validated by a network of connected users who 
could reach a unanimous agreement, or consensus, 
about who owned or transferred value at any point 
in time. To achieve this, Nakamoto combined pre-
existing computer networking and cryptography 
technologies in ingenious ways to create a platform 
that could act as a public ledger, or database, 
that anyone can access but no single person can 
control. By providing a decentralised, trustworthy, and immutable record of transactions, the platform 
allows individuals and institutions to collaborate, 
transact and share information with previously 
unheard-of levels of trust and transparency
5. Today this kind of platform is known as a blockchain, and put simply, ‘it is a machine for creating trust’
6. 
‘The technology and cryptography that sits behind blockchain is complicated,’ writes Don and Alex 
Tapscott in Blockchain Revolution
7, ‘but the main 
idea is simple. It’s a platform for everyone to know 
what is true8, at least with regard to structured 
recorded information. As such, it holds the potential for unleashing countless new applications…that have 
the potential to transform many things’. Here is how 
it works.
Blockchains are distributed ledgers, or shared 
databases. Similar to online document sharing platforms, all participants on a blockchain’s network 
are given equal status and can submit, review and verify the records, or ‘blocks’ of information, in real time. When a block of information is recorded 
onto the blockchain by any user – whether this is a 
financial transaction between two people, a record 
of land ownership, or a refugee’s personal details – 
the data is instantly and automatically duplicated 
onto all of the other connected computers (or ‘nodes’) on the blockchain, rather than the record 
staying with a single, centralised authority. By 
automatically distributing the blocks of information 
across the whole network, the blockchain 
ensures that every user sees the most up-to-date 
information, the database has no single point of 
failure, and no single institution can control how the 
information is recorded, audited or managed.
Types of NetworksWhat is 
‘Blockchain’?
Source: Baran, 1964II.
Centralised
[A]Decentralised
[B]Distributed
[C]
3. Nakamoto, S. (2009). ‘Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System’. Available at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
4. Pisa, M. and Juden, M. (2017).
5. Tapscott, D and Tapschott, A. (2016). Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin is Changing Money, Business and the World. Penguin Publishing Group.6. The Economist, ‘The Trust Machine’ (2015)
7. Tapscott, D and Tapschott, A. (2016).
8. As explained further in this section, the record is known as ‘true’ in the sense that it is peer-vetted, immutable and auditable; the information may well not be correct, as is 
the problem with any other database systemWhat is ‘Blockchain’? What is ‘Blockchain’?6 7
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTDistributing information in this way makes 
blockchain a powerful and efficient tool for 
sharing information across multiple organisations 
in real-time. In refugee contexts, a consortium of 
humanitarian organisations might use a blockchain 
to maintain an up-to-date record of the services 
they are providing to a refugee population, helping 
to ensure that they aren’t duplicating records, 
wasting valuable resources or excluding individuals 
from receiving assistance. A blockchain could also 
be used to help individuals record and protect vital 
personal information that they don’t want a single 
authority to control and manage, such as their right 
to land, their educational achievements, or their 
proof of citizenship. It could be extremely valuable, 
for instance, for a refugee or displaced person to 
have their citizenship status and other personal 
credentials permanently verified and recorded on 
a blockchain, enabling them to retain control over 
their vital information in instances of state-based 
oppression or persecution.
Unlike online file-sharing platforms, however, 
blockchains are immutable. Once an entry has been 
made, the record is time-stamped and given a ‘hash’ 
– a unique, mathematically-generated identifier 
that automatically ties each new record to the entry 
that came before it. This means that it is impossible 
for any user to amend, delete or duplicate a single entry in the blockchain without noticeably affecting 
all of the entries that are part of the chain, making 
fraudulent activity immediately visible to the 
other users on the ledger. This ingeniously simple 
innovation helps guarantee the integrity of the data 
stored on the blockchain, and allows users to reach a 
unanimous consensus that every record is authentic 
and unchanged. 
Blockchains can be designed to be either public 
or private. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin run 
on totally decentralised, public blockchains; on 
these, anyone in the world can gain access the 
blockchain, view the flow of transactions, submit 
their own records, and participate in the consensus process
9. The obvious advantage of a public 
blockchain is that no one individual or group of 
individuals is able to control the information which 
is contained on the blockchain, maintaining the 
technology’s original virtues of neutrality and 
openness. Public blockchains can be a valuable 
tool for tracking the movement and provenance of 
assets, a feature that could help facilitate supply 
chain management by improving transparency 
and preventing fraud10. South African diamond 
specialist De Beers is investigating how to use 
blockchain to help differentiate legitimately sourced 
diamonds from those that have been sourced in 
conflict zones11. Starbucks has also begun to explore 
how the technology could be used to record each transaction that takes place in their coffee value 
chains, capturing highly-detailed information on 
the farmers that grow their beans and the weight, 
grade, and other specifications that are analysed 
by coffee buyers
12. By connecting all of the ‘nodes’ 
in coffee value chains, one day blockchain might allow customers in a café to scan a QR code on their 
coffee cup, pull up information about their coffee’s 
origin, and give the farmer who grew the beans  
a tip.
Contrary to public blockchains, a private, or 
‘permissioned’ blockchain is operated by one 
organisation or group of organisations, and is only 
accessible to other individuals or organisations 
that have been granted permission to use it
13. 
Increasingly, permissioned (rather than public) blockchains are beginning to proliferate as 
centralised organisations such as banks and 
humanitarian agencies investigate how to use 
the technology to collaborate with partners or 
improve their own internal processes. These can be 
characterised as ‘incorporative’ blockchain projects. 
The extent to which incorporative blockchain 
projects are still ‘peer-to-peer’ is debatable 
considering centralised intermediaries remain in 
place, but they also tend to be an easier starting 
point for organisations that wish to engage with 
blockchain.Permissioned blockchains are particularly 
advantageous when organisations want to maintain 
the confidentiality of the information that they store on the blockchain. For instance, in support 
of the ID2020 initiative
14, Accenture, Microsoft and 
Avanade have built a sophisticated, permissioned blockchain which connects existing record-keeping 
systems from private and public institutions into 
one database. The result is a rich set of portable, 
personal credentials that have been validated by 
multiple trusted parties, such as birth registration 
data from UNICEF; national ID numbers or 
voter documents issued by national registration authorities or electoral commissions; vaccination records from GAVI (a global vaccine alliance) and 
other non-government organisations (NGOs); and 
refugee registration data from UNHCR. In practice, 
this means someone arriving at a border crossing could use the information stored on the blockchain 
to prove he or she originated from an area where 
they faced violence or persecution, or that they 
qualified for emergency assistance or aid. In their 
host country, the same person could call up their 
school records to help them find employment, or to 
find information on their medical history in the event 
of a health emergency
15. 
Lastly, blockchains are secure. The information 
stored on the ledger is protected by a form of 
cryptography that provides each user with two 
types of ‘keys’ – one key is kept private, and the others are made public – which work together like 
the two-key system used to access a safety deposit 
box. The private key, similar to a password or PIN, 
gives a user the ability to ‘lock’ or ‘unlock’ their 
information and control when, and by whom, it is 
accessed. Other trusted ‘nodes’ on the network 
can then be given a public key so that they can read the unlocked information and double-check that it actually comes from the user. For example, 
when a blockchain is used to store a person’s 
identity information – i.e. their name, age, address, citizenship status or credit history – the private key 
could give the user complete control over who is 
able to access their data, as well as which specific 
pieces of data they are able to see. An MNO or bank 
could then be given a public key, which allows them 
to view the unlocked KYC-related information and 
verify that they belong to the user. Accenture’s blockchain prototype in support of ID2020 
Source: ID2020.orgUNICEF
Ministry  
of Health
National 
Registration 
Bureau
Electoral 
CommisionGAVI
UNHCR
UNDPBIRTH REGISTRATION
VACCINATION 
(CHILD HEALTH CARD)
VOTER REGISTRATION
REFUGEE REGISTRATION
NATIONAL ID  
CARD
9. Buterin, V. (2015). On Public and Private Blockchains. Available at: https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/08/07/on-public-and-private-blockchains/  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
10. Pisa, M. and Juden, M. (2017).
11. IT-Online. (2017). ‘Blockchain’s African Potential Goes Beyond Finance’. Available at: https://it-online.co.za/2017/08/18/blockchains-african-potential-goes-beyond-fi -
nance/  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
12. Hackett, R (2017). ‘This Blockchain Startup Ties Coffee to Crypto’. Fortune. Available at: http://fortune.com/2017/09/29/national-coffee-day-starbucks-blockchain/  
[Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].13. Lexology.com, (2016). ‘Blockchain - Public or Private’. Available at: https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=a381bb8a-3494-4f8d-9655-7f469cfddb23  [Accessed 
15 Nov. 2017].
14. For more information, see http://id2020.org
15. Roberts, F. (2017). ‘Microsoft and Accenture Unveil Global ID System for Refugees’, Fortune. Available at: http://fortune.com/2017/06/19/id2020-blockchain-microsoft/  
[Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].The Mobile Industry and Blockchain The Mobile Industry and Blockchain8 9
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTToday’s mobile ecosystem is increasingly connecting 
everyone and everything. By the middle of 
2017, two thirds of the world’s population had a 
mobile subscription – a total of five billion unique 
subscribers. By 2020, a further 620 million new 
mobile subscribers will be added, taking the global 
penetration rate to 75%16.
Reaching the next billion subscribers will be the industry’s toughest challenge yet. With developed 
markets approaching saturation, developing 
countries will account for nine out of ten new 
subscribers between now and 2020. Asia Pacific 
will represent two-thirds of new subscriber growth 
over that period, and annual growth in Sub-Saharan 
Africa – the world’s most under-penetrated region – 
will also be significant. Rising demand for data and more sustainable 
pricing will act as positive levers in ensuring mobile 
revenues continue to grow over the next four 
years, but the future outlook remains mixed. In 
Asia Pacific and Sub-Saharan Africa in particular, 
revenue growth has slowed sharply in recent years 
due to regulatory pressures, increasing competition, and a challenging macroeconomic environment. 
Across all regions, mobile operators will be looking 
for opportunities to implement new strategies 
that can drive overall growth and ensure the long-
term sustainability of their operations. Investments 
in new technologies and deeper collaboration 
with start-ups will be essential to operators’ own 
development, allowing them to create new avenues 
for revenue growth, generate cost efficiencies, and 
drive user acquisition and retention by enhancing or 
expanding their product offerings
17.The Mobile 
Industry and 
BlockchainIII.Net growth in mobile subscribers, Q2 2017 - 2020
Source: GSMA Intelligence
Note: Developed = 'High' and 'Upper middle' income countries (GNI per capita above $3,956). Developing = 'Lower middle' and 'Low' income countries (GNI per 
capita $3,955) as classified by the World Bank.India 162
128
99
73
65
41
20
14
11
2Rest of developing Asia
North AmericaChina
Latin America
CISSub-Saharan Africa
MENA
Europe
Developed Asia26%
21%
16%
12%
11%
7%
3%
2%
2%
0.3%
Percentage of global new subscribers
16. GSMA (2017). The Mobile Economy 2017. Available at: https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=9e927fd6896724e7b26f33f61db5b9d5&download
17. GSMA (2017). The Mobile Economy Asia Pacific 2017. Available at: https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=336a9db2ab3ed95bc70e62bf7e867855&downloadBlockchain for Development11
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
The Mobile Industry and Blockchain 10
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTIt is within this context that many operators have 
started to explore opportunities to invest in the 
development and implementation of blockchain 
projects, forging partnerships with technology 
companies and dedicating new funds to blockchain 
research (see examples below). It is likely that much 
of this activity is happening below the radar, as the 
potential use cases for mobile operators receiving the most attention to date fit our definition of ‘incorporative blockchain projects’ – meaning 
they focus on lowering the cost of operators’ own 
internal processes or expanding access to digital 
value-added services. Although blockchain projects 
such as this are outside the scope of this paper, a 
few well-publicised initiatives are worth highlighting 
here:
In June 2015, Orange Silicon Valley launched 
ChainForce, an initiative that brings together 
innovative blockchain start-ups and forward-
thinking corporations for short-term, 
collaborative pilot projects. Over eight to 
twelve weeks, corporations and start-ups 
work together to develop a Minimum Viable 
Blockchain App (MVBA), which ChainForce 
supports by providing limited development 
resources, mentorship, and business cases 
from their corporate partners to help orient the 
project. Today, ChainForce is exploring novel 
uses of blockchain related to digital identity, 
Internet of Things (IoT), provenance, insurance, 
supply chain and utility/energy Management
18. 
Also in 2015, Verizon Ventures invested in a 
blockchain start-up, Filament, that developed 
a blockchain-based IoT solution which allows 
industrial assets to securely communicate with 
one another wirelessly, independent of cloud 
connectivity or any other third-party data 
platform. Verizon provided a new round of 
funding to Filament in 2017, with the intention 
to scale the offerings from paid pilots to large 
production-grade installations, and to build 
out a wider ecosystem of delivery partners, 
including large technology integrators, 
value-added resellers, and global industrial 
conglomerates19.At the beginning of this year, Du announced 
a pilot programme which uses blockchain technology to facilitate the secure transmission 
of electronic health records in the United Arab 
Emirates. The aim is to bring data integrity, 
security and trust to the relationship between health providers and patients. It intends to do 
this through a blockchain-based solution in 
partnership with the Global Blockchain Council, 
which is itself a partnership between industry 
and government
20.
GSMA’s Mobile Connect is investigating how to use blockchain to make their existing, federated 
identity solution more convenient for users. For 
instance, they are exploring the possibility of 
introducing the concept of an ‘identity wallet’, 
through which a user could self-assert their 
attributes on the blockchain, which can then 
be validated by other entities such as banks or 
governments. By allowing Mobile Connect to 
manage the user’s digital keys on a blockchain, 
users could interact with the platform using 
more ‘humanised’ identifiers, such as their 
mobile phone number. Mobile Connect is 
viewed as the ideal framework for supporting 
such wallets, and providing users with a simple means of authenticating their identities in a way 
which is both convenient and secure
21. EXAMPLES OF OPERATORS WHO ARE INVESTING IN BLOCKCHAIN
In recent years, the mobile industry has actively 
embraced and supported the introduction of the 
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with 
operators across the world identifying new ways 
of working in partnership with governments, the 
development sector and other key stakeholders to 
deliver impact in digital identity, financial services, 
health, agriculture, utilities, disaster resilience 
and gender equality. A 2015 review from the UK’s 
Department for International Development (DFID) 
highlighted that the rapid expansion of mobile 
phones and internet access in poor countries offered 
unique opportunities to stimulate growth, enhance 
people’s experience of services and as citizens, 
involve them in development work, cut fraud, help 
hold governments and other institutions to account, 
and support organisations responding  
to humanitarian emergencies22.
Mobile devices and mobile connectivity will surely 
play an important role in future ‘blockchain for 
development’ projects, if only because these  
peer-to-peer networks largely depend on smartphones and other connected mobile devices 
to be the main interface between users and 
blockchain applications. However, it is less clear at 
this point what other opportunities these projects 
will present to mobile operators. To address this 
knowledge gap, in the following section we explore 
three emerging use cases for blockchain in the 
context of development, looking at how MNOs will 
be able to support, and derive value from, these 
projects. 
The case studies are presented with one significant 
caveat: all four highlight platforms that are in the early stages of development. There is still much 
work to be done to prove that blockchain platforms 
such as these are cost-effective, secure, sustainable, 
and more appropriate than other enabling 
technologies. For that reason, the last section of the 
report unpicks the use-cases to help us consider 
whether they are technically feasible, what the 
social-contextual and stakeholder challenges might 
be, and how mobile operators could fit in.Blockchain for 
DevelopmentIV.
18. For more information, see: http://www.chainforce.org/#chainforce
19. Business Wire (2017). ‘Filament Receives $15M in New Funding for Industrial IoT’. Available at: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20170330005189/en/Filament-Re -
ceives-15M-New-Funding-Industrial-IoT  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
20.  Rizzo, P. (2017). ‘Mobile Telco Du Reveals New Blockchain Healthcare Partnership’, Coin Desk. Available at: https://www.coindesk.com/mobile-telco-du-reveals-new-block -
chain-healthcare-partnership/  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
21. Hazari, G. (2017). ‘The Relationship Between Blockchain and Digital Identity’, GSMA. Available at: https://www.gsma.com/identity/the-relationship-between-blockchain-and-digi -
tal-identity  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].22. Ranger, P., Chandler, J. and Arscott, B. (2015). ‘DFID Review of Digital in Development Programmes’. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/at -
tachment_data/file/417521/Review-Digital-Programmes-Feb2015.pdf
23. World Bank (2017). ‘Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development: Toward the Digital Age’. Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/213581486378184357/Principles-on-identification-for-sustainable-development-toward-the-digital-ageBlockchain for Development13
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
Blockchain for Development 12
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTWhen a person wishes to register to access services 
such as government subsidies, a mobile SIM 
card or a bank account, they are often required 
to prove their identity using government-issued, 
physical documents such as a national identity 
card, passport, or voter ID. However, at least 1.1 
billion people lack any form of officially-recognised 
identity, and this problem disproportionately 
impacts rural residents, the poor, women, children, and other vulnerable groups, particularly in Africa 
and Asia. Furthermore, in many places identity 
systems remain fragmented and require individuals 
to hold several functional forms of identity, each of which might serve a different purpose, follow a 
different application process, and reach different 
segments of society. 
In 2017 the World Bank, in partnership with the 
GSMA and a number of other public and private 
sector stakeholders, agreed to a set of common 
principles that are considered fundamental to 
maximising the benefits of identification systems 
for sustainable development
23. Among these was 
the principle of universality, which advocates 
that countries should fulfil their obligations to 
provide legal identification to all residents—
not just citizens—from birth to death. While 
government agencies have a vital role in providing 
legal identification, centralised identity systems 
inherently carry some risk, as they ‘lock’ individuals 
into a single authority with the power to deny 
their identity, hold documents for ransom, or even 
confirm a false identity24. Since the start of the civil 
war in Syria, it has become nearly impossible for Syrian citizens to replace or apply for new identity 
documents - those who fear political persecution are unable to approach government authorities, and 
many citizens applying from abroad have had their 
applications denied. It is estimated that up to 70% of 
Syrian refugees currently lack access to state-issued 
identity documents, which threatens their ability to access humanitarian assistance, move freely 
within their country of exile, seek employment, 
register the birth of their children, or move closer 
to voluntary repatriation or resettlement
25. In other 
cases, individuals originating from poor, vulnerable, 
or disconnected segments of society will never have 
access to State-issued identity documents because 
the application process is too costly or inconvenient, 
or because their government lacks the capacity to 
issue identity documents to its citizens.
The belief that people should have greater control 
over their own personal identity and the value 
derived from it has led some ID experts to shift their 
focus to the development of “user-centric” or “self-
sovereign” ID systems. In contrast to systems where 
institutions provide ID credentials, self-sovereign 
IDs are built to empower individuals to control the 
formalisation of their identity, manage their digital 
personas, and actively monetise their personal 
data26. As with any ID system, to be useful a self-
sovereign ID must be convenient and trusted, as well as personal, persistent, portable, and private; that 
is, they should be unique to only one person, live 
with a person from life to death, be accessible from 
anywhere, and only given out with permission
27. 
Until recently such a solution seemed technically 
infeasible, but blockchain technology appears to be 
making this possible28.Blockchain and Self-Sovereign Digital IdentityUSE CASE 1 In more than 140 countries, MNOs are now subject to mandatory SIM registration obligations which 
require customers to present Government-
recognised identity credentials before a SIM card 
can be activated. Similar (or identical) Know-Your-
Customer (KYC) requirements need to be met when 
customers open mobile money accounts. In most 
cases, these KYC regulations only allow customers 
to present identity documents that have been 
issued by government authorities, such as national 
identity cards, passports, or drivers’ licenses. KYC 
processes can be expensive, time-consuming and 
potentially troublesome for service providers, 
particularly when MNOs are obligated to validate 
customers’ ID credentials against a government 
database and are charged a fee for each validation 
query they make. In addition to the operating 
costs associated with customer enrolment, data 
protection and document management, cases of 
identity fraud can lead to heavy fines and damage a company’s brand reputation. For many of the world’s most marginalised people – such as rural 
residents, poor people, women and refugees – the 
lack of officially-recognised identity poses a major 
barrier to accessing mobile services.
This has led the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
to recommend that governments and regulators consider adopting proportionate, risk-based 
approaches to KYC, where those with less-official 
forms of identification are able to open accounts 
that have restrictions on the type and/or value 
of transactions that are permitted (e.g. a cap on 
the amount that a customer can send or receive 
using mobile money services per month). Here, 
there may be an opportunity for mobile operators, 
policymakers and other partners to develop 
acceptable substitute processes with lower levels of 
assurance, and to assist users in establishing their 
own trusted, self-sovereign identities.
Gravity describes itself as a ‘next-generation identity solution’ with an ambition to give everyone access 
to a mobile phone by creating a digital identity 
infrastructure that is fundamentally inclusive. To do 
this, they help individuals establish a trusted identity 
– or ‘Proof of Existence’ – that is independent from 
public infrastructures and non-dependent on official 
identity documents, postal addresses or banking 
systems. The platform has not been fully deployed 
to date, but Gravity has recently run a first pilot 
in Kenya registering 1,000 users over three days, 
and is currently working on a second pilot with an 
aim to register 10,000 people on their platform. While Gravity’s end-to-end solution uses back-end 
blockchain technology to certify a customer’s KYC-
related information, the customer’s experience and 
interaction with the app remains streamlined and 
easy: users do not need to know what blockchain is 
in order to use the platform, and the service works 
on any mobile device through a USSD menu or 
smartphone application. Customers are guided through the enrolment process with help from a Gravity agent who visits 
them at their home or in their community. To begin, 
the customer uses a USSD menu in their own 
mobile device to self-declare their KYC-relevant 
information, including: 
• First name
• Last name
• Phone number
• Date of birth
• Gender• NationalityAll of these identity claims are then anonymously 
sealed on a public blockchain and stored on a 
second permissioned and cryptographically secured 
distributed ledger. At this point, confidence in the 
customer’s identity is at a base level.Gravity: Improving access to mobile through KYC-compliant identities
The Blockchain Solution
24. Allen, C. (2016). ‘The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity’. Available at: http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
25. Norwegian Refugee Council (2017). ‘Syrian Refugees’ Right to Legal Identity: Implications for Return’. Available at: https://www.nrc.no/globalassets/pdf/briefing-notes/icla/fi -
nal-syrian-refugees-civil-documentation-briefing-note-21-12-2016.pdf
26.  USAID (2017). ‘Identity in A Digital Age: Infrastructure for Inclusive Development’. [unpublished]
27. Simonsen, S. (2017). ‘5 Reasons the UN Is Jumping on the Blockchain Bandwagon’, Singularity Hub. Available at: https://singularityhub.com/2017/09/03/the-united-nations-and-
the-ethereum-blockchain/  [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].
28. Pisa, M. and Juden, M. (2017).Blockchain for Development Blockchain for Development14 15
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTEnter PIN to proceed:
Send CancelSelect ID attributes
Surname
Male Female
Send Cancel
Name
Surname
Gender
AddressName
Surname
Gender
AddressName
Surname
Gender
AddressLOW
MEDIUM
HIGH!
!Next, the blockchain enables the customer’s self-
declared information to go through a process of 
‘distributed vetting’. As a last step in the enrolment 
process, the user provides contact details for five 
or more of their peers (typically family members 
or friends), who are subsequently sent an SMS 
message asking them to verify each of the identity 
claims. In this way, an entire virtual community 
becomes involved in validating the integrity of the 
user’s identity. A machine learning scoring module 
ensures that inaccurate or malevolent information is 
rejected, and as a further incentive to Gravity’s users 
to report information that is accurate, if the majority 
of their peers respond by confirming that the 
information is true, Gravity rewards the original user 
by providing them with free mobile airtime credit. 
As more and more relationships are established 
and information is validated on the blockchain, confidence in the accuracy of the user’s attributes – and hence the identity itself – grows organically, 
allowing Gravity to build a real-time risk assessment 
of each customer’s profile. Additional critical fields 
of the KYC profile can be added subsequently, 
such as the user’s National ID, birth certificate, 
professional licence for merchants, or any other 
information required by regulators. In these cases, 
the user will take a picture of the ID document 
through the app, and present the hard copy to a 
Gravity or MNO agent, typically a small shop owner. 
Upon verification, their identity score increases. 
Addresses also tend to be a key KYC requirement, 
and these can be self-declared on the application 
and reviewed by GPS location. Gravity is therefore 
not a substitute to official government-issued IDs, 
but complementary, bringing more flexibility and 
interoperability.
Once a user’s KYC-relevant information has been authenticated, mobile operators can be given 
permission to link into Gravity’s blockchain to check 
a customer’s KYC-related information and see the 
most current picture of their risk profile. Importantly, 
the encrypted, PIN-protected application gives 
each user the ability to remain anonymous and 
in full control of their personal details until they 
decide to share specific information, with a 
specific service provider, for a specific purpose. 
The solution complies by design to the EU General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) requirements 
on personal data protection which is considered 
to be the most stringent anywhere. To help make 
the platform sustainable, Gravity plans to charge 
operators or any other data consumer a small fee to access the user’s validated KYC information, a significant portion of which will go back to the 
users to reward them for using the service. As such, 
Gravity brings monetary value to the user’s ID.
None of the platform’s users – the customers, their 
peers, service providers, or even Gravity - are able 
to change or manipulate the information stored on 
the blockchain without detection, increasing MNOs’ 
confidence that the information provided is true. 
Regulators also benefit from independent audit trails on KYC data. Gravity believes that blockchain-
enabled, peer-to-peer authentication of identity-
related data is more robust and less prone to fraud 
than many of the documents regulators currently 
accept as proof of identity.Source: GravityFor mobile operators, linking into Gravity’s platform could significantly lower the cost of on-boarding 
new customers by reducing or eliminating the costs 
associated with traditional KYC/SIM registration 
processes, such as agent commissioning, back office 
procedures, and data systems. At the same time, 
the platform could help operators enhance their 
KYC and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) security by 
replicating the currently required information (name, 
date of birth, address) and adding additional levels 
of attributes, such as the user’s income, occupation 
or next of kin. This could give MNOs access to the 
data they need to increase a customer’s mobile 
money wallet limit, or to provide them with access 
to more sophisticated, targeted services (to the 
extent that any KYC compliance requirements have 
been met). The platform is also designed to improve 
the customer’s experience with their operator by 
making it easier to navigate the SIM registration 
process and by providing mobile airtime rewards. As a recognition of the platform’s potential, in November 2017 Gravity won the Digital Africa 
Challenge on Citizenship and e-Government, 
beating a field of 770 start-up competitors. The 
awards ceremony took place at the Fifth Africa–
EU Summit, which focused on youth and the 
demographic trends in Africa that are creating major 
challenges for young people in terms of migration, 
security and employment.
To support their initiative going forward, 
Gravity is hoping to work with MNOs who are 
willing to provide access to internal facilities, 
such as databases and procedures, to test the 
interoperability of the solution with its systems and 
to measure the impact on KYC/SIM registration-
related costs. 
For more information, see: www.gravity.earthSource: GravityRisk ProfileBlockchain for Development Blockchain for Development16 17
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTAn estimated 2.3 billion people depend on 
agriculture for their livelihoods, and according to the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, 
four-fifths of the developing world’s food is a 
product of small-sized farms. Small, family-run 
farms are also home to the majority of people 
living in absolute poverty, and half of the world’s 
undernourished people29. Supporting smallholder 
farmers, therefore, is critical to reducing poverty, 
hunger and malnutrition.
The rural poor are one of the least likely 
demographics to have access to an official proof of 
identity, which is increasingly essential to securing 
access to mobile connectivity, financial services 
and social protections. There is also a tension 
between fixed identities (i.e. the demographic and biometric details found on a person’s legal identity), 
and the need for a more fluid ‘economic identity’ 
that accounts for one’s shifting, dynamic life and 
economic profile. 
Today, many smallholder farmers have limited 
access to the formal economy or formal financial 
products such as savings, credit or insurance, relying 
instead on multiple levels of financial intermediaries, 
or ‘middlemen’ who pass on costs to the farmer 
in the form of high interest or other fees. This is 
often because vital information about a farmer is 
collected, stored and used in silos by agribusinesses, 
mobile operators, non-profits and other service 
providers, providing each entity with an incomplete 
picture of the farmer’s life and their unique 
economic situation:There is a need for new, digital approaches to identity that help farmers authenticate and take 
ownership of a wide range of personal data, such as their income, transactional histories, credit 
worthiness, rights to/ownership of land, geolocation, farm size, and other vital credentials.
BanQu: Creating economic identities for smallholder farmers• Monthly Income
• Inputs used
• Crops grown and size of land
• Informal loan repayments
• Top-up history
• Geolocation• Use of mAgri services
• KYC-related information
• Training history
• Informal savings 
• Personal networks
• Qualification for subsidies Agribusiness
Mobile Operator
Agri Non-Profit
BanQu’s mission is to connect the world’s poorest 
people to the global economy by providing them 
with a secure, portable digital identity. Their 
proprietary blockchain-based platform allows 
farmers to set up a unique digital profile and 
then connect with their peers, aid organisations, 
governments, banks, and payment companies to 
accumulate data on variety of personal and financial 
transactions. In a live production environment, 
BanQu has seen early evidence of success in Asia, 
where they are working with a global consumer 
product company to create economic identities 
as part of wider efforts to create a supply chain 
transparency tool. The application is designed to 
work on any mobile device, and is free to sign-up 
and use.
Through BanQu, anyone with a mobile phone is 
able to connect to the BanQu network and set up 
their economic identity. Knowing that farmers are 
unlikely to have access to physical documentation that verifies their economic credentials, the BanQu 
platform begins to create a unique, digital profile by 
capturing the user’s selfie and a ‘mashup’ of other 
immutable (i.e. unchanging) characteristics. From 
there, the ethereum-based30, permissioned ledger 
allows the user to connect to and interact with their ‘banked network’ - including family, friends, 
agribusinesses, service providers, and associated 
NGOs – who can use their own phones or BanQu’s 
website to record and authenticate any of the 
farmer’s personal and financial transactions. This 
might include property records, cash disbursements, 
the purchase of inputs, the quality of their harvests, 
health records, training records, or credit histories. 
As the BanQu user starts accumulating a transaction 
history and a registry of their assets on the BanQu 
blockchain, this information is used to build a 
traceable, vetted and farmer-owned ‘economic 
identity’ that can provide new or more targeted 
access to a wide range of formal services.The Blockchain Solution
29. Fan, S., Brzeska, J., Keyzer, M. and Ha, A. (2013). ‘From Subsistence to Profit: Transforming Smallholder Farms’. International Food Policy Research Institute. Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/transforming%20smallholder%20farms.pdf30. Ethereum is an open software platform based on blockchain technology that enables developers to build and deploy decentralised applications.Blockchain for Development19
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
Blockchain for Development 18
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTThrough the BanQu platform, the end user sees 
every transaction that is stored on the blockchain 
and maintains ownership of their personal 
information - as with the Gravity platform, the 
BanQu user decides what information is shared 
and with whom. When a farmer wishes to access 
new financial services, BanQu’s platform gives 
banks or other FSPs the ability to check the identity 
components as captured in the blockchain, ensuring 
they are able to fulfil any identity-related regulatory 
and compliance requirements. 
While the concept behind an economic identity 
seems simple, the technologies available before 
blockchain were not strong enough to make 
it a reality; according to BanQu, a centralised 
approach to managing user identities would be 
too cumbersome, too insecure, and too ‘heavy’. 
A permissioned, distributed ledger on the other 
hand is powerful, light and easy to configure. 
Furthermore, the fact that the platform is distributed 
and consensus-driven means that an endless 
number of trusted partners can contribute to the 
blockchain, and with each new addition the strength 
of the farmer’s economic identity is improved. BanQu believes there are opportunities for mobile 
money providers to utilise the data collected 
through the BanQu platform to form a more 
complete picture of their customers. GSMA has seen 
success stories of innovative partnerships between 
mobile money providers, financial institutions, 
banks, fintech and technology companies that use 
customer data in innovative ways; the most notable 
being m-Shwari in Kenya, which uses algorithms to 
analyse a customer’s use of M-Pesa and assess their 
credit-worthiness, assign individual credit limits, and 
lend to new applicants31. If allowed by regulators, 
MNOs could also use the platform to help lower the cost of on-boarding new mobile money customers, 
accessing all of the identity information needed 
to comply with KYC, AML, Counter-Financing of 
Terrorism (CFT) and Suspicious Activity Reporting 
(SAR) regulations.
For more information, see: www.banquapp.comIn 2012, Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, closed the High-Level Panel on 
Accountability, Transparency and Sustainable 
Development by highlighting the severe impact of 
fraud on international aid, describing its impact as 
both direct and devastating. ‘Last year,’ he stated, 
‘corruption prevented 30% of all development 
assistance from reaching its final destination. 
This translates into bridges, hospitals and schools 
that were never built, and people living without 
the benefit of these services. This is a failure of 
accountability and transparency. We cannot let it 
persist.’
32
Distributing and tracking funds to ensure they 
have maximum impact remains a challenge for 
the international development sector. Official 
development aid (ODA) is largely disbursed through 
legacy banking systems that are opaque, slow and expensive, with banking fees, exchange rates, and 
currency fluctuations chipping away at vital funds. 
Furthermore, once donor funds arrive in a country 
they are usually dispersed to a number of NGOs 
and other local implementing partners, creating an 
easy environment for donations to become lost or 
misappropriated. 
More fundamentally, one reason for the lack 
of accountability in aid distribution is because 
development organisations have no way of tracing 
funds as they move between the donor and end 
beneficiary, making it impossible to fully measure 
the efficiency and effectiveness of aid. Donor funds 
might be routed through multilateral organisations, or pooled with other funds contributed by other 
countries or organisations, limiting the direct control 
they have over their expenditure.Blockchain and International Aid DeliveryUSE CASE 2 
31. For more information, see: http://cbagroup.com/m-shwari/ 32. United Nations (2012). ‘Secretary-General's closing remarks at High-Level Panel on Accountability, Transparency and Sustainable Development’. Available at: https://www.
un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2012-07-09/secretary-generals-closing-remarks-high-level-panel-accountability [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].GOVERNMENT
PARTNERS
BUYERS
VENDORSPersonal information  
and photo
 Payments and 
disbursements
Mapping of land and 
other assets
Seed inputs and finance
Extension servicesCrop lifecycle and 
processing
Harvest
Processing methods
Weight and Quality
TransportationFINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS
Source: DisberseSLOW
It can take weeks 
for funds to arrive, 
even during a crisis 
responseEXPENSIVE
Bank charges, poor 
exchange rates & 
currency flucuations 
raise the costs+ + =
OPAQUE
Funds can't be traced 
from end-to-end, 
creating potential for 
mismanagementREDUCED IMPACT
for those individuals 
& communities who 
need it mostBlockchain for Development Blockchain for Development20 21
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
As a first step, Disberse works with the project 
stakeholders to outline the objectives and budget 
of a project, clearly defining the amount of money 
the donor is contributing and its intended purpose. 
This ‘supply chain’ of connected stakeholders might 
include a government department, NGO offices in 
both the donor and project country, local delivery 
partners, and the individuals or group receiving the 
benefit at point of delivery. Additional partners can 
be added to this chain at any time, as needed. 
Each of the stakeholders in the chain must then 
open an account, or ‘wallet’ on Disberse’s platform, through which project funds will be traced. Next, the 
Donor guarantees the project funds by depositing 
them in Disberse’s escrow account in the form of fiat 
currency, such as USD or GBP. The funds are then 
‘tokenised’, which means that the fiat currency is 
converted into digital value on a 1:1 basis; for every 
USD $1 or GBP £1 deposited, Disberse issues  
a digital token representing exactly that value to  
the Donor (just like e-money). These tokens can 
then be distributed to anyone, anywhere in the 
world through the blockchain’s wallet, and traced 
in real-time as ownership of the tokens is moved 
through the chain. Importantly, the blockchain does not shift the project’s funds from one stakeholder’s bank 
account to another, as is done in the traditional aid 
disbursement process. Instead, the blockchain uses 
the digital tokens as a representation of value, and 
creates a permanent record on the ledger every 
time a stakeholder transfers their ownership of 
this value to the next organisation in line. Digital 
currencies like Bitcoin work in the same way, albeit 
on a public blockchain. The transfer of digital tokens 
can be validated and processed quickly, and will 
continue all the way down the chain until the tokens 
reach the final beneficiary; once this happens, the 
digital tokens can be exchanged for cash at one 
of Disberse’s local financial or corporate partners. 
In the end, the project funds only exchange hands 
twice: once when the Donor deposits the funds into 
Disberse’s account, and again when Disberse settles 
with their corporate partner in the project country. 
In this way, the platform removes several financial 
intermediaries, and their respective fees, from the 
international transfer process.By the time the Disberse settles with their financial 
partner, the blockchain will have created an 
immutable record of every transaction that took 
place from donor to beneficiary, making it easy 
for organisations to track the flow of funds, to 
see exactly how every dollar of their donations 
was spent, and spot inefficiencies or weaknesses 
in the supply chain. Disberse also provides the 
organisation with this data for reporting, auditing, 
and compliance, giving previously unheard-of levels of transparency to the organisation, beneficiaries and donors.
In early 2017, Disberse implemented their first pilot 
by distributing and tracking funds from the UK to 
Swaziland in support of a girls’ education project. 
The funds were distributed from a UK NGO to 
a Swazi NGO, and then on to four local schools, 
supporting vulnerable girls left as orphans by the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic.
The pilot proved that Disberse’s permissioned 
blockchain provides the ideal platform for delivering 
aid. It enabled cheaper and faster transfers, both 
locally and internationally, as well as access to better 
exchange rates at the local level. Disberse saved 
the donor 2.5% on their transfer fees, which meant 
the NGO could fund an additional three girls to go to school for a year. The NGO was also able to see 
in real time how the funds were being distributed 
down the chain, and where funds were at any given 
time. As a result, the NGO didn’t have to chase local 
partners for receipts or proof of transactions, and it 
is hoped that the additional transparency will result 
in increased donations in the future.
Disberse has encountered some challenges that 
have to be addressed by any organisation working with blockchain, the biggest being the need to 
educate organisations on what blockchain is, how 
it works, and how it changes business processes - 
in this case, fund distribution. This can take time, but Disberse insists that once partners see the 
value and benefits the technology can provide, the platform sells itself
33. Evens so, in the short term 
Disberse believes that the platform is likely to get 
more interest from smaller NGOs, rather than bigger and more bureaucratic organisations. Regulations 
around international money transfers have also 
been a significant overhanging challenge. Here, 
Disberse have benefitted from participating in the 
FCA ‘regulatory sandbox’, which allowed them to 
explore their relationship with existing regulatory 
infrastructures in a secure environment. They will 
continue to refine their business model, but believe that the combined transparency improvements 
and cost savings will enable them to create a 
viable business based on transaction fees that can 
compete with legacy financial institutions.
Disberse is interested in exploring opportunities 
to link their platform to mobile money services, 
potentially by allowing beneficiaries to exchange 
Disberse tokens for mobile money credit rather 
than cash. In the short term, linking to Disberse’s platform could allow MNOs to generate new 
sources of revenue by facilitating the disbursement of international aid, but in the future, these use 
cases could also expand to include the delivery of 
emergency funds in humanitarian crises, social cash 
transfers, and results-based financing. 
For more information, see: www.disberse.comGLOBAL 
DONORSPOSITIVE WOMEN 
UK CHARITYBoMAKE  
SWAZI NGO4X SCHOOLS 
SWAZILAND1000 X STUDENTS 
SWAZILAND
Donations aggregated from 
foundations & individualsDistributed & tracking to  
recipient partners & schoolsOngoing delivery of  
education & mentoring
33. Fearn, N. (2017). ‘Interview: Ben Joakim, CEO of Disberse’. TechDragons. Available at: http://techdragons.wales/interview-ben-joakim-ceo-of-disberse/  [Accessed 15 Nov. 
2017].Source: DisberseDisberse is a fund management platform that 
aims to make the delivery of development and 
humanitarian aid more transparent, efficient and 
effective. Using a permissioned blockchain, they 
help donors, governments and NGOs transfer and trace their funds through the whole value chain, 
ensuring that vital resources actually reach the 
people they are intended to serve and are achieving 
the greatest possible impact. The Blockchain Solution
Source: Disberse1
PROJECT 
DEFINED
Objectives & budget 
agreed between 
stakeholders2
FUNDS  
GUARANTEED
Guaranteed by Donor 
or held in Disberse 
escrow3
FUNDS  
ISSUED
Funds are issued to 
the Donor account4
FUNDS  
DISBERSED
Funds are traced as 
they flow down the 
chain5
FUNDS  
REDEEMED
Into local currency 
via bank transfer or 
mobile moneyBlockchain for Development23
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
Blockchain for Development 22
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTAn unprecedented and ever-increasing number 
of people were forced to leave or flee their homes 
due to conflict and persecution in 2016, with the 
global displaced population reaching nearly 64 
million by mid-year. Over 21 million of the displaced 
are refugees, who have traversed international 
borders to escape considerable physical, economic 
and social hardships such as new and unresolved 
conflict, human rights violations or persecution. Having left behind their home, livelihoods, 
possessions and social networks, refugees must 
rely on their host government, the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the international community to ensure that they are 
able to live in safety and have access to vital support 
and assistance
34.
Over the past decade, the World Food Programme 
(WFP) has significantly increased their use of cash 
transfers to provide assistance to refugees and 
other people in need. In 2016, a total of 14.3 million 
people in 60 countries received cash assistance 
from WFP, up from 9.6 million in 2015 and only 
3 million in 201035. When deployed in the right 
context, cash transfers have been found to empower 
people to make their own choices about what they 
eat, and also reduce the need to resort to negative coping strategies, such as selling valuable assets, 
to buy food. WFP advocates that cash transfers 
also reduce the cost of providing food assistance, 
thus maximising the number of people that can be 
reached. 
Traditionally, in order to transfer cash to 
beneficiaries WFP has had to work closely with 
a financial service provider, such as a local or 
national bank. At the beginning of each month, the 
bank is given an entire month’s worth of cash for 
distribution, alongside of a list of beneficiaries and 
the amount of cash to which each is entitled. WFP 
estimates that in Jordan alone, monthly transfers 
to banks can total over USD $10 million. Once a 
beneficiary is notified by the bank that they have 
been granted a cash entitlement, they are able to 
go to a designated merchant and make a purchase, 
typically by using a physical card as a proof of ID. 
At the point of sale, the transaction is authorised by 
the bank, who verifies that the refugee’s remaining 
entitlements are able to cover the cost of their 
purchase, and in time the merchant is reimbursed 
by the bank using the funds deposited in WFP’s account. At the end of the month, the bank sends 
WFP a summary of their transactions and reports 
any issues with distributions.Blockchain and Humanitarian Cash PaymentsUSE CASE 3 
There are four key challenges with this process. First, advancing large sums of money to a financial 
service provider creates a financial risk for WFP, 
especially when this is done in fragile markets where 
financial institutions are more likely to fail or commit 
fraud. The process is also expensive, costing WFP 
and other large humanitarian agencies millions of 
dollars every year – not only in banking fees, but 
also to cover the cost of tracking and reviewing 
thousands of banking transactions. For beneficiaries, there are also risks associated with privacy – sharing, misplacing or misusing sensitive personal 
information is especially dangerous for refugees, 
particularly those who are seeking protection from 
oppressive regimes. Finally, there is an issue of 
accountability – humanitarian organisations do not 
have their own ‘record of reality’, relying instead on 
the information provided to them at the end of each 
month by the bank.WFP’s Traditional Humanitarian Cash Transfer Process
STEP 1
The bank receives WFP 
disbersement and entitlement 
information, notifies refugee
STEP 2
Refugee transactions are 
verified by the bank at the 
point of sale
STEP 3
The bank reimburses the 
merchant and provides a 
summary report to WFPWPF
WPFBANKBANK
BANKMERCHANT
MERCHANT
34. GSMA (2017). ‘Refugees and Identity: Considerations for Mobile-Enabled Registration and Aid Delivery’. GSMA. Available at: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/
wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Refugees-and-Identity.pdf
35. For more information, see: http://www1.wfp.org/cash-transfersBlockchain for Development Blockchain for Development24 25
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTWFP’s journey with blockchain began by 
investigating how the risks and inefficiencies in the 
cash transfer process could be improved. In January 
2017, they launched a small pilot in Sindh province, 
Pakistan, to test core assumptions around the ability 
of blockchain technology to authenticate, record, 
and reconcile cash and food assistance transactions. 
After seeing positive results, the project moved into 
full-development and the ‘Building Blocks’ platform, 
which utilises a private blockchain, was rolled out in 
Jordan. Between May and November 2017, Building 
Block has been used to transfer USD $1 million in 
food vouchers to 10,500 Syrian refugees in Jordan, 
using the system to facilitate more than 220,000 
individual transactions36.
Crucially, the platform removes WFP’s reliance on 
an intermediary bank to verify transactions and 
distribute funds. Rather than sending the bank 
sensitive information on each beneficiary, WFP can 
create secure profiles for each refugee on Building 
Blocks, where they only need to record two pieces of information: the refugee’s entitlement, and a 
unique ID number given to each person or family. 
This ID number is linked to the biometric data stored 
in UNHCR’s refugee database, which means that beneficiaries are able to authenticate themselves at merchants by simply scanning their irises, rather 
than having to reveal personal details such as their 
name or age.
When designing their new blockchain solution, 
WFP recognised the importance of not changing 
the beneficiaries’ experience with disbursements – 
both in terms of the technology used (electing to 
use the iris verification system that already existed 
in Jordan) and the social value beneficiaries gained 
from the shopping experience (meaning refugees 
could visit merchants as frequently as they wanted). 
Once a beneficiary receives a message from WFP 
saying that they have an entitlement, they can go to 
an approved merchant and make a purchase, in the 
same exact way they did in the traditional process. 
At the point of sale, the merchant uses a connected 
device to authenticate the refugee’s transaction 
against the entitlement information stored on 
Building Blocks, automatically confirms that the 
beneficiary has the ‘credit’ available to make their purchase. Every transaction is recorded on the 
refugee’s profile, and WFP uses this information  
to pay the supermarket directly, using their 
corporate bank.WFP’s Blockchain Solution WFP’s Blockchain-Enabled Humanitarian Cash Transfer Process
STEP 1
WFP creates profile for the 
refugee on Building Blocks, 
notifies refugee
STEP 2
Refugee transactions are 
verified by Building Blocks 
at the point of sale; this record is instantly visible 
to WFP 
STEP 3
WFP reimburses the merchantWPFWPFBUILDING 
BLOCKS
BUILDING 
BLOCKSMERCHANT
MERCHANTWPF
With the new blockchain-enabled system, WFP has eliminated a significant portion of the fees 
previously paid to the bank and simplified its 
reconciliation and payment process. The blockchain 
provides WFP with a permanent, real-time record 
of every transaction, compiling information on 
when each transaction happened, which beneficiary 
conducted the transaction, where the transaction 
took place (at which supermarket), and the 
transaction amount. Every single transaction is 
verified instantly on the blockchain, allowing WFP 
to make payment to merchants as frequently as desired. Building Blocks has also eliminated the need to advance funds to a bank, reducing finical 
risk. With an estimated initial development cost 
of less than USD $100,000 (and minimal ongoing 
maintenance costs), the return on investment has 
been significant. WFP has set an ambitious goal 
to use Building Blocks to deliver cash transfers to 
100,000 individuals by early 2018. By the second 
quarter of next year, the system could cover the 
entire Syrian refugee population of Jordan, or 
500,000 people
37.
36. For more information, see: http://innovation.wfp.org/project/building-blocks 37. Wong, J. (2017). ’The UN is using ethereum’s technology to fund food for thousands of refugees’, Quartz. Available at: https://qz.com/1118743/world-food-programmes-
ethereum-based-blockchain-for-syrian-refugees-in-jordan/ [Accessed 15 Nov. 2017].Evaluating Blockchain for Development Projects27
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENT
Blockchain for Development 26
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTThe applications developed by Gravity, BanQu and 
Accenture (for ID2020) suggest that permissioned 
blockchains provide the ideal platform for 
supporting self-sovereign identity services. The 
technology enables any individual with a mobile 
phone to anonymously record and manage their 
sensitive personal data, while giving the user 
complete control over how and with whom their 
information is shared. This ensures the identity 
systems remain portable and private. The fact 
that the information recorded to the blockchain 
is immutable and vetted by the customer’s peers 
(or banked network) means that the ID is also 
persistent and trusted. And finally, by allowing 
service providers to securely tap into the platform, 
the ID system becomes highly convenient. By 
definition, this meets the standard requirements for 
sustainable, inclusive identity systems.
The case studies also indicate that self-
sovereign identity systems could offer MNOs 
new opportunities to significantly lower the cost 
of on-boarding new customers and fulfilling 
SIM registration and KYC requirements. GSMA Intelligence has also found that mobile operators are well placed to verify a user’s attributes on self-
sovereign identity solutions due to their unique 
range of credentials
38, including their network 
credentials (customer’s SIM and mobile number), 
customer account credentials (customer account 
data, point of presence locational data and billing), 
and personal credentials (individual biometrics 
and PIN codes). By leveraging these assets and 
helping to validate their customers’ identity claims, 
MNOs have the opportunity to provide customers 
with access to more sophisticated identity-linked 
services, and potentially create new sources of 
revenue by providing identity-as-a-service. 
It is likely that operators in emerging markets will 
be the first to capitalise on these opportunities, 
as social reputation-based identity systems have 
the most immediate need in places where access 
to legal proof of identity is limited. However, 
partnerships and business models that can adapt 
to decentralised approaches to identity must be in 
place for these kinds of blockchain projects to be 
successful, and this is a difficult task.Evaluating 
Blockchain for 
Development 
ProjectsV.WFP has pointed out that everything they have 
done through their platform so far could be done 
on a traditional IT system, without blockchain. 
However, they advocate that the real value of the 
technology will become evident once they begin 
to cross organisational boundaries and allow other 
humanitarian organisations to link to the database. 
In fact, while WFP currently operates Building 
Blocks on its own, the platform has been designed 
to allow multiple parties to contribute and share 
information. Currently, refugees in Jordan are 
likely to be registered multiple times, as different 
beneficiaries, by multiple NGOs, and refugees have 
to wait longer than necessary to obtain assistance 
because it is often unclear what support they have 
already received. Soon, WFP hopes to use the new 
blockchain system to empower beneficiaries with 
more control over, and access to, their information. 
This will become possible as more agencies join the 
blockchain, connectivity in camps improves, and 
smartphone devices become more ubiquitous. 
Despite the platform’s success, some challenges 
remain. Because blockchain is still a largely 
unproven, nascent technology, it is tough to argue 
that there are no bugs or issues with Building 
Blocks, especially when it is common to hear 
concerns about Bitcoin-related security breaches even though Building Blocks does not currently use 
any cryptocurrencies. Furthermore, WFP recognises 
that standards related to storing and managing 
refugee ID’s is not fully developed yet, and there 
is still some uncertainty around how blockchain-
enabled identity platforms fit into existing 
regulations.
In the near-term, WFP is hoping to start leveraging 
mobile money as a convenient and safe means of 
cash disbursement. In this scenario, WFP would 
open their own mobile wallet with an operator. 
When a beneficiary wants to ‘cash out’ their 
entitlement by transferring it to their personal 
wallet, or if a merchant would like to be reimbursed 
for a refugee’s purchase via mobile money, the 
blockchain can be used to approve the transaction 
and initiate the transfer of credit. In time, delivering 
vouchers or entitlements through mobile money 
channels could allow beneficiaries to save unused 
funds, or even transfer entitlements to their 
family and friends. The blockchain backbone will 
allow beneficiaries to seamlessly redeem their 
entitlements through mobile money, ATMs, or 
supermarkets.
For more information, see:  
http:/ /innovation.wfp.org/project/building-
blocks
38. GSMA, The Mobile Economy 2017. Page 29.Evaluating Blockchain for Development Projects28
BLOCKCHAIN FOR DEVELOPMENTgsma.comSelf-sovereign identity systems will require a 
willingness from global institutions, governments 
and other service providers to collaborate and 
share sensitive information outside of their internal, 
trusted silos. Despite the widely accepted belief that 
blockchain technologies replace the need for human 
trust, it is crucial to point out that with permissioned 
ledgers the user must still trust the people who 
designed the application, the platform owners and 
the verifiers of data that is recorded on the chain. 
Fundamentally, these systems will need government 
backing, and in many emerging markets, legal 
and regulatory frameworks around identity are 
often unclear and fragmented, and there are no 
standards for how to use unproven technology such 
as blockchain to store, manage and share citizen 
data. Regulators will need to determine who is 
legally responsible for the data in ‘self-sovereign’ 
ID systems – the user, or the platform provider? 
They will also need to grapple with questions such 
as: how will users and regulators know that the 
platforms and personal data are sustainably secure? 
And how does the use of blockchain for producing, 
using and sharing data fit within existing legal and 
regulatory practices? 
Until questions like these are addressed, MNOs and 
other formal service providers will likely be reluctant 
to start tapping into these blockchain applications 
to validate or access data, and potentially risk their 
reputation with government and regulators by 
using technology that has not been properly vetted. However, Disberse has shown that small-scale pilots 
run in cooperation with regulators, government and 
service providers could create a regulatory ‘safe 
sandbox space’ where stakeholders can become 
more comfortable with the technology and define 
how blockchain can be used for KYC and identity 
purposes, leading to greater social and economic 
impact.
While the self-sovereign identity platforms appear 
libertarian and paradigm-shifting, the ‘incorporative’ 
platforms developed by Disperse and WFP – which 
focus on improving the efficiency of administrative 
systems and internal processes – might offer a more 
imminent opportunity for the mobile industry and 
development community to start working with 
blockchain technologies. The platforms fit more 
neatly within existing institutional frameworks 
and processes, appear to be sustainable and 
scalable, and are less likely to feel ‘radical’ for the 
end beneficiary. With Building Blocks, for instance, refugees do not know that blockchain is being employed, and the way they manage their cash 
transfers remains completely unchanged. 
In general, it will likely be easier to introduce 
blockchain technologies that are designed to be 
private and permissioned as there is less risk and 
fewer unknowns, as all participants on the network are known to each other. However, there is some risk 
that permissioned blockchains will perpetuate the 
fragmentation of identity management and service 
delivery by keeping knowledge and data trapped 
in organisational silos. There is hope that the trust, 
transparency and security offered by blockchain will 
remove any remaining excuses organisations might 
have for avoiding collaboration and data-sharing, 
helping the sector move from an ‘organizational 
focus’ to an ‘issues focus’. Here, MNOs and the 
development sector could learn from the financial 
service industry. Since 2014, a consortium of over 
100 global financial institutions and regulators 
have been collaborating on blockchain-related 
initiatives through a software firm called R3. With 
support from over 2,000 technology, financial, and 
legal experts, these organisations have created 
a distributed ledger platform, called Corda, 
which is designed to automate legal agreements 
between partners and support interbank trading 
and settlements. R3 was born out of a common frustration amongst banks and other financial 
institutions with multiple generations of disparate 
legacy financial technology platforms that struggle 
to interoperate, causing inefficiencies, risk and 
spiralling costs
39.
Lastly, the success of the Disberse and WFP 
platforms indicate that the role operators play in 
the humanitarian and aid delivery spaces could soon be enhanced. Blockchain-enabled platforms 
that leverage mobile money services could provide 
a more convenient, cost-effective and transparent 
way for humanitarian organisations to transfer 
entitlements to refugees, and for donors to transfer 
project funds across international borders. The high 
uptake of mobile money services in developing 
markets – particularly among the segments 
of society which are targeted by development 
aid – suggests that operators should explore 
opportunities to link into and support these 
platforms. In doing so, they are likely to find new, 
exciting ways to support the delivery of aid, expand 
their customer base and generate new sources of 
revenue. 
39. For more information, see: https://www.r3.com/about/To download the full report please visit  
the GSMA website at www.gsma.com
GSMA HEAD OFFICEFloor 2The Walbrook Building25 WalbrookLondon EC4N 8AFUnited KingdomTel: +44 (0)20 7356 0600Fax: +44 (0)20 7356 0601
