 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process  of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper No. 81  
 
Capturing Gender and Class 
Inequities: The CCTVisation of  
Delhi  
 
AAYUSH RATHI & AMBIKA TANDON  
 
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute, SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/    
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................  2 
B. BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 3 
B1. FEMINIST SURVEILLANCE STUDIES  ................................ ................................ .................  3 
B2. PRIVACY AND THE GAZE THROUGH A CRITICAL FEMINIST LENS ................................ ............  4 
B3. DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  5 
B4. NEOLIBERAL GOVERNANCE AND URBAN PLANNING ................................ ..........................  6 
C. METHODOLOGY  ................................ ................................ ................................  7 
D. FINDINGS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  8 
D1.  PROCEDURAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ........................  8 
D2.  INSTRUMENTAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ...................  10 
D3.  RIGHTS -BASED DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ....................  13 
D4.  STRUCTURAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ .......................  15 
E. DISCUSSION AND CO NCLUSIONS  ................................ ................................ ...... 17 
E1. CONCLUSIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  18 
E2. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................  19 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  21 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 23 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 23 
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
1 
 Capturing Gender and Class Inequities:  
The CCTVisation of Delhi  
 
Aayush Rathi & Ambika Tandon1 
The Centre for Internet and Society (India)  
 
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Cityscapes across the global South, following historical trends in the North, are increasingly 
being littered by closed -circuit television (CCTV) cameras. In this  paper, we study the 
wholesale implementation of CCTV in New Delhi, a city notorious for incredibly high rates of 
crime against women. The push for CCTV, then, became one of many approaches explored 
by the state in making the city safer for women.  
 
In this  paper, we deconstruct this narrative of greater surveillance equating to greater safety 
by using empirical evidence to understand the subjective experience of surveilling and being 
surveilled. By focussing on gender and utilising work from feminist though t, we find that the 
experience of surveillance is intersectionally mediated along the axes of class and gender. 
The gaze of CCTV is cast upon those already marginalised to arrive at normative 
encumbrances placed by private, neoliberal interests on the urba n public space. The 
politicisation of CCTV has happened in this context, and continues unabated in the absence 
of any concerted policy apparatus regulating it. We frame our findings utilising an analytical 
data justice framework put forth by Heeks and Shek har (2019) . This  comprehensively sets 
out a social justice agenda that situates CCTV within the socio -political contexts that are 
intertwined in the development and implementation of the technology itself.  
 
  
                                                      
1 Authors are listed in alphabetical order.  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
The past decade has seen monume ntal growth in video -based surveillance systems across 
cities in the global South. Governments have invested in such systems for a variety of 
reasons, including anti -terrorism initiatives, general safety and security, and law and order 
(Firmino and Duarte,  2015). Surveillance of public spaces is also directed at providing 
security to women from harassment and violence, as can be seen in cities such as New Delhi 
that are grappling with high incidence of crime against women. Accordingly, the location for 
this research is New Delhi.  
 
Over the past decade, Delhi has developed a dense network of cameras. These are 
implemented and controlled by a complex network of both private and public actors, who 
share management, resources, and control over closed -circuit tel evision (CCTV) spread 
throughout the city. Private actors controlling the system include property -owning 
individuals, commercial establishments, and Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) and 
Market Welfare Associations (MWAs)2. Public stakeholders include t he Delhi government, 
which is currently in the process of fulfilling its election promise of providing each electoral 
constituency in the city with extensive CCTV coverage, the central government, the Delhi 
Police, the Public Works Department, the Delhi Me tro Railway Corporation and three 
municipal corporations.  
 
This paper contributes to the discussion on CCTV surveillance from the perspective of data 
justice, which assesses the ability of a data system to provide social justice to those it 
impacts. We int errogate the extent to which CCTV cameras support the achievement of 
justice, particularly from the perspective of women using public spaces. To do so, we adopt 
Heeks and Shekhar’s (2019) model of data justice which provides various dimensions to 
analyse d atafication initiatives.  
 
We also borrow concepts from feminist surveillance studies, which has been overtly political 
in critiquing the “heterosexual, heteronormative, and sexist male gaze” of surveillance of 
women and sexual minorities (Walby, 2005). In generating empirical evidence, we employ a 
feminist qualitative approach to question intersectional power dynamics and centre the 
embodiedness of data, safety, and privacy in the city. We align this with the framework of 
urban data justice to understand da tafication as being embedded within the social contexts 
in which the data systems are operationalised. Existing literature on feminist surveillance 
has underrepresented the experiences of women in the global South, while data justice has, 
so far, not direc tly engaged with feminist thought.  
 
One of the key research aims of the project, then, is to critically deconstruct this narrative of 
greater surveillance and visibility equating to greater safety by using empirical evidence to 
understand the subjective ex perience of being surveilled. This allows us to position CCTV 
cameras within the broader understanding of gendered access to  geographical space as well 
as rights and justice systems. These feed into interrogating the extent to which CCTV in 
                                                      
2 Resident Welfare Associa tions and Market Welfare Associations, as the names indicate, are elected non -
governmental bodies that respectively represent the interests of residents or businesses operating out of 
particular residential or commercial areas.  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
3 
 Delhi is design ed to enable accomplishment of the stated objectives of safety to women, 
especially those from informal settlements.  
 
The paper is structured as follows. The first section provides a background of the existing 
literature that the study will draw upon or ch allenge, largely within the fields of urban data 
justice, surveillance studies, and feminist surveillance studies. After briefly discussing the 
methodology, the findings from the research are presented using the five dimensional 
analytical framework develo ped by Heeks and Shekhar (2019). Finally, we conclude with 
some further discussion, and propose recommendations and future research questions that 
arise out of the present study.  
 
 
B. Background  
 
B1. Feminist Surveillance Studies  
 
A crucial aspect of this  paper is to advance an understanding of how, taken -for-granted as 
benign, surveillance technologies such as CCTV systems end up impacting already 
disenfranchised bodies. The dominant rationality of neutrality and objectivity that lend 
support to these tec hnological tools could be borne out of historical inequalities, or morph 
and challenge them. For instance, Ruha Benjamin has shown that new technologies are 
often thrust upon populations that have historically had to resist their imposition (Benjamin, 
2016 ). Browne (2010, 2015) draws nuanced linkages between the historical modalities of 
policing slaves and contemporary technologies of surveillance such as biometrics. 
Questioning the supposed neutrality of these technologies allows for an exposition of the 
power relations that give rise to and govern the use of these technologies.  
 
While not having been originally articulated in the context of ‘datafication’, a key theme 
utilised in feminist responses to surveillance borrows from feminist scholarship focusing  on 
the intersectional, not additive, ways in which power differentials are wedded into the 
social relations of domination and resistance (Crenshaw, 1989). Using a critical 
intersectional feminist approach allows for the unravelling of “what constitutes su rveillance, 
who is scrutinised, why and at what cost” (Dubrofsky and Magnet, 2015).  
 
Monahan's (2009) conceptualisation of the overlapping gendered dimensions of surveillance 
is a useful analytical framework to draw from as well. Monahan conceptualises tec hnology 
to mediate the reproduction and reinforcement of unequal power structures through: (a) 
body discrimination i.e. by privileging a certain type of person and rendering others as 
deviant, (b) context or use discrimination by reproducing already unequa l social structures, 
and (c) discrimination by abstraction i.e. by the reduction to data points that facilitates the 
control from distance ( ibid. ). In other words, a feminist approach to surveillance allows for 
the interrogation of what the mythologies are  that lend meaning to the technology in the 
first place.  
 
That being said, most studies assessing CCTV along the axis of gender indicate general 
support for CCTV among women as a measure of providing the experience of safety and Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
4 
 security (Koskela, 2002; Hu ey, 2010). This can be found in studies such as Hasija and 
Nagpal’s (2018), who in their survey of 250 young women in Delhi and their responses to 
CCTV found overwhelming support despite awareness of the risk of stalking and abuse and 
lack of clarity about  the identity of the surveiller or objectives of surveillance.  
 
Previous research assessing CCTV surveillance from a feminist lens has also highlighted the 
impact of subjectivities and power relations on the experience of video -based and other 
surveillance  systems. For instance, Wright et al. (2014), in their study on video -based 
surveillance within apartment buildings in Toronto, found that women tended to identify as 
the objects of surveillance rather than agents conducting the surveillance, even in priva te 
settings where residents have a certain level of control over surveillant infrastructure. They 
further found that women were more likely to express trust in the surveillance system if 
their objectives aligned with that of the surveillant authority.  
 
B2. Privacy and the Gaze through a Critical Feminist Lens  
 
In addition to state and private surveillance, feminist scholars have also had a long 
engagement with the subject of privacy and its relation to the male gaze, expanding on the 
notion of differentiate d rights. Adler -Bell (2018) argues that for marginalised communities, 
privacy in the form of “ungoverned” spaces has been historically inaccessible. The Fourth 
Amendment in the United States, for instance, defines privacy spatially - the “reasonable 
expect ation of privacy” is largely within the private space of the home ( ibid. ). This then 
implies that privacy as a right is contingent on property rights rather than being a universal 
right; something available only to those who can afford it. This leads to a stratified access to 
privacy, with groups living in informal settlements and the homeless having the least access 
to privacy (Gellman and Adler -Bell, 2017). One of the possible consequences of differential 
access to the right to privacy for different group s is the enforcement of normative 
boundaries in public spaces.  
 
This is also reflected in jurisprudence around privacy in the United States, where the 
Supreme Court has ruled that citizens should not expect privacy in public spaces, as the 
constitution doe s not prevent people from spying on each other in public (Firmino and 
Duarte, 2014). The conception of the right to privacy as only available in private spaces is 
contingent on the historical dichotomy between the two (public and private) kinds of 
spaces, which has been amply critiqued by feminist scholars. They critique the imposition of 
modesty and domestic isolation on middle and upper class women in India and other 
contexts as a result of the private/public divide, which has also led feminist writers to  
critique the notion of privacy itself (Allen, 2011). Feminists argue that framing the discourse 
of privacy as protectionist, including in the context of video -based surveillance, does not 
align with a rights -based approach that would aim to increase decis ional autonomy among 
women (Thomasen, 2018).  
 
In the context of India, Phadke et al. (2011) argue that the threat posed by public spaces to 
‘respectable’ women is constructed within middle class discourse as arising from lower class 
or Muslim men. In a thr ee year project on the use of urban public space in Mumbai, they 
find women internalised this discourse, identifying Muslim and lower class men as a source 
of anxiety and threat ( ibid. ). This then justifies placing the surveillant (protectionist) gaze on Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
5 
 middle class women and the surveillant (suspicious) gaze on lower class men - mediating 
access to public space for both.  
 
Khan (2018) argues that in urban Pakistan, women are put under the surveillant gazes of 
men and the paternalistic state as they enter p ublic spaces, with the attempt to provide 
women security by “inverting the male gaze onto itself”. This is a function of state 
surveillance also embodying characteristics of the male gaze, such that only particular types 
of “good women” are guaranteed prot ection - those who enter public space for legitimate 
purposes and have a character deemed “worthy of protection” (Khan, 2018).  
 
However, rights -based framings of privacy have also been critiqued by feminists for starting 
from the perspective of an individu alised subject with bargaining power (Allen, 2011). 
Individualisation has the potential to invisibilise the web of power and social relations which 
mediate decision -making for women across the global South, including about their own 
bodies (Weinberg, 2017) . 
 
Kovacs (2017), while critiquing surveillance through the lens of gender, invokes Lyon (2003) 
in arguing for a shift from the individual rights -based framing of privacy to that of social 
justice, since surveillance is a “structural” rather than “individu al” problem. This aligns well 
with the theorisation of data justice, the starting point for which is embedding data systems 
in their social context and web of power relations (Taylor, 2017).  
 
B3. Data Justice  
 
Where the discourse around CCTV surveillance, as with other data -driven systems, has been 
framed around tradeoffs between efficient security, privacy, and data protection (Dencik et 
al., 2016), data justice allows fo r factoring in the politics of data by squarely situating these 
data -driven systems within the social contexts in which they are embedded (Taylor, 2017).  
 
Recognising the shifts in the social contract that datafication is bringing about, Taylor (2017) 
utilises a ‘capabilities’ approach to bridge disparate conversations around data justice to 
carve out three pillars on which an international data justice approach could be premised: 
(in)visibility, (dis)engagement with technology and anti -discrimination. Taylor (2017) argues 
that these integrate the key negative and positive freedoms which are required by 
individuals for a fair engagement with data systems globally. For instance, along with the 
right to privacy, this would include the right to be represent ed, or to move out of the 
“surveillance gap” - which applies to individuals or groups who are excluded from databases 
depriving them of critical rights ranging from citizenship to welfare benefits (Gilman and 
Green, 2018).  
 
Heeks and Shekhar (2019) provide an overarching analytical framework to think through the 
different dimensions of data justice. As mentioned earlier, we use their model to situate our 
case study of CCTV systems in Delhi. They define data justice as having five dimensions, 
relating to data flows and results of the data system. The first dimension, that of procedural 
data justice, relates to the processes of data handling within the “information value chain”: 
the flow from data through information and decisio ns to actions and results. It indicates the 
level of inclusion across different points in the value chain, upstream (relating to data and Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
6 
 information) and downstream (relating to decisions and actions), which in turn indicates the 
distribution of those con tributing data and those who make decisions utilising that data. The 
second dimension relates to instrumental data justice, or fairness in the results of the data 
system. Rights -based data justice relates to the enforcement of the negative and positive 
rights outlined by Taylor’s (2017) framework, including representation and anti -
discrimination. Structural data justice pertains to the extent to which the ‘structure’, 
constituted by dominant actors and institutions, supports social justice in the functionin g of 
data systems. Finally, distributive data justice encompasses all of the categories detailed 
above, and relates to broader concerns of justice and equity (or lack thereof) that underpin 
data systems. Put simply, it is “the concern for who gets what as a result of data systems” 
(Heeks and Shekhar, 2019).  
 
B4. Neoliberal Governance and Urban Planning  
 
Data justice - particularly the structural dimension - concerns itself with the political 
economy of the data system, and the extent to which it is dictated  by, or challenges, power 
differentials. Recent work has noted the increasing privatisation of public spaces, reflected 
in practices of neoliberal governance and the discourse around data -driven ‘smart cities’ 
(Firmino and Duarte, 2015; Coletta et al., 201 8). A critical imperative within this discourse is 
projecting efficiency to attract investment by global capital (Firmino and Duarte, 2015). 
Phadke et al. (2011) argue that this imperative inherently conflicts with the rights of 
marginalised groups to equa lly access public spaces, as they get sanitised and 
commercialised. They go so far as to say that private spaces of consumption then 
“masquerade” as public spaces, welcoming only those with the “capacity to buy” ( ibid. ). 
 
This happens, in part, through pri vately funded surveillance systems that impose the 
normative boundaries on public spaces, set by private actors. Fyfe (2004) characterises 
public -private partnerships in the United Kingdom as a way of “justifying private control 
over public spaces”. He arg ues that private surveillance excludes those individuals that are 
considered deviant by the private actors that control the surveillance system ( ibid. ). 
Minnaar (2012), in an empirical study on growth of CCTV in South Africa, demonstrates that 
such growth can be mapped onto the parallel growth of gated neighbourhood enclosures. 
Gated residential enclosures have also sprung up all over New Delhi, and have been illegally 
encroaching on public spaces through the city (Govindarajan, 2016). Video -based 
surveilla nce in semi -private spaces such as gated residential areas then distributes security 
unequally (Huey, 2010), and could even reinforce caste and class relations by policing 
workers (Alkazi, 2015).  
 
Firmino and Duarte (2015) further argue that the public -private model of CCTV systems 
leads to “scattered networks of technologies and practices”, as opposed to acting like a 
centralised control system as has been projected in the discourse of urban planning. These 
are then understood to be locally contextualised and mediated, rather than entirely top -
down systems with perfect command -and-control centres. Despite such fragmentation, it 
has been argued that constant awareness as a risk management strategy has become an 
integral identifier of contemporary societies ( Giddens, 1990; Beck, 1992). As video -based 
surveillance systems move towards greater integration, penology moves away from 
problem diagnosis towards risk management ( ibid. ). An “actuarial” approach to managing Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
7 
 criminal activity at the aggregated level of e ntire populations is then seen to be taking hold 
(McCahill, 2002).  
 
 
C. Methodology  
 
The study takes a feminist approach to qualitative methods. Drawing on Wickramas inghe’s 
(2009) conception of feminist epistemology of knowledge in the global South, we con ducted 
semi -structured, in -depth interviews to bring out lived experiences of surveillance among 
different stakeholders, with a focus on women living in informal settlements in Delhi. Other 
stakeholders were interviewed to surface the social relations in w hich the surveillance 
system is embedded. We interviewed six categories of stakeholders, listed in Table 1. 
Interviews also allowed us to glean perspectives of different stakeholders to interrogate 
dominant, alternative, and counter narratives around video -based surveillance and privacy, 
and integrate these into a theoretical framework of urban data justice.  
 
We employed purposive sampling, aiming to gather perspectives from across key 
stakeholders engaged in and affected by video -based surveillance of publ ic spaces in New 
Delhi. We employed the snowballing technique within purposive sampling for law 
enforcement and government officials, and attempted to diversify civilian respondents by 
class.  
 
In addition to the interviews, some observational and anecdotal  evidence was also collected 
during the course of the fieldwork, by observing meetings between stakeholders. Finally, we 
also sent in Right to Information requests to the Delhi Police inquiring about budgetary 
allocations to cameras and drones under progra mmes that aim to ensure safety for women.  
 
Stakeholder Group  No. of Respondents  
Women using public spaces  15 
Delhi Police  11 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation/Central 
Industrial Security Force  4 
Resident Welfare Association  7  
Commercial Establishments  8 
Government Officials (Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, Public Works Department, 
New Delhi Municipal Council, civil servants)  5 
Total  50 
 
 Table 1: Stakeholders Interviewed  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
8 
 D. Findings  
 
D1. Procedural Data Justice  
 
Fragmentation and function creep  
 
Several differing motivations and functions behind investment into video -based surveillance 
by the police and state emerged during the course of our research. This has implications for 
the manner in which data flows are structured and data handling processes are designed. 
While it is unclear precisely when and what the motivations were behind the initial uptake 
of CCTV installation in Delhi, one of our respondents from law enforcement suggested that 
initial installations were rolled out in t he course of preparations for New Delhi hosting the 
2010 Commonwealth Games.3 This is in consonance with other efforts to commercialise the 
city and make it appear worthy of investment including slum demolition and the growth of 
surveillance systems with c ommercial interests (something seen in other cities in the global 
South (Minnaar, 2012)).  
 
The well -publicised push for CCTV installation in Delhi commenced as a response to the 
country -wide protests following the multi -perpetrator rape of a young female i n New Delhi 
in 2012. A sizeable corpus of INR 6.6 billion (c.USD 96.5 million) earmarked for th is purpose - 
the Nirbhaya Fund - was set up by the central government in the immediate aftermath of 
the rape. The installation of CCTV formed a part of technolog ical solutions that were to play 
a key role in making cities safer for women (Ministry of Women and Child Development, 
n.d.). From 2010 until February 2018, about 5,000 CCTV cameras were installed by the Delhi 
Police. However, as indicated by the respon ses to our Right to Information application to 
the Delhi Police, none of them have been installed under the Nirbhaya Fund. Moreover, an 
interview with an official of the nodal ministry for the corpus indicated that the ministry’s 
outlook now was that CCTV systems are not to be funded out of the corpus as they were 
ineffective in enhancing safety - at least in the ministry’s articulation of safety - and were 
more effective for the purposes of investigation.  
 
What has also emerged is a fragmented yet organise d matrix of CCTV systems used to 
surveil over public spaces and perform undefined roles, as theorised by Firmino and Duarte 
(2015) previously. This then leads to the utilisation of CCTV for purposes that are 
determined on an ad hoc  needs basis. For instanc e, while CCTV systems have been installed 
primarily to increase safety for women in public spaces, the police unit that is specifically 
designed to address crimes relating to women and children had no role to play in the 
implementation or monitoring of suc h systems. In a similar vein, the implementation of 
CCTV cameras by the metro corporation was initially meant to aid in operational and crowd 
control objectives, and the utilisation of CCTV cameras for security purposes then became a 
by-product. Meanwhile,  the objectives behind installation of a CCTV camera system by the 
municipal council in its jurisdiction was intended for maintenance of public order, not 
criminal activity as such.  
 
                                                      
3 The respondent also sugges ted that most of the cameras installed back in 2010 while preparing for the 
Commonwealth Games are probably dysfunctional now and need to be replaced.  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
9 
 Another way in which contradicting purposes behind CCTV installations eme rge is by 
observing the provisioning of signage, if any, designed to indicate ongoing surveillance. 
Simply put, law enforcement officials described two aims behind placing visible signage 
accompanying CCTV cameras, (a) crime deterrence, and (b) making thos e under the 
camera’s gaze feel safer by knowing they are being watched. On the other hand, covert 
surveillance, i.e. CCTV installations without any indication of such installation, aims to watch 
without the knowledge of the person being watched, which then  has detection of crime as 
its primary motive. The two sets of objectives come into conflict, and are often adopted on 
an ad hoc  basis.  
 
For example, in a busy marketplace in Delhi, widespread CCTV installations by the MWA in 
this public spot were accompan ied by regular announcements on the public address system 
informing those in the marketplace of being under surveillance. A law enforcement official 
posted at the marketplace, then, also indicated that CCTV cameras were intended to deter 
crime and for post -facto investigation. Within the same marketplace, however, several 
commercial establishments that we spoke to indicated that while they had initially installed 
cameras as an “insurance” against crime, a key purpose that they served now was to 
monitor stoc k as well as employees - or managerial surveillance, in other words. These 
commercial establishments either did not have any signage or the few that did opined that 
the signage was a relic from when they had initially installed the cameras, and that it ser ved 
“no real purpose”. For the commercial establishments especially, the symbolic deterrent 
effec t of CCTV cameras (Hempel and T öpfer, 2004), then, is significantly diluted owing to an 
array of reasons: irregular monitoring, informational overkill, and the  inertia within law 
enforcement.  
 
The selective use of signage could additionally contribute to an information asymmetry 
between the implementers of CCTV cameras and those being surveilled. This argument is 
substantiated further in the next subsection.  
 
Access to information  
 
We found that a number of women were unaware of the existence of cameras installed or 
governed by law enforcement, except in places where cameras are very visible, such as in 
metro stations. A few interviewees expressed discomfort with  the topic of conversation due 
to their perception of low levels of knowledge regarding CCTV cameras, and some women 
who were approached even refused to interview, citing their lack of any knowledge. None of 
the interviewees were aware of the extent or loc ations of camera coverage, the identity of 
surveilling authorities, or the demarcation between private and public systems - even if they 
were aware of the general existence of CCTV cameras. This information asymmetry was 
explicitly endorsed by some of our respondents within the Delhi Police, as they understood 
the purpose of CCTV surveillance to primarily be of crime detection. This, according to them, 
then mandates the least level of information dispersion, as surveillance was understood to 
be a covert act ivity to be performed without the knowledge of the watched.  
 
In most cases, however, this did not erode trust in the system, as the general awareness of 
cameras operated by law enforcement made women feel safer, especially in isolated areas. 
This is in con trast to Koskela’s (2002) interviewees, whose trust in the system was Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
10 
 significantly eroded by lack of knowledge regarding the identity and location of the 
surveillers. This could partly be attributed to the perceived lack of capacity and 
approachability of , and therefore trust in, the Delhi Police. Women across locations and 
classes, with a few exceptions, expressed the inadequacy of the Delhi Police in responding 
to crimes against women. By and large, women who expressed distrust in the police also 
express ed increased trust in technological systems, perceiving them as unbiased and 
dispassionate observers.  
 
To regulate or not to regulate  
 
Delhi’s CCTV project has stemmed from a drive towards crime control that is governed 
through coalitions between locally s ituated police, retailers, private citizenry and hyper -local 
governing institutions. What is emergent then is “scattered networks” (Firmino and Duarte, 
2015). This has significant repercussions for the manner in which data is handled and the 
kinds of voice s that become dominant in decision -making processes. Over the last 2 years, 
there have been calls from voices, albeit solitary, within the state machinery to have 
standard operating procedures in place that govern the installation of CCTV cameras 
(Barman, 2018). In the absence of any governing legislation speaking to the installation of 
CCTV cameras specifically, or data protection broadly, untethered power is being granted to 
both state and non -state actors without any accountability mechanism in place.  
 
It was in this backdrop that a draft version of the “Delhi Rules for Regulation of CCTV 
Camera Systems in NCT [ National Capital Territory ] of Delhi, 2018” (CCTV Rules hereafter) 
were released. While the CCTV Rules still do not have the force of law, members  of one 
RWA that we interviewed stated that the CCTV Rules make the CCTV installations legal and 
are being utilised to support further installation drives. The CCTV Rules seek to regulate the 
installation and use of CCTV cameras in public spaces in Delhi. The CCTV Rules do have some 
useful stipulations, such as somewhat limiting the purposes for which the information 
recorded is used, mandating signage indicating ongoing surveillance, and also on the 
utilisation of open technical standards. However, they fa ll short on several counts. For one, 
they treat the information recorded as belonging to the owner of the system with the right 
to access the information provided only to “authorised persons”. It is unclear who such 
authorised persons are. Further, they pa y performative obeisance to incorporating privacy 
protections when they state that “the camera shall be located at such place so that it shall 
not collect information which invades the privacy of an individual” (Government of Delhi, 
2018). These stipulatio ns read together encode an understanding of privacy as a condition 
that individuals occupying public spaces do not have a claim to. It is evident that a primary 
objective here is of according significantly enhanced law enforcement control to, knowledge 
of, and access to all CCTV installations “collecting information from a public space” ( ibid. ). 
 
D2. Instrumental Data Justice  
 
Security for whom?  
 
The Delhi Police had installed 5,000 cameras across the city as of February 2018. A majority 
of its network come s from a public -private model of collaboration, called the ‘Nigehbaan’ 
scheme. This allows the Delhi Police to access another 175,000 cameras across the city. This Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
11 
 network includes cameras installed by private individuals or groups, including individual 
residents, businesses, wealthier RWAs and MWAs. An overwhelming majority of CCTV 
cameras in Delhi are thus implemented and controlled by private stakeholders. As has been 
pointed out in other cities across the global North and South, the privatisation of sec urity in 
public spaces inevitably results in unequal access to security for different groups (Huey, 
2010). This also brings into question data ownership, as it is very likely that the individuals 
being recorded would not even have ready access to the foota ge, or any procedures in place 
in order to do so.  
 
Access to public space itself becomes unequal, as privately funded security systems privilege 
the interests of the landed class or those with commercial capital and discriminate against 
lower caste and class groups entering those spaces (Alkazi, 2015). The interests of those 
who own surveillance systems often come into conflict with interests of those without 
access to resources and capital to perform surveillance - posing challenges to rights to 
access and ownership of data and data systems. This surveillance system can then be seen 
as a concrete reproduction of the ‘suspicious gaze’, extending here to all workers entering 
gated residential areas and other privately surveilled public spaces (Phadke et al ., 2011).  
 
Such conflicts emerged during a meeting we observed between residents of a gated 
residential area with local police officials in the south of New Delhi. Residents raised several 
questions demanding the implementation of CCTV, which they were tol d has been taken 
care of by the RWA. Law enforcement and residents then discussed security issues in the 
area, largely seen as arising from the entry of workers such as private security personnel, 
cab drivers and domestic workers within the gated community . Both residents and law 
enforcement discursively positioned workers as potential criminals to be controlled through 
surveillance systems. It is in such a context that CCTV systems are being introduced into the 
gated area, including those being funded by t he Delhi government. The privatisation of data 
and data systems then inevitably creates the conditions for distributive injustice, as data is 
extracted from lower class workers and benefits accrue to upper or middle class employers.  
 
Simultaneously, we fou nd that poorer sections of the urban landscape, such as slum camps - 
even those that are legally recognised by the state - were found to be existing in the 
surveillance gap (Gilman and Green, 2018). With no CCTV installations provided either by 
law enforce ment or the state, these areas were curiously outside of the growing 
ubiquitousness of CCTV -based surveillance systems. This was consistent with the non -
recognition of their requirement for basic amenities such as water drainage and pothole -
free lanes. Con trast this with the experience of affluent gated communities where not only 
is there a web of privately installed CCTV cameras, but also funding and infrastructural 
support by the state for further installations. This leads to the structural invisibilisati on of 
vulnerable groups with very little political voice.  
 
Akin to how surveillance is utilised to reproduce power dynamics, the surveillance gap can 
be similarly utilised as a tool to exert social control ( ibid. ). While the “gap” is not something 
that is de facto intended to be bridged, our respondents expressed a strong preference for 
the installation of at least some CCTV cameras at the entry and exit points as a crime -
deterrent tool in the absence of a responsive and approachable law enforcement 
mechani sm. This lends further credence to the feminist understanding of privacy as having a Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
12 
 deeply contextual meaning, instead of implying the complete rejection of surveillance 
systems.  
 
Conflicting expectations and objectives  
 
This section deals with conflictin g expectations within women respondents and law 
enforcement, which indicate different results of surveillance for different groups.  
There emerged several fault lines, along the lines of caste, region, and class, within women 
respondents using public spaces . A small subset of women respondents, largely those who 
identified as middle class, advocated for CCTV cameras covering residential areas in which 
they lived. They expressed the need to monitor entry and exit points into gated residential 
spaces, and to r egulate the movement of outsiders into what were perceived as private 
zones. These outsiders mostly constituted other marginalised groups, including working 
class men, male migrant workers from other states or neighbouring countries, and sex 
workers. This corroborates Phadke et al.’s (2011) conception of the dominant narrative of 
working class men being constructed as one of the primary threats to middle class women 
as they use public spaces, justifying the use of surveillance mechanisms to police both 
grou ps. Further, as corroborated by Wright et al. (2014), groups such as sex workers and 
beggars are at greater risk of persecution as they regularly perform solicitation on the street 
which either (a) heightens visibility in public spaces or (b) is criminalis ed when performed in 
public.  
 
Fault lines between the objectives of civilian women respondents and surveilling authorities 
also emerged in several cases. Most women respondents argued that CCTV fulfilled either or 
both of two purposes – prevention and inve stigation. However, all our interviews with law 
enforcement indicated that there is little to no crime prevention, including sexual 
harassment and violence, that they have experienced or expect to experience in the future - 
at least while systems continue to be fragmented. In addition, women respondents also 
expected constant real -time monitoring in places where cameras had been installed, which 
is not the case across state and privately controlled systems. The perceived trade off being 
made by respondents between security and privacy in urban public spaces is then made in 
the context of limited information dispersion. This then leads to expectations of constant 
surveillance from a system that is excessively fragmented.  
 
Fault lines were also found in specif ic use cases. We found that tracking missing persons is a 
regular function of the Delhi Metro surveillance system, which includes women or men who 
have run away from home. Maintaining the autonomy of the “missing persons” then lies at 
the discretion of the  officers handling their case – as one respondent told us, they don’t do 
anything “unethical” and therefore turn back husbands who are stalking their wives, but do 
help with cases of runaway persons whose parents report them as missing. That these fault 
lines appear along the axis of gender very frequently can also be found in other cases - such 
as in Orissa, when a camera that was installed to protect women against violence had to be 
removed after protests from women who did not want to be watched while ba thing (PTI, 
2012). These cases illustrate that the objectives and zones of protection determined by 
those in authority and those of the beneficiaries do not always overlap.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
13 
 The conflicts then bring out contradictions in surveillance systems that are aimed  at both 
control and care, demanding the balancing of the right to privacy against physical security 
(Taylor, 2017). Wright et al. (2014) describe this conflict as the extent to which “visibility 
threatens or provides safety”. Reading the concept of the ma le gaze along with Monahan’s 
(2009) understanding of context/use discrimination is relevant here. Read together, they 
speak to the masculinised and distanced monitoring of the feminine body and feminised 
spaces. As Monahan ( ibid. ) argues, “when social cont exts are already marked by sexist 
relations, then surveillance (and other) technologies tend to amplify those tensions and 
inequalities”. The case of the surveillant gaze and the voyeuristic gaze are, in this case, 
overlapping to disadvantage either partic ular groups across contexts (couples getting 
intimate), or all women in a particular zone of surveillance (on the beaches of Puri). The 
latter can be addressed through the principle of engagement with technology ( ibid. ) within 
the principles of data justic e, which enables selective use of technology, and could then be 
mobilised to reject surveillance in certain public zones.  
 
D3. Rights -Based Data Justice  
 
Privacy and the surveillant male gaze  
 
We found women respondents prioritising the right to be represe nted in video -based 
surveillance systems over their right to privacy, displaying very high levels of support for 
CCTV systems. This then implies that the CCTV system in the city provides rights -based data 
justice, in the trade -off between security and priv acy. As in Hasija and Nagpal’s (2018) study, 
women overwhelmingly chose the right to be represented in the surveillance systems with 
the perceived benefit of security.  Unlike Hasija and Nagpal’s study however, we did not find 
evidence of women feeling at risk of stalking or violations of privacy. We further found that 
respondents who supported video -based surveillance also felt that current levels of 
coverage in the city were low, advocating for further coverage of isolated or lonely roads in 
particular.  
 
Respondents across the various stakeholders we interviewed indicated their understanding 
of privacy as confined to private spaces, which were amorphously defined. Individual police 
officials define the private zone based on their subjective understandings of privacy. One of 
our respondents from the Delhi Police, for instance, conceptualised private zones as any 
area inside one’s home that is not visible from the street. It then appears that being 
constantly monitored and recorded is inevitable for those who  do not have access to private 
property, limiting rights to disengage with technology. It was striking that it was only in the 
context in which privacy in public spaces was brought up by a law enforcement official in 
our interviews was when referring to ar eas that house senior government officials and those 
with political power, described as “VIPs”. A senior Delhi Police official revealed that the 
provision of safety to VIPs could even be through the temporary installation of cameras on 
routes being used by  such persons, which are then removed to protect the privacy of 
permanent residents in these areas which typically house a host of high -level politicians and 
government officials. The right to disengage from surveillance systems, a critical data right 
(Tay lor, 2017), was only  accessible to publicly elected officials and government officials at 
the very top of the hierarchy.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
14 
 Women using public spaces affirmed the dominant discourse of privacy and public spaces 
being in completely separate domains, with priv acy only to be sought and protected in the 
spatial understanding of the private domain. The lack of a conception of privacy in public 
spaces reiterates the gradations in access to the right to privacy outlined by feminists, 
through its contingency on a str ict dichotomy between private and public spaces (Allen, 
2011; Adler -Bell, 2018). The publicness of a space then justified, and even demanded, the 
presence of the surveillant gaze of law enforcement. The gaze is then aimed at sanitising 
public spaces of pot entially dangerous elements, who could cause disruption to public order 
(Walby, 2005).  
 
When asked whether they considered the leaking of footage of couples getting intimate in 
metro trains as a harm of CCTV -based surveillance, most women civilian respondents, with 
the exception of two, did not perceive this to be a privacy violation and blamed the couples 
for getting intimate in a public space. In a similar vein, Phadke et al. (2011) finds in her study 
that the discourse of privacy has been used to  persecute couples for acts such as holding 
hands in public spaces, through the discourse of obscenity. Obscenity then overwhelms the 
privacy violation in the public imagination, with several respondents arguing that being 
intimate in a public space such a s a metro, which has families and children, is against 
cultural norms of propriety in public spaces. This also points to the notion that expectations 
of privacy are hyperlocal and specific to the norms of a particular space.  
 
Video surveillance in this cas e is used to enforce cultural behavioural norms by punishing 
deviance with not only the violation of privacy, but the removal of the expectation of 
privacy at all. This manifestation of privacy is very similar to Allen’s (2011) notion of 
unpopular privacy - as an argument against autonomy.  
 
Contrary to this, two women raised distinct objections to the leaking of footage of couples 
on the metro. One argued that such incidents are “disgusting” and “amount to the misuse of 
the public”, particularly because the  official monitoring the footage is “watching porn and 
gaining entertainment...they make a video of it and upload”. The respondent raises a 
specific concern about the voyeuristic gaze of the surveillant authority, which brings 
disproportionate attention on  women in public - including particular categories of 
vulnerability such as “breastfeeding women”.  
 
The second argument against data leaks, made by a respondent who described herself as 
being a recent entrant into public spaces without male companionship, supported increased 
protections against leakage “especially because people don’t have knowledge of these 
things, and are very often not educated or aware”. Lack of awareness could stem from poor 
access to information, barriers such as signs indicating the presence of cameras being in an 
unfamiliar language, or general unfamiliarity with public spaces due to barriers to access. It 
can be seen that categories such as women with unequal access to public space, 
undereducated groups, and migrants then simultaneo usly face higher risks of privacy 
violation (Adler -Bell, 2018) and/or have fewer resources or awareness to deal with such 
violation. This could then pose a threat to rights -based data justice as certain groups are 
overrepresented in the leaked data, and pr ocedural data justice, as those groups are left out 
of the value -chain of information flows.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
15 
 Criminalisation and the panoptic gaze  
 
In our interviews with Delhi Police in Central Delhi, the part of the city with the maximum 
concentration of government off ices and other state agencies, and also therefore of public 
demonstrations, we found protest gatherings to be one of the key sites of surveillance. 
Officials from control rooms that perform the surveillance revealed that some of the fish -
eye cameras have b een recently acquired and are only deployed in key locations - which 
includes the locations where political protests and public demonstrations are organised. The 
heightened surveillance at sites of public demonstrations are in a context where protesters 
can be detained or arrested for performing demonstrations as it constitutes a breach of 
public order, among other concerns (Delhi Police, 2019). Targeted surveillance at sites that 
have been demarcated for public demonstrations by law enforcement are an addi tional 
measure of control, in addition to prior permissions from law enforcement to stage such 
demonstrations. Taken together with instances of illegal detention, heightened surveillance 
adds to a context of constraints placed upon the right to freedom of assembly in the city.  
 
This can be seen as an instance of a larger shift in how risk assessment and criminalisation is 
increasingly being thought of by law enforcement, with the imagination of heightened 
surveillance technology. Respondents involved in the  implementation of CCTV systems 
expressed intentions to integrate other technologies in the ‘ideal’ security solution. 
Technologies such as facial recognition and video analytics were frequently suggested. One 
proposed implementation of facial recognition was of metro users at station entry and exit 
points. Among other functions, this could be used to expedite entry and exit from metro 
stations of certain categories of individuals such as government employees. The data of 
these individuals would be stored i n a database against which the facial recognition 
software would cross -check the legitimacy of those seeking to enter or exit through this 
system. Another proposed implementation was for images of ‘suspects’ at metro stations to 
be searched in real -time ag ainst a database that already had stored images. Such 
‘searchability’ in CCTV footage is also being desired nationally (NCRB, n.d.). 
 
What these imaginations bring forth is the objective of CCTV -based systems to provide more 
than the raw data observed, and  move towards the actuarial approach to crime 
management (McCahill, 2002). If implemented, these will have a profound impact on how 
CCTV systems are utilised, given that the data justice implications of these newer 
technologies such as facial recognition a nd artificial intelligence are only just starting to be 
understood by civil society. CCTV in and of itself, then, is also seen as a weak surveillance 
tool, whose integration with computer -based systems with sophisticated data processing 
power is crucial to  then exercise more intensive surveillance (Lyon, 2001).  
 
D4. Structural Data Justice  
 
“At least then they will believe us”  
 
Most participants from lower socioeconomic backgrounds had direct or secondary 
experiences of the Delhi Police as unresponsive to t heir needs or even violent. Poor women 
expressed very low levels of trust, with statements such as “the police is not meant for poor 
people, it is only meant for the rich”. Several instances of such unresponsiveness were Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
16 
 detailed through interviews, includ ing cases where the police took a response time of 
several days, delayed investigations, or even refused to investigate. One group of 
participants, selling goods close to a busy thoroughfare in Central Delhi, spoke about 
routinely facing violence from the police, and regularly getting taken to police stations for 
thefts that they did not commit. They believed themselves to be easy scapegoats during 
police investigations, due to their constant physical presence in public areas. Poor women 
felt a fear of unre sponsiveness or violence in their interactions with law enforcement, in 
addition to their fear of harassment or violence from men in public spaces. They partly 
ascribed their persecution by law enforcement to their constant presence in public spaces, 
as th ey operated in public every day to earn their livelihoods.  
 
Due to the historical experience of suspicion that the police displayed towards them, they 
felt that cameras in public spaces would allow them to provide incontrovertible evidence of 
either cases where they were complainants, or prove their innocence in cases where they 
have been falsely accused. One group of women also expressed that it might help them to 
carry investigations through, as the police personnel usually take four to five days to 
respo nd to complaints by which time witnesses may no longer be available. In all of these 
instances, the presence of a camera could provide or improve access to justice and legal 
recourse for citizens and communities who currently feel excluded from such system s. 
 
However, several participants challenged this reading of the camera, and reiterated that it is 
merely an object embedded in the social context, rather than a free floating tool to be used 
for the benefit of the aggrieved. They were thus sceptical of th e extent to which CCTV could 
enhance access to justice, without responsive officers carrying out investigations on the 
basis of that footage. This indicates that increased access to legal redressal through video 
surveillance is contingent on rights -based j ustice within broader social structures - it is 
critical for citizens to have access to legal systems and data flows for this potential to 
materialise.  
 
Turning the gaze inwards  
 
Several respondents from among law enforcement and government officials spoke  about 
initiatives to provide CCTV coverage to public offices, such as police stations, civil servants’ 
offices, and Public Works Department’s offices. This is following a Supreme Court order in 
2014 to install CCTV across police stations in the city, and has been explicitly identified as a 
move to prevent violence against women in police stations (Express News Service, 2019).  
 
Three objectives emerged behind the coverage of police stations and other government 
offices in our interviews with law enforcement  and government officials. One, providing 
officials protection from false complaints. In particular, police officials spoke about 
protecting themselves against false allegations of violence, while government officials spoke 
about false allegations of commi tting atrocities against Scheduled Castes and Tribes, or of 
sexual harassment in case of male officers. Two, increasing accountability to the public, by 
treating government offices as public spaces to be monitored and held accountable to 
citizens. Three, m anagerial surveillance, with monitoring of their own stations as well as 
through centralised monitoring of several stations in one control room. Each of these 
objectives could potentially contribute towards making policing systems and government Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
17 
 functionin g more transparent and accountable to citizens, as their actions are made visible 
to the public and to each other. This requires greater emphasis on procedural aspects of 
data flows, with the inclusion of police officials upstream, and the inclusion of cit izens 
downstream in the information value chain.  
 
The configuration of the infrastructure of the monitoring system determines its contribution 
towards enabling accountability and transparency and ultimately, structural justice in the 
results of surveillanc e systems. In police stations, screens could either be placed in public 
areas such as reception rooms and/or in the offices of senior officials. We found some 
stations where screens were monitored and controlled only by senior officials, which could 
exacer bate power inequalities. During a field visit, for instance, we found that public 
demonstrators were told by beat officers that they would have to appear harsh in their 
behaviour since they were under surveillance from another station. On the other hand, a  
senior bureaucrat said that she uses CCTV cameras to ensure that each officer across 
departments is treating visitors properly. CCTV could then act as a tool to alleviate power 
inequalities between citizens and government and law enforcement, by making ea ch 
stakeholder visible to the other. This is not the case in monitoring systems that prioritise 
upstream data  flows (from citizens to state) over downstream ones (from state to citizens), 
posing barriers to data -just systems (Heeks and Shekhar, 2019).  
 
 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
The design of contemporary urban spaces has been dominated by increasing concerns 
around securitisation. Achieving and maintaining these imaginations requires the reinforcing 
of implicit hierarchies, and by extension, exclusio ns, in public space. One way in which these 
have manifested is through geo -spatial segregations that are privately controlled. Indeed, 
the idea of the public itself has been constructed to value some social groups over others, 
with access to public space b eing made differentially available. That the urban public space 
itself is the medium as well as the outcome of social practices is abundantly clear. Exclusion 
and intolerance, and their conflation with safety and security, get negotiated and co -
produced wi th others occupying the public space.  
 
CCTV systems have proliferated remarkably in Delhi in the last few years, and continue to 
grow at remarkable levels even as this paper is being published. While there is a care motif 
at play here, it also showcases ho w disciplining functions co -evolve (see Lyon, 1994). Our 
findings indicate that the panoptic gaze is not a homogenous power exercised only by the 
surveiller, but is multifarious and intermingling. For example, one finding in this research is 
that the gaze of the panopticon is turned on itself, as both public servants and the public are 
both now within the gaze.  
 
The disciplining power of the gaze also manifests in the internalisation of modesty ideals by 
women themselves, as women respondents in our street interviews indicated having 
internalised the absence of rights such as privacy that may be reasonably afforded in public 
spaces. The equating of increasing CCTV with increasing women’s safety then indicates a 
contradiction in the shifting of the gender ide ologies in public spaces, with women now 
required to be making themselves hypervisible in exchange for security guarantees from the Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
18 
 masculinised state. Visibility, then, is made to be a prerequisite to security. Moreover, 
women respondents in the study inv ariably identified as objects of surveillance rather than 
subjects, consistent with research on CCTV surveillance elsewhere (Wright et al., 2014). This 
is reflected in the lack of female representation among those planning and executing 
surveillance system s, even among those designed specifically to combat violence against 
women.  
 
E1. Conclusions  
 
The theoretical focus of work on CCTV systems has focussed on it at a post -installation 
stage, on its operation. Such a view leads to the dehumanising of video -based surveillance 
whereas the material realities unsurprisingly indicate the centrality of human engagement 
at every stage of implementation and operation. Re -centring the ‘human element’ allows 
for work around data justice to understand technological devel opments in light of larger, 
historical forms of structural and institutional oppression. We utilise this framework, 
particularly the model of data justice developed by Heeks and Shekhar (2019), to study the 
implementation of CCTV systems in New Delhi and t he social context in which those systems 
are embedded. Further, explicitly attending to questions around gender, while incorporating 
methodological and epistemic innovations put forth in feminist thought, allows for the 
exposition of a social justice agend a. In doing so, we were able to centre the power 
relationships that underpin surveillance.  
 
Within the dimension of procedural data justice, or justice in handling data systems, we 
interrogated the motivations and interests of those who control CCTV system s in Delhi. We 
found objectives devised by civilians, the state, and law enforcement to be mutable, and at 
times contradictory. The provision of signage, or lack thereof, was found to be indicative of 
different theories of change behind CCTV installation. Responses addressing the uses of 
CCTV were usually wide ranging: pre -emptive behavioural change, and/or post -facto 
evidence of crime, and/or performative security. The objective for the state, at times, was 
to protect commercial interests, also at odds wit h the propagated public narrative that 
makes CCTV crucial in enhancing women’s safety in public spaces. This could arise from the 
lack of representation of marginalised interests at the procedural stage of the system, with 
implementation being largely cont rolled by private actors, law enforcement, or the state.  
 
Results of the system, or instrumental data justice, w ere found to be critically dependent on 
the harms or benefits of visibility to the state. Thus, while most middle class women 
supported CCTV sy stems for enhancing their safety, most women from informal settlements 
found it useful to prove their innocence in cases of false accusations or when officials 
refused to believe their complaints. Women performing activities in public spaces that 
heightene d visibility while also inviting public censure or disrupting public order, such as sex 
workers, were found to be accruing the harms of the voyeuristic and controlling gaze of the 
state and others using public spaces.  
 
Within the dimension of rights -based data justice, a key right that we focus on is that of 
privacy within public spaces. Our findings indicate a deeply contextual articulation of 
privacy. Inherent in the articulation is an internalisation of a strict separation between what 
constitutes a publ ic or private space with privacy only to be expected in the latter. This, Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
19 
 along with belief in the efficacy of CCTV in aiding greater security and safety, also provides 
the fuel for the articulation of greater CCTV coverage by the supposed beneficiaries of  CCTV 
installation. However, contradictions emerge as this trade -off between privacy and security 
is made in an information -scarce environment, often intentionally designed as such by 
surveillers. The other key right we assessed was the right to be represe nted, which was 
unfulfilled for Informal settlements as they were found to be in the ‘surveillance gap’ 
despite wanting CCTV systems to deal with unresponsive law enforcement officials.  
 
Finally, structural data justice, or the extent to which powerful ins titutions and individuals 
support the interests of equality and justice within data systems. We found that regardless 
of objectives and expectations of different stakeholders, the actual usage of CCTV systems is 
hyperlocal and determined by power relations , social norms, and institutional structures in 
the particular space in which it operates. This is also applicable to CCTV cameras that are 
placed upon law enforcement and government officials, which aim at turning the gaze of 
the state onto itself but can  only succeed in doing so if upstream and downstream data 
flows are given equal attention.  
 
E2. Recommendations  
 
Given the multiplicity of actors that are engaged in the unrolling of Delhi’s CCTVisation, as 
well as the breadth of intended beneficiaries, several conflicts emerge in how these systems 
are designed, who they are designed for, and what benefits and harms subsequently 
emerge. Such conflicts can be addressed through wide public consultations with different 
stakeholders, including non -governmenta l and civil society organisations working on 
women’s rights, gender, urban planning, and the right to privacy, in addition to RWAs and 
MWAs (Goswami, 2018).  
 
A recommendation that holds true for all datafication programmes in India that are at 
various stag es of implementation is for the crafting of policy that ensures robust 
transparency and accountability measures are institutionalised. This is especially critical in 
the absence of any comprehensive data protection law. At the same time, there is a dire 
need for processes that mandate mechanisms of appraisal regarding the utility and 
subsequent appraisal of these datafication initiatives. This is glaring in the present case of 
CCTV, where it is effectively the mythology of the technology that is garnering t he political 
support for increased demarcation of public funds towards the CCTV project.  
 
The lack of any concerted approach towards the roll out of the CCTV programme has also 
led to potentially debilitating consequences owing to the ad hoc  determination of use -cases 
by departments within government and law enforcement tasked with the mandate to 
implement CCTV. The case of the police unit that has been carved out to address crimes 
relating to women and children having no engagement with CCTV is telling. Th is is especially 
curious given the equating of more CCTV with enhanced women’s safety, as well as a 
scenario where uptake of CCTV is being ensured in every police station in the city. Whether 
any internal processes govern this inter -departmental work alloc ation vis -a-vis CCTV is 
unclear, and in any case, opaque.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
20 
 Future research agenda  
 
An immediate research agenda is to better understand the implications of the ‘newer’ 
technologies creating big data systems such as facial recognition software and artificia l 
intelligence applications for which use -cases are being cultivated in datafication 
programmes being spearheaded by the state. The political economy around these moves is 
as yet understudied, and urgent work is required to pre -empt some of the distinct wa ys in 
which the governance of society and the data justice potential of systems could be 
impacted. As these make their way into the delivery of welfare systems in the global South, 
what datafication programmes entail for contemporary understandings of the social 
contract, participation in a democratic society and for citizenship itself are more overarching 
questions that require urgent addressing.  
 
Any data justice project explicitly occupies the realm of governance, making it a worthwhile 
bridge to inform any such project through disciplines that do not occupy the space. While 
this case study was one such attempt at doing  feminist surveillance studies, a data justice 
project could, in some sense, bring together any disciplines more occupied with critical 
approaches such as urban studies, critical data studies and surveillance studies.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
21 
 References  
Adler -Bell, S. (2018). Privacy for whom? The New Inquiry , 21 Feb. 
https://thenewinquiry.com/privacy -for-whom/  
Alkazi, A. (2015). Gated Communities in Gurgaon: Caste and Class on the Urban Frontier . 
Senior Projects Paper 114. Annandale -On-Hudson, NY: Bard College. 
https://digitalcommons.bard.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1249&context=senproj_s
2015  
Allen, A. L. (2011). Unpopular Privacy: What Must We Hide? Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Barman, S. (2018). State of surveillance: Who controls the data  collected from CCTVs in the 
capital? Indian Express , 21 May. https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/state -of-
surveillance -delhi-cctv-aap-anil-baijal -5184751/   
Beck, U. (1992). Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity (first ed.). London: Sage 
Publications.  
Benjamin, R. (2016). Informed refusal: Towards a justice -based bioethics. Science, 
Technology, & Human Values, 41(6), 967 -990. doi:10.1177/0162243916656059  
Browne, S. (2010). Digital epidermalization: Race, identity and biometrics. Critical Sociology, 
36(1), 131 -150. doi:10.1177/0896920509347144  
Browne, S. (2015). Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.  
Coletta, C., Evans, L., Heaphy, L., & Kitchin, R. (2018). Creating Smart Cities . Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge.  
Crenshaw, K. (1991). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and violence 
against women of color. Stanford Law Re view , 43(6), 1241 -1299. doi:10.2307/1229039  
Delhi Police. (2019). Order No. 1872 -1996/SO -ACP/Pt.Street/NDD . Sub -Division of 
Parliament Street, Delhi: Delhi Police.  
Dencik, L., Hintz, A., & Cable, J. (2016). Towards data justice? The ambiguity of anti -
surve illance resistance in political activism. Big Data & Society , 3(2), 1 -12. 
doi:10.1177/2053951716679678  
Dubrofsky, R. E., & Magnet, S. A. (eds.). (2015). Feminist Surveillance Studies . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.  
Express News Service. (2019). 145 out  of 192 police stations got CCTV cover. The New Indian 
Express , 10 Jan. http://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/delhi/2019/jan/10/145 -
police -stations -got-cctv-cover -1923216.html  
Firmino, R., & Duarte, F. (2015). Private video monitoring of public spaces: The construction 
of new invisible territories. Urban Studies , 53(4), 741 -754. 
doi:10.1177/0042098014567064  
Fyfe, N. (2004). Zero tolerance, maximum surveillance? Deviance, difference and crime 
control in the late modern city. In L. Lees (ed.), The Emancipatory City? Paradoxes and 
Possibilities (pp. 40 -56). London: Sage.  
Gellman, B., & Adler -Bell, S. (2017). The  disparate impact of surveillance, The Century 
Foundation , 21 Dec https://tcf.org/content/report/disparate -impact -surveillance/    
Giddens, A. (1990). The Consequences of Moder nity. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.  
Gilman, M. E., & Green, R. (2018). The surveillance gap: The harms of extreme privacy and 
data marginalization. NYU Review of Law and Social Change , 42(253).  
Goswami, S. (2018). 1.4 lakh CCTV cameras in Delhi’s markets, r esidential areas by October. 
Hindustan Times , 8 Feb. https://www.hindustantimes.com/delhi -news/1 -4lakh -cctv-Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
22 
 cameras -in-delhi -s-markets -residential -areas -by-october/story -
IXqbi0PoXuyu1YFVJJU4LN.html   
Government of Delhi. (2018). Delhi Rules for Regulation of CCTV Systems in NCT of Delhi . 
Delhi: Government of Delhi. 
http://dceast.delhigovt.nic.i n/wps/wcm/connect/b4db69004622dcdbb778b7c8da9eb17
e/CCTV.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&lmod=1855201116&CACHEID=b4db69004622dcdbb778b7c
8da9eb17e  
Govindarajan, V. (2016). Should Delhi’s (illegally) gated enclaves be thrown open to reduce 
traffic congestion? Scroll.in , 30 J un. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20190708123735/https://scroll.in/article/809558/ should -
delhis -illegal -gated -enclaves -be-thrown -open -to-reduce -traffic -congestion  
Hasija, S., & Nagpal, S. (2018). CCTV surveillance in public spaces of Delhi: Exploring the 
perspectives of youth visiting malls and Delhi Metro. IOSR Journal of Humanities an d 
Social Science , 23(12), 2nd ser.  
Heeks, R., & Shekhar, S. (2019) Datafication, development and marginalised urban 
communities: an applied data justice framework. Information, Communication & Society , 
22(7), 992-1011.  
Hempel, L., & Töpfer, E. (2004). Fina l Report: CCTV in Europe, Working Paper no. 15 . Berlin: 
Centre for Technology and Society, Technical University of Berlin. 
http://www.urbaneye.net/results/ue_wp15.pdf   
Huey, L. (2010). False se curity or greater social inclusion? Exploring perceptions of CCTV use 
in public and private spaces accessed by the homeless. The British Journal of Sociology, 
61(1), 63 -82. doi:10.1111/j.1468 -4446.2009.01302.x  
Khan, S. (2018). Punjab Government’s Safe Citi es Project, (Safer City) or Over Policing?  
Lahore: Digital Rights Foundation . https://privacyinternational.org/news -
analysis/2228/punjab -governments -safe-cities -project -safer -city-or-over -policing  
Koskela, H. (2002). Video surveillance, gender, and the safety of public urban space: 
"Peeping Tom" goes high tech? Urban Geography , 23(3), 257 -278. doi:10.2747/0272 -
3638.23.3.2 57 
Kovacs, A. (2017). Reading surveillance through a gendered lens: Some theory. Gender 
Surveillance , February. https://genderingsurveillance.internetdemocracy.in/theory/  
Lyon, D . (1994). The Electronic Eye: The Rise of Surveillance Society . Cambridge: Polity Press.  
Lyon, D. (2001). Surveillance Society. Monitoring Everyday Life . Buckingham: Open 
University Press.  
Lyon, D. (ed.). (2003). Introduction. In Surveillance as Social Sor ting: Privacy, Risk and Digital 
Discrimination . Abingdon, UK: Routledge.  
McCahill, M. (2002). The Surveillance Web: The Rise of Visual Surveillance in an English City . 
Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing.  
Ministry of Women and Child Development. (n.d.). Framework for Nirbhaya Fund . New 
Delhi: Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/Approved%20framework%20for% 20Nirbhaya%20F
und_0.pdf   
Minnaar, A. (2012). Private security companies, neighbourhood watches and the use of 
CCTV surveillance in residential neighbourhoods: The case of Pretoria -East. Acta 
Criminologica: South African Journal of Criminology , Special Edit ion 1, 103 -116.  Manchester Centre for Development Informatics Working Paper 81  
23 
 Monahan, T. (2008). Dreams of control at a distance: Gender, surveillance, and social 
control. Cultural Studies < -> Critical Methodologies , 9(2), 286 -305. 
doi:10.1177/1532708608321481  
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). (n.d.). Request fo r Proposal to Procure National 
Automated Facial Recognition System (AFRS) . New Delhi: Ministry of Home Affairs. 
http://ncrb.gov.in/TENDERS/AFRS/RFP_NAFRS.pdf   
Phadke, S., Khan, S., & Ranade, S. (2011). Why Loiter?: Women and Risk on Mumbai Streets . 
New Delhi: Penguin Books.  
Press Trust of India  (PTI) . (2012). CCTV cameras removed from Puri beach after protests by 
women.  The New Indian Express , 7 Dec. 
http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha/2012/dec/07/cctv -cameras -removed -
from -puri-beach -after -protests -by-women -431766.html   
Taylor, L. (2017). What  is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms 
globally. Big Data & Society , 4(2), 1 -14. doi:10.1177/2053951717736335  
Thomasen, K. (2017). Beyond airspace safety: A feminist perspective on drone privacy 
regulation. SSRN Electronic Jo urnal . doi:10.2139/ssrn.3143655  
Walby, K. (2005). How closed -circuit television surveillance organizes the social: An 
institutional ethnography. Canadian Journal of Sociology , 30(2), 189 -214. 
doi:10.2307/4146130  
Weinberg, L. (2017). Rethinking privacy: A feminist approach to privacy rights after 
Snowden. Westminster Papers in Culture and Communication , 12(3), 5 -20. 
Wickramasinghe, M. (2014). Feminist Research Methodology: Making Meanings of 
Meaning -Making. New Del hi: Zubaan.  
Wright, J., Glasbeek, A., & Meulen, E. V. (2014). Securing the home: Gender, CCTV and the 
hybridized space of apartment buildings. Theoretical Criminology , 19(1), 95 -111. 
doi:10.1177/1362480614544210  
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequali ty and Justice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support fro m Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre  (IDRC). This case study was also partially funded by the “Big 
Data for Development Network”, established and supported by IDRC. More information 
about the network and work produced by it can be found here: http://bd4d.net/ . The 
authors express their gratitude to Richard Heeks and Linnet Taylor for being extremely 
generous with their time in providing prompt and insightful feedback . 
 
About the Authors  
Aayush Rathi is a researcher at the Centre for Internet and Society, India. A lawyer by 
training, he produces interdisciplinary research at CIS working at the intersections of 
feminist theory, surveillance studies and labour.  
 
Ambika T andon is a researcher at the Centre for Internet and Society, India. She works at 
the intersection of gender and technology through interdisciplinary research on areas such 
as surveillance, reproductive health, and labour. Before CIS, she was pursuing a Ma ster’s in 
Media, Communications and Development from the London School of Economics and 
Political Science.  