1CHATBOTS FOR SERVICE DELIVERY 
MONITORING: A CIVICTECH PILOT IN 
MADAGASCAR
GOVERNANCE NOTES
JUNE 2020  No.23
Prepared by Olivia Rakotomalala, Tiago Peixoto and Saki Kumagai1 
Growing evidence confirms that citizen engagement 
is key to improving the delivery and quality of 
public services, management of public finances, 
and promoting social inclusion, tangibly improving 
people’s lives (World Bank Group 2014). The advent 
and availability of innovative technologies provide 
new opportunities to reach citizens, aggregate their 
“voice” and demands, help governments respond, and 
partner with citizens to find and implement solutions 
collectively. With the right approach, CivicTech enables 
citizens to overcome income, social, and geographical 
barriers to interact with governments and participate 
at the local or national level.
Launched in February 2019, the CivicTech pilot in 
Madagascar supported the development of a Facebook 
chatbot to enable third-party and citizen monitoring 
of service delivery operations for the Madagascar 
Public Sector Performance Project (PAPSP). This 
Governance Note  documents the experience gained and 
lessons learned. A similar approach can potentially be 
replicated for operations through community-driven 
development and local government and decentralized 
service delivery operations that benefit from third-
party and citizen monitoring with a multi-channel 
engagement structure (e.g., engagement offline and 
with mobile and web resources).
1  This Governance Note  was prepared by Olivia Rakotomalala, Tiago Peixoto, and Saki Kumagai (Governance Global Practice (GGP), World 
Bank). The pilot was partially supported by the GGP’s programmatic analytics and advisory service (ASA), “Citizen Engagement: Re-building 
the State and Citizen Social Contract.” The ASA aims to provide analytical insights, knowledge, and learning the implementation of the next 
phase of the World Bank Group’s Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group Operations.  The authors 
express their appreciation to Asmeen Khan and Helene Grandvoinnet for their guidance and comments, Kimberly Johns for peer review 
comments, and Barbara Rice for editorial support. 
2 For the overview, see the World Bank website at https:/ /www.worldbank.org/en/country/madagascar/overview.COUNTRY CONTEXT: DECENTRALIZED SERVICE 
DELIVERY
Madagascar is the fifth largest island in the world with 
a population of 25.6 million. In spite of its considerable 
natural resources, it is one of the poorest countries 
in the world, with an estimated poverty rate of 74.1 
percent in 2019—far exceeding the regional average of 
41 percent. The country’s human capital index ranking 
is among the lowest worldwide with an estimated 1.4 
million children having dropped out of primary school 
in 2012.2 The government of Madagascar adopted a 
national development plan to address the country’s 
development challenges, focused on three pillars: 
(i) improving basic social services; (ii) strengthening 
governance and democracy; and (iii) promoting economic 
growth. Decentralization is identified as a core feature to 
improve service delivery nationwide. The PAPSP supports 
this vision by helping to improve revenue management—
boosting the government’s revenue mobilization efforts 
and public financial management effectiveness—and local 
service delivery nationwide as well as in the education 
sector within selected regions (World Bank 2016).
Madagascar’s decentralization framework establishes 
three levels of government: provinces, regions, and 
communes. Communes are the level of subnational 
government led by elected officials that is closest to 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized2
JUNE 2020  No.23 GOVERNANCE NOTEScitizens in urban and rural areas. In September 2014, the 
government adopted new decentralization legislation that 
increases the responsibilities of communes for service 
delivery, particularly the rehabilitation of education 
and health facilities and investments in small-scale 
infrastructure, such as rural roads and markets. Yet 
local governments have limited capacity for revenue 
mobilization, and the budget remains highly centralized. 
Only 5 percent of total government revenues are 
channeled outside the Analamanga region, where the 
capital city is located, despite these combined regions 
accounting for 90 percent of the country’s population. In 
addition, funds being transferred to local governments 
often experience significant delays. 
To alleviate these challenges, the PAPSP provides 
grant transfers to rural communes nationwide through 
the Local Development Fund (FDL). The FDL was created 
in 2007 by the government to support sustainable 
socioeconomic development though subnational 
government capacity building and funding for local 
public investment projects. The PAPSP grant transfer 
program is designed to encourage citizens to engage in 
the process of budget allocation decision-making through 
local participatory budgeting. While this engagement 
constitutes a significant landmark for decentralization in 
Madagascar, the central government and FDL are unable 
to monitor the allocation and use of these funds in over 
1,700 remote communes. This ultimately poses a threat 
to the credibility of the decentralization process and the 
effective delivery of public services.
The CivicTech pilot for third-party and citizen 
monitoring aimed at addressing this concern by engaging 
with citizens—and youth in particular. The chatbot was 
designed to be linked to the PAPSP’s grievance redress 
mechanism, composed of an “issues-tracker,” in which 
citizens’ reports were uploaded. These reports were 
then sorted and sent to relevant institutions, which 
were tasked with formulating a response that would be 
reported back to citizens. An existing toll-free “3-2-1” 
automated hotline, which delivers information on a wide 
range of development topics, was leveraged to direct 
callers to the PAPSP hotline to find more information 
about local government investments through the FDL. The rollout of the toll-free 3-2-1 hotline and participatory 
budgeting mechanisms have been successful in 
increasing access to information on development issues 
and engaging citizens at the local level.
FACEBOOK CHATBOT FOR THIRD-PARTY AND 
CITIZEN MONITORING
Understanding the local context is important to design 
suitable and sustainable CivicTech approaches and tools. 
A key element is deciding whether to explore using an 
existing open source solution or developing a customized 
solution. For this pilot, the team took into account 
the following elements: types of communication and 
interaction needed on the CivicTech tool, cost and time 
required to develop it, and uptake. The project identified 
the Facebook Messenger chatbot as a tool to explore 
third-party and citizen monitoring of decentralized 
service delivery and civil works (see box 1).
Box 1. Identification of a Suitable CivicTech 
Solution for the Pilot
For this CivicTech pilot for third-party and citizen 
monitoring of decentralized service delivery in 
Madagascar, the following considerations were made:
• Built-in chatbot functions.  Chatbots can support 
very targeted and personalized interactions with 
users. They use a self-learning process to monitor 
user interactions and preferences, and adapt 
their responses accordingly. This allows them to 
offer relevant services to the user and proactively 
approach them on a regular basis. 
• Cost and timeframe.  Building new applications, 
and promoting their uptake, is more costly than 
building on an existing, popular platform such as 
Facebook.
• Why Facebook rather than a customized solution?  
Many internet users in developing countries are 
familiar with the Facebook interface. Sixty-five 
developing countries worldwide benefit from 
Facebook’s “Free Basics” program. It allows users 3
JUNE 2020  No.23 GOVERNANCE NOTESequipped with a smartphone to access a range of 
free basic services, including chats. The majority 
of their internet users—and particularly those who 
cannot afford data plans—navigate the internet 
exclusively through Facebook. This is the case in 
Madagascar. While a customized solution may 
provide a more versatile CivicTech application that 
matches the scope and scale of grant activities in 
over 1,700 communes, it would run potential risks 
of higher cost and longer solution development 
time frames together with uptake challenges.
• Uptake of CivicTech applications.  Many users 
in developing countries have limited Wi-Fi 
connectivity, access to mobile data, and on-board 
memory, which makes it difficult to introduce 
and install an entirely new CivicTech application. 
Users might not see any value in downloading 
an unfamiliar new app. Evidence suggests that 
a quarter of all downloaded apps are abandoned 
after a single use. The already existing user 
population and uptake were considerations 
addressed by the project team.
Given the context, mobilizing the user base of the 
Facebook Messenger chatbot for content generation 
and diverse engagement on service delivery appeared 
to be a more convenient way to target participants 
for third-party monitoring. Users are more familiar 
with the Facebook interface and more likely to be 
responsive if asked to download a new app.
Source: World Bank.
Note:  There are an estimated 2.4 million Facebook users in 
Madagascar, out of 2.6 million total active internet users, with 
a quarterly growth of 4.3 percent in January 2019. For more 
information see the Digital 2019 Madagascar website at https:/ /
www.slideshare.net/DataReportal/digital-2019-madagascar-
january-2019-v01.
3 The total cost includes two contracts for the development of chatbot, the integration of the issues-tracker function, and the deployment of 
outreach campaigns; a World Bank short-term consultancy; and World Bank staff cost.
4 Chatbots must go through an approval process by Facebook to ensure that the chatbot meets the platforms’ standards and terms of use.
5 Information can also be provided through a hotline that is integrated with the issues-tracker.ACHIEVEMENTS TO DATE AND CHALLENGES
The CivicTech pilot in Madagascar was rolled out in two 
phases: (i) development of the chatbot and integration 
of the issues-tracker function; and (ii) deployment of 
targeted outreach campaigns on Facebook. The total 
pilot budget was $80,000,3 which was supported by the 
PAPSP and the GGP’s Citizen Engagement ASA. Once the 
product is fully developed, additional deployment of the 
chatbot in another project is estimated to cost $10,000 
per project.
Under the pilot, the chatbot was prototyped, 
developed, approved by Facebook4 and tested by the 
client (the Public Sector Reform Unit within the Presidency 
of the Republic of Madagascar) between May and 
August 2019. It was implemented in a Facebook page 
and compatible with Facebook versions on any device, 
browser, and handset, including on Facebook Free Basics.
The platform supporting the chatbot interacts with the 
Facebook application program interface to automatically 
respond to the feedback of end users, i.e., citizens, in 
real time. End users access the chatbot in the Facebook 
Messenger app on their smartphones. The interactions 
take place through text commands or by selecting 
predefined menu options, and the chatbot answers with 
text, voice, and visual or audiovisual content. It prompts 
Facebook users to monitor public works in their area, 
allowing users to: 
• Receive information about public works projects in their 
area to be monitored (e.g., type of work, cost, timeline);
• Submit information about the status of public works;
• Anonymously report potential irregularities;5 and
• Invite other Facebook friends to join the monitoring 
efforts.
The chatbot provides user-driven interaction flow along 
a predefined decision tree. Users are walked through the 
decision tree and can opt into different options, responding 
to the chatbot by typing text or numeric answers (“I want 
more info”) or clicking on menu options (“More info”).4
JUNE 2020  No.23 GOVERNANCE NOTESA two-week promotion effort in May 2019 used 
the 3-2-1 hotline to encourage users to receive more 
information from the PAPSP hotline. More than 46,000 
users heard the promotional message, and 83 percent 
(more than 38,000 users) expressed an interest in 
receiving a call back from the PAPSP hotline. This 
overwhelmingly positive response was unexpected and 
resulted in a budgetary shortfall with so many users to 
call back. As a result, only a sample of 1,863 call backs 
were made, of which 40 percent were successful. Of 
the successful calls, 40 percent asked to speak to an 
operator. More than half of the users called were between 
the ages of 18 and 24, and overwhelmingly male (see 
tables 1 and 2).
Table 1. Feedback from the PAPSP Hotline Promotion, 
May 15–31, 2019
Feedback Number Percentage
Would 
you like to 
receive a call 
back from 
the PAPSP 
hotline?Yes 38,682 83%
No 7,854 17%
T otal responses 46,536 100%
Call-back 
statisticsUnsuccessful call 
(no response)1,094 59%
Successful call 769 41%
Call not completed 470 25%
Call fully completed 299 16%
T otal 1,863 100%
Table 2. Demographics of Successful Call Backs
Age in Y ears Female Male T otal
18–24 296 720 1,016
25–34 54 201 255
35–44 23 84 107
Over  44 9 34 43
Under  18 138 304 442
T otal 520 1,343 1,863Despite these achievements, the chatbot is not yet 
entirely operational. Delays were caused initially when the 
tech team struggled to make information available for 
the more than 1,700 communes, sometimes with several 
ongoing or closed projects within the same commune. 
The off-the-shelf product required further development. 
In addition, in June 2019, Facebook unexpectedly disabled 
the “share your location function” for all chatbots, which 
underlies the commune look-up feature, and allowed 
users to obtain more information on the PAPSP-funded 
projects in their vicinity. This complication contributed to 
delays while the tech team tried to develop alternative 
proposals to make the look-up feature work.
Once this stage is finalized, the government plans 
to organize testing and feedback sessions with users 
and civil society. They will focus on highlighting any 
context-based improvements in the overall design 
and deployment of the chatbot as well as highlighting 
any technical challenges that might prevent the user 
from having a seamless experience. The tech team will 
integrate possible adjustments to the chatbot as required 
based on the participants’ feedback.
LESSONS LEARNED
Six key lessons learned during the implementation of this 
pilot have important ramifications for replication in other 
projects and countries.
Creating accountability requires leadership and 
coordination to close the feedback loop. Transparency 
through access to information is essential, but not 
sufficient to achieve accountability. Projects must 
focus on closing the feedback loop by ensuring the 
government’s responsiveness to citizens’ concerns 
through the chatbot or other third-party monitoring 
tools. Establishing the right institutional framework 
is key and requires high-level leadership. This can help 
ensure the allocation of adequate resources to respond 
to citizens’ concerns. It also signals to civil servants that 
they are given sufficient latitude to respond transparently 
to citizens’ feedback. Full or partial outsourcing of 
services to professional call centers is an option. 
Coordination with anti-corruption agencies is essential to 5
JUNE 2020  No.23 GOVERNANCE NOTESfollow-up and investigate any allegations or anomalies. 
This requires allocation of dedicated resources.
Conducting user testing is essential to deploy user 
centric CivicTech solutions.  User testing was done using 
task scenarios, where users were expected to accomplish 
specific tasks, in this case requesting information or 
reporting a case to the authorities. This is only one of 
a series of tests that should be continued as the tool is 
refined and released to the wider public. User testing is 
recommended for future development of any CivicTech 
solution in different settings. Testing user experience and 
flow of engagement is essential to create a successful 
experience for the end user. The design aspects of 
modifications and user testing should be an ongoing effort, 
with several iterations to make needed improvements 
for the overall user-engagement experience. This is 
particularly important since chatbot experts are not user 
and content experts, and the government tends to adopt 
an institutional approach that does not promote uptake of 
CivicTech initiatives, especially among youth. In addition, 
it is essential to test the product within the target 
user’s familiar environment, where natural constraints 
(e.g., connectivity) can be assessed and they will feel 
comfortable providing candid feedback.
Factoring in the complexity of multiple points of sale 
is critical to design, plan, and roll out the CivicTech 
activities. Projects should take into consideration the 
complexity of designing digital technology with a large 
number of points of sale. Madagascar’s PAPSP targets 
more than 1,700 communes. The scale—the number 
of points of sale—was an unexpected challenge for the 
technical team and generated delays given the off-the-
shelf solution initially discussed lacked the capacity 
to manage such a large volume of information. Such 
complexities should be factored up-front into project 
planning and budgeting. 
Leveraging a successful point of interaction works 
but be prepared for the demand. The common practice 
in the private sector is to use a successful point of 
interaction with users to promote another service. Yet, 
this approach is rarely used in the public sector and for CivicTech in particular. The pilot has demonstrated that 
this approach can be highly effective, with promotions 
on the 3-2-1 hotline generating many more calls 
than initially foreseen. However, they also generated 
significant subsequent work to respond to the sudden 
and unexpected demand, for which government was 
unprepared. When adopting such a mobilization strategy, 
projects should be ready for the response and sudden 
rise in demand. Training should be conducted before the 
launch, and financial and human resources adequately 
allocated.
Relying on an off-the-shelf CivicTech solution can have 
drawbacks. While it is most useful to rely on a platform 
that already has a strong audience such as Facebook, 
the project should be prepared for possible changes 
in the policy of the solution provider(s) over which the 
project has no control. This is the case, for example, with 
the “share your location” function that was withdrawn 
by Facebook, which can lead to very costly alternative 
development. Budget should be allocated during planning 
for unforeseen development costs.
Allocating the maintenance and update costs 
up-front can contribute to the sustainability of 
CivicTech activities. Even with an off-the-shelf 
solution, digital technology is a living product that 
should not be considered simply as a capital cost. It also 
requires recurrent costs for maintenance and constant 
updating. This is especially the case when leveraging 
other platforms (such as Facebook) and facing possible 
changes in policy over which the client has no control. 
Solutions should be considered during project planning 
and budgeting for the financing of recurrent costs to 
ensure sustainability.6
JUNE 2020  No.23 GOVERNANCE NOTESREFERENCES
World Bank Group. 2014a. Strategic Framework for 
Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group 
Operations: Engaging with Citizens for Improved Results. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. http:/ /documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/266371468124780089/
pdf/929570WP0Box380ategicFrameworkforCE.pdf.
World Bank. 2016. “Madagascar — Public 
Sector Performance Project.” Program Appraisal 
Document Report 1547, World Bank, Washington, 
DC. http:/ /documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/513681468197098764/pdf/PAD1547-PAD-P150116-
OUO-9-IDA-R2016-0116-1.pdf.
GOVERNANCE GLOBAL PRACTICE
Guiding Results through Public Institutions
Governance Notes  captures knowledge derived from 
World Bank engagements and technical and financial 
assistance requests. 
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank.
For more information, contact: govgplearns@worldbank.org.