3Citizen participation in the design of public policy 
through ICTs in Colombia
Participación ciudadana a través de las TIC en el diseño de política pública en Colombia
Participation citoyenne à travers les TIC dans la conception de la politique                         
publique en Colombie                             
Helga Bermeo Andrade1 
Professor and Researcher, Faculty of Engineering, Universidad de Ibagué, Colombia.                                               
e-mail: helga.bermeo@unibague.edu.co
Dora Luz González-Bañales2
Professor and Researcher, Department of Systems and Computing, Instituto Tecnológico de Durango,                      
Tecnológico Nacional de México. e-mail: doraglez@itdurango.edu.mx
Iván Hernández Umaña3
Professor and Researcher, Faculty of Economics and Administrtion Sciences, Universidad de Ibagué, Colombia. 
e-mail: ivan.hernandez@unibague.edu.co
Mónica Calderón Pinedo4
Student and research assistant, Master of Sociology, East Carolina University, USA.                                             
e-mail: mcalderonpinedo85@gmail.com
Article of Scientific and Technological Research, 
PUBLINDEX-COLCIENCIAS classification
Submitted: 13/01/2018
Reviewed: 18/03/2018
Accepted: 20/04/2018
Core topic: Administration and Organizations; Public Policies
 JEL classification: H7, Z18, O2, O21
DOI: 10.25100/cdea.v34i60.5990 
Abstract
The growing development and social appropriation of ICTs nowadays represent a means that facilitates the partici -
pation of citizens in the design and management of public policies. The objective of this research was to assess the 
contribution generated by the use of a digital platform as a means to design and execute public policies aimed at 
strengthening the productive apparatus in the tourism and cultural industry of the Tolima region within the “Tolima 
Vive Digital”-TVD (Tolima Lives Digitally) project developed between 2013 and 2014 within the framework of the “Vive 
1 Industrial Engineer, Universidad de Ibagué, PhD on Engineering and Innovation Projects, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain. 
Member of the GINNOVA Research Group, Category B Colciencias, Universidad de Ibagué. 
2  B.S. on Computer Science, Instituto Tecnológico de Durango, Mexico, PhD in Integration of ICT in Organizations, Universidad           
Politécnica de Valencia, Spain. 
3 Economist, Universidad Nacional, Colombia, PhD on Innovation Economics, University of Manchester, UK. Member, GINNOVA          
Research Group, Category B Colciencias, UNIDERE Research Group, Universidad de Ibagué. 
4 Economist, Master’s degree on Economics, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Colombia. Jan. - Apr. 
2018
Cuadernos de  Administración
Journal of ManagementVOL. 34
N° 60
Print ISSN: 0120-4645 / E-ISSN: 2256-5078 / Short name: cuad.adm. / Pages: 3-17
Facultad de Ciencias de la Administración / Universidad del Valle / Cali - Colombia4
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  
Digital” (Live Digitally) initiative by the National Govern -
ment. Through an evaluative research model, structured 
surveys and in-depth interviews were applied to benefi -
ciaries linked to the tourism and culture sector in the re -
gion, as well as to facilitators-experts in the operation of 
the platform. The results of the evaluation show the po -
sitive contribution of ICTs to the processes of citizen par -
ticipation in the design of public policies by facilitating 
the participation and inclusion of citizens from remote 
regions, by enabling a more efficient systematization 
and integration of citizen demands and by generating a 
new communication channel between Government and 
citizens. In this way, the experience of the Tolima region 
represents a reference point for other government ma -
nagers, and becomes a complementary contribution to 
the evaluation of the strategy for the digitalization of the 
public service in Colombia. 
Keywords:  Public policy, Government, ICT,                                
Development, Region, Citizen participation.
Resumen
El creciente desarrollo y apropiación social de las TIC en 
la actualidad representan un medio que facilita la par -
ticipación de los ciudadanos en el diseño y gestión de 
políticas públicas. El objetivo de esta investigación fue 
valorar la contribución generada por el uso de una plata -
forma digital como medio para el diseño y ejecución de 
política pública orientada al fortalecimiento del aparato 
productivo en la industria turística y cultural de la región 
Tolima dentro del proyecto Tolima Vive Digital (TVD) de -
sarrollado entre los años 2013 y 2014 en el marco de 
la iniciativa Vive Digital del Gobierno Nacional. A través 
de un modelo de investigación evaluativa se aplicaron 
encuestas estructuradas y entrevistas a profundidad a 
beneficiarios vinculados al sector turismo y cultura de la 
región, así como a facilitadores-expertos en la operación 
de la plataforma. Los resultados de la evaluación eviden -
cian la positiva contribución de las TIC a los procesos de 
participación ciudadana en el diseño de políticas públi -
cas al facilitar la participación e inclusión de ciudadanos 
de las regiones apartadas, al permitir sistematizar e in -
tegrar de una manera más eficiente las demandas ciu -
dadanas y al generar un nuevo canal de comunicación 
entre el Gobierno y los ciudadanos. De esta manera la 
experiencia de la región Tolima representa un referente 
para otros gestores de gobierno, y son una contribución 
complementaria a la evaluación de la estrategia de digi -
talización de la función pública en Colombia. 
Palabras clave:  Política pública, Gobierno, TIC,               
Desarrollo, Región, Participación ciudadana.
Résumé 
Le développement croissant et l’appropriation sociale 
des TIC représentent actuellement un moyen qui faci -
lite la participation des citoyens dans la conception et 
la gestion des politiques publiques. L’objectif de cette 
recherche était de valoriser la contribution produite 
par l’utilisation d’une plate-forme numérique comme un moyen pour le design et l’exécution d’une politique 
publique visant à renforcer l’appareil productif dans l’in -
dustrie touristique et culturelle de la région Tolima dans 
le projet appelé Tolima Vive Digital (TVD) développé en -
tre les années 2013 et 2014 dans le cadre de l’initiative 
Vive Digital du gouvernement national. Á travers un mo -
dèle de recherche évaluative ont été mises en œuvre 
des enquêtes structurés et des interviews à profondeur, 
ont été appliqués aux bénéficiaires associés au secteur 
touristique et culturel de la région, ainsi qu’aux facilita -
teurs-experts dans le fonctionnement de la plate-forme. 
Les résultats de l’évaluation mettent en évidence la con -
tribution positive des TIC aux processus de participation 
citoyenne dans la conception des politiques publiques 
en facilitant la participation et l’inclusion des citoyens 
des régions éloignées, en permettant de systématiser 
et d’intégrer d’une manière plus efficace les exigences 
citoyennes et en même temps, en créant un nouveau 
canal de communication entre le gouvernement et les 
citoyens. De cette façon, l’expérience de la région de 
Tolima représente un point de référence pour les autres 
gestionnaires gouvernementaux, et est une contribution 
complémentaire de l’évaluation de l’stratégie de numé -
risation de la fonction publique en Colombie. 
Mots clés: Politique publique, Gouvernement, TIC,            
Développement, Région, Participation citoyenne.
1. Introduction
Currently, the use of the Internet in pu -
blic administration has become consolidated 
and is seen by academics and empiricists as 
a means to innovate the processes and ser -
vices that each government provides to its 
citizens (Alzahrani, Al-Karaghouli and Wee -
rakkody, 2017; Criado and Gil-Garcia, 2013). 
Undoubtedly, the adoption of the e-govern -
ment system by the public administration has 
created a new relationship between citizens 
and government (Sour-Vargas, 2007). As a re -
sult of the foregoing, one of the great challen -
ges faced by governments nowadays is how 
to appropriate and take advantage of the In -
ternet and Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) to create new and effecti -
ve information and communication channels 
with their citizens (García and García Jimé -
nez, 2013; Meijer, Curtin and Hillebrandt, 
2012), and even more, to allow them to parti -
cipate in the design of public policies (Criado 
and Gil-García, 2013; Linders, 2012; Wijnho -
ven, Ehrenhard and Kuhn, 2015). The evolu -
tion of this new form of public administration 
has given rise to innovative approaches such 
as “gobierno abierto” (open government) and 
“gobierno 2.0”  (government 2.0), which have 5
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
been transforming the delivery of public ser -
vices in various parts of the world (Salem and 
Jarrar, 2013).
Open government refers to the presence 
of more transparent, efficient and accounta -
ble public administrations, whose essential 
components are the participation and colla -
boration of governed citizens (Purón-Cid and 
Gil-García, 2012). On the other hand, opera -
ting under environments such as Web 2.0 has 
enabled the emergence of the so-called Go -
vernment 2.0 that has empowered citizens to 
interact and collaborate among themselves 
as content creators, which not only informs 
them, but also turns them into providers of 
information (Karkin, 2013) at opinion genera -
tors for the design of public policies (Linders, 
2012)or into actors of public control of the ru -
lers’ actions (Mergel, 2013; Picazo-Vela, Fer -
nandez-Haddad and Luna-Reyes, 2016).
To the extent that ICTs have broadened 
the spectrum of action of public administra -
tion, so have these, in the same way, moti -
vated the interest of society in general, and 
academics in particular, to establish and as -
sess the real contributions to the effective -
ness of the governments that integrate them 
into their administration. In this respect, se -
veral studies have taken place, such as that 
carried out by Criado and Gil-García (2013), 
which aimed to describe the process of im -
plementating ICT into government functions; 
Vercelli (2013), in turn, became interested in 
describing the ways of citizen participation 
through ICT, and along the same lines, Pare -
ja and Echeverría (2014) were interested in 
studying the role played by new technologies 
in the construction of public opinion. On the 
other hand, Mergel (2013) focused on evalua -
ting the impact of the initiatives that integra -
te ICTs in the participation and collaboration 
of citizens, while pointing out that there is 
still little evidence to actively measure the 
impact of the digital interactions derived be -
tween government and citizens.
Considering the foregoing, this paper 
analyses the Tolima Vive Digital (TVD) pro -
ject in Colombia, a public intervention Pro -
gram based on the principles of Open Gover -
nment. In particular, it was interesting to 
study the results of the implementation of its 
first component: the use of the Ethos  digital 
ethnographic platform as a means for the de -sign and execution of public policies aimed at 
strengthening the productive apparatus wi -
thin the tourism and cultural industry of the 
Tolima region. 
This study is complementary to the eva -
luation process that the national Government 
carried out through the “Departamento Na -
cional de Planeación”-DNP (National Depart -
ment of Planning) and the “Sistema Nacional 
de Evaluación y Gestión de Resultados”- Si -
nergia (National System for Evaluation and 
Management of Results), consulting other re -
gions of the country on three other compo -
nents of the Vive Digital Plan: digital kiosks, 
digital Points and digital Homes (DNP, 2015), 
as well as the initial work carried out by 
Mora (2012) with the executive assessment of 
the Vive Digital Colombia Plan. This paper is 
structured from the frame of reference, the 
methodology used, the results of the evalua -
tion and its discussion, to the presentation of 
conclusions. 
2. Reference framework
2.1. Traditional public policy design versus 
alternative design
In the more traditional approach to pu -
blic policy design, professional experts have 
been questioned for serving their own inte -
rests and those of elites seeking to maintain 
their dominance over the rest of society (Fis -
cher, 1993). Moreover, the theory of public 
election (Buchanan and Tollison, 1984) has 
developed much of its conceptual framework 
based on the assumption or premise, without 
further questioning, that political decisions 
made by agents (e.g. experts and professio -
nals) in charge of state management protect 
their individual interests with the aim of ha -
ving themselves re-elected or remaining in 
positions of power. In this way, those who are 
under the control of the state are subject to 
these interests, who in turn may or may not 
proactively reinforce this practice through 
clientelism. 
In response to this strong criticism and 
its practical manifestations, several social 
scientists have attempted to advance on a 
collaborative alternative to this traditional 
form of generation. Those who have promo -6
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  ted the participatory action research model  
(PAR) or simply participatory research (PR) 
are particularly important (Koch and Kralik, 
2009) (Fals-Borda and Rahman, 1991; Koira -
la-Azad, 2017). PAR builds on the efforts of 
citizens’ groups to both expand their access 
to information produced by scientists and to 
systematize their own local knowledge (Fis -
cher, 2000). Hence, they are an effort of de -
mocratic collaboration between agencies, 
state agents and citizens.
2.2 Open government: transparency and 
timeliness in PAR processes
The term open government  has positioned 
itself as a new articulating axis of efforts to 
improve government capacities and moder -
nize public administrations under the prin -
ciples of transparency and openness, parti -
cipation and collaboration (Ramírez-Alujas, 
2011). The idea of achieving an open e-gover -
nment  is nowadays seen as an alternative that 
will lead to the construction of better forms 
of government in the digital age, seeking to 
make them more transparent, reliable, parti -
cipatory and collaborative (Vercelli, 2013). It 
is a format that emerges, therefore, as a res -
ponse to a specific concern of governments 
to counteract the more traditional top-down  
practices of public policy design and imple -
mentation mentioned above. E-government 
is driven in particular by the use of ICT to 
provide effective delivery of government ser -
vices and information to citizens, businesses 
and other government agencies (Alzahrani et 
al., 2017). 
In the case of open government, as Hec -
kmann (2011) sees it, one of its purposes is 
to improve transparency and accountabili -
ty in all public affairs, and therefore, as Wi -
jnhoven  et al.  (2015) allude, it can improve 
opportunities for citizens to participate in 
public policy making. On the other hand, for 
the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD), the term open go -
vernment has evolved over time from being a 
transparent, responsive, accountable, acces -
sible and responsive public administration 
(2006) to an approach where it is seen as a 
platform to find ways for the government to 
work with society to co-create public value 
(Ramírez-Alujas, 2014, 2011). Furthermore, e-government has to do with 
citizen participation through citizen consul -
tation platforms, which enable an active role 
for them in the design and formulation of pu -
blic policies; it also includes the implementa -
tion of active listening mechanisms and two-
way channels, promotion of spaces for citizen 
initiatives, digital services, online petitions, 
and platforms for collaborative work. In the -
se mechanisms, there is room for initiatives 
of co-design, co-creation and co-production 
of services, open innovation and collective in -
telligence applied to public management and 
public-private/public-social partnerships. 
2.3 Citizen participation
In terms of openness to citizenship, the 
possible scopes of citizens’ participation in 
open government are citizen ideation and 
innovation, which aim to gather external 
knowledge, mostly from citizens, to impro -
ve the achievements by the public adminis -
tration (Hilgers, 2012). Within this opening 
lies the so-called citizen sourcing  on the one 
hand (Nam, 2012; Wijnhoven et al.,  2015)
and the so-called urban observatories on the 
other (Valenzuela-Montes and Carvalho-Cor -
tes-Silva, 2015). 
Citizen  sourcing’s aim is to have citizens 
support daily public administrative tasks but 
does not involve innovation or new ideas, and 
finely the collaborative democracy that seeks 
answers to the normative questions for the 
future development of society (Wijnhoven et 
al., 2015). As regards urban observatories, 
these are related to the capacity to promo -
te citizen participation by using Geographic 
Information Technologies (GIT) for the pur -
pose of analyzing the use that citizens make 
of urban phenomena, policies, plans and pro -
jects (Valenzuela-Montes and Carvalho-Cor -
tes-Silva, 2015).
Based on the aforementioned, the impor -
tance and depth of the active and interactive 
role of citizens in the development of the open 
public administration becomes evident (Gar -
cía and García Jiménez, 2013), so that they 
are not limited to observing only. Thus, with 
a real opening of open government the citi -
zen could participate with the government 
from three areas (Cortés-Sánchez, Cardona 
and Wong, 2013): e-enabling  which consists 7
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018on using technology for citizen participation; 
the second is e-engaging  which is the use of 
technology to engage the citizenry, and fi -
nally e-empowering  that involves the use of 
technology to empower the citizenry. Any of 
these three types of participation implies the 
government being willing to provide oppor -
tunities for citizens to participate in the de -
sign of public policies, aside from facilitating 
social innovation processes.
2.4 The integration of ICTs for government 
management in Colombia
In Colombia, there are initiatives aimed at 
promoting both open and electronic govern -
ment. Article 270 of the recent Political Cons -
titution of 1991, empowers citizens to take an 
active part in the control of public manage -
ment by establishing: “An Act shall organize 
the forms and systems of citizen participa -
tion making it possible to oversee the public 
management completed at the various admi -
nistrative levels and their results”. This re -
gulation grants Colombian citizens the right 
to know, participate and control government 
processes. On the other hand, since 2000, Co -
lombia has been carrying out a campaign to 
implement e-government in order to contri -
bute to improving the efficiency and trans -
parency of the Colombian State through the 
gradual construction of an online govern -
ment. 
In the case of Colombia, online government 
appears mainly in the following modalities 
(Riascos Erazo, Martínez Giordano and So -
lano Rodríguez, 2008): a) Government-to-Ci -
tizen (G2C), where initiatives aimed at de -
livering administrative, information and/
or transaction products and/or services to 
citizens by the State are found; b) Govern -
ment-to-Business (G2B), which comprise ini -
tiatives aimed at delivering administrative, 
information and/or transaction products and/
or services information to businesses by the 
State; and c) Government-to-Government 
(G2G), with initiatives aimed at meeting coor -
dination requirements between the different 
institutions of the national and territorial go -
vernment. The citizen-to-government (C2G) 
modality is present to a lesser extent, na -
mely, wherein the citizen can be not only a 
consumer of information, but also a producer 
of it through ICTs.Among the highly positioned initiatives in 
Colombians lies the digital platform “Urna de 
Cristal” (Urn of Crystal (www.urnadecristal.
gov.co); created in 2010 as a multi-channel 
mechanism for citizen participation, where 
the user has the possibility to: a) know the 
results, progress and initiatives of the Gover -
nment; b) forward their concerns and propo -
sals; c) interact and learn from state mana -
gement.
Other outstanding open government ini -
tiatives in Colombia are: the “Alianza Go -
bierno Abierto” Program -AGA (Open Gover -
nment Alliance), which began in 2011 with 
the participation of eight countries and has 
already brought together more than 60 coun -
tries around the world hitherto, Colombia 
amongst them, all of which are committed to 
“improving government performance, pro -
moting effective participation and improving 
governments’ responsiveness to their citi -
zens through the implementation of strate -
gies on transparency, access to information, 
citizen participation and the use of new tech -
nologies that generate concrete and visible 
change” (AGA, 2017); and the “Mi Medellín” 
(My Medellín) Program in Antioquia, which 
has become a channel of connection between 
citizens and the Local Administration, thus 
motivating the prioritization of resources 
and the execution of budgets based on the 
ideas and proposals stemming from citizens 
(Ruta Medellín, 2015). 
2.5 The Vive Digital Program in Colombia
The Vive Digital (VD) program was the te -
chnology plan created by the Colombian Go -
vernment for the 2010-2014 four-year period, 
to enable the country to make a technological 
leap forward  by means of the massive usage 
of the Internet and developing the national 
digital ecosystem. Its design was based on 
the experience of other nations such as Chi -
le and India, as well as on the reports of the 
World Economic Forum (Kim, Kelly and Raja, 
2010), which showed the direct correlation 
between Internet penetration, ICT appro -
priation, job creation and poverty reduction. 
Other countries’ previous experiences in the 
massification of the Internet showed certain 
key factors for its success, among them: exis -
tence of a country vision, existence of a regu -
latory framework, public financial leverage, 8
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  
stimulation of demand and large deployment 
of infrastructure to facilitate the increase of 
network coverage (MINTIC, 2010). 
In the case of Colombia, although increa -
sing Internet penetration rates have been re -
ported since 2004, they were still low in 2010; 
the Internet penetration rate among the in -
habitants did not exceed 2.5% on mobile In -
ternet and was close to only 5.5% on fixed 
Internet (MINTIC, 2010). This reality showed 
Colombia lagging behind other countries in 
the Latin American region such as Chile, 
Mexico and Brazil. With all these arguments, 
the VD program was launched at the national 
level as a digital ecosystem as seen in Figu-
res 1 and 2, which was remarkably success -
ful with respect to the set goals, achieving its 
execution in practically the entire na tional 
territory (1,222 municipalities) by 2014, with 
a cumulative number of direct beneficiaries 
that exceeded 1.5 million people, including 
public officials and citizens certified in the 
use of ICT, the vast majori ty of the latter co -
ming from disadvantaged groups. 
The Tolima region was among the 25 de -
partments of Colombia that benefited from the VD program, through the project called 
Tolima Vive Digital (TVD). This project was 
formulated considering the low supply of 
newfangled digital content aimed at promo -
ting the tourism sector in the Region, and 
the insufficient access and exploitation of 
ICT tools by the overall community. To ad -
dress these issues, the TVD project was im -
plemented between June 2013 and July 2014 
in order to help promote a citizen-centered 
information society in Tolima, where citizens 
are able to create, consult, use and share in -
formation and knowledge to promote employ -
ment, sustainable development and improved 
quality of life.
In its execution, the TVD project was struc -
tured in four components, the first whereof 
was related to the implementation of a Digi -
tal Platform for Citizenry Activation (PAC by 
its acronym in Spanish) in tourism and cultu -
re, based on ethnographic processes, which 
sought to generate innovation opportunities 
for the development of new digital content 
and for the emergence entrepreneurship ac -
tions, both for the tourism sector and for the 
ICT sector in Tolima.
Figure 1. Ecosystem for the Vive Digital Plan in Colombia 2010-2014
Source: Ministry of Information and Communication Technologies, 2010.
 INFRASTRUCTURE
PROVID ES DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY
SERVICES
ENABLES THE DEVEL OPMEN T OF 
DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY
APPLICA TIONS
GENERATE DEMAND IN THE ECOSYST EMUSER S
TECHNOL OGY APPROPRIATION AND 
CONTENT CREA TIONECO
DIGITAL 
SYSTEMOFFER
DEMAND9
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
3. Methodology
The TVD project’s first component’s im -
pact assessment - the Ethos  digital ethnogra -
phic platform as a means for the design and 
execution of public policies aimed at streng -
thening the productive apparatus in the re -
gion’s tourism and cultural industry - was 
carried out on the basis of the methodologi -
cal guidelines recommended for evaluative 
research (Uribe Correa, Puerta Zapata and 
Restrepo Gómez, 1996), which proposes that 
once the preparation stage of the evaluation 
process has been completed (with the design 
and validation of the questionnaires through 
pilot tests), the evaluation process should be 
carried out, which may be qualitative and/or 
quantitative.
The evaluation process was structured to 
address the following questions: 
• What is the perception of the first 
component’s beneficiaries and facili -
tator-experts regarding the quality of 
the training workshop held? 
• What is the perception of the first 
component’s beneficiaries and facilita -tor-experts regarding the benefits ex -
pected from the workshop? 
• What is the perception of the first com -
ponent’s accompanying experts regar -
ding the benefits expected from the 
ethos  platform?
To answer these questions, the assessment 
process was expedited through the following 
stages:
• Application of instruments.  Twen -
ty-nine beneficiaries linked to the re -
gion’s tourism and culture sector (out 
of 175 registered as participants) and 
16 facilitators-experts in the operation 
of the Ethos  platform (out of 27 regis -
tered as collaborators) were consul -
ted through a questionnaire. Likewise, 
Interviews were also conducted with 
three key actors within the TVD pro -
cess.
• Information processing.  The infor -
mation obtained was processed with 
descriptive statistical tools, and the 
opinions of the interviews were inter -
preted from the technical foundations Figure 2. Applications of the Vive Digital Plan Ecosystem in Colombia 2010-2014
Source: Applications of the Vive Digital Plan Ecosystem in Colombia 2010-2014.
 •
•
•Governme nt Online, one click away  from g overnme nt
Curre nt situation
 Online Governme nt Strate gy
 Initiatives
N° 1 in the Region :
Elect ronic governmen t
Citizen partici patio n
N° 9 World:
Online Governmen t 
Servi ces Subscri ptDEMOCRA CY
TRANSFORMAT ION
TRANSACTION
INTERACTION
INFORMAT ION•Crystal urn
•Online Congress
•Telecommu ting
•Territorial online 
gove rnmen t
•Governmen t Intranet
•Electronic syste m for publi c 
procuremen t
•Zero paper in centra l 
administratio n
•Online Notaries
•Online controlTerritorial 
EntitiesCentral 
Government
APPLI CATIONS10
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  
of discourse analysis. The internal 
consistency of the consultation instru -
ment was checked (Cronbach’s alpha 
acceptable α > 0.7) and validated the 
presence of stakeholders representing 
each group thereof for the study.
• Results Analysis . The opinions obtai -
ned by questionnaires were oriented 
towards establishing a rating for the 
results of the activities carried out and 
the expected benefits, while the opi -
nions obtained through the interviews 
were oriented towards an assessment 
of the impacts in scientific-technologi -
cal and socio-cultural terms.
4. Results and discussion 
4.1 Results of the TVD Project’s first 
component 
Figure 3  schematically summarizes the 
enriched and dynamic loop of interaction 
enabled by the ethos  platform between ICT 
solutions buyers and sellers and the govern -
ment of the Tolima region. As shown in Figure 3, the enriched and dy -
namic loop of interaction between stakehol -
ders facilitated several outcomes particular -
ly valuable to the government administration 
in place at the time, including the following:
• Recognition of Tolima’s touristic po -
tential 
• Recognition of the possibilities offered 
by ICT under web 2.0
• The creation of a specialized technolo -
gical platform to facilitate multi-user 
and online participation in popular 
consultations ( Ethos )
• The consolidation of a bank of initia -
tives to improve and change the tou -
rism and culture sector in the region, 
as shown in Tables 1 and 2.
• The generation of mobile applications 
(Apps) and websites, containing useful 
information for the tourism and cultu -
re industry, as seen on Table 3.
• The activation of work units that led to 
the emergence of a local cluster for the 
digital industry in Tolima, as Table 4 
shows.Figure 3. Interaction model Platform & Community participating in TVD
Source: Author’s own elaboration.
 
Prioritized  
actions
ICT sector in
Tolima and Colombia Bank of issues  
and solution 
opportunitiesInitiative s-
prioritizing 
Platform
Central operator
Capital city
ExpertsMunicip ality n1
Municip ality n2
Municip ality n3
Municip ality n4Needs, issues  
and 
opportunities
Citizens of Tolim a
Businessmen  in the area11
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
Table 1. List of categories hosting the 
initiatives generated through Ethos
Categories
Pricing Products and services
Promotion and                              
disseminationBase infrastructure
Safety and securityIncentives, support and 
recognition
Quality Environment
Technological                                       
InfrastructureLoyalty
Commercial                                         
InfrastructureIntegration
Education and training Historical heritage
Cultural identity Coverage and inclusion
Guidance and advicing Projects
Legalization
Source:  Author’s own elaboration based on the reports 
provided by the TVD Project.
Table 2. Consolidation of initiatives generated 
through Ethos
Prioritized sectors Issues Opportunities Needs
Tourism 47 63 55
Culture 8 7 16
Tourism and culture 97 103 149
Total 152 173 220
Source: Author’s own elaboration based on the TVD           
Project reports.
Table 3. Technological solutions with digital 
content generated for tourism - TVD Project
Content orientation 
areas Mobile                           
applications 
(App)Websites
Culture and                                   
gastronomy8 10
Sport and recreation 6 4
City and mobility 3 3
Conservation and         
environment3 1
Business development 0 3
Other topics 3 6
Total 23 27
Source: Author’s own elaboration based on the TVD               
Project reports.Table 4. Companies and alliances from the ICT 
sector, participating in the TVD project
Participants QuantityLocal 
operationOperation 
beyond the 
local
Entrepreneurs 25 20 5
Unique companies 7 5 2
Business Alliances 1 1 0
Total 33 26 7
Source: Author’s own elaboration based on the TVD 
Project reports.
4.2 Assessment of the Ethos  platform’s 
results 
The assessment of the results was perfor -
med based on the opinion provided by the 
process’s beneficiaries and facilitators, com -
pared to the two central activities that took 
place: the workshop to identify the needs and 
opportunities of the sector, and the interac -
tion between actors through the use of the 
Ethos  platform.
The workshop to “Identify needs and 
opportunities in the sector” was rated from 
good to excellent by the respondents, whom 
in this case were tourism sector actors, fa -
cilitators and experts. This high rating sug -
gests that the workshops met their intended 
purposes, facilitating the active participation 
of stakeholders from the tourism and culture 
sector in the region, as presented in Figure 
4a (opinion of stakeholders from the tourism 
sector) and Figure 4b (opinion of facilitators 
and experts).
Regarding the benefits generated by the 
workshops (nine workshops in total, held in 
as many municipalities), most of the benefi -
ciaries consulted agreed that these facilita -
ted the active participation of the different 
actors from the sector’s community and ena -
bled the compilation of a citizen concerns 
bank to be addressed by the Departmental 
government, as Figure 5  displays. Notwiths -
tanding, this same consensus is not evident 
in terms of facilitating the participation of 
actors from the different sub-regions of the 
Department, nor in the costs of consultation 
on issues felt in the sector. 12
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  
Figure 4a. Assessment of the workshop’s quality - Opinion of the beneficiaries
Source: Author’s own elaboration.
Figure 4b. Assessment of the workshop’s quality - Opinion of facilitators and experts
Source: Author’s own elaboration.
Continuing with the benefits generated 
by the workshops in the consultation carried 
out with facilitators and experts, the latter 
as well as the beneficiaries, agree that the workshops facilitated the active participation 
of the sector’s community’s different actors, 
and allowed to compile of a bank of citizen 
concerns to be attended by the Departmental  13
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
Figure 5. Assessment of the workshop’s benefits - Opinion of the beneficiaries
Source: Author’s own elaboration.
 Figure 6. Assessment of the workshop’s benefits - Opinion of facilitators and experts
Source: Author’s own elaboration.14
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  
government, as Figure 6  shows. Nonetheless, 
this group does not present the same appre -
ciation regarding the issue of costs and faci -
litating the participation of actors from the 
different sub-regions of the Department, sin -
ce the lowest ratings lie in the concept “Fa -
cilitated the design of actions oriented to the 
benefit of the sector” and “Created and va -
lidated a strategy of citizen participation in 
Tolima” according to the experts.
On the other hand, as seen in Figure 7,  the 
Ethos  ethnographic platform was rated by 
the consulted experts, with an overall rating 
above four on a scale from one to five, five 
being the best. These highlighted the con -
tribution to saving time in the carrying out 
of citizen consultations (62%) and the ease it 
offers for the capturing information from ci -
tizen opinions (56%).
4.3 Assessment of the impacts generated 
through the Ethos platform 
The qualitative analysis of the results 
stemming from the application of the  Ethos  
tool as an ICT tool for citizen participation in 
the design of regional public policies in Co -lombia was carried out on the basis of the in -
terviewees’ opinions, whose profile obeyed to 
people representing the process (representa -
tive of the national co-financing entity, repre -
sentative of the regional executing entity of 
the project and representative of the entity 
developing the Ethos  platform), considering 
its impacts through two dimensions: scienti -
fic-technological and socio-cultural. Some of 
the main views on the perceived impacts of 
ICT as a tool in public policies design are des -
cribed below.
In science and technology  matters, the 
results coming from the interviewees’ opi -
nions showed impacts in the generation of 
new knowledge about the touristic and cul -
tural destinations of the Region, thus contri -
buting to social innovation, the transferring 
of information and the generation of coope -
ration processes between the academy, sec -
tor ICT and government. To the interviewees, 
the Ethos  platform represented an innovative 
proposal for the design of public policies ai -
med at strengthening the region’s productive 
sectors, based on the crossing of information 
between demand and supply of initiatives. 
The scientific-technological cooperation was 
evidenced with the participation and con -Figure 7. Assessment of the ethos platform’s benefits - expert opinion
Source: Author’s own elaboration.15
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
fluence of diverse actors for the achievement 
of the project’s objectives: 
“...I believe that the participation of the -
se entities was active, key and enriching, 
because to the extent that we contributed, 
so did the ICT ministry, the government of 
Tolima and the university, and for this rea -
son the achievements that are now reported 
have been obtained ” (Co-financier).
The actors interviewed referred to the te-
chnology transfer  that took place through the 
Ethos  platform in such a way that it facilita -
ted citizen participation based on ICTs, and 
the appropriation of digital contents alongsi -
de it:
“(...) Of course, everything that has to do 
with technologies, everything that has to do 
with the new applications that we have, this 
station will be connected to a page that the 
Departmental Government has....in which all 
the artistic areas are located and they will 
have direct access to each of the events that 
are taking place ” (Representative of the De -
partmental Government).
Regarding socio-cultural  matters, there 
were impacts on the contributions towards 
greater inclusion of non-residents in the city 
into the generation of information that con -
tributed to the design of public policies for 
the region. The tools designed motivated cul -
tural changes in Tolima people, both in their 
traditional ways of communication with the 
public administration and in the sources 
used for consulting specialized information. 
The interviewees acknowledged the  Ethos  
platform to have operated as a support to cul -
tural  services  by facilitating the gathering 
of information on tourism and cultural con -
tent, as well as the generation of networks 
between different types of existing digital re -
sources to boost information on tourism con -
tents: 
“(...) Every time we make a festivity, every 
time we have a musical, cultural or dance 
event in the department of Tolima we want 
to promote it through this technological tool, 
which allows not only the Tolima people to 
see it but also foreigners who are outside the 
country ” (Representative of the departmen -
tal government).
The project brought about a change in the 
State’s relationships with the community, in -
sofar  as the citizen activation platform is per -ceived as a new channel of communication 
with the State , thus becoming a space that 
facilitates the participation of citizens in pu -
blic policy design processes:
“I believe that this project helped us to com -
ply with a good part of the axis 7 policies. 
Everything that has been done has a great 
impact on continuing to meet the goals of 
the government’s plan ” (Co-financier).
5. Conclusions  
The TVD Project implemented in the To -
lima region (Colombia), and in particular 
the usage of the Ethos  digital ethnographic 
platform as an ICT tool for citizen participa -
tion in the design of regional public policies, 
supports how the current digital media re -
presents an effective tool for the design and 
execution of public policies aimed at stren -
gthening the productive apparatus of a par -
ticular region and sector, in this case as su -
pport for the tourism and cultural industry 
of Tolima.
Within the scope of the impact perceived 
from the TVD project through the Ethos  plat-
form, the following aspects stand out: the ge -
neration of new knowledge, the activation of 
citizen participation, the appropriation of di -
gital contents and the motivation of changes 
in the ways of communicating with the public 
administration. 
The benefits arising from implementating 
the Ethos  Citizen Activation Platform (PAC) 
were present beyond the public administra -
tion, they are also reported in the promotion 
of the region’s tourism and culture sector, as 
well as in the activation of new actors (bu -
sinessmen/entrepreneurs) in the ICT sector. 
Looking forwards to the future, the results 
obtained from the TVD project have conti -
nued to be useful as a source of information 
for successive governments in the region to 
continue with other regional improvement 
processes. 
From the academic point of view, the re -
sults obtained in TVD support the thesis that 
the integration of ICTs facilitates citizen par -
ticipation and is an effective and enriching 
mechanism for the design, implementation 
and monitoring of public policies aimed at ad -
dressing issues related to the socio-economic 
development of a region.16
Helga Bermeo Andrade et al, ::  6. Acknowledgements 
The authors are grateful for the contribu -
tion of the members of the technical team 
that carried out the Technical Scientific, So -
cial, Cultural and Environmental Study (TCS -
C&A) of the Tolima Vive Digital Project at the 
Universidad of Ibagué (Colombia), as well as 
the coordinating team of the TVD Project for 
their leave to publish the results.
7. References
AGA. (2017). Alianza Gobierno Abierto.  Medellin, 
Colombia: Alianza Gobierno Abierto. 
Alzahrani, L., Al-Karaghouli, W., & Weerakkody, 
V. (2017). Analysing the critical factors influen -
cing trust in e-government adoption from citi -
zens’ perspective: A systematic review and a 
conceptual framework. International Business 
Review , 26(1), 164–175. 
Buchanan, J. M., & Tollison, R. D. (1984). The 
Theory of public choice--II . Michigan, USA: Uni -
versity of Michigan Press. 
Cortés-Sánchez, J. D., Cardona, D., & Wong, M. 
(2013). Gobierno electrónico: Diagnóstico de efi -
ciencia en municipios del programa MuNet II – 
Caso Panamá.  Bogotá, Colombia: Universidad 
del Rosario.
Criado, J. I., & Gil-García, J. R. (2013). Public Poli -
cy and Management. Gestión y política púbica . 
Ciudad de México, México: Centro de Investiga -
ción y Docencia Económica (CIDE). 
DNP. (2015). Evaluación de impacto del Plan Vive 
Digital. Recuperado  de https://colaboracion.
dnp.gov.co/CDT/Sinergia/Documentos/Plan_
Vive_Digital.pdf
Fals-Borda, O., & Rahman, M. A. (1991). Action 
and knowledge: Breaking the monopoly with 
participatory action research . New York, USA: 
Apex Press. 
Fischer, F. (1993). Citizen participation and the 
democratization of policy expertise: From theo -
retical inquiry to practical cases. Policy Scien -
ces, 26(3), 165-187. 
Fischer, F. (2000). Citizens, experts, and the envi -
ronment: The politics of local knowledge . Dur -
ham, USA: Duke University Press. 
García, B. C., & García Jiménez, A. (2013, enero). 
Herramientas interactivas y participación ciu -
dadana en los ayuntamientos españoles. Ámbi -
tos, (22). Retrieved from https://institucionales.
us.es/ambitos/?p=335Heckmann, D. (2011). Open Government—Retoo -
ling Democracy for the 21st Century. In IEEE 
Computer Society (Edi.), Proceedings of the 
44th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences . University of Hawaii at Manoa, Kauai, 
Hawaii, USA.
Hilgers, D. (2012). Open Government: Theore -
tische Bezüge und konzeptionelle Grundla -
gen einer neuen Entwicklung in Staat und 
öffentlichen Verwaltungen. Zeitschrift für Be -
triebswirtschaft, (6). Retrieved from https://
www.springerprofessional.de/en/open-govern -
ment-theoretische-bezuege-und-konzeptione -
lle-grundlag/5875066
Karkin, N. (2013). Herramientas Web 2.0 para  la 
participación pública a través de los sitios de 
i n t e r n e t  d e l  g o b i e r n o .  R e c u p e r a d o  d e   h t t p : / /
www.scielo.org.mx/pdf/gpp/v22nspe/v22ns -
pea9.pdf
Kim, Y., Kelly, T., & Raja, S. (2010). Building broad -
band: Strategies and policies for the developing 
world. Washington, USA: Global Information 
and Communication Technologies (GICT) De -
partment.
Koch, T., & Kralik, D. (2009). Participatory action 
research in health care . Oxford, UK: John Wiley 
& Sons. 
Koirala-Azad, S. (2017). Reclaiming the Collective: 
Challenging Neoliberal Ideology Through PAR. 
In Participatory Action Research and Educatio -
nal Development . New York, USA: Springer In -
ternational Publishing. 
Linders, D. (2012, octubre). From e-government 
to we-government: Defining a typology for ci -
tizen coproduction in the age of social media. 
Government Information Quarterly . Riverport 
Lane Maryland Heights, USA: Elsevier. 
Meijer, A. J., Curtin, D., & Hillebrandt, M. (2012). 
Open government: connecting vision and voice. 
International Review of Administrative Scien -
ces, 78(1). DOI: 10.1177/0020852311429533 
Mergel, I. (2013). A framework for interpreting 
social media interactions in the public sector. 
Government Information Quarterly , 30(4), 327-
334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2013.05.015
MINTIC. (2010). Diagnóstico y Punto de partida de 
Colombia para el Plan Vive Digital. Bogotá, Co -
lombia: Ministerio de Tecnologías de la Infor -
mación y las Comunicaciones de Colombia. Re -
cuperado de partir de http://www.mintic.gov.
co/portal/vivedigital/612/w3-article-1518.html
Mora, M. (2012). Evaluación ejecutiva al Plan Vive 
Digital Colombia. Recuperado de https://reposi -
tory.javeriana.edu.co/handle/10554/1426817
Cuadernos de Administración :: Universidad del Valle :: Vol. 34 N° 60 :: January - April 2018
Nam, T. (2012). Suggesting frameworks of citi -
zen-sourcing via Government 2.0. Government 
Information Quarterly , 29(1), 12-20. 
Pareja, N., & Echeverría, M. (2014). La opinión pú -
blica en la era de la información. Propuesta teó -
rico-metodológica para su análisis en México. 
Revista Mexicana de Opinión Pública , 17, 50-68. 
Picazo-Vela, S., Fernandez-Haddad, M., & Lu -
na-Reyes, L. F. (2016). Opening the black box: 
Developing strategies to use social media in 
government. Government Information Quar -
terly, 33(4), 693-704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2016.08.004
Purón-Cid, G., & Gil-García, J. (2012). Gobierno 
abierto, tecnologías de información y análisis de 
políticas públicas: Oportunidades y retos para 
América Latina y el Caribe. XVII Congreso In -
ternacional del CLAD. Centro Latinoamericano 
de Administración para el Desarrollo (CLAD), 
Cartagena de Indias, Colombia.
Ramírez-Alujas, Á. (2014). Gobierno abierto. Eu-
nomía, (5), 201-216.
Ramírez-Alujas, Á. V. (2011). Gobierno Abierto y 
Modernización de la Gestión Pública: Tenden -
cias actuales y el invitable camino que vie -
ne. Reflexiones Seminales. Revista Enfoques , 
IX(15), 99-125. 
Riascos Erazo, S. C., Martínez Giordano, G., & 
Solano Rodriguez, O. (2008). El Gobierno Elec -
trónico como estrategia de participación ciu -
dadana en la Administración pública a nivel de 
Suramérica -Casos Colombia y Uruguay. En Co-
llECTeR Iberoamérica  (pp. 1-10). Madrid, Espa -
ña: Universidad Politécnica de Madrid. Ruta Medellín. (2015). Mi Medellín, mejor iniciati -
va de gobierno abierto y acceso a la información 
según OEA.  Recuperado de http://agacolombia.
org/
Salem, F., & Jarrar, Y. (2013). Braving the Futu -
re of Government Services: Paving the Way 
Forward. The Government Summit Review,  7-9. 
Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/264900305
Sour-Vargas, L. (2007). Evaluando al gobierno 
electrónico: avances en la transparencia de las 
finanzas públicas estatales. Economía, Socie -
dad y Territorio,  VI(23), 613-654. 
Uribe Correa, S., Puerta Zapata, A., & Restrepo 
Gómez, B. (1996). Módulo 6: Investigación Eva -
luativa. En Especialización en teoría, métodos y 
técnicas de investigación social . Bogotá, Colom -
bia: Instituto Colombiano para el Fomento de la 
Educación Superior, ICFES. 
Valenzuela-Montes, L. M., & Carvalho-Cortes-Sil -
va, J. (2015). Observatorios urbanos en Améri -
ca Latina: ¿observar o participar? Economía, 
Sociedad y Territorio , XV(49), 779-806. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.22136/est002015710
Vercelli, A. (2013). La participación ciudadana en 
la era digital. Análisis de las tecnologias digita -
les que se utilizan para la gestión de derechos 
ciudadanos. Virtualis , 4(7), 115-129 
Wijnhoven, F., Ehrenhard, M., & Kuhn, J. 
(2015Open government objectives and parti -
cipation motivations. Government Information 
Quarterly , 32(1), 30-42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2014.10.002
¿How to quote this article?
Bermeo Andrade, H., González-Bañales, D. L., Hernández Umaña, I., Calderón Pinedo, M. (2018). Citizen partici -
pation in the design of public policy through ICTs in Colombia. Cuadernos de Administración, 34 (60), 3-17. DOI: 
10.25100/cdea.v34i60.5990
Cuadernos de Administración journal by Universidad del Valle is under licence  Creative Commons Reconoci -
miento-NoComercial-SinObrasDerivadas 4.0. Based in http://cuadernosdeadministracion.univalle.edu.co/