 
  
The K4D helpdesk service provides brief summaries of current research, evidence, and lessons 
learned. Helpdesk reports are not rigorous or systematic reviews; they are intended to provide an 
introduction to the most important evidence related to a research question. They draw on a rapid desk -
based review of published literature and consultation with subject specialists.  
Helpdesk reports are commissioned by the UK De partment for International Development and other 
Government departments, but the views and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of 
DFID, the UK Government, K4D or any other contributing organisation. For further information, please 
contact h elpdesk@k4d.info.  
Helpdesk Report   
Civil documentation for I nternally 
Displaces Persons (IDPs)  in 
protracted displacement  
Kerina Tull  
University of Leeds Nuffield Centre for International Health and Development  
5 July 2019 
Question  
 How to encourage a government to simplify or provide temporary civil documentation to 
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)  in protracted displacement?  
 
Contents  
1. Summary  
2. IDP: Definitions  used in literature and resulting issues  
3. Solutions  for encouraging the Iraqi government   
4. Advice for further action   
5. References  
 
  2 1. Summary  
Internal displacement is a global humanitarian, human rights, and security issue. As national 
governments bear the primary responsibility for internally displaced pe rsons’  (IDPs’) protection 
and welfare, they need encouragement to simplify or provide tempor ary civil documentation  for 
them – especially  for people  in protracted displacement. In a protracted crisis such as Iraq, direct 
assistance by government  is not sufficient  (IOM Iraq, 2019) ; it is vital that self -reliance among 
individuals and communities i s also built up (St. Thomas King and Ardis, 2015 ; IRC, 2017 ; 
OCHA, 2018 ). This review gives examples of how the Iraqi government can simplify or provide 
temporary civil documentation to IDPs in protracted displacement.  Conflict and violence are the 
main tr iggers of internal displacement; therefore, information is provided on such  countries  with 
protracted displacement . Practical solutions used  effectively  by them is also included .  
If national governments are unable or unwilling to meet their responsibilities, the international 
community has a role to play in promoting and reinforcing efforts to ensure protection, assistance 
and solutions for IDPs (OCHA, 2018). Therefore, m ost of the literature  available is focused 
towards the needs of the IDPs , as well as the assistance provided by these agencies, e.g. the 
United Nations ( UN). Evidence is mainly for both refugees and IDPs  – in some cases the terms 
are used inter -changeably .  
In order to simplify the  docum entation  process, a dvances in digital technology are resulting in 
new approaches , e.g. introduction of centrally -based identity  systems by governments around 
the world (Oakeshott et al., 2018 ; Mills, 2019; UNHCR, 2019 ). As this review is focusing on Iraq, 
the g overnmen t could also accept t estimonies of mukhtars  (local mayors) , recommending 
citizens and affirming their place of residence, as "an acceptable official document" (al -Taie, 
2017b)  as a temporary solution  to security clearance . This could prevent potential problems due 
to movement from  place of origin (LandInfo, 2018). Multi -count ry evidence proves that u pdating 
policies with inclusivity is a necessary but complex and longer-term process ( Saieh et al., 2019) : 
disability and g ender -based discrimination in existing Iraqi laws and practices regarding civil 
registration , as well as  the provision of nationality legal documentation , need  to be addressed . 
However, no evidence was found to see if this is currently the case.  Likewise, d ata allowing use 
of expired documentation  will also need further investigation . 
2. IDP: Definitions used in literature  and resulting issues  
Internally displaced persons ( IDPs ) 
The UN adopted the ‘ Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement ’ in 2001; the African Union 
adopted a ‘ Convention for the Protection an d Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in 
Africa’ in 2009 (now known as the Kampala Convention). Both documents give the same 
definition of internally displaced persons (IDPs): “persons or groups of persons who have been 
forced or obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a 
result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, 
violations of human rights or natural or human -made disasters, and who have not cross ed an 
internationally recognized State border.”  Thus, if a person who otherwise fulfils the definition of 
refugee has not crossed an international border, he or she is an IDP. A person who has been 
forced  to leave his or her home for other reasons, not fal ling within the definition of the 1951 
Convention or the 1969 African Convention, is also an IDP. The same distinction is not made 3 based on the reason for moving as for those who are in another country than that of their usual 
residence.1 
Protracted displacement  
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR ) defines protracted displacement as 
displacement for five years or more. However,  data shows that from 1974 –2014, fewer than 
one refugee crisis in 40 was resolved within three years; in fact, more t han 80% of all 
refugee crises lasted for 10 years or more  (Crawford et al., 2015). There are far more IDPs 
than refugees in the world today, and the scale of the problem is challenging the capacity of 
humanitarian organisations and governments to respond t o the needs of both IDPs and local 
populations. Conflict and violence are the main triggers of internal displacement; a significant 
proportion of IDPs are in the Middle East, especially in Iraq, Libya , Syria, Turkey , and Yemen .2  
Rights for IDPs vs refugee s 
Refugee status entitles individuals to certain rights and international protection , such as from the 
UN, as they had to cross an international border to find safet y (Wilson, 2015) . However, being an 
IDP is not a legal status ; IDPs are still under the jurisdiction of their own government, and may 
not claim any rights additional to those shared by their compatriots.3 However, help is available 
from humanitarian aid agencies.  
IDP issues related to lack of civil documentation  
IDPs  are unable to replace personal documentation that was left behind, lost, destroyed, or 
confiscated in the conflict or disaster situation , or during fleeing their home ( Kälin and Entwisle 
Chapuisat, 2018 ). This can result in numerous issues , as such docume nts are often necessary to 
access basic services.  The fact that IDPs may be unable to replace lost or destroyed personal 
documentation, even years after their initial displacement, impedes their abi lity to become self -
sufficient (as  such documents are essential to move freely, access social services, qualify for 
reconstruction or compensation funds, purchase or rent housing and land, enrol in school, and 
find employment  in the formal labour market ). Hence , the need for  help from their government.  
3. Solutions  for encouraging the Iraqi government  
Lessons from Syria show that solutions must start with recognition of the fundamental 
importance of the right to a legal identity, continue with an understanding as to why some IDPs 
have been una ble to obtain such documentation, and conclude with practical steps  and 
measures to assist persons obtain such vital documentation in full compliance with international 
law protections (Clutterbuck et al., 2018).  It is vital that  self-reliance  among indivi duals and 
communities is also built up (St. Thomas King and Ardis, 2015).  
                                                   
1 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/375811469772770030/pdf/107276 -WP-P156810 -PUBLIC.pdf  
2 Conference: “Responses to Displacement in the Middle East.” LSE, London UK, 30 November 2017: 
https://www.lse.ac.uk/middle -east-centre/research/collaboration -programme/2016 -17/secure/displacement -
conference  
3 www. forcedmigration.org  4  
1. Recognising  the international law of human rights  and improving transparency  
The right to a legal identity is enshrined in international law. The ‘ International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights ’ notes the right of all persons to have recognition before the law (Clutterbuck 
et al., 2018). However,  this does not necessarily  apply to IDPs – and governments “are too often 
part of the problem.”4  
In Iraq, lack of governmental transparency has made it difficult to assess the magnitude of many 
reported human rights problems. Iraq is party to several international human rights conventions , 
and many of them have not been yet ratified.5 Now that the Iraq High Commission for Human 
Rights (IHCHR) is “independent ,”6 and empowered to co -ordinate with relevant agencies to 
develop joint strategies and mechanisms to implement its functions , this will be the right moment 
to recognise and act on the needs of IDPs .  
Evidence  
Ukraine: After adoption of the law on ‘Provision of the Rights and Freedoms of Internally 
Displaced Persons,’ the government had to develop regulations within three months , and bring 
its regulations on IDPs in compliance with t he law  (Council of Europe, 2016: 10) . However,  by 
the end of the year no document was issued.  After formation of the parliament coalition and 
appointment of a new Cabinet of Ministers, synergy in co -operation of central governmental 
bodies, including the M inistry of Social Policy and non-government organisations ( NGOs ) in the 
field of protection of rights of IDPs, is growing. Regular meetings of representatives of NGOs and 
central governmental bodies take place in the Ministry of Social Policy.  
2. Vocalise gov ernment support for IDPs’ right s with partners  
National governments bear the primary responsibility for IDP protection and welfare.7 DFID is 
aware that it is “crucial” that governments, with international support, take action to provide safe 
and durable solutions for IDPs.8 Recent research from the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) shows that less than 15% of IDPs in a non -camp population had lost documents 
due to displacement. However, three years later (round 3 of data collection), among th ose who 
had lost documents, less than half ha d been able to replace them (IOM Iraq, 2019: 65).   
All Iraqis have the right to access civil documentation, which should be regardless of affiliations 
of their relatives  (e.g. to Daesh). To do this ( Council of E urope, 2016 ): 
 The Prime Minister’s Office must  declare the need for legal documentation for displaced 
populations;  
 This must be p rogressively integrate d into the social and economic life of the community  
(via policies) , and 
                                                   
4 https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/foreign -affairs/house/house -magazine/104503/lord -mcconnell -internally -
displaced -persons -idp 
5 https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/iraq_en/47660/Human%20rights%20and%20democracy%20in%20Iraq  
6 Iraq Corruption Report (2018). https://www.ganintegrity.com/portal/country -profiles/iraq/  
7 https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IDPersons/Pages/Issues.aspx  
8 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/human -rights -council -38-internally -displaced -persons -idps 5  Engagement with local authorities boosted, as h aving an identity document  facilitates 
social participation for many IDPs and other risks of marginalisation (Oakeshott et al., 
2018).  
Evidence  
Kenya: Kenya d eveloped their “ National Policy on the Prevention of Internal Displacement, 
Protection and Assistance to IDP s” (Republic of Kenya, 2011 ). This policy is applied to all IDPs 
without discrimination of any kind (such as race, colour, sex, language, religion or belief, political 
or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, legal or social status, age, disability, property, 
birth, or any other similar criteria).  However,  latest figures show that  the progress of over 700 
IDPs towards durable solutions cannot be verified.9 
3. Protect vulnerable groups  and recognise their rights for legal documentation  by 
using inclusivity in policy development  
Women  
Lack of documentation places restrictions on women’s movements and on their ability to obtain 
title to land . The non -recognition of customary forms of property and land tenure, and domestic 
laws prohibiting widows from inheriting land title from husbands killed in conflict or disasters, may 
limit possibilities for finding durable solutions (Kälin and Entwisle C hapuisat, 2018; Oakeshott et 
al., 2018).  
Evidence – unavailable: There is no ev idence available to show that there is a priority to change 
this law in patriarchal  countries any time soon.  
Disabled  
In Iraq, disabled women and girls are not entitled to soci al security payments if they are married 
or if their father is alive (Ceasefire Centre for Civilian Rights and Minority Rights Group 
International, 2016: 25).  
Evidence – Kenya: The government accepts that IDPs, including women and children, the elderly 
or persons with disabilities, have th e right to liberty and security, as well as freedom of 
movement. All IDPs are also provided with free legal aid in accordance with national law 
(Republic of Kenya, 2011).  
                                                   
9 http://www.internal -displacement.org/countries/kenya  6 Children  
Regional civil registration and vital stat istic (CRVS) initiatives in Africa10 and in Asia and the 
Pacific11 have shone a light on the importance of host states registering the births of refugees, 
IDPs, and stateless persons, to protect child rights (Oakeshott et al., 2018).  
The Committee for Human Rights states  that Iraq i s in process of legally recognising children  
born under Daesh  rule.12 For months  in 2019 , there have been ongoing discussions between the 
commission, parliament, as well as human and civil rights groups , about issuing formal 
documentation to the children. If passed, this legislation will allow children with missing 
documentation to attend schools and graduate. They will be able to receive healthcare like any 
other Iraqi, as well as benefit from social wel fare. Children with no civil documentation may also 
be at a higher risk of recruitment by armed groups ; this is  because their options to find economic 
support are limited , and because they have fewer legal protections. Children who don’t have birth 
certifi cates are also more exposed to diseases , as they are not able to use health services e.g. 
for vaccinations  (Baker, 2019)  – which could cause a national emergency if left unchecked . As 
the Iraqi government  (with  the international community ) continues to inv est in the restoration of 
public services and institutions, it mush ensur e that  the people most severely affected by the 
conflict with Daesh have the documentation required to access services . This  will be critical to 
guarantee that Iraq’s road to recovery  is inclusive. Failure to include children in this  risks 
undermining prospects for social cohesion , and exacerbating existing ethno -religious tensions 
that were dramatically worsened by the conflict with Daesh (Saieh et al., 2019).  
Evidence  
Cameroon: The status and treatment of refugees in Cameroon is governed by Law No. 2005/006 
of July 2005 and implementing Decree No. 2011/389 of November 2011. Under these statutes, 
registered refugees and IDPs can access health and education services witho ut paying 
significant fees. Documentation, however, remains a critical issue  (The World Bank, 2018: 14).  
Côte d’Ivoire:  The government acceded to ‘International Conventions on S tatelessness ,’ and in 
August 2013 reformed its nationality law, key steps to cl arify the nationality of thousands of 
residents . Since the adoption of the Abidjan Declaration to eradicate statelessness in West Africa 
in February 2015, 6,400 people have received nationality papers.13 However, some observers 
believe  that the government's mass naturalisations  (citizenship)  is solely intended to boost its 
electoral support base.  
Georgia:  Conflicts with neighbouring Russia have led to around 300,000 people displaced within 
Georgia.  Recognising their health needs, the govern ment established health insurance schemes 
targeted at IDP populations. The situation is complex, however.  There is shared responsibility for 
delivery of health services across national and regional governments, whilst various IDP groups 
have been offered d ifferent entitlements. Health Research Union  (HRU)’s findings show that 
                                                   
10 Fourth Conference of African Ministers Responsible for Civil Registration. Nouakchott Declaration (2017).  
http://apai -crvs.org/sites/default/files/public/Nouakchott%20Declaration%20 -%20Dec2017 -English.pdf  
10 Ministerial Declaration to “Get every -one in the picture” in Asia and the Pacific (2014). 
http://getinthepicture.org/sites/default/files/resources/Ministe rial.Declaration.English.final_.pdf  
12 https://www.thenational.ae/world/mena/iraq -in-process -of-formally -recognising -isis-children -committee -for-
human -rights -says-1.869726  
13 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -world -factbook/fields/print_2194.html  7 despite government attempts to target health insurance schemes to IDPs, the complexity has left 
IDPs substantially in the dark about their entitlemen ts; even the doctors themselves do not know 
what their IDP patients are entitled to (ELRHA, 2017).  
Azerbaijan: IDPs benefit from free or low -cost education, health care and energy and have some 
special employment opportunities.14 Though their ability to express their interests is limited by 
inability to elect municipal representatives.  
Involve IDPs in developing frameworks  to complement other collaborations  
Involving IDPs would help move the search for solutions in the right direction (Walicki, 2009: 26).  
Listening to IDP voices is crucial to ensuring that their identity document  needs are met , 
and their protection enhanced. This will complement other collaboration , such as joint work 
in countries where governments are seeking to include refugees and IDPs in identity 
document  systems ( Oakeshott et al., 2018 ).  
Evidence  
Kenya: Proven  profiling and registration tools are used in such identification processes. In 
particular, it is ensured by law that IDPs are involved in such identification processes ( Republi c of 
Kenya, 2011).  
4. Use local people’s testimonies as official  documentation  
Practical steps towards full realisation of the right to an identity can include collaborating with 
trusted individuals.  Proof of legal stay in the host country is often necessary before birth and 
other documents can be issued. In Iraq, m ukhtars (local mayors) know the residents of the ir 
village or neighbourhood , and all the residents know him (al -Taie, 2017a). These local d ignitaries  
have been providing security forces with a trove of information, including displaced Iraqis who 
have moved into their communities from other areas.15 Their presence supports improved 
security and administrative services and facilitates two -way co mmunication between the 
government and residents ( al-Taie, 2017a ; Ahmed, 2018).  
Anbar is reinstating the mukhtar system in all districts of the province (Ahmed, 2018). They will 
be authorised to process civil transactions and stamp forms needed by residen ts. Baghdad's 
government has commissioned 400 dignitaries in residential areas to serve as mukhtars, 
selecting them on their competence, integrity, and good reputation  (al-Taie, 2017a ).16 In Mosul, 
local council decided to dismiss mukhtars  who continued working in the city while Daesh was in 
control. The city administration has started selecting a new group of mukhtars to be in charge of 
monitoring newcomers or suspicious persons, and reporting them to the security services, and 
also will b e responsible for vouching for the good character of other local residents (al -Taie, 
2017b). The testimonies of mukhtars, recommending citizens and affirming their place of 
residence, constitute "an acceptable official document" (al -Taie, 2017b). These tes timonies can 
                                                   
14 https: //www.crisisgroup.org/europe -central -asia/caucasus/azerbaijan/tackling -azerbaijan -s-idp-burden  
15 https://diyaruna.com/en_GB/articles/cnmi_di/features/2018/12/12/feature -05 
16 This is currently a pilot phase; more mukhtars will be needed as Baghdad comprises of 37 administrative units 
divided into small towns or neighbourhoods that house about eight mil lion people.  8 be of essential importance "when issuing official documents related to births, deaths, marriage 
agreements, divorce , application to universities , and for official jobs."  
Evidence  
Sri Lanka: The government has adopted guidelines to promote meas ures by which the Ministry 
of Disaster Management and Human Rights (MDMHR) and UNHCR by using community 
members as trusted intermediaries.17  
Côte d’Ivoire: The government undertook a civil registration exercise during the period 2007 -
2008 aimed at providin g everyone with a birth certificate and identity card to be registered by the 
local magistrate acting in the presence of traditional authorities. It was sufficient to provide oral 
statements of two witnesses to provide the necessary information needed (IAS C, 2010: 39).  
Syria: The conflict in Syria has resulted in the closure and destruction of many civil registry 
offices. In non -government controlled areas it is almost impossible to obtain official Syrian civil 
documentation (Clutterbuck et al., 2018). Inst ead, IDPs said they obtain civil documents from the 
local sharia court, local councils, NGO/de facto authorities , and armed actors. These documents 
may be all that are available to IDPs, yet questions as to their legal validity and recognition 
remain.  
Tanz ania:  Neighbours and community members can play a crucial role in facilitating access to 
government services, the banking system, or employment opportunities. This social capital is 
critical to the lives of the urban displaced, particularly those who lack authorisation to live in 
Dar es Salaam (IRC, 2017: 15).  However, this may be applicable more for refugees than IDPs.  
5. Use available frameworks for action in adapting policies for accountabil ity 
The current ‘ Global Compact on Refugees’  discussions provide only limited considerations with 
respect to IDPs. This is a critical omission given the likelihood that returning refugees, in 
particular, may become IDPs. While approximately  forty States have introduced laws and 
policies, only one th ird have been fully implemented. Critical to this process is strong state 
capacity , but also domestic and international accountability mechanisms (Orchard, 2018: 1).  
Frameworks like the ‘Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)’ have achieved broad internation al 
buy-in for certain goals.18 However, refugees and IDPs have not been elevated sufficiently as 
key populations within these goals.19 Though not legally -binding, the ‘Guiding Principles’ have 
attained significant authority since their inception. In Septembe r 2005, Heads of State and 
governments assembled at the World Summit in New York and recognised the Guiding 
Principles as "an important international framework for the protection of internally displaced 
persons."20 The ‘ Guiding Principles’ provide a compreh ensive set of durable solutions for IDPs 
                                                   
17 https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5b449f104.pdf  
18 i.e. to “provide legal identity for all, including birth registration” by 2030 (target 16.9). New York Declaration for 
Refugees and Migrants  (2016). https://www.unhcr.org/new -york-declaration -for-refugees -and-migrants.html  
19 Samman E, Lucci P, Hagen -Zanker J, Bhatkal T, Telias Simunovic A, Nicolai S, Stuart E, and Caron C (2018). 
SDG  Progress:  Fragility,  crisis  and leaving  no one behind . September  2018.  ODI and IRC. 
https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/document/3260/odireport.pdf  
20 G.A. Res. 60/L.1, 132, U.N. Doc. A/60/L.1.  9 and are therefore a useful framework in such circumstances. However, introduction of domestic 
legislation and policies is only the first step.  
The 2010 ‘IASC Framework on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons’ is widely 
recognised as the internationally agreed benchmark to work towards solutions for IDPs (IASC, 
2010: 39):  
 The competent national or local authorities need to facilitate the issuance of new 
documents or the replacement of documents lost in the course of displacement, without 
imposing unreasonable conditions, such as requiring the return to one’s area of habitua l 
residence in order to obtain documents.  
 Women and men have equal rights to obtain documents and women have the right to 
have documents issued in their own names.  
 Separated and unaccompanied children also need to be provided with their own 
documents.  
Evidence  – uncertain :  
While a number of States have successfully implemented their own IDP legislation and policies , 
the overall implementation picture is mixed .21 Experience from Angola and Colombia shows that 
incorporating the ‘Guiding Principles’ into domestic law does not necessarily lead to better 
government policies or to automatic improvements in the rights of IDPs, but at least there is 
legislation in place against which governments can be held to account.22  
6. Clarify  use of expired documentation  in law to ease replacement  
In Iraq, expired identity  documents could be used due to lack of means to update them. 
However, a number of people who have successfully obtained civil IDs for their families reported 
being asked to pay bribes ranging from 100,000 t o a million Iraqi Dinars (84 to 840 USD) to civil 
directorate officials if they wanted to avoid delays in their cases (Saieh et al., 2019: 21). Not 
everybody can afford this.  
Evidence – uncertain :  
In Ukraine, a mendments to the IDP  law neither clarified whether previously issued 
IDP certificates will remain valid after their expiration date, nor stipulated a procedure for 
exchanging previously issued certificates for ones with no expiration date. This has caused a 
situation where thousands of IDPs  with ex pired IDP  certificates cannot renew them. This 
situation must be resolved urgently. Doing so would simply require clarifying the respective 
procedures in the final provisions of the IDP  Law and aligning the by -law with these (Council of 
Europe, 2016).  
Allow freedom of movement to update /replace  documentation  
IDPs are scattered across different governorates with varying degrees of security and access 
constraints (St. Thomas King and Ardis, 2015). The long -term risk is that missing, expired or 
incomplete docu mentation could become a significant obstacle to return and other durable 
                                                   
21 https://www.unhcr.org/5a86d0497.pdf  
22 https://www.oecd.org/countries/eritrea/35093445.pdf  Refer to Section 6.2  10 solutions. Lack of civil documentation continues to impede IDPs’ freedom of movement (UNHCR, 
2019). In Jeddah Camps in Ninewa Governorate, IDPs reported that their freedom to go outs ide 
of the camps was limited even for medical purposes as they lacked civil documentation and they 
feared being harassed at checkpoints.  
Identity document  cards can only be issued in the district where someone is registered 
(LandInfo, 2016: 18). That mean s that IDPs often need help obtaining new documents if they live 
in another governorate than where they are registered. There is, however, a plan to open an 
office for such documentation in Erbil, but it might take more than one year to establish. Once 
this office is established, and, for instance, an IDP from Mosul obtains an identity document  
card from this office, it would appear on the identity document  card that the card was issued in 
Mosul. This could potentially cause a problem for IDPs living and ge tting married in KRI 
(LandInfo, 2018 : 11). 
Evidence  
Columbia: in conjunction with the National Civil Registry Office UNHRC focuses on IDPs and 
persons at risk of displacement. The project facilitates access to State services, improves 
security, updates civ il registries, and provides identity cards for children and adults. UNHCR has 
put mobile teams with the necessary equipment (computers, fingerprint materials, cameras and a 
satellite antenna to connect the unit with the national database) at the disposal o f the National 
Civil Registry. Although campaigns have traditionally focused on rural or hard -to-reach areas, 
urban campaigns have also been carried out. Altogether, from 2000 to 2009, birth registration 
and identity cards were issued for hundreds of thous ands of children between ages 7 and 18  
years  (UNHCR, 2013: 4).  
7. Centralise registration procedures to aid in issuing cost-effective residency 
documentation  
99% of IDPs are in low - and middle -income countries (LMICs), therefore they face severe 
economic chal lenges as a result of displacement (Huang and Graham, 2018). In Iraq, the 
government  has already lower ed policy barriers  for IDPs , such as requiring legal permission to 
reside and work - but only  in certain areas  (Home Office, 2017; Huang and Graham, 2018).  
In Iraq, civil status documentation  is generally issued and renewed at the local civil status office 
in a person’s place of origin where the original records are maintained. However, this prospect is 
not feasible for those originating from areas under Dae sh control or conflict areas. In response to 
the large -scale displacement since 2014, alternative civil status offices have been opened in 
various parts of the country to issue/renew different types of civil status documentation. However, 
restoring nationa l civil registration systems to facilitate issuance of IDs will take into account the 
reasons for which IDPs may have been un able to obtain such documents .  
Evidence   
There are many options now for CRVS software products that countries could use, with vary ing 
capabilities, product features, and prices  (Mills, 2019) . 11 Provide appropriate government  staff  contacts  to aid returnees  
All IDPs should be given points of contact in the local government administration in case they 
face barriers to their full return to their lands (Wassel, 2009: 8). According to the Forced 
Migration Review (Wassel, 2009: 8), IDPs should not be taken off the  IDP registration list until it 
is confirmed they have returned to their original place of residence, not just returned to their 
home village.  
Nevertheless, administrative procedures involved to recover lost identification documents is 
reportedly filled with obstacles.23 For example, persons displaced from Salah Al -Din and Al -
Anbar governorates cannot issue/renew their civil identity document  card in Baghdad. Rather, 
the civil identity document  card has to be issued/renewed in Samarra/Salah Al -Din (for IDP s 
from Salah Al -Din), and Ameriyat Al -Fallujah/Al -Anbar (IDPs from Fallujah). For IDPs from 
Ninewa, several alternative directorates have been established in January 2015 to deal with IDPs 
from specific areas (none of which is in Baghdad). Repeated changes  to applicable instructions 
and the specified locations have reportedly caused confusion among IDPs and lawyers as to 
which office to approach.  
There are reportedly insufficient staff working in these offices, resulting in delays in 
administration (UNHCR, 2016: 27 -28). The rule is that two members of staff must be present 
when new identity document  cards are issued ; according to the Director -General of GDN  (); 
control of disloyal employees had become much more stringent (LandInfo, 2016: 22). Employees 
of the branches in the cities as well as in the rural areas have a lot of experience and have 
received special training to check for falsifications.  However, apparently bureaucracy has more 
than doubled in size of staff since the US -led invasion , leading to muc h longer waiting times for 
documentation replacements .24 
Evidence  
Kenya: Free or subsidised transportation for IDPs to facilitate their access to economic activities 
away from their present location are provided  (Republic of Kenya, 2011). Administrative 
requirements, such as documentation for registering, are also waived in order for services to be 
acce ssed.Officials directly involved in the assistance for or protection of IDPs are to be trained 
and advised on how to carry out their duties in line with policy (Republic  of Kenya, 2011).  
Ukraine: The government a llocate d adequate resources from the State Budget, including to the 
newly -designated Ministry mandated with lead responsibility on IDP  issues as well as to regional 
and local authoriti es, to address internal displacement in all phases, including supporting safe, 
voluntary, and durable solutions to displacement  (Council of Europe, 2016: 10) . According to the 
Decree No. 505 , the government allocated Ukrainian Hryvnia (UAH) 510 million (USD 20 million) 
to the Ministry of Social Policy to provide monthly targeted assistance to IDPs.25   
                                                   
23 Since Daesh took control of large parts of  Ninewa and Anbar in 2014, interim offices have been established in 
Dohuk, Bagdad and Kerbala, where people from areas controlled by Daesh can be issued identity document  
(ID) cards (Iraqi e mbassy in Amman, meeting, 2014). Daesh issue d separate ID cards in the area they currently 
control, but these ID cards are not recognised by the Iraqi authorities (LandInfo, 2016: 18).  
24 https://www.ft.com/content/8ea461b2 -77e7 -11e9 -be7d -6d846537acab  
25 On 1 October  2014 , two CMU decrees for IDPs had been adopted: the Decree of CMU No. 505 ‘ On Monthly 
Targeted Ass istance to Persons who Move from Temporarily Occupied Territory of Ukraine and Districts of the 12 Allow use  of innovation  to register births and deaths and issue certificates  
Retrieving birth registration records, issuing a duplicate copy of a birth certificate , or sharing civil 
registration data with other relevant agencies can be ineffective and time consuming with paper -
based systems.  
According to a Western embassy in Amman, fake birth certificates were the personal documents 
most frequently uncov ered by this embassy (LandInfo, 2016: 29). One possible reason for this 
may be that many people do not have a birth certificate, but need to obtain one to be issued an 
identity document  card and nationality certificate. The information in a fake birth cert ificate is not 
necessarily false.  
Death certificates are issued by hospitals, although the Ministry of Health (MoH) is responsible 
for registering deaths and certifying death certificates with a stamp. A standard form exists, and 
the certificate is issued in four copies, of which the deceased’s parents or other close relatives 
are given one, while the three others are filed in the same way as birth certificates. Iraq does not 
have a central register of deaths (Karagiozakis, 2009). According to diplomatic so urces in 
Amman, a large percentage of fake death certificates have been detected (LandInfo, 2016: 29).  
A paper published in the Canadian Studies in Population journal, based on a UNFPA (United 
Nations Population Fund) funded field visit to Iraq, explained that all births, deaths, marriages 
and divorces are updated on the family registry (Bah, 2014). Family records are held locally at 
the daa’ira (local civil registration office), where a new event, for example a birth, marriage or 
divorce, would be manually  input onto the family register. However, as the process is manual, not 
electronic, there will be some time lag in records being updated  (Home Office, 201 7: 19). 
Evidence  
Côte d’Ivoire: UNHCR legal aid programmes assisted thousands of people with informati on and 
late birth registration in the context of the large -scale audiences foraines  (mobile court hearings) 
carried out in the country in 2008 and 2009. These itinerant judicial hearings for granting of birth 
certificates  targeted persons age 13 and above who were born in Côte d’Ivoire, regardless of 
their nationality. They benefitted a total of approximately 900,000 people in Côte d’Ivoire and 
have helped to prevent statelessness (UNHCR, 2013: 4).  
Sri Lanka: The Government’s Department of Registrations of Persons  has already taken steps to 
issue birth, death and marriage certificates to the IDPs currently housed in welfare centres in 
Vavuniya, Mannar and Jaffna.26 
Promote Biometric National Card  to ease monitoring  
The Iraqi National Card  is an electronic  biometric  card issued by the  Ministry of Interior  (MoI) 
from 1 January 2016. It replace s the Nationality Certificate and Civil Identification Document 
previously issued. In 2018 it also replaced the Residency Card. It will also replace the Ration 
                                                   
Antiterrorist Operation to Cover Living Expenses, including Housing and Facilities ’, and the Decree of CMU No. 
509 ‘On Account of Persons who Move from Temporar ily Occupied Territories of Ukraine and Districts of the 
Antiterrorist Operation.’ However, According to the Decree No.  509, the registration procedure is not clearly 
determined.   http://khpg.org/e n/index.php?id=1433405434  
26 https://reliefweb.int/report/sri -lanka/sri -lanka -birth-marriage -and-death -certificates -idps 13 card (PDS -card). This card has a high security platform and is connected directly to the Iraqi Civil 
System.27 The biometric chip contains fingerprints of all ten fingers of the applicant, as well as a 
scan of their iris, and a colour photo.  
Evidence  
South Sudan: IOM began Biometric Registration of IDPs in June 2014. The process includes 
fingerprinting of all household members and  photographing young children and babies whose 
fingerprints are not recordable. 28 Registration is complemented through regular authenticat ion. 
To date (April 2019 figures), 700,000 beneficiaries of social support (including IDPs) are active in 
its programmes .29 They can also be observed on an ongoing basis.  
4. Advice for further action  
Collaborate with international agencies to ensure IDP self -reliance  
If national governments are unable or unwilling to meet their responsibilities, the international 
community has a role to play in promoting and reinforcing efforts to ensure protection, assistance 
and solutions for IDPs (OCHA, 2018). As such, a fun damental shift in focus is under way, to 
move away from solely humanitarian aid -centric approaches, which often foster dependence, to 
governments working towards providing co -ordinated efforts to support IDPs themselves in 
finding long -term solutions for t heir displacement. This strategy aims to promote the preservation 
of dignity, encourage self -reliance, support livelihoods, and improve opportunities for those 
displaced (OCHA, 2018). Humanitarians should only act as a watchdog to ensure that displaced 
persons don’t fall into the cracks of various levels of government service provision (IRC, 2017: 5).  
National and international NGOs can also play a constructive role in advising IDPs as to the 
formal registration procedures, assisting them to obtain documents and advising stakeholders of 
key obstacles, with policy recommendations for remedying gaps (Oakeshott et al., 2018 ). The 
UNHCR  is working with the g overnment of Iraq and KRG authorities to harmonise registration 
procedures, including the wide scale use of biometrics, but a common format and practice is 
unlikely in the short term. In the Kurdistan  Region, registration questionnaires and software have 
been deployed to enhance needs profiling. Across central and southern Iraq, the UNHCR is also 
funding close to 300 staff positions in the Ministry of Displacement and Migration in Iraq  (MoMD ) 
regional offices. However, serious capacity issues remain , and practical assistance through 
these offices is largely limited to cash “donations ” (Home Office, 2017: 24).  
Keep stakeholders involved  in IDP feedback  
It is critical to keep local stakeholders engaged th roughout the process, and to create 
channels for people to actively provide feedback on their experiences getting and using 
identity document s, including through grievance redress mechanisms ( Oakeshott et al., 
2018 ). 
                                                   
27 http://www.nid -moi.gov.iq/  
28 https://southsudan.iom.int/  
29 https://displacement.iom.int/reports/sou th-sudan -%E2%80%94 -biometric -registration -update -april-2019  14 Standardise  timings for countrywide residence permits  
According to IOM, sometimes, the temporary residence permit in Iraq is extended for any time 
between one week and three months during the approval process for a permanent residence. 
The decision may depend on the applicant’s background and place of origin. According to 
PAO/KHRW,30 there is no fixed practice ensuring that an IDP can have a permanent residence 
permit after five years; it varies from place to place. Date shows that long -term residents, 
including IDPs w ho have lived in KRI for many years, are treated more favourably than new 
IDPs. However, PAO/KHRW state that IDPs still need to renew their residence permit every 
three or six months or once a year, depending on the governorate they live in, and Kurdish ID Ps 
do not have to renew their residence permits; only Arab IDPs do (Home Office, 2018: 46).  
Change views on lineage and documentation  issued during the 
Daesh regime  
In Iraq, children only get person identity without guardianship at age 18 years. If a disas ter strikes 
and children are separated from their families, a reunion could be next to impossible with out 
proper identification. W ith birth registration, government officials are more able to safely unite 
families and account for every child (Baker, 2019).  However,  proof of paternal  lineage is needed 
in order for a state -issued birth certificate ; if this proof  is missing, then that child may be linked to 
political affiliation (e.g. Daesh), and their family punished; they also will not be able to obtain a 
civil identity card, nationality certificate, or the new 'unified identity ' for children born in the last 
five years (Saieh et al., 2019: 27).  
Capitalise on IDPs trust of government to update policies  
In Iraq, recent research interviewing IDPs shows that the  central government, aid organisations, 
and the local government were the top three sources of assistance for the displaced (IOM Iraq, 
2019: 32). By the next round of interviews the following year (round 2 of data collection), the 
central government assumed the majority share of aid provision (58%), with local government 
only contributing 8% . The same report reveals that IDPs have high levels of trust in governmental 
legal institutions. IOM Iraq recommend s that the government  capitalis es on this infor mation by 
making sure it works fairly and justly for all Iraqis – including IDPs (IOM Iraq, 2019: 67).31 
  
                                                   
30 'PAO  [Pubic Aid Organisation]/ KHRW  [Kurdish Human Rights Watch].  
31 Round 4 interviews from August – November 2018 will assess the impact of different levels of assistance on 
the lives, survival strategies, and standards of living of IDPs, movers, and returnees. Round 4 results will reveal 
whether compensation is paid to more IDPs, and if so how this affects changes returnees’ and IDPs’ abilities to 
rebuild their lives. However, it is not known wh en this data will become available.  15 5. References  
Ahmed, S. (2018). Anbar province reinstates mukhtar system.  29 August 2018. 
https://diyaruna.com/en_GB/articles/cnmi_di/features/2018/08/29/feature -01 
al-Taie, K. (2017 a). Baghdad restores mukhtar system to support security.  10 June 2017. 
https://diyaruna.com/en_GB/articles/cnmi_di/features/2016/06/10/feature -01 
al-Taie, K. (2017b). Mosul restores mukhtar system to boost security.  13 September 2017.  
https://diyaruna.com/en_GB/articles/cnmi_di/features/2017/09/13/feature -02 
Baker, H.M. (2019). Iraq: No documents, no future.  30 April 2019. 
https://www.nrc.no/perspectives/2019/iraq -no-documents -no-future/  
Bah S. (2014).  The Iraqi civil registration system and the test of political upheaval. Canadian 
Studies in Population , 41(1 –2), 111 –119. 
https://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/csp/article/viewFile/21887/16367  
Clutterbuck, M., Cunial, L., Barsanti, P., & Gewis, T. (2018). Establishing  legal identity for 
displaced Syrians. Forced Migration Review. https://www.fmreview.org/syria2018/clutterbuck -
cunial -barsanti -gewis  
Ceasefire Centre for Civilian Rights and Minority Rights Group International (2016). December 
2016. https://minorityrights.org/wp -content/up loads/2016/12/MRG -report -A4_english -DECEMBER -
2016_WEB -2.pdf  
Council of Europe (2016). ENHANCING THE NATIONAL LEGAL FRAMEWORK IN UKRAINE 
FOR PROTECTING THE HUMAN RIGHTS OF INTERNALLY DISPLACED PERSONS, pp.55 -
56. https://rm.coe.int/baseline -coe-report -on-idp-/16808c9da5  
Crawford, N., Cosgrave, J., Haysom, S., & Walicki, N. (2015). Protracted displacement: uncertain 
paths to self -reliance in exile.  Overseas Development Institute.  
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi -assets/publications -opinion -files/9851.pdf  
ELRHA (2017). A FORGOTTEN CRISIS: IMPROVING IDP ACCESS TO HEALTH SE RVICES 
IN GEORGIA.  19 October 2017. https://www.elrha.org/news/forgotten -crisis -improving -idp-
access -health -services -georgia/  
Home Office (2017). Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Return/Internal relocation Version 
4.0. June 2017. https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/59ae93424.pdf  
Home Office ( 2018 ). Country Policy and Information Note. Iraq: Internal relocation, civil 
documentation and returns.  Version 7.0. September 2018. The Independent Advisory Group on 
Country Information (IAGCI). https://www.refworld. org/pdfid/5b9badb64.pdf  
Huang, C., & Graham, J. (2018). Where Do Internally Displaced People Live and What Does that 
Mean for Their Economic Integration?  10 May 2019. Center for Global Development. 
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/where -do-internally -displaced -people -live-and-what -does -mean -
their -economic -integration  16 IASC (2010). IASC Framework on Durable Solutions for I nternally Displaced Persons. Inter-
Agency Standing Committe e. https://inform -durablesolutions -idp.org/guidance/  
IOM Iraq (2019). ACCESS TO DURABLE SOLUTIONS AMONG IDPs IN IRAQ: THREE YEARS 
IN DISPLACEMENT.  International Organization for Migration. The United Nations Migration 
Agency. 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/IOM_Iraq_ACCESS_TO_DURABLE_SOLUTIONS_A
MONG_IDPs_IN_IRAQ_THREE_YEARS_IN_DISPLACEMENT_digital.pdf  
IRC (2017). The Right to the City for Urban Displaced.  International Rescue Committee. 
https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/document/1324/therighttothecityforurbandisplacedweb.pdf  
Kälin, W., & Entwisle Chapuisat, H. (2018). Guiding Principle 28: The Unfulfilled Promise to End 
Protracted Internal Displacement.  International Journal of Refugee Law , 30(2), 243 –
268. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijrl/eey030  
Karagiozakis, M. (2009). Co unting excess civilian casualties of the Iraq War: Science or Politics? 
2 June 2009. The Journal of Humanitarian Assistance.  http://sites.tufts.edu/jha/archives/559  
LandInfo (2016). Iraq: Travel docum ents and other identity documents.  The Norwegian Country 
of Origin Information Centre. https://www.landinfo.no/asset/3369/1/3369_1.pdf  
LandInfo (2018). Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI). Report on issuance of the new Iraqi ID card. 
Report based on interviews in Erbil and Sulaimania. November 2018. 
https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5beada0a4.pdf  
Mills,  S (2019). Building national civil registration systems that ensure effective service delivery. 1 
March  2019. http://blogs.worl dbank.org/health/building -national -civil-registration -systems -ensure -
effective -service -delivery  
Oakeshott, N., Marskell, J., Weedon Chapman, E., & Benihirwe, M. (2018). Empowering 
refugees and internally displaced persons through digital identity. Wold Ban k Blogs. 19 June 
2018. https://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/empowering -refugees -and-internally -displaced -persons -
through -digital -identity  
OCHA (2018). Internal Displacement.  United Nations Office for the Co -ordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs. https://www.unocha.org/es/themes/internal -displacement  
Orchard, P. (2018).  Protecting Internally Displaced Persons: The Role of National Legislation and 
Policies.  Asia Pacific Centre for the Responsibility to Protect. University of Queensland, 
Australia. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328627987_Protecting_Internally_Displaced_Persons_The_R
ole_of_National_Legislation_and_Policies   
Republic of Kenya (2011). NATIONA L POLICY ON THE PREVENTION OF INTERNAL 
DISPLACEMENT, PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO INTERNALLY DISPLACED 
PERSONS (IDPS) IN KENYA . August 2011. https://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5a8412554.pdf  
Saieh, A. , Johnstone, N., & Delbridge, J. (2019). Barriers from Birth.  Norwegian Refugee Council 
https://www.nrc.no/globalassets/pdf/reports/iraq/ barriers -from -birth/barriers -from -birth -med -
pages.pdf  17 St. Thomas King, J., & Ardis, D. (2015). Identity crisis? Documentation for the displaced in Iraq.  
https://odihpn.org/magazine/identity -crisis -documentation -for-the-displaced -in-iraq/ 
The World Bank (2018). Community Development Program Support Project Response to Forced 
Displacement (P164803).  30 March 2018. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/182641525399305603/pdf/CAMEROON -FORCED -
DISPLACEMENT -PAD-03302018.pdf  
UNHCR (2019). Iraq P rotection Update.  31 January 2019. The UN Refugee Agency. 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/201 90328%20Iraq%20Protection%20Update%20
-%20January%202019.pdf  
Walicki, N. (2009). Europe’s IDPs still marginalised. Forced Migration Review,  33, 25-26. 
Wassel, T. (2009). Protecting housing rights for IDPs in Sri Lanka. Forced Migration Review,  33, 
6-8. 
Wilson, E. (2015). Refugee or IDP  - What’s the difference?  20 January 2015. 
https://preemptivelove.org/blog/refugee_or_idp_what_s_the_difference/  
Suggested citation  
Tull, K.  (2019).  Civil Documentation for Internally Displaced Persons ( IDPs ) in Protracted 
Displacement. K4D Helpdesk Report 636.  Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.  
About this report  
This report is based on six days of desk -based research. The K4D research helpdesk provides rapid sy ntheses 
of a selection of recent relevant literature and international expert thinking in response to specific questions 
relating to international development. For any enquiries, contact helpdesk @k4d.info . 
K4D services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations working in international development, led by 
the Institute of Development Studies (IDS), with Education Development Trust, Itad, University of Leeds Nuffield 
Centre for International Health  and Development, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), University of 
Birmingham International Development Department (IDD) and the University of Manchester Humanitarian and 
Conflict Response Institute (HCRI).  
This report was prepared for the UK Go vernment’s Department for International 
Development (DFID) and its partners in support of pro -poor programmes. It is licensed for 
non-commercial purposes only . K4D cannot be held responsible for errors or any 
consequences arising from the use of informatio n contained in this report. Any views and 
opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of DFID, K4D or any other contributing 
organisation.  © DFID - Crown copyright 201 9. 
