COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE 
APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE 
GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE13 NOVEMBER 2020
© UNICEF/UNI381399/BONGYEREIRWE©UNICEF November 2020COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE2
© UNICEF/UNI232355/NOORANI
01 INTRODUCTION
Digital information technologies and social 
media platforms have become important 
means of communication used by UNICEF 
and its partners. The physical distancing 
requirements during the COVID-19 pandemic 
have further strengthened reliance on mass 
media, social media and mobile technology as 
a way of reaching and engaging with intended 
audiences. Even where access to digital 
resources remains limited, country programmes 
are launching innovative approaches to 
continue social and behaviour change 
activities despite the physical distancing 
challenge, combining new and more traditional communication methods. This guidance note 
is designed to support country programmes to 
conduct quality, evidence-based, meaningful 
and measurable engagement for prevention 
of harmful practices programming, even when 
interpersonal communication is not possible. In 
particular, this note will:
	nOutline commonly used digital 
communications resources and their 
functions
	nProvide insights into information that can 
help design and/or refine behavioural 
and social norms programming for digital 
approaches
	nHighlight a series of tips for conducting 
effective digital engagement activities
	nOutline complementary channels to 
enhance the reach of digital approachesThe physical 
distancing 
requirements 
during the COVID-19 
pandemic have further 
strengthened reliance 
on mass media, 
social media and 
mobile technology  
as a way of reaching 
and engaging with 
intended audiences.
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 3	nReview areas for monitoring and 
evaluation of digital activities 
	nPoint readers to relevant risk 
communication and community 
engagement (RCCE) resources
	nSummarize key considerations for 
choosing digital approaches
02 DIGITAL COMMUNICATION 
RESOURCES BY FUNCTION1
With continual advances in the digital sphere, 
more options emerge for engaging remotely 
with intended audiences. Table 1 aims to give 
readers an overview of commonly used digital 
platforms and the functions they can perform. 
A more detailed description of each platform 
can be found in Appendix 1.The choice of digital engagement option(s) 
will depend on the country context and 
communication ecosystem. Developing 
a plan for digital engagement requires an 
understanding of the social, political and 
economic context, as these often define 
access and use of digital resources by intended 
audiences. Mapping the digital landscape, 
including identifying channels, resources and 
communication spaces, as well as identifying 
communities with limited access to digital 
and media channels, can help define a 
comprehensive strategy, where digital and 
traditional approaches intersect to ensure 
greater reach.
Table 1 provides a list of remote mobile 
and digital engagement options, noting the 
requirements for implementing them and their 
suitability for two-way communication. This 
information is intended to help programmes 
identify the most suitable approaches for their 
individual context. Even where 
access 
to digital 
resources remains 
limited, country 
programmes are 
launching innova -
tive approaches 
to continue social 
and behaviour 
change activities 
despite the physical 
distancing challenge.
TABLE 1: FUNCTION
FUNCTION BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF POSSIBLE USES 
Gather social data • Polling and surveys, such as RapidPro, U-Report, GeoPoll, IPSOS ODK/Ona/Kobo, and Viamo, can be used to quickly assess 
important elements such as knowledge, attitudes, perceptions, perceived expectations, intention and behaviours of communities 
regarding harmful practices.
• These tools can also be used to identify information gaps.
• Tools that provide data visualization options, such as Magicbox and Power BI, can help better present information to facilitate 
evidence-based decision making by packaging feedback to allow for real time monitoring.
Share information and 
promote services• Messages around harmful practices can be disseminated across UNICEF, Government and partners’ websites and social media 
platforms, mass media and mobile networks.
• These platforms can also be used to advise the public of available services, including trusted information sources and helplines.
Facilitate dialogue 
and engagement with 
intended audiences• Digital platforms can be used to facilitate two-way communication and dialogue with intended audiences (e.g. adolescents, parents, 
influencers, service providers).
• RapidPro platforms can support and set up additional tools such as the Internet of Good Things (IOGT), Chatbots, U-Report and 
Viamo to provide an interactive space for dialogue and engagement around specific content.
• Selection of the appropriate platform will depend on the needs, infrastructure, capacities of intended users and context.
• Social media and messaging platforms such as Viber, WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger and Facebook groups, as well simpler SMS 
technology, can be used to disseminate correct information and solicit feedback.
• Interactive Voice Response (IVR), such as Viamo, Echo, and Orange Voice Pro, can be effective in low literacy settings to share 
information and solicit feedback.
Support training and 
capacity building• Existing digital platforms and resources can be used to support key workers, by sharing essential information and training packages, 
providing them with resources and digital solutions to enhance their reach to intended audiences.
• Remote training and virtual instruction can be provided to community and faith leaders, mobilisers, mentors and peer educators 
through platforms such as RapidPro, Chatbots, U-Report, the Internet of Good things, and Viamo.
Tracking and addressing 
sentiment and 
misinformation• Digital engagement resources, such as call-centres, social media platforms, and digital engagement solutions, can be harnessed to 
gather information on the dominant sentiment about a given topic (e.g. harmful practices, COVID-19, education, gender).
• Social mobilizers, peer educators, mentors and partners can be capacitated as users of social media to conduct social listening and 
to track and address misinformation.
• Social media platforms can be used to promote referral to trusted sources of information and services.
1 Adapted from UNICEF’s “Digital Community Engagement Strengthening Polio C4D Strategies” Concept Note, UNICEF , June 2020COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE4
03 DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT 
AND HARMFUL PRACTICES 
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE 
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
When it comes to harmful practices and 
the COVID-19 pandemic, it is important 
to recognize how the pandemic and the 
restrictions imposed are affecting people’s 
behaviours, including those related to harmful 
practices. For instance, there is evidence that 
in parts of the world, child marriage is on 
the rise as families try to cope with financial 
burdens brought about by the pandemic, while 
in some communities, the female genital 
mutilation (FGM) season is being anticipated 
to take advantage of schools’ closure and 
disruption in protection systems. 
Programmes need to devise ways to keep 
abreast of how the pandemic is affecting 
people’s thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, feelings, 
motivation and intention around FGM and 
child marriage. Such information, as well as 
information on the communication landscape 
and available digital options, can be gathered 
via a rapid desk review and rapid assessments. 
Together, these will shed light on important 
elements for behaviour and social norms 
change programming, such as identifying 
key audiences and influencers, which may 
have changed as a result of the pandemic, determining appropriate channels to reach them 
both on and off-line, and tailoring messages 
and content to the new situation.
GATHERING INFORMATION TO HELP 
DESIGN AND REFINE BEHAVIOUR AND 
SOCIAL NORMS PROGRAMMING 
A rapid desk review should look at media 
habits of intended audiences, trusted and 
utilized information sources, and credible 
spokespersons. In exploring digital media habits, 
remember to look at mobile device ownership 
and access (noting the distribution of smart 
phones versus low-end devices, such as feature 
phones), network strength, availability, speed, 
popular data packages and utilization of any 
low-bandwidth applications, such as Facebook 
Lite, or applications that are available free of 
data charges through Mobile Network Operator 
partnerships, such as Free Basics by Facebook .
A. RAPID ASSESSMENT AND SURVEYS 
These will give you insights into if and how 
people’s perceptions, attitudes, intentions and 
intended behaviours are changing. Assessments 
should be conducted both with your intended 
audiences as determined by the desk review 
(girls, boys, women, parents, and other relevant 
community members), and with key stakeholders, 
such as community and faith leaders, current 
and former excisors, social workers, women 
and youth leaders, and other individuals who 
are likely to have a good understanding of how 
TABLE 2: COMMONLY USED DIGITAL PLATFORMS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS
REMOTE ENGAGEMENT 
OPTION2-WAY 
COMMUNICATIONNETWORK / BANDWIDTH 
REQUIREMENTBURDEN OF SCALE DEVICE REQUIREMENTS
Radio No None None Radio
Television No Television cable or satellite None Television
Interactive Voice 
Response (IVR)Yes Edge network High: talk-time costs typically 
borne by country officeBasic feature phone
SMS* Yes Edge network High: SMS costs typically borne by 
country officeBasic feature phone
Web, Free Basics (e.g. 
Internet of Good Things)Yes Edge Network None Basic feature phone
Web, Facebook Lite Yes 2G End user bears burden of data 
bundleSome feature phones, smart 
phones
Facebook Messenger*, 
WhatsApp*, Viber*Yes 2G End user typically bears burden of 
data bundleSmart phones
* Platforms where U-Report and RapidPro functionCOVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 5harmful practices are evolving in the community. 
Consider conducting the assessment at regular 
intervals (every 2 to 3 months) during the 
pandemic to monitor any changes and adapt 
interventions accordingly.
B. REMOTE SURVEY OPTIONS 
These will be necessary when physical distancing 
measures are in place. Table 1 provides a list of 
possible options of commonly used applications. 
You can find an example of how IVR has been 
successfully used in Ghana to assess media 
exposure and behavioural determinants in this 
monitoring and evaluation note .
Wherever possible, prioritize solutions that 
do not require data bundles in order to reach 
the widest audiences. IVR, USSD and SMS 
(via RapidPro or other solutions) are generally 
preferred to social media applications such as 
WhatsApp, Viber and Facebook Messenger. For 
ideas on how to conduct remote assessments, 
you can refer to this summary of methodologies 
in the era of social distancing  and review  this 
guidance on SMS and IVR surveys . 
You should also be aware that, while digital and 
mobile platforms allow you to gather data, they 
remain inaccessible to many. You can refer to 
Box 1 for some considerations on how to keep 
your surveys inclusive. 
To capture information that can help shape your 
behaviour and social norms change programme 
and integration of digtial compoments, your 
surveys should aim to ask questions that shed 
light on the following three areas:PRACTICES, BEHAVIOURS  
AND DRIVERS:
	nIf and how the prevalence of harmful 
practices is changing during the pandemic
	nWhat families think and feel about engaging 
in harmful practices during the pandemic
	nWho engages in the harmful practices 
	nWho, in the household, decides if the girl 
marries and/or undergoes FGM
	nWhy respondents think it is important (if at 
all) to engage in harmful practices at this time
	nWhether families/respondents intend to 
engage in the practice now  
NORMS:
	nWhether respondents believe/think that a 
majority of community members will engage 
in harmful practices during the pandemic 
	nWhether respondents believe/think they are 
expected to engage in the harmful practices 
at this time by those who matter to them  
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION  
AND SOCIAL NETWORKS:
	nHow respondents employ their time during 
periods of confinement
	nThe people respondents communicate/
engage with regularly in these times
	nThe spokespersons who are most trusted 
in the community/among your intended 
audiences
	nThe trusted and utilized sources of 
information in these times, especially 
around harmful practices 
BOX 1: CONSIDERATIONS FOR INCLUSIVE REMOTE ASSESSMENTS 
Wherever possible, prioritize solutions that do not require 
data bundles in order to reach the widest audiences. 
IVR, USSD and SMS (via RapidPro or other solutions) are 
generally preferred to social media applications such as 
WhatsApp, Viber and Facebook Messenger.
Where access to mobile phones is limited, ask local 
leaders to conduct the assessments with community 
members. They can do this by using tablets provided by 
your organization or paper-based questionnaires that can 
then be collated by the programme. 
Local leaders can also help people with impairments to 
complete the survey. Encourage them to approach people with disabilities in their community so that their views 
are also reflected in your assessments. 
Where lockdown orders do not allow for direct 
interactions, try to include the views of the most 
marginalized by asking questions about their needs to 
groups and leaders who represent them.
Translate the questionnaires and assessments in relevant 
languages, paying particular attention to the languages 
spoken by women and by vulnerable and remote 
communities.
(Please refer to the Resources section at the end of this note 
for more ideas on inclusive approaches)
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE6	nRespondents’ media habits, in particular 
their digital media habits and who their 
online influencers are
	nRespondents’ network access, data 
access, device sharing practices and 
phone type  
 
Information gathered from these rapid 
assessments will provide insights into how the 
pandemic is affecting people’s engagement 
with harmful practices, and help you shape and 
adapt your programme and digital engagement 
activities accordingly.TIPS FOR CONDUCTING EFFECTIVE 
DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT
Digital and online modes of engagement 
allow users to connect virtually, share content 
and ideas, and engage in discussions with 
unprecedented reach, usability and immediacy. 
They represent a channel that can complement 
and enhance communication interventions 
for behaviour and social change. The 14 tips 
summarized in Box 2 will help you make the 
most of your digital approaches, ensuring they 
are evidence-based and promote meaningful 
engagement with intended audiences.
1LINK YOUR DIGITAL EFFORTS TO  
YOUR PROGRAMME’S THEORY OF 
CHANGE: When you devise your programme’s 
theory of change, you need to consider 
behavioural determinants beyond the individual 
level, and include contextual, environmental 
and inter-personal factors too. Your digital 
approaches should align to your existing 
theory of change and reflect the findings from 
the desk review and rapid assessments 
described above. You can find links to 
behavioural theories in the reference section 
at the end of this note.
2TAILOR ACTIVITIES TO YOUR  
INTENDED AUDIENCES’ HABITS AND 
PREFERENCES:  It is crucial that you meet your 
intended audiences where they are. For this, 
you will need to understand their media and 
technology access and use, including 
information about devices, channels, media 
sources, influencers, popular data packages, 
BOX 2: 14 TIPS FOR EFFECTIVE DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT2
1. Link your digital efforts to your 
programme’s theory of change
2. Tailor activities to your intende\d 
audiences’ habits and preferences
3. Reach both girls and boys
4. Provide opportunities for audiences to 
interact with your digital content
5. Build trust and use credible champions
6. Develop engaging concise content
7. Pre-test your concepts8. Think carefully about language and 
literacy
9. Factor in costs and data limitations
10. Promote your digital platform 
11. Budget for moderation and management 
of content and comments
12. Avail capacity to respond to additional 
demand generated
13. Put digital safeguarding in place 
14. Make a plan for feedback to your users
2  Adapted from iMedia’s Digital and Social Media for Social and Behaviour Change Communication , (2019)© UNICEF/UNI376197/BONGYEREIRWE
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 7network strength, and other elements that are 
related to whether and how they access and 
use digital devices, programmes and 
platforms. The assessments described above 
will shed light on many of these areas. 
3REACH BOTH GIRLS AND BOYS:   
To address norms within the community 
as a whole, your digital interventions should 
not exclusively focus on girls. Gender norms 
interventions for example, should also engage 
boys and men. You can see an example of 
how men have been engaged against harmful 
practices in Box 3 and refer to UNFPA’s and 
UNICEF’s  technical note on partnering with 
men and boys to end child marriage in the 
Global Programme to End Child Marriage  for 
more information on this topic. 
4PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUR 
AUDIENCES TO INTERACT WITH YOUR 
DIGITAL CONTENT : Digital interventions can 
be designed flexibly to include interactive 
components (two-way communication), 
opportunities for feedback, and timed 
messaging to engage users in targeted ways. 
Build-in opportunities for engagement such as 
closed discussion groups, virtual counselling, 
testimonials, challenges and feedback, that 
are adapted to the needs, and digital media 
habits of your different audience segments. 
For examples of innovative digital engagement 
you can read about mobile-phone based 
hygiene and sanitation promotion in Somalia , 
and the use of how adolescent girls in 
Mozambique are empowered through SMS 
Biz. Co-creating activities with your intended 
users is an effective way of engaging them 
while ensuring that your activities resonate 
with them. You can provide opportunities for 
them to input into the design process, either 
virtually or in person through workshops or sprint design events. For a practical example 
of how to co-create with your audience, read 
here  about how UNICEF Latin America and 
the Caribbean Regional Office co-created 
UPSHIFT with adolescents, a programme 
aimed and empowering young people to 
become social innovators and entrepreneurs 
through leading approaches in youth 
development and private sector tools. 
5BUILD TRUST AND USE CREDIBLE 
CHAMPIONS:  The use of trusted and 
credible influencers, spokespersons and 
champions is a well-established practice in the 
field of social and behaviour change, including 
within the digital sphere. Select your 
spokespersons based on the findings from your 
initial assessments, and test whether they 
really are credible, popular influencers that 
resonate with your intended audiences and 
your programme. Examples of such champions 
include, national and local celebrities, political 
figures, government agencies, international or 
national/local non-governmental organizations, 
and even fictional characters developed 
exclusively for your intervention.
6DEVELOP ENGAGING, CONCISE 
CONTENT: The content you develop 
should command attention and encourage 
users to engage with it. For this, it needs to 
be appealing and concise. Use an eye-catching 
headline of no more than eight words 
(suggested number of words for highest 
click-rate) and pre-package your content so 
that it is easily sharable. When using images 
remember that low-end devices have a low 
screen resolution and digital images should 
therefore not include text in them. Text should 
be formatted around the images. This will also 
increase the application opportunities of 
content across platforms.The use of 
trusted and 
credible 
influencers, 
spokespersons 
and champions is a 
well-established 
practice in the 
field of social and 
behaviour change, 
including within 
the digital sphere. BOX 3: ENGAGING MEN FOR THE ELIMINATION OF HARMFUL PRACTICES
In Senegal, UNICEF’s supported programme, used a 
combination of education and social mobilization to 
empower women and communities to reduce FGM 
and child marriage. The strategic approach involved 
seeking the buy-in of male village leaders, employ local 
facilitators to teach education sessions, tap into local 
communication channels and use community dialogue 
with both men and women. The programme purposely 
targeted men to enlist their support and mobilized male community and religious leaders, as well as 
engaging women and girls, in an effort to ensure that 
abandoning FGM was a collective and explicit decision, 
involving a whole-community approach. Evaluation 
results from the male engagement component of this 
work showed positive changes in knowledge, attitudes 
and behaviours, which ultimately led to a public 
declaration against FGM and early marriage, as well as 
a slight reduction in child marriages.
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE87PRE-TEST YOUR CONCEPTS: Factor in 
time and money to pre-test your concepts 
with your intended audiences to ensure they 
resonate and are received and understood the 
way you expect them to be. For guidance on 
pre-testing, you can refer to this pre-testing 
guide  developed by UNICEF during the 
COVID-19 pandemic . Try to personalize data 
and feeds based on your users’ characteristics 
generated from click-data research that indicate 
the type of content they are more likely to 
engage with.
(To learn more about this, see this story from 
UNICEF Senegal on rural outreach on health 
and human rights: https://www.unicef.org/
infobycountry/senegal_53695.html ) 
8THINK CAREFULLY ABOUT LANGUAGE 
AND LITERACY: Assess the level of 
literacy of your intended audiences to 
determine how to engage with them digitally 
and what language and terms to use. Where 
literacy levels are low, IVR and audiovisuals 
may be more appropriate. Ensure that your 
content is available in relevant languages and 
remember that language can also be a 
politicizing factor in some contexts. 9FACTOR IN COSTS AND DATA 
LIMITATIONS:  For greater and more 
equitable reach and utilization of your digital 
platforms, explore how to minimize data 
consumption. Your programmes should be 
cognizant that a portion of your audience 
(sometimes the majority) will have limited 
minutes, data and text message allowances. 
Consider also that smartphones often come 
equipped with pre-installed applications (for 
example Facebook Lite), and with free minutes 
available for specific platforms. Knowing the 
common, standard, free applications supported 
by data packages will help you select digital 
channels that are more likely to be accessed by 
your intended users. Web-based solutions 
often have greater potential to reach remote or 
low-income communities than application-
based solutions, as many low-end devices do 
not have access to an application store but 
come with built-in web browsers. 
10BUDGET FOR MODERATION AND 
MANAGEMENT OF CONTENT AND 
COMMENTS:  If your platforms include an 
interactive component (discussion groups, virtual 
sessions, questions and answers etc.), allocate 
the required resources to respond to and 
moderate those activities. Moreover, in recent 
years, online platforms such as Facebook and 
WhatsApp have been increasingly used to spread 
false and misleading information, including during 
the current COVID-19 pandemic. Women and 
girls are especially likely to face harassment 
online, in particular when they speak out on 
gender discrimination or against deep-seated 
cultural and social norms. It is recommended that 
you budget sufficient resources to monitor, 
moderate and manage content within your digital 
communication platforms, looking out for and 
removing any harmful content and comments. If 
your country benefits from U-Report, consider 
engaging existing U-Partners for content 
moderation. Often, these partners are trained in 
comment moderation.
11AVAIL CAPACITY TO RESPOND TO 
ADDITIONAL DEMAND GENERATED:  It is 
likely that your digital activities will generate 
increased demand for services and information. 
Indicate clearly in your online communication 
where users can go and/or call for support, and 
ensure you have the capacity in place to 
respond. Inability to respond to increased 
demand for services will frustrate your 
participants, reduce their trust in your activities © UNICEF/UNI353143/MAWA
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 9and drive them away, ultimately making 
behaviour change less likely in the future and 
impacting negatively on your programme goals.
12PUT DIGITAL SAFEGUARDING 
PRACTICES IN PLACE : Digital 
safeguarding covers important dimensions such 
as data privacy and protection, data security and 
how to keep people safe when using digital 
devices and platforms. Determine appropriate 
safeguarding measures for your context and 
chosen platforms. You can find more information 
on this in the Safeguarding Tips and Guidance  
and the UNICEF-supported  Guidance on 
Responsible Data for Children  documents.
13CONSIDER HOW TO ENGAGE WITH 
OFF-LINE USERS THROUGH MOBILE 
TECHNOLOGY: IVR and RapidPro systems allow 
you to engage with off-line users using low-end 
mobile phones. IVR for example, allows people 
to call and leave messages, or to listen to 
pre-recorded messages left by other users. 
Such a system enables information sharing and 
collection of feedback and opinions by 
encouraging intended audiences to call and 
leave a message. These messages can then be 
used to inform mass-media programming (for 
example radio or TV), which in turn encourage 
audiences to call-in and answer or ask 
questions, or provide comments, thus 
generating a continuous dialogue with intended 
audiences. For an example on how IVR 
technology can be used, please refer to Box 4. 14MAKE A PLAN FOR FEEDBACK:  As your 
digital solution inquiries about users’ 
preferences and opinions inform your activities 
and services, make a plan to share feedback 
with your users as often as possible. Inform 
them about how improved information sharing 
services are available to them or how what 
they share will be used. This creates a virtuous 
data cycle, incentivizing your users to share 
more information, more frequently, with greater 
honesty and accuracy.
USING COMPLEMENTARY CHANNELS 
FOR GREATER IMPACT
Despite the extensive reach of digital 
approaches, and their flexible options for 
various degrees of engagement, there is little 
evidence that they will succeed in changing 
behaviours and social and gender norms if used 
in isolation. For effective engagement, digital 
approaches need to be complemented by 
other channels and reinforced through multiple 
media. Even in times of physical distancing, 
interventions should continue to operate across 
levels of the socio-ecological model (SEM). 
Table 3 provides some examples for engaging 
remotely with intended audiences across 
the SEM. Many of the examples listed are 
digital, however some non-digital, remote 
engagement channels are also suggested for 
message reinforcement.
BOX 4:  MESSAGING FOR MATERNAL & CHILD HEALTH: 
THE APONJON EXAMPLE FROM BANGLADESH
Aponjon, meaning “dear one” in Bangla, is the Mobile 
Alliance for Maternal Action’s (MAMA) programme 
in Bangladesh aimed at reducing maternal and child 
mortality through mobile communication technology. 
Adaptable, time-sensitive and stage-based information on 
maternal and infant health issues is delivered directly to 
expectant and new mothers through SMS or interactive 
voice response (IVR). Almost 80% of users from rural areas 
selected to receive messages through IVR, indicating the 
popularity of this approach among rural populations. 
Aponjon delivers twice weekly messages that are 
entertaining and educational, formatted in ‘mini-skits’ with 
actors playing out real life scenarios as characters such 
as pregnant women, doctors, husbands and mothers-in-
law. MAMA Bangladesh also created a unique messaging 
service specifically for husbands, to reinforce messages provided to their wives, and encourage their involvement 
in decision-making on pregnancy, birth and infant care.
An evaluation of Aponjon indicated that women 
reporting at least 6 months use of the service were 
approximately 3 times more likely than non-users to 
score high on both maternal healthcare knowledge and 
related practices, such as attending ante-natal care 
visits, taking iron-folic acid during pregnancy, or taking 
vitamin A after delivery. Further, women reporting 
receiving and listening to at least 3 messages per month, 
were almost twice as likely to have a higher knowledge 
score and better related practices for maternal health 
compared to non-users.
(For more information on Aponjon, please refer to this brief by 
the Mobile Alliance for Maternal Action (MAMA) .)
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 10TABLE 3:  REMOTE ENGAGEMENT OPTIONS ACROSS THE SOCIAL ECOLOGICAL 
MODEL – APPROACHES, TIPS AND CONSIDERATIONS
SEM LEVELPOTENTIAL 
APPROACHESTIPS & CONSIDERATIONS EXAMPLES
Individual and 
Interpersonal• Social media 
platforms such as 
Facebook, Twitter and 
Instagram
• Low-bandwidth, free-
to-access websites, 
such as the Internet of 
Good Things
• Photo and video 
virtual challenges
• Hotlines
• Interactive voice 
recordings
• Interactive video 
games
• Interactive 
applications
• U-Report• Choose social media platforms that allow for two-way engagement 
such as Facebook Groups and Live Chats on Instant Messenger
• Generate debate and discussion by running live sessions, such 
as Instagram Live or Live Facebook Chats on pre-defined topics. 
Involve your intended audience in the development and facilitation 
of these sessions.
• Use your platform as a safe space and opportunity for girls 
and vulnerable groups to interact with peers and increase their 
collective agency for change.
• Promote/maintain new norms challenging users to post videos 
or photos of themselves taking a stance against FGM and child 
marriage.
• Allow for callers to ask or type questions when they reach out to 
hotlines and IVRs.
• Access or develop video games that mimic real life situations 
around the topic of interest where the user must determine the best 
course of action.
• If you use avatars in your games, select them carefully as avatars 
chosen by young people especially have been shown to inspire and 
influence their behaviour and identity offline.
• If you develop an application for your programme, build-in 
engagement opportunities such as quizzes, discussion groups, 
and peer-to-peer support. Encourage continued engagement by 
exploring opportunities to partner with the private sector to provide 
gifts, prizes, vouchers or free data as users interact with the 
activities in the application.Family Choices  is a game that aims 
to enhance the perception of a girl’s 
place in and value to her family, with 
an emphasis on keeping her and her 
peers in school. Through the game 
players to explore the outcomes of 
a family’s choices related to girls’ 
education early, early marriage 
and family planning. Players decide 
whether Anu (in India) or Mercy (in 
Kenya) will ultimately achieve their 
dreams of becoming a financially 
independent nurse.
U-Report  is available in 50 countries, 
it provides an open-source mobile 
messaging platform that gives young 
people and their communities a 
voice on issues that matter to them, 
including FGM and child marriage.
The Dawwie  initiative in Egypt 
creates a safe environment that 
supports girls to share their 
aspirations and stories, and provides 
them with access to services 
and experiences that can help 
them shape a brighter future for 
themselves and their peers.
Community • Communication 
applications such as 
WhatsApp, Viber or 
Facebook messenger 
groups
• Videos and leaflets at 
places that continue 
to be accessed by 
community members 
such as essential 
shops and services
• Live chats and 
virtual meetings 
with community/
faith leaders and 
other influential 
stakeholders
• Radio and TV 
shows with call-in 
opportunities• Closed groups such as WhatsApp, Viber or Facebook messenger 
can enable two-way communication with key stakeholders such 
as community and religious leaders, women’s groups and other 
relevant civil society organizations. The groups can be used to 
exchange information, continue promoting key messages, organize 
virtual calls to debate issues arising in the community, and 
monitoring if and how the situation is evolving.
• Radio and TV shows can have extensive reach. Build in 
opportunities for interaction with the audience by providing a call-
in number that people can use to ask questions or comment on a 
topic to generate debate and discussion. Where a local radio exists, 
people who do not have access to a phone can be encouraged to 
write their comments and questions and leave them at the radio 
station.
• Megaphones only provide one-way communication; however, they 
can be helpful in informing community members of opportunities to 
engage in activities.
• Videos, leaflets and information boards can be placed strategically 
in places that people continue to access even with confinement 
restrictions. Again, these do not provide two-way communication 
opportunities, but they can help reinforce key messages and desired 
actions, as determined by your initial assessments.Shujaaz  is a multi-media platform 
using comic books, social media, 
and SMS messaging to engage with 
young people in Kenya and Tanzania. 
Telling the story of a 10-year old DJ 
and influencer living in the outskirts 
of Nairobi. Shujaaz has created 
a digital environment that brings 
young people together to talk about 
their experiences, the changes they 
want to make and the barriers that 
are standing in their way.
Silent Reflection  is a UNICEF 
funded social media campaign 
in Thailand aimed at raising 
awareness of gender roles and 
gender expectations. A Facebook 
page shows thought-provoking 
content encouraging followers 
to post videos and engage with 
peers. The campaign also targets 
adults allowing for a virtual 
intergenerational dialogue.COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 11SEM LEVELPOTENTIAL 
APPROACHESTIPS & CONSIDERATIONS EXAMPLES
Services • Virtual counselling
• Videos and leaflets at 
points of services• You can integrate opportunities in your digital platform for virtual 
one-to-one discussion and counselling with users. This will afford 
deeper discussion to address barriers to change.
• Some essential services will continue to operate even during the 
pandemic. Medical facilities, maternal and child health services, 
the police and other social services are likely to be open. Explore 
opportunities to integrate messages and materials at these points of 
service.
• Some service providers may benefit from learning more about FGM 
and child marriage and may be well placed to advocate for the 
elimination of these practices among their service users. Consider 
options for virtual training to equip them with the necessary skills to 
discuss key messages with their service users. Radio can also be used 
for remote training.Flying Youthhood  was an entirely 
web-based sex education programme 
in Shanghai, China. Users accessed 
a password protected website 
providing information on sexual and 
reproductive health and services. 
Online professional counselling 
was also offered through the site, 
providing an opportunity for users 
to interact virtually with service 
providers.
Social and 
structural level• Advocacy with media
• Virtual training for 
media
• Online engagement 
with local and 
national celebrities 
and key opinion 
leaders
• Online civic 
engagement• Work with media providers to ensure they continue covering stories 
and information regarding FGM and child marriage despite the 
demands for COVID-19 information.
• Provide virtual or distance training to media providers on key 
messages and content on FGM and child marriage.
• Engage with local and national celebrities, and relevant key opinion 
leaders to actively take a stance against FGM and child marriage and 
promote your messages through their social media channels.
• Use the digital space to increase civic engagement to drive 
participation and advocacy.This video  was developed for 
COVID-19 messaging and how training 
can be delivered online, in a simple 
and rapid manner.
CrowOutAids  is a UN AIDS online 
project across Africa that seeks to 
influence policy on HIV and AIDS. 
Through social media platforms and 
crowdsourcing solutions, it gathers 
and integrates the youth perspective 
into the policy process and political 
advocacy.
See UNICEF’s rapid analysis on 
digital civic engagement by young 
people  for an analysis of enablers 
and constraints of youth civic 
engagement.TABLE 3:  REMOTE ENGAGEMENT OPTIONS ACROSS THE SOCIAL ECOLOGICAL 
MODEL – APPROACHES, TIPS AND CONSIDERATIONS  (continued)© UNICEF/UNI118960/TYLLE
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 12
04 MONITORING AND 
EVALUATION
Even in the realm of digital engagement, it 
is important to put in place key metrics that 
allow you to monitor if and how your digital 
engagement activities are contributing to the 
programme goals. Many social media platforms, 
such as Facebook and Twitter, come with 
built-in analytic dashboards. Third-party software 
platforms also exist that can help you monitor 
social media analytics. Both the in-built and 
third-party platforms can track metrics such as 
clicks, likes, tags, shares and reposts. In most 
cases, these metrics give information about 
reach, with little insight into uptake, interest or 
actual changes in attitudes or behaviours. 
Social media sentiment analysis metrics 
go beyond reach to measure user interest 
by grouping together different actions by 
users, such as comments and engagement 
with content and categorizing them as 
negative, neutral or positive. In social norms 
programming this can give a sense of the 
users’ attitudes and feelings about the topic. 
When choosing the metrics for your digital 
activities, consider the following tips:
	nUse few, carefully selected core 
metrics. Define key metrics that can 
help you measure your intervention. 
Understand the user journey and how 
metrics along the way (engagement with 
particular content, journey completion) can 
provide insights into their experience with 
and response to your digital content.
	nMeasure quickly and often.  Digital 
technologies are iterative and fast-
changing, with users accessing and 
interacting with them in constantly evolving 
ways. Short, iterative evaluations at 
regular intervals help you monitor the user 
experience and make prompt, required 
adjustments to your digital content. 
	nExplore ways to investigate impact.  
Find ways to explore how online 
engagement translates into offline 
behaviour. Online surveys, comment 
analysis, and analysis of user-generated 
content can help understand feelings, 
intention, and impact among users. If 
you are conducting regular assessments 
as described at the start of this note, 
add some questions on respondents’ 
engagement with your digital content (for example utilization and recall). 
Coupled with the other questions in 
your assessment, information about 
respondents’ engagement with your 
digital activities can give an indication 
of its contribution towards any changes 
in other metrics measured by the 
assessments (attitude, intention, beliefs, 
feelings). In Nepal, the Rupantaran  
empowerment programme for example, 
has been adapted to run through the radio 
and changes in girls’ knowledge are being 
assessed through random SMS messages 
after each show. 
	nOffline measurement is still important. 
Where possible, supplement your digital 
data with offline approaches such as 
case studies, focus group discussions, 
observations, and other qualitative 
methods. Such assessments help explore 
why and how users engage with your 
digital approaches, and if and how they 
apply what they have learned offline. 
When lockdown measures prevent face-
to-face meetings, and where connectivity 
allows, you can conduct these qualitative 
assessments remotely using online media, 
such as zoom calls, Facebook Messenger, 
and other communication applications.  
RISK COMMUNICATION AND COMMUNITY 
ENGAGEMENT INDICATORS 
As part of its Global Risk Communication and 
Community Engagement (RCCE) response for 
COVID-19, UNICEF has developed three key 
indicators pertaining to digital and traditional 
media that are also included in the global 
Humanitarian Action of Children (HAC) appeal 
and the global Situation Report (SitRep) on 
COVID-19. To align approaches, the three 
RCCE indicators listed below can also help 
in obtaining a sense of how activities around 
harmful practices are progressing:
	nReach: The number of people 
reached through one-way channels of 
communication
	nEngagement: The number of people 
involved in participatory actions
	nFeedback:  The number of people sharing 
their concerns and asking questions/
clarifications for available support services 
to address their needs through established 
feedback mechanisms
For a breakdown on each indicator and how it 
can be adapted to harmful practices, please 
refer to Appendix 2.Media 
analytics 
is the 
practice of analysing 
digital interactions 
on social media 
platforms using 
various forms of 
data.  It can be 
used to track your 
intended audience’s 
opinions and needs 
in relation to your 
topic or practice 
of interest. COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 13
05 CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
GOING DIGITAL
While digital channels offer potential for 
increased reach and engagement, there are 
also important challenges around equitable 
access. Gender, disability, income, education 
and geography can all affect if and how your 
intended users engage with your digital 
activities. The following questions will help 
you assess the feasibility of including digital 
approaches in your social norms interventions, 
reflect on potential risks, and consider ways 
to reduce exclusion and exacerbation of pre-
existing power imbalances. 
	nCost: Consider the cost of your digital 
programme and assess whether your 
intended audience is able to afford 
engaging with your content. 
	nLiteracy and language: Ensure that 
the digital channel you choose uses the 
language of your intended audience and is in 
an accessible format. Lower literacy levels 
will require more visual and audio content. 
Remember that in some settings, women 
and girls have lower literacy levels than men 
and boys. 
	nTechnology skills: Assess whether your 
intended audience has the technology 
skills and confidence required to 
interact with your content. Consider any 
differences in skills between audience 
segments, for example rural versus urban 
populations, girls/women versus boys/
men, young versus older people, or 
wealthy versus poor. 
	nCultural norms: Reflect on any local 
customs that may limit or prohibit access 
to digital technology and mobile devices. 
In some cases, there may be negative 
cultural reactions to some audience 
segments, particularly girls and women, 
using mobile phones and the internet.  
	nGender digital divide: The gender digital 
divide is rooted in discriminatory social 
and gender norms which affect the ability 
of girls to access and engage with digital 
technologies. In some contexts, girls 
do not have the same access to digital 
technologies or to devices as boys, or 
they may only be able to access a mobile 
device through a male household member. Often, girls and women have limited 
time for media consumption due to high 
volumes of chores. They may also have 
limited opportunities for learning and 
development, which impacts their skills 
and confidence to interact with digital 
content, denying them a voice for sharing 
experiences and speaking out against 
harmful practices. Programmes need 
to reflect on whether including a digital 
component may exclude girls and women 
and further exacerbate gender imbalances.
	nDisability: Consider how accessible 
your digital content is to people with 
impairments. Assess what assistive 
technology is available to make your 
content inclusive. 
	nPhone lines, internet connection 
and electricity supply: Consider the 
available infrastructure, phone lines, and 
connectivity, as well as electricity supply. 
Disparate infrastructure may mean that 
a segment of your audience is unable to 
access your digital programme. 
	nEthical considerations:  The digital age 
has amplified existing risks and, in some 
cases, created new ones. Child abuse, 
exploitation and trafficking online still 
occur, and children are increasingly facing 
a range of other online risks such as 
cyberbullying, hate speech, harassment 
and exposure to unsuitable content. 
It is essential that children are able to 
participate in a safe online environment, 
benefit from safe devices, applications 
and platforms, and have the ability to use 
the internet safely. Ethical considerations 
need to be at the heart of any digital 
engagement strategy to ensure protection 
of young users. Please refer to UNICEF’s 
Policy guide on children and digital 
connectivity . © UNICEF/UNI319830/KANOBANA
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 14
A1 DESCRIPTION OF DIGITAL 
PLATFORMS AND TECHNOLOGIES 
AND POTENTIAL USES3
With increased mobile penetration, digital 
engagement is steadily increasing reach  
across the globe. In light of this, country 
programmes will need to revise, strengthen or 
update their strategies to include digital modes 
of communication. Below is a brief menu of 
the main mobile and digital platforms and 
technologies that can be used to support remote 
and virtual engagement with intended audiences. 
Chatbots  are computer programmes designed 
to simulate conversation with human users at 
scale. Programmes can design chatbots, or 
messaging experiences, and deploy them over many communication channels, including  
SMS, Facebook Messenger, U-Report, 
WhatsApp and Viber. 
GeoPoll  is a mobile-based platform that can 
administer remote, mobile-based surveys all over 
the world. Using SMS and voice calls to target 
specific populations it can be used to conduct 
surveys to gather insights into communities’ 
knowledge, perceptions, beliefs, expectations 
and behaviours around harmful practices. 
Google One Box vetted sites (for example 
National Ministries of Gender, Social Welfare, 
Health or Education) can update their website’s 
code base to include an algorithm that, once 
enabled, allows relevant content to appear in a 
featured box during relevant searches. Google 
One Box, through its partnership with UNICEF 
and the Internet of Good Things (IOGT), offers ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
OTHER RCCE RESOURCES AND HARMFUL PRACTICES
Global RCCE efforts have included the development of a 
range of resources and tools to support communication 
and community engagement even with physical distancing 
measures. Many of these resources contain helpful 
information that is also applicable to harmful practices. 
Appendix 3 provides a list of these resources with key 
considerations for FGM and child marriage programming. 
SOCIAL AND BEHAVIOUR CHANGE THEORIES:
Petit, Vincent. (2019). The Behavioural Drivers Model: A 
Conceptual Framework for Social and Behaviour Change 
Programming. UNICEF: https://www.unicef.org/mena/
sites/unicef.org.mena/files/2019-10/The_Behavioural_
Drivers_Model%5B1%5D.pdf
Raftree Linda., Digital and Social Media for Social and 
Behaviour Change Communication. iMedia Associates,  https://
imediaassociates.org/app/uploads/2019/07/Digital-and-Social-
Media-for-SBCC-March-2019.pdf , accessed March 2019.
CONDUCTING DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS:
Girl Effect (2017) From browsing to behaviour 
change How digital interventions influence 
offline change among adolescent girls:  https://
www.datocms-assets.com/15254/1567649714-
newknowledgereportdigitalfinal.pdfASSESSMENTS AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT:
Community Rapid Assessment: https://drive.google.com/
file/d/11x9Ie5i5rZD_Rtf6s_0ez3zDUcbmEoJ1/view
COVID-19: How to Include Marginalized and Vulnerable 
People in Risk Communication and Community 
Engagement: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/
resources/COVID-19_CommunityEngagement_130320.pdf
Tips for Engaging Communities in Low Resource 
Settings, Remotely and In-Person: https://
communityengagementhub.org/wp-content/uploads/
sites/2/2020/05/CE-low-resource-settings-distance-
April-2020.pdf
Raftree Linda. Digital and Social Media for Social and 
Behaviour Change Communication.  iMedia Associates, 
2019, https://imediaassociates.org/app/uploads/2019/07/
Digital-and-Social-Media-for-SBCC-March-2019.pdf , 
accessed March 2019.
Paluck, Elizabeth Levi, & Ball, Laurie. (2010). Social norms 
marketing aimed at gender-based violence: A literature 
review and critical assessment . New York: International 
Rescue Committee.
UNICEF. (2010) Dynamics of social change: Toward the 
abandonment of female genital mutilation/cutting in five 
African countries . Florence: Innocenti Research Center.
3 Adapted from UNICEF’s “Digital Community Engagement Strengthening Polio C4D Strategy” Concept Note, June 2020COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 15UNICEF country offices the opportunity to be a 
source of trusted information for communities 
of interest.
Internet of Good Things (IOGT)  is a 
community engagement and system 
strengthening tool that offers free access 
to mobile-ready, web-based resources 
and applications configured for low-end 
mobile devices. It provides access to free 
educational and life-saving information. 
Currently, the topics and issues available 
on IOGT include harmful practices, such as 
child marriage and FGM, maternal health, 
hygiene, diseases such as Ebola, Polio, 
Cholera and COVID-19, sexual health advice 
for adolescents, Internet safety, positive 
parenting techniques and more. Content 
is delivered to three distinct user groups: 
parents and caregivers, adolescents and 
young people, and frontline workers and 
educators. It includes engagement tools 
such as surveys and polls. In the context of 
physical distancing, IOGT provides access 
to information in hard to reach communities. 
Country programmes interested in using this 
platform should explore whether it is already 
functioning in the country and add relevant 
content on harmful practices.  
MagicBox is UNICEF’s big data platform 
which is involved in measuring the secondary 
effects of COVID-19 to understand the impacts 
on social behaviour, education, sentiment, 
opinion and vulnerable populations. In addition, 
it provides guidance on how to pinpoint and 
combat misinformation about COVID-19. 
While not strictly related to harmful practices, 
having an awareness of how communities 
are responding can help shape programming 
around harmful practices as well.
RapidPro  is a digital messaging platform that 
powers programmes such as the Internet of 
Good Things, U-Report and Chatbots. It allows 
programmes to develop messages that can 
be disseminated to specific groups, while also 
collecting data via SMS and other channels 
such a voice or social media, to enable real-
time data collection and mass communication 
with intended audiences. RapidPro has 
traditionally been used to support immunization 
campaigns, conditional cash transfer 
programmes and monitoring of public services. 
Messaging can be adapted to address barriers 
and enablers around harmful practices.U-Report  is a digital mobile messaging 
solution that is built on the RapidPro platform. 
It is a social messaging tool and data collection 
system developed by UNICEF to improve 
citizen engagement, inform and foster positive 
change. The programme sends SMS polls and 
alters messaging to its participants, collecting 
real-time responses and subsequently 
publishes the data gathered. 
Viamo  is a simple, low-cost technology 
for data collection and for the provision of 
public information via mobile phones. In 
countries where Viamo is present, it can 
provide information to the general population 
or selected audiences, provide training to 
mobilizers, leaders
 and others, and conduct survey and polls 
to monitor general sentiment, attitudes and 
expectations around harmful practices. 
A2 GLOBAL RCCE INDICATORS 
ADAPTED TO HARMFUL 
PRACTICES
UNICEF’s global RCCE response efforts 
include the development of RCCE indicators 
to promote consistency in global, regional and 
country level reporting on RCCE indicators 
pertaining to digital and traditional media. 
These indicators are included in the global 
Humanitarian Action for Children (HAC) appeal 
and the global Situation Report (SitRep)  
on COVID-19. The three following indicators 
are proposed: 
	nReach:  the number of people 
reached through one-way channels of 
communication
	nEngagement:  the number of people 
involved in participatory actions
	nFeedback: the number of people sharing 
their concerns and asking questions/
clarifications for available support services 
to address their needs through established 
feedback mechanisms.
To promote alignment with these global 
indicators, the tables below provides the 
breakdown and description of each indicator. 
It is a slightly revised version of the ‘UNICEF 
Guidance for Country Offices on RCCE 
Indicators for COVID-19 Global Response’ to 
indicate application of indicators in the context 
of harmful practices programming.MagicBox 
is UNICEF’s 
big data 
platform which 
is involved in 
measuring the 
secondary effects 
of COVID-19 to 
understand the 
impacts on social 
behaviour, education, 
sentiment, opinion 
and vulnerable 
populations.COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 16TABLE 4: INDICATOR 1: NUMBER OF PEOPLE REACHED
SUPPORTING 
PLATFORMINDICATORS, DEFINITION AND RATIONAL TOOLS
Social media Indicator:  The number of impressions per post (on content relating harmful 
practices).
Definition:  While the exact definition of an impression varies among different 
social media platforms it can be defined as the number of times your content 
enters a person’s screen.
• Facebook:  organic impressions  are the number of times any content from your 
page or about your page entered a person’s screen. Facebook paid impressions  
measure how often your ads were on screen for your target audience.
• Instagram: Impressions measure the total number of times users saw your 
post or story.
• Twitter:  Impressions are defined as any time a Twitter user sees one of your 
tweets.
• LinkedIn:  Impressions are the number of times the updates were shown to 
members.
• For any other social media networks, please refer to their specific definitions.
Calculation:  Select your top performing social media channel (e.g. Facebook) and 
identify all posts relating to harmful practices during the reporting period. For these 
posts, take the total number of impressions and divide by the number of posts.
Rationale: On social media, reach and impressions are related concepts that can 
indicate exposure to messaging. Prioritizing impressions is recommended as this 
is a standard, easily accessible metric across most major social media platforms.Native analytics for 
each social media 
platform (e.g. Facebook, 
Twitter Analytics, 
Instagram Insights etc.)
Web Indicator: The number of unique pageviews for content related to harmful practices.
Definition: Aggregate number of unique views to the programme’s harmful 
practices web pages generated by the same user in the same session during the 
reporting period, i.e. the number of sessions during which the page was viewed, 
one or more times, within a 24 hour period.
Rationale: The number of unique pageviews is an indication of how many 
times messages related to harmful practices on UNICEF or partner webpages 
are viewed. It also helps to identify which posts/pages are most popular to help 
shape future content strategies. This is an easily available metric that can be 
aggregated across relevant web pages relating to harmful practices.
Considerations: The number of unique pageviews is a simple approach that is 
easily accessible to most country offices across different skill levels and capacity 
using Google Analytics. Alternatively, countries can choose to report on ‘# of 
users for specific harmful practices pages’ if they have the capacity to configure 
Google Analytics to limit this data to specific pages.Google Analytics
TV and radio Indicator: The number of people reached through TV and/or radio.
Definition:  Maximum potential reach from radio and TV content on harmful 
practices (e.g. spots, news broadcasts, radio shows).
Rationale: This aligns with the broader RCCE guidance on mass media channels.Use data provided on 
viewership,
listenership, etc. by the 
broadcaster, a media 
monitoring agency, or 
similar sources.
Print and online 
newsIndicator:  The number of people reached through print/online news.
Definition: Maximum potential reach for print/online news. Use the highest 
number of:
• print publications:  use the circulation number
• online news:  use the average number of monthly visitors
Rationale:  This aligns with the broader RCCE guidance on using audience size.Media monitoring 
agency or media 
monitoring tool such as 
LexisNexis NewsdeskCOVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 17SUPPORTING 
PLATFORMINDICATORS, DEFINITION AND RATIONAL TOOLS
RapidPro-
enabled 
programmes 
(includes 
U-Report, 1000 
days, chatbots, 
etc.)Indicator:  The number of times users were reached with information on harmful 
practices
Definition:  An aggregation of
• Total number of times users were sent at least one message in a RapidPro 
flow on harmful practices, and
• Total number of times users’ questions were answered via Case-Pro/U-Partners, and
• Total number of users reached/times users were reached through other 
RapidPro activities (e.g. via RapidPro API).
Rationale: The number of messages sent by RapidPro-enabled programmes 
gives a reasonably accurate representation of receipt of content. Measuring 
unique users that receive messages in a specific time period is a more difficult 
metric to collect manually.
Considerations: Not all outgoing messages are viewed, and for some channels 
there is no reporting on message delivery (e.g. SMS). This is the best possible 
indicator at this time given current data access. A RapidPro “user” is a single 
contact record, which in most cases represents a single SMS number, Facebook 
account, WhatsApp number, etc. A single person may create more than one 
“user” in RapidPro, but analysis showed this to be infrequent (3% of users).Rapid-Pro, Case-Pro/U-
Partners, Realtime 
Data-driven Dashboards 
(R3D)
Internet of 
Good ThingsIndicator: The number of site visitors who access relevant content on IOGT
Definition: Number of users accessing pages tagged for harmful practices and 
related content.
Rationale:  A “site visitor” represents a single person that may access multiple 
articles or messages on harmful practices on the IOGT site. This indicator, is 
defined by Google Analytics as “user,” tracks “site visitors” by IP address, that 
ensures no double-counting occurs of the same person visiting multiple sites.Google Data Studio 
Dashboard
Other digital 
toolsIndicator:  Can be adapted from some of the suggested indicators above.
Rationale:  Offices may employ additional digital tools, such as Viamo or 
CommCare, to reach target populations with information and messages. When 
measuring the reach of messages with these tools, reporting should focus on 
capturing the number of unique  users reached.
Ignored prompts do not qualify for reach reporting but can be used to inform 
programmatic decision making around priority messages and audience 
preferences. Effort should be made, where possible, to disaggregate reach by 
audience type (i.e. gender, age, location, profession).TABLE 4: INDICATOR 1: NUMBER OF PEOPLE REACHED  (continued)
© UNICEF/UNI232348/NOORANICOVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 18TABLE 5:  INDICATOR 2: NUMBER OF PEOPLE 
INVOL VED IN PARTICIPATORY ACTIONS
SUPPORTING 
PLATFORMINDICATORS, DEFINITION & RATIONAL TOOLS
Social media Indicator: The number of engagements per relevant post on your top 
performing channel.
Definition: Publicly visible engagements including likes, reactions, 
comments, replies and shares/retweets.
Calculation: Select your top performing social media channel (e.g. 
Facebook) and identify all posts relating to harmful practices during the 
reporting period. For these posts, take the total number of engagements 
and divide by the number of posts.
Rationale:  Due to the limitations of existing tools, there is no simple, 
accurate way to convert the number of engagements to the number of 
people engaged. Accordingly, this metric aims to give an indication of 
the number of people engaged through social media while reducing the 
potential for double counting. Public engagements indicate support and 
interest in your content, and they are also more easily comparable across 
different platforms. Dividing the total number of engagements by the 
number of posts reduces the risk of double counting. Focusing on your top 
performing channel simplifies this process.
Considerations: To simplify data collection across different platforms, 
country offices can use tools that aggregate engagements into a single 
dashboard.Native analytics (e.g. Facebook 
Insights, Twitter Analytics, etc.)
Country offices can use tools 
that aggregate results across 
accounts such as: Talkwalker, 
Social Bakers, Hootsuite, Fan 
Page Karma, or similar.
Web Indicator: Average time on page for relevant content relating to harmful 
practices.
Definition: Average amount of time all users spend on pages relating to 
harmful practices.
Rationale: Average time on page is an indication of how long users 
spend on a webpage before clicking to another page. A longer duration 
can indicate that users are finding the content interesting or informative. 
Please note that using ‘% of returning visitors’ is not recommended as the 
Global Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) may affect the accuracy of data.Google Analytics
TV and radio Indicator: The number of people engaged through interactive radio and 
TV platforms/programmes (especially community radio).
Definition: The number of people who call-in via interactive TV/radio 
programmes.Varies by platform. May 
be reported by the station, 
broadcaster or digital tools.
Print and online 
newsN/A – not likely relevant N/A
RapidPro-
enabled 
programmes 
(includes 
U-Report, 1000 
days, chatbots, 
etc.)Indicator: The number of messages received in messaging programmes 
that have incorporated content on harmful practices.
Definition:
• The number of messages received from users on RapidPro flows on 
harmful practices
• The number of messages received from users on CasePro/U-Partners 
platforms
• The number of messages received from users through other RapidPro 
activities (e.g. via RapidPro API).
Rationale: The number of messages received from a user in a message 
service relating to harmful practices is the strongest indicator of the 
level of engagement with your content. This is also comparable across 
different messaging platforms and accounts for the digital messaging 
channel modality, where due to length restrictions (e.g. length of SMS) 
content is often broken up across a series of messages.RapidPro, CasePro/U-
Partners, Realtime Data-driven 
Dashboards (R3D)COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 19SUPPORTING 
PLATFORMINDICATORS, DEFINITION & RATIONAL TOOLS
Internet of 
Good ThingsIndicator:  The number of poll, survey and question responses and 
comments posted relating to harmful practices.
Definition:  Responses or comments represent the engagement with 
a single user. Aggregate the number of polls, survey and open-ended 
question responses relating to harmful practices that are submitted on 
the IOGT site, added with the total number of comments  posted across 
articles relating to harmful practices that do not violate community terms 
and conditions.
Rationale:  IOGT has four opportunities for users to engage with  
the platform:
1. Polls
2. Surveys
3. Open-ended questions
4. Comments on the page
Considerations: Poll participation requires the user to login to the 
website, and is therefore infrequently used, but represents the most 
engaged response a user can initiate. Comments, surveys, and open-ended 
questions can be configured to allow anonymous responses and therefore 
tend to have more engagement. This data cannot be successfully pulled 
from Google Analytics and requires login to the Content Management 
System of your IOGT site in order to access and aggregate total reporting.Google Data Studio Dashboard
Other digital 
toolsIndicator Guidance: Can be adapted from some of the suggested 
indicators above.
Rationale: Offices may employ additional digital tools, such as Viamo or 
CommCare, to engage target populations on actions relating to harmful 
practices. When measuring engagement through these tools, reporting 
should capture the number of unique, two-way user engagements 
completed  (without regard to the number of unique users).
Consideration: Two-way communication through a digital tool is 
defined as any time user feedback is solicited by the tool and responded 
to by the user.
TABLE 6: INDICATOR 3: NUMBER OF PEOPLE SHARING THEIR 
CONCERNS AND ASKING QUESTIONS/CLARIFICATIONS RELATING TO 
HARMFUL PRACTICES AND ON A V AILABLE SERVICES TO ADDRESS 
THEIR NEEDS THROUGH ESTABLISHED FEEDBACK MECHANISMS
SUPPORTING 
PLATFORMINDICATORS, DEFINITION & RATIONAL TOOLS
Social media/
mass media/
web platformsThis indicator relates to accountability to community members and 
closing the feedback loop related to available services. If you are using 
mass media, social media and web platforms for this type of purpose, 
you may report relevant results here. Otherwise, you may consider other 
available mechanisms such as hotlines, radio call-in shows or U-Report.U-Report, hotlines, radio call-
ins, etc. where applicable
Other digital 
toolsIndicators: These can be adapted from the suggested indicators above.
Rationale: Offices may employ additional digital tools, such as Viamo or 
other established platforms deployed specifically as feedback mechanisms. 
When reporting on additional digital tools, this indicator should capture the 
number of unique users who share personal stories and opinions relating 
to harmful practices or who request, via a workflow-based engagement or 
open-ended response, information or support on harmful practices.
Consideration: Two-way communication through a digital tool is 
defined as any time user feedback is solicited by the tool and responded 
to by the user.TABLE 5:  INDICATOR 2: NUMBER OF PEOPLE INVOL VED 
IN PARTICIPATORY ACTIONS  (continued)COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 20
© UNICEF/UNI287096/MOSTAFA
A3 COVID-19 RCCE RESOURCES 
AND THEIR APPLICABILITY 
TO CHILD MARRIAGE
Unless a link is provided, the resources listed 
below can be found in the COVID-19 RCCE 
Resource Package , which is updated regularly  
as new resources become available.
TABLE 7: COVID-19 RESOURCES AND CONSIDERATIONS 
ON FGM AND CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
TITLE OF THE 
RESOURCEMAIN CONTENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR FGM & 
CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND FEEDBACK MECHANISMS
Accountability 
to Affected 
Populations 
(AAP) 
Guidance 
in COVID-19 
Response
(7-page guide)• Highlights 3 key principles in AAP (information provision; 
participation; complaints & feedback mechanisms)
• Refers to resources on how to assess community needs and 
their information sources, though these do not necessarily 
take into consideration physical distancing requirements
• Provides suggestions on participation and feedback 
approaches during social distancing (call centres, digital 
platforms such as U-Report and IOGT, social media and social 
messaging apps, radio and TV channels)
• Includes some AAP indicators• Some AAP indicators can be adapted to 
monitor how programmes and activities 
are meeting community needs.
• Some of the feedback approaches can 
be used to obtain community feedback 
and input to inform programming.
Tips for 
Engaging 
Communities 
During 
COVID-19 in 
Low Resource 
Settings, 
Remotely and 
In-person
31-page brief• Provides considerations for engaging communities in social 
distancing times (using phone lines, going through local 
leaders, coordinating with partners)
• Proposed action and considerations are very COVID-19 
specific (shielding approaches, ways to access health 
services, mapping of high transmission areas, identification 
of vulnerable groups and individuals)• Some approaches can be used to engage 
communities on FGM and child marriage 
content; however, there is nothing in this 
guide that is not covered in some way by 
other guides and documents looking and 
community engagement.
How to Include 
Marginalized 
and Vulnerable 
People in Risk 
Communication 
and Community 
Engagement
12-page guide• This lists vulnerable/marginalized people to consider when 
conducting community engagement: children; persons with 
disabilities; women and girls; pregnant women; people 
living with HIV; gender based violence survivors; refugees 
and migrants; elderly; people living in existing humanitarian 
emergencies; people with pre-existing medical conditions; 
sexual and gender minorities; ethnic minorities.
• Describes key actions that can be taken to ensure inclusion/
engagement of identified vulnerable groups.
• All proposed actions are mostly related to RCCE activities• Can help with considerations around 
ensuring that the most vulnerable are 
reached, but the suggested action in 
the guide are very much focused on 
COVID-19 communication and RCCE 
activities and not always transferable.
Community 
Action Guide
5-page tip sheet• Key steps on how a community can be engaged to prevent 
the spread of COVID-19
• Divides action in three domains: (1) Learn, (2) Act, (3) Help• Could possibly adapted for engaging 
communities in keeping girls safe from 
FGM and child marriage.
COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 21TITLE OF THE 
RESOURCEMAIN CONTENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR FGM & 
CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND FEEDBACK MECHANISMS  (continued)
Guidance 
for National 
Societies 
on Safe and 
Remote Risk 
Communication 
and Community 
Engagement 
during 
COVID-19
28-page 
guidance• Provides considerations for conducting face-to-face activities
• Contains a list of questions to help determine level of risk in 
regard to COVID-19 for different activities
• Include tips on how to reduce COVID-19 transmission during 
face-to-face communication
• Lists options on how to mobilize, engage communities, share 
and collect information when face-to-face is not feasible. 
Options listed include: Social media, mass media, hotlines, 
WhatsApp, TV shows, remote survey, telephone calls with 
key informants and service providers, virtual focus-group 
discussions (FGDs).• Contains some helpful ideas and tips on 
how to engage with communities while 
respecting social distancing regulations 
that can help FGM and child marriage 
programming engage in two-way 
dialogue with audiences.
• Questions to assess and reduce level 
of risk for conducting face-to-face 
communication can be applicable to 
FGM and child marriage programming 
too
Community 
Engagement 
from a Distance
8-page guide• Lists alternative approaches to face-to-face communication 
(use trusted information source to disseminate information 
virtually/via phone; use fixed loudspeakers; use front-line 
staff to conduct interpersonal communication)• This is a very clearly written guide and 
the information can also inform FGM 
and child marriage activities, however 
there is nothing new or that isn’t covered 
elsewhere.
Malaria Social 
and Behaviour 
Change 
Program 
Guidance in 
the Context 
of COVID-19 
Pandemic
(33-page 
guidance)• Lists different low risk channels in the context of COVID-19
• Provides options for co-messaging on malaria with COVID-19 
messages
• Describes advantages, disadvantages consideration for 
different channel options in context of COVID-19
• Advocacy packages for key stakeholders/ decision makers to 
be provided in print or digital copies and virtual meetings
• Integration of reminders around malaria during existing 
COVID19 advocacy meetings
• Radio and TV (spots, debates, Q&As, phone-in programmes)
• Social media and social media monitoring to ensure correct 
information
• Hotline number
• Laminated print materials as job aids
• Town-criers and mobile units
• Virtual religious services
• Phone calls instead of house visits
• Include brief guidance on rumour tracking, rumour 
management, on gender and stigma (how to ensure that 
women also received messages and increased risk of gender-
based violence)
• Defines desired behaviours (around malaria) for different 
audience groups (communication agents, health facility staff/
SBC staff; community health workers; community members, 
community members at health facilities) and how to integrate 
promotion of desired behaviours into standard health activities• Considerations for different, low-risk 
channels can be used to guide choice 
of channels for FGM and child marriage 
programming too
• Guidance on rumour tracking, gender and 
stigma also relevant for FGM and child 
marriage programming.TABLE 7: COVID-19 RESOURCES AND CONSIDERATIONS ON 
FGM AND CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING  (continued)COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 22TITLE OF THE 
RESOURCEMAIN CONTENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR FGM & 
CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND FEEDBACK MECHANISMS  (continued)
Community-
based Health 
Care Including 
Outreach and 
Campaigns in 
the Context 
of COVID-19 
Pandemic
44-page manual• Provides guidance on continuation of essential services 
delivered at the community level and how to leverage and 
strengthen community platforms for COVID-19 response
• Includes ideas on how to adapt health system functions 
in the pandemic context and how to protect workers and 
communities with infection prevention and control measures 
and use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
• Contains guidance on how to continue providing support and 
services around life-course issues (family planning, maternal 
and newborn health, adolescent and elderly health etc.)
• Provides recommendations for teleconsultations with 
adolescents and utilization of mHealth platforms
• List key elements of effective communication, building trust, 
reducing fear and strengthening collaboration
• Provides ideas on expanding digital platforms to include 
training, supervision, peer-to-peer• Could some of the guidance on 
continuation of essential services be 
applied to FGM and child marriage 
services?
• Tips for leveraging and strengthening 
community platforms can be adapted to 
FGM and child marriage activities.
• Infection prevention & control, and 
guidance on PPE can be used to guide any 
community activities, including around 
FGM and child marriage.
• Could explore opportunities for integrating 
FGM and child marriage messaging in some 
of the life-course issues recommended for 
continuation in the manual (e.g. in family 
planning, maternal, newborn and child 
health, and folic acid supplementation 
activities).
• Find entry points with Community Health 
Workers/health service providers and 
health platforms, all of which are at the 
centre of community-based health care.
• Consider similar model described in the 
manual around teleconsultation with 
adolescents for FGM and child marriage?
• Advice on how communication should 
be conducted can be transferred to FGM 
and child marriage activities.
• Considerations around expansion of 
digital platforms can be used to guide 
FGM and child marriage programming 
too.
Social Science 
in the Era 
of Social 
Distancing: a 
summary of 
methodologies
5-page list• Lists methodologies for doing fieldwork during physical/
social distancing.
• Lists and describes each methodology as well as tools required 
for each (e.g. smartphone, pen and paper, computer etc.).
• Although it talks about fieldwork, the methodologies 
described are types of communication activities and ways of 
engaging with communities.• The methodologies/approaches listed 
can be used to inform communication 
activities in the context of FGM and child 
marriage too. 
• The document is very clear and brings 
together approaches that are described 
in different documents.
DIGITAL APPROACHES
UNICEF’s 
Approach to 
Digital Health
(43-page 
roadmap)• Roadmap on how to build capacity of staff, partners and 
government to implement digital health, leverage information 
and communication technology (ICT) solutions to overcome 
bottlenecks in health systems, improve health service delivery, 
strengthen health systems, engage communities and civil 
society in decision making
• Lists types of digital health platforms that may exist in 
different countries that can be leveraged (e.g RapidPro, open 
medical records, district health information systems)
• Defines principles for developing a digital health approach 
(design with user, build for sustainability etc.)
• Lists different digital functions (SMS, MMS, IVR, audio clips, 
video images)• Explore options for integrating FGM 
and child marriage data collection into 
existing systems? 
• Digital functions can provide ideas 
to consider for digital communication 
around FGM and child marriage.TABLE 7: COVID-19 RESOURCES AND CONSIDERATIONS ON 
FGM AND CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING  (continued)COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 23TITLE OF THE 
RESOURCEMAIN CONTENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR FGM & 
CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
DIGITAL APPROACHES (continued)
Internet of 
Good Things
https://www.
unicef.org/
innovation/IoGT• A set of free, mobile-ready, web-based resources and 
application containing educational and lifesaving information, 
provided for free. 
• Currently includes information on topics such as maternal 
health, hygiene, emergency information on diseases such as 
Ebola, Polio, Cholera, and sexually transmitted infections, 
advice for adolescents on sexual health and internet safety, 
positive parenting and more
•  Provides localized, updated quality content for free. • Should determine reach and utilization of 
IOGT in the country. If adequate reach, 
could also add FGM and child marriage 
content.
U-Report • A free tool for community participation to run polls, collect and 
map responses in real time. 
• Users are generally young people aged 10 to 25 years
• The UNICEF East and Southern Africa Regional Office is using 
U-Report to assess level of knowledge on COVID-19 among 
U-Reporters and to clarify any wrong beliefs about the disease 
through a “Myth Buster Quiz”• Check reach and utilization of U-Report in 
the country.
• Can be used for quick pulse on whether 
and how perceptions, attitudes, 
expectations and behaviours around FGM 
and child marriage are changing in the 
context of COVID-19
ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Focus Group 
Discussion 
Guide for 
Communities
8-page guide• Guidance on how to conduct FGDs (seating arrangements, 
facilitator and notetakers, introduction and conclusion)
• Questions to assess perceptions, knowledge, attitudes around 
coronavirus
• Developed prior to enforcement of physical distancing and 
does not provide alternative ways for conducting FGDs• Some helpful information on how to 
conduct FGDs however does not address 
issue of physical distancing
COVID-19 Rapid 
Assessment 
Tool
4-page KAP 
questions• Rapid assessment containing questions to assess knowledge, 
attitudes and practices around COVID-19.
• Can be used for key informant interviews or to guide FGD• If country offices are conducting these 
rapid assessments regularly to monitor 
knowledge, attitudes and practices around 
COVID-19, could some key questions to 
capture perceptions/ intention around FGM 
and child marriage behaviour be added? 
MONITORING & EVALUATION
RCCE M&E 
Framework for 
RCCE• Contains indicators, means of verification, and frequency for 
different behavioural drivers: knowledge and awareness; 
social accountability and community feedback; stigma; 
intent; self-efficacy; risk perception.• Framework can be used to guide key 
questions for FGM and child marriage 
activities to measure beyond reach.
RCCE Indicator 
Guidance 
Package
42-page 
PowerPoint 
presentation• Guidance summarizing key information on data collection, 
measurement, and indicators for UNICEF RCCE in relation to 
COVID-19 response
• Includes HAC, WHO and HRP indicators
• Provides suggestions on how to collect data• Some information can be used to help 
inform data collection for FGM and child 
marriage activities, however the RCCE 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework 
described above is more comprehensive
UNICEF’s 
COVID-19 
Global 
Response 
2020: Indicator 
Methodology
3-page 
worksheet• Description of the 3 HAC indicators and approaches for 
collecting them• HAC indicators focus mostly on reach 
(Number of people reached through 
COVID-19 messaging; Number of people 
through RCCE activities; Number of people 
sharing their concerns and asking questions/
clarifications)
• Not necessarily relevant for FGM and 
child marriage monitoring and evaluation, 
however if country offices have established, 
regular data collection mechanisms for HAC, 
they could explore opportunities for adding 
some questions relating to FGM and child 
marriage activities.TABLE 7: COVID-19 RESOURCES AND CONSIDERATIONS ON 
FGM AND CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING  (continued)COVID-19: DIGITAL AND REMOTE APPROACHES IN ELIMINATING FEMALE GENITAL MUTILATION AND CHILD MARRIAGE 24TITLE OF THE 
RESOURCEMAIN CONTENTCONSIDERATIONS FOR FGM & 
CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING
OTHER
Faith in Action 
COVID-19 
Initiative
Global Initiative:  
https://www.
faith4positive  
change.org/  
covid-19Key objectives of the initiative are to:
• Manage communication/misinformation and rumours
• Dispel fear, discrimination stigma
• Promote adaptation of religious gatherings, practices of rituals, 
handwashing and hygiene
• Address specific needs of vulnerable groups
• Prevent violence against children and engage children actively 
in the initiative
• Promote and support the recovery of social services
Contains a series of resources and guides for faith leaders 
(Communicating to end misinformation, discrimination and to instil 
hope; Maintaining health & hygiene; Adapting how we gather together, 
pray and practice rituals; Helping people who are at risk of COVID-19; 
Addressing vulnerable groups; Preventing violence against women and 
children; Children and youth participation; Supporting recovery and 
social services; Digital and media engagement) - see below• FGM and child marriage specific 
information could be added to some of 
the guides. 
• Initiative is useful for FGM and child 
marriage activities that rely on faith 
leaders
Protecting 
Children and 
Women from 
Violence 
During 
COVID-19 
Guidance for 
Faith Leaders
12-page handbook 
for faith leaders/
faith community• Series of recommendations on what faith leaders can do to 
reduce violence against women and children and support 
families at risk of experience violence. 
• Refers to religious and sacred texts to reinforce messages
• Does not contain content on FGM or child marriage 
• Not finalized yet• Guidance includes FGM and child 
marriage content is included (Alessia 
working with Kerida and Faith Initiative 
group on this)
Promoting 
Child and Youth 
Participation 
Guidance for 
Faith Leaders
10-page handbook 
for faith leaders/
faith community• Principles of effective participation
• Recommendations on what faith leaders/faith communities 
can do to address some of the challenges experienced by 
children during COVID-19 times
• Refers to religious teachings and quotes to reinforce guidance 
and messages in the handbook (e.g. Scriptures valuing children 
and child participation)
• Not finalized yet• Some messages around the role of young 
people in preventing FGM and child 
marriage can be included. 
Pre-testing of 
Materials• Pre-testing templates for newly developed materials
• Contains COVID-19 specific questions but can be easily 
adapted to any type of material• Can help programmes to pre-test new 
materials
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
UNICEF wishes to thank our partners the governments of Austria, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, AECID (Spain), Sweden, 
the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the European Union for their generous financial contributions towards the 
elimination of female genital mutilation. We also thank the Governments of Belgium, Canada, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway and the 
United Kingdom, the European Union and Zonta International for their generous financial contributions towards ending child marriage.
For more information, please contact:
Child Protection, Programme Division, UNICEF HQ
Email: childprotection@unicef.orgCommunication for Development, Programme Division, UNICEF HQ  
Email: c4dhq@unicef.orgTABLE 7: COVID-19 RESOURCES AND CONSIDERATIONS ON 
FGM AND CHILD MARRIAGE PROGRAMMING  (continued)