1 Democratic Countries Should For m a Strategic Tech Alliance  
Stanford - Vienna Transatlantic Technology Law Forum, Transatlantic Antitrust and IPR 
Developments, Stanford University, Issue No. 1/2021  
Mauritz Kop1 
Abstract  
China’s relentless  advance in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and quantum computing has engendered a 
significant amount of anxiety about the future of America’s technological supremacy. The resulting 
debate centres around the impact of China’s digital rise on the economy, secu rity, employment and 
the profitability of American companies. Absent in these predominantly economic disquiets is what 
should be a deeper, existential concern: What are the effects of authoritarian regimes exporting their 
values into our society through th eir technology? This essay will address this question by examining 
how democratic countries can, or should respond, and what you can do about it to influence the 
outcome.  
The essay argues that democratic countries  should form a global, broadly scoped Strategic Tech 
Alliance, built on mutual economic interests and common moral, social and legal norms, technological 
interoperability standards, legal principles and constitutional values. An Alliance committed to 
safegu arding d emocratic norms, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) 
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). The US, the EU and its democratic 
allies should join forces with countries that share our digita l DNA, institute fair reciprocal trading 
conditions, and establish a global responsible technology governance framework that actively 
pursues democratic freedoms, human rights and the rule of law.  
Currently, two dominant tech blocks exist  that have incompa tible political systems : the US and China . 
The competition for AI and quantum ascendancy  is a battle between ideologies : liberal democracy  
mixed with free market capitalism versus authoritarianism  blended  with surveillance capitalism . 
Europe stands in the middle, championing a legal -ethical approach to tech governance.   
The essay discusses political feasibility of cooperation along transatlantic lines, and examines 
arguments against the formation of a democratic, value -based Strategic Tech Alliance that wil l set 
global technology standards. Then, it weighs the described advantages of the establishment of an 
Alliance that aims to win the race for democratic technological supremacy against disadvantages, 
unintended consequences and the harms of doing nothing.  
Further, the essay attempts to approach the identified challenges in light of the ‘democracy versus 
authoritarianism’ discussion from other, sociocritical perspectives, and inquires whether we are 
democratic enough ourselves.   
1 Mauritz Kop  is a Stanford Law School TTLF Fellow  and Managing Partner  at AIRecht , a leading 4th Industrial 
Revolution technology consultancy firm based in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The author is grateful to Suzan 
Slijpen (Slijpen Legal) for valuable comments on an earlier version of this article , and to Juha Vesala for 
excellent editorial support .  2 The essay maintain s that technology is shaping our everyday lives, and that the way in which we 
design and utilize our technology is influencing n early every aspec t of the socie ty we live in. 
Technology is never neutral. The es say describes tha t regulating emerging technology is an unending 
endeavour tha t follows the lifespan of th e technology and its implementation . In addition, i t debates 
how democratic countrie s should construct regulator y solution s tha t are tailored to the exponential 
pace of sustainab le innovation in the Fourth Industria l Revolution (4IR). 
The essay conclud es tha t to prevent authoritarianism from gaining ground, governments should do 
three things: (1) inaugurate a Strategic Tech Alliance, (2) set worldwide core rules, interoperability & 
conformity standards for key 4IR technologies such as AI, quantum, 6G and Virtual Reality (VR), and 
(3) actively embed our common democratic norms, principles and values into the architecture and 
infrastructure of our technology.  
TABLE OF C ONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  2 
2. THE CHALLEN GE ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  3 
3. THE RESPONSE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4 
4. POLITICAL FEASIBILITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  5 
5. ARE WE DEMOCRATIC ENOUGH OURSELVES ? ................................ ................................ ................  8 
6. TWO DOMINANT TECH BLOCKS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 9 
7. HARMS OF DOING NOTHING  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  10 
8. REGULATING 4IR TECHNOLOGY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 11 
9. CONCLUSION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 13 
1.Introduction
In December 2020, Europe reached  a comprehens ive multi -billion -dollar  investment  agreement (CAI)  
with China.2 As the United States (US) are facing  the challenges of intensified  competition with China , 
the deal has come under some criticism by the Biden Presidency .3 The question arises whether 
differing US and EU strategies towards China  are damaging transatlantic relations4, and whether the 
world would be better off with a united US -EU front .5  
China’s relentless  advance in Artificial Intelligence ( AI) and quantum computing has engend ered  a 
significant amount of  anxiety about  the future of America’s technological supremacy.6 Currently, 
China is leading in quantum technolog y, the US still have a  slight  edge in AI.7 The resulting debate 
2 See: https://edition.cnn.com/2020/12/31/asia/eu -china -trade -deal -human -rights -us-intl-hnk/index.html   
3 See: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/23/business/china -european -union -united -states.html   
4 See: https://www.politico.eu/art icle/why -europe -china -investment -deal -will-poison -transatlantic -relations -
joe-biden/   
5 See also: https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/event/transatlantic -cooperation -in-the-era-of-ai/  
6 See: https://edition.cnn.com/2020/11/15/asia/biden -china -policy -trump -us-intl-hnk/index.html   
7 See for example: https://hai.stanford.edu/research/ai -index -2021  and 
https://www.newsweek.com/2020/12/25/china -leads -quantum -computing -race -us-spies -plan -world -fewer -
secrets -1554439.html   3 centres around the impact o f Chin a’s digital rise on the economy, security , employment and the 
profitability of American compan ies. Absent in these predominantly econom ic disquiets is what 
should be a deeper, existential conc ern: What ar e the effects of authoritarian regimes8 exporting 
their valu es into our society through their technology?9 This essay will address this question by 
examining how democratic countri es can , or should respond, and what you can do about it to 
influ ence the outcome.  
The essay argu es that democrati c countries  should form a global, broad ly scop ed Strategi c Tech 
Alliance, buil t on mutual economic interests and common moral, social and legal norms, 
technological interoperability standards, legal principl es and constitutional values.10 The US, the EU 
and its demo cratic allies should join forces with countries that share our dig ital DNA , institute fair 
reciprocal trading condition s, and establish a global technology governan ce framework that actively 
pursues democratic freedoms, human rights and the rule of law.11 In this essay, ‘democratic norms’ 
refer to the principles and values as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Righ ts (UDHR) 
and the International Covenan t on Civil and Political Righ ts (ICCPR). 
The essay concludes that to prevent auth oritarianism from gaining ground, governments should do 
three things: (1) inaugurate a Strategic Tech Alliance, (2) set worldwide core rules, interoperability & 
conformity standards for key 4IR (Fourth Industrial Revolution) technologies such as AI, quantum , 6G 
and Virtual Reality (VR), and (3) actively embed our common democratic norms, principles and 
values into the architecture and infrastructure of our technology.12  
2. The Challenge
Technology is shaping our everyday lives. The way in which we desig n and use our technology is 
influencing n early every aspect of the society we live in.13 The opposite is also true: the type of 
society we live in, its norms and standards, shapes the architectur e of technology. Technology is 
never neutral : our society’s norms and valu es are reflected in th e technology we produce. As society 
shap es technology , technology shap es society.  
For exampl e, privacy prese rving techniques used in machin e learning algorithms help to safeguard 
privacy: a fundamental, constitutional freedom. Protecting privacy features high on the list of 
8 See for a list of authoritarian regimes: https://www.wearethemighty.com/lists/the -21-most -authoritarian -
regimes -in-the-world/   
9 See also: Roundtable: A ‘China Model?’ Beijing’s Promotion of Alternative Global Norms and Standards, U.S. -
China Economic AND Security Review Commission, April 27, 2020, https://www.uscc.gov/hearings/roundtable -
china -model -beijings -promotion -alternative -global -norms -and-standards   
10 See also: https://beyondstandards.ieee.org/ieee -7010 -2020 -launch -prioritizes -human -well-being -and-
environmental -sustainabili ty-via-technology/   
11 See also: https://www.scmp.com/comment/opinion/article/3118137/china -eu-investment -deal -shows -
biden-united -front -trade -will-not-be  
12 See: Mauritz Kop, Machine learning and EU data -sharing  practices: Legal aspects of machine learning  
training datasets for AI systems , (March 3, 2020). Research Handbook on Big Data Law edited by Roland Vogl, 
Chapter 22,  pp. 431 -452, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. , 2021 , Forthcoming . 
13 See also:  Ünver, H. Akın. Artificial Intelligence, Authoritarianism and the Future of Political Systems . Centre 
for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies, 2018, www.jstor.org/stable/resrep26084 .  4 
 priorities in a society that cherishes human  rights.14 On the other  end of the spectrum  are facial  and 
voice  recognition techniques used for a social crediting system . These have no place in a democracy.  
Just like we embed our own values in our  hi-tech  systems, the a uthoritarian regimes  do the same . 
With authoritarianism I mean autocratic governments that have a culture with less political 
participation, less checks and balances and less civil liberties.15 Societies with social norms, 
democratic standards and ethical priorities  that are  incompat ible with  our own system .   
Subsequently, t he regimes  export  their undemocratic ideology  to our society  through the 
construction, dissemination  and functionality  of their technology .16 Main c ontributors to this spread 
of culture and ideology through techno logy are the Belt & Road Initiative, Confucius Institutes and 
Chinese multinationals .17 I am referring here to  central  4IR technologies such  as 5G infrastructures , 
AI, big data  and quantum computing .18 Excesses involve  automated social profiling systems  that 
monitor and h inder  online dissidence . This process  of exporting an incompatible  political  ideology 
through technology  holds the danger of permanently weaken ing the health of our  democracy , 
including  the rights and freedoms we care so deeply  about. We should prevent that from happening.  
It is important to note that w e do not intend  to exclude the people who are living  in authoritarian  or 
even totalitarian  regimes such as China, Russia , Iran  and North Korea , nor the companies tha t are 
willing to abide to democratic technological standards . Instead, our strategy  should be  to avoid the 
ideas of the regimes that are incorporated in their technology, which is never neutral.  
 
3. The Response  
What needs to be done and who should do it ? 
Democratic Countries Should Form a Strategic Tech Alliance. That’s the first, foundational st ep. 
The US and its democratic allies  should establish  a strong , broadly scoped  Strategic  Tech Alliance 
with countries that share our digital DNA. An Alliance  built on strategic autonomy, mutual economic 
interests and shared democratic & constitutional values.  Main purpose of th e Strategic  Tech Alliance 
is to win the race / stay ahead of the competition.  
Multilateral cooperation with any country that has matched concerns about the outcome of the race 
for AI & quantum dominance in view  of democratic values, is paramount. A natural starting point for 
a geopolitical dialogue on disruptive technology that is also in the focus of President  Bide n, is 
Transatlantic cooperation.19 In addition to the US, EU, UK & Canada, countries such as India, Israel, 
Japan, South -Korea , Taiwan  and Australia  would be great candidates  to join the cause . The Strategic 
Tech Alliance could also connect with existing structures such as NATO.  
 
14 See for example:  https://plato.stanford.edu /entries/it -privacy/  and 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/12/14/138615/its -time -for-a-bill-of-data -rights/   
15 Such as the Chinese Communist Party an d the Kremlin.  
16 See also: https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/11/16/biden -huawei -trump -china/   
17 See also:  The National Endowment for Democracy, Sharp Power and Democratic Resilience Series, February 
12, 2020, https://www.ned.org/sharp -power -and-democratic -resilience -series/ . 
18 See also: https://edition.cnn.com/2020/10/30/world/trump -china -xi-election -intl-hnk/index.html   
19 See also: https://www.politico.eu/article/long -term -significance -of-new -transatlantic -agenda/   5 
 Moreover, it is crucial and urgent that democratic countries  set worldwide technology standards 
together. This includes the development of globally accepted benchmarks and certification.  
Standards based on safety, security and interoperability, with respect for our common Humanist 
moral values.20 Values in which the rule of law and human dignity play a leading part.  
Consequently, AI & quantum products and services made within the territory of the Strategic  Tech 
Alliance or elsewhere in the world, should adhere to  specific safety and security benchmarks, before 
they qualify for market authorization. These sho uld follow  the high technical, legal and ethical 
standards that reflect Responsible, Trustworthy AI & quantum technology core values. Ex ante 
certification comparable to the USA Compliance Marking or the European CE -marking should be 
mandatory before AI and quantum infused products and services are eligible to enter the 
Transatlantic markets.21 
In this vis ion, the Strategic  Tech Alliance should regulate transformative technology in a harmonized 
way across member countries. Using a risk-based  approach that incentivises sustainable innovation. 
For example, the Strategic  Tech Alliance would share core horizont al rules that govern the 
production and distribution of transformative tech  systems . Think of universal, overarching guiding 
principles of Trustworthy and Responsible AI & quantum technology that are in line with the 
distinctive  physical characteristics of  quantum mechanics.22 Technology  that gained the trust of the 
general public has  significant  marketing advantages.  
To preserve pre-pandemic life as we kn ew it, we must  bake our norms, standards, principles and 
values into the design of our advanced hi-tech -systems.23 From the first line of code. We can 
accomplish this by pursuing responsible, Trustworthy tech : by actually building socially & ethically 
aligned AI and quantum architectures  and infrastructures .24 We should incorporate our values en 
bloc and make our uniform design standards and (inter)operational requirements mandatory by law . 
A Strategic Tech Alliance could be the engine.  
 
4. Political Feasibility  
Let us discuss arguments against the formation of a democratic , value -based  Strategic Tech Alliance  
that will set global technology standards . First, is establishing an Alliance  that opposes the 
authoritarian tech agenda a realistic , politically feasible  scenario or mere naive utopian thinking ? Will 
the ambition of harmonized, glob al technology standards be limited by a cold shorter -term  sum of 
costs and benefits? Will Realpolitik make it fade away in beauty?  
 
20 Mauritz Kop, Beyond AI & Intellectual Property: Regulating Disruptive Innovation in Europe and the United 
States – A Comparative Analysis , https://law.stanford.edu/projects/beyond -ai-intellectual -property -regulating -
disruptive -innovation -in-europe -and-the-united -states -a-comparative -analysis/  
21 Mauritz Kop, Shaping the Law of AI: Transatlantic Perspectives , TTLF W orking Papers No. 65, Stanford -Vienna 
Transatlantic Technology Law Forum (2020), https://law.stanford.edu/publications/no -65-shaping -the-law-of-
ai-transatlantic -perspectives/ . See also: https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single -market/ce -marking_en   
22 For a detailed description of ethical, legal and social guiding principles for quantu m technology, see: Mauritz 
Kop, Establishing a Legal -Ethical Framework for Quantum Technology , (February 28 , 202 1), Yale Journal of Law 
& Technology  (YJoLT) The Record 2021, Forthcoming  
23 See also: Kara Frederick, Democracy by Design  - An Affirmative Response to the Illiberal Use  
of Technology for 2021, CNAS, D ecember 15 2020, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/democracy -by-
design   
24 See also: https://www.aitrends.com/videos/artificial -intelligence -the-alpha -trend/   6 
 Let’s start with the United States. After the Democrats recently recaptured Senate majority, 
progressive policies might regai n momentum. But still, forming an Alliance and setting joint tech 
governance goals would require a bipartisan, bicameral effort . It would require large majorities  to 
prevent legislative filibusters . Moreover, President  Biden’s primary policy objectives  are battling 
COVID -19 together with  relief measures, Medicare for All, rebuilding the country’s infrastructure and 
fighting climate change . Regulating Big Tech  and its impact on society might have less priority. 
However, winning the race for AI & quantum  asce ndancy  should be high on any president’s agenda.25 
Then  the EU. In recent years, the European Commission has been very active and progressive in the 
field of legal -ethical frameworks for emerging tech, including the conception of responsible AI and 
data governance models. Since it has become clear that MAGA (M ake America Great Again) will no 
longer be the leading ideology in America for the next 4 years, Ursula von der Leyen’s Team h as not  
missed a single  opportunity to strengthen transatlantic ties  and inject political momentum  into the 
relationship . With the main goal of implementing a mutual  tech governance agenda , and jointly 
manag ing the geopolitics of exponential technology .  
An exception to this rule was t he recent EU -China deal , which raised  quite a few eyebrows  in 
Washington.26 This trade deal makes cle ar that e conomic interests of Western democratic  countries 
in China, in this case prompted  by commercial interests of the German car industry  and the Silk Road 
Initiative , may stand in the way of the targeted team effort needed to achieve the envisaged  
Strategic  Tech Alliance.27 As of 2020, t he EU has surpassed the US as China's largest trading partner 
(numbers) . The economic interests are  gigantic  and vary widely from one  Member State to another.28 
For example, the Netherlands, a country of 17 million people, has a n annual  trade deficit with China 
of no less than 70 billion  euros . Therefore, one might think that  the EU will be  less likely to ‘turn 
away ’ from China and choo se sides.  
It is to be hoped that Europe has not been  lulled into blissful sleep by the Chinese Siren Song of smart 
partnerships, better working conditions, respect for intellectual property and fair trade & investment 
opportunities.29 The idea that the Chinese Party apparatus will allow more openness is a strategic 
misconception.30 The opposite of openness, reliability, honesty and a fair level playing field happens 
every day before our eyes in Hong Kong.31 And it doesn't get any bette r. Entirely in line with the 
autocratic paradigms of systematic repression, inequality, arbitrariness , state surveillance  and 
control .32 It is not expected that the political situation and civil liberties  & human rights  in China will 
 
25 See also: https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/01/22/1016652/biden -administration -ai-plans -what -to-
expect/   
26 See: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/30/business/china -eu-investment -deal.html   
27 See: https://www.politico.eu/article/eu -china -investme nt-deal -angela -merkel -pushes -finish -line-despite -
criticism/   
28 See: https://www.politico.eu/article/germanys -drive -for-eu-china -deal -draws -criticism -from -other -eu-
countries/   
29 See also: https://www.politico.eu/article/paris -will-block -eu-china -deal -says -trade -minister/   
30 See also: https://www.project -syndicate.org/commentary/eu -china -investment -agreement -criticisms -by-
daniel -gros -2021 -02  
31 See also: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/17/world/asia/china -europe -xi-jinping.html   
32 See also: Wright, Nicolas D., Artificial Intelligence and Democratic Norms  - Meeting the Authoritarian 
Challenge, Sharp Power and Democratic Resilience Series, The National Endowment For Democracy (August 
2020), https://www.ned.org/sharp -power -and-democratic -resilience -series -artificial -intelligence -and-
democratic -norms/   7 
 change in the short or  medium term. We are competing with a  political ideology that is 
fundamentally at odds with our  own system .33 
In addition, internal divisions within the EU Member States may delay the rollout of progressive 
political initiatives.34 Facing the portrayed cha llenges, Europe should speak with one voice. Further, i t 
is to be hoped that European ambition s towards  strategic autonomy and data sovereignty will not 
stand in the way of transatlantic partnerships in the field of AI and quantum  computing, quantum 
sensin g and the quantum internet.   
Second, is there sufficient political will , enough common ground between the various continents and 
countries  to forge such an Alliance, comparable to the foundation of the United Nations in 1945 after 
World War II? There currently seem to be di verging  opinions between the US and the EU on 
antitrust, digital tax and digital trade35, and consensus on IP policy, ethics, cybersecurity  and the need 
for global value -based  standards that respect democratic freedoms, human rights and the rule of 
law. On the other hand, it can be quite healthy to have mutual differences, and a varied pallet of 
perspectives within a partnership.  
Moreover, who are we to pursue  worldwide , culturally sensitive norms and  standards ? Could this be 
perceived by other countries as undesirable technologically expansionist behaviour? Will excessive 
standardization, certification and benchmarking have ramifications  on rapid innovation, global 
competition and consumer welfare?  
Brexit has made it painfully clear how difficult it is to agree on even the most trivial  affairs . The 
question is whether the barriers to cooperation will be removed , just  because a new wind is blow ing 
from White House.36  
In conclusion: political support to realize our ideal is a precondition for success. Preferably not in a 
weakened compromise form, but in a manner  that reflect s the power of the technology  and the 
interests at stake . Instead of an isolationist MAGA approach, policy  makers on both sides of the 
spectrum need to see the bigger picture  and the urgency of the issues at hand . And reach out to 
nations that historically share our values and that demonstrably meet the democratic conditions set 
by the Alliance to qualify for membership.  
With existential challeng es ahead of us, normative choices must be made. We cannot get there with 
transactional politics and trade deals alone. We have to bring the best of both worlds together. A 
combination of normative choices - which are contextual , culturally sensitive  and in  constant flux  - 
and Realpolitik is the key. Making the right choices  today can result in  the lasting partnerships  we 
need to respond to the big questions we face.  Partnerships based on mutual trust, strategic 
autonomy and shared sovereignty.37 Partnerships that acknowledge the need for regulatory 
cooperation  and a values -based  approach . 
 
 
33 See also: 20200917_IETC Hearing with Chairman Eric Schmidt: “Interim Review of the National Security 
Commission on AI”  https://youtu.be/USEKVNSf4oI?t=862 . 
34 See: https://edition.cnn.com/2020/12/31/europe/eu -bad-2020 -2021 -analy sis-intl/index.html   
35 See: https://www.politico.eu/article/eu -to-us-president -elect -joe-biden -lets-be-tech -allies/   
36 See also: https://www.politico.eu/article/europe -us-technology -drifting -joe-biden/   
37 See Kop, supra  note 2 1 and Mamudu HM, Studlar DT. Multilevel Governance and Shared Sovereignty: 
European Union, Member States, and the FCTC. Governance (Oxf) . 2009;22(1):73 -97. doi:10.1111/j.1468 -
0491.2008.01422.x  8 
 5. Are We Democratic Enough Ourselves?  
Let's see if we can approach this matter from other, soci ocritical perspectives.  
First, are the Chinese the real threat,  or is it us ? Are we really democratic enough ourselves?38 Is 
making the distinction between the democratic and the authoritarian model the correct  line of 
thinking, the proper  approach for our proposed response to the identified challenges ? Are 
technology  and data capitalism coupled with the wrong kind of self -regulation caus ing filter bubbles, 
fake news and racial bias?39 In other words,  could  technology that originate d from Western online 
platforms such as Facebook, Amazon, Google and Twitter  be the real source of danger ? Are the 
behemoth platforms , with market dominance and lobbying power greater than countries , menacing 
our democracy?  In general, absent regulation, the tech platforms have corporate social responsibility 
and should adopt an Apollonia n mindset  towards responsible entrepreneurial  ideology, world view 
and philosophy of life, instead of a Dionysian  attitu de.40 
One can argue whether the harmful soci etal influence of the social platforms was caused by naive 
idealism from Silicon Valley, or by unrealistic price and profit expectations of Wall Street.41 Or by a 
combination  thereof . In this view, the algorithms42 have become less democratic not so much as a 
consequence of the wrong corporate ideology, but because  of the increasing pressure that  
shareholders are putting on tech companies.43 Thus, the system is to blame.  
But can you be a  role model for the rest of the world  this way ? Are the dangers of our privatized 
technology governance mod el not as threatening , or even more dangerous to our society than the 
predictable authoritarian technology governance model  could ever be ? Is there an enemy within, 
that stands  at the cradle of excesses like th e Capitol  Insurrection ?44 Is the privatized power over the 
digital w orld a similar  existential challenge , for which solutions  must be developed ? The answer 
appears to be in the affirmative. Democratic countries themselves  have serious internal problems.  
Moreover , there is no empirical evidence that AI will endanger democra cy and reinforce 
authoritarianism, totalitarianism or even fascism, since AI is ideologically neutral.45 That said, 
shouldn’t we better use machine values instead, since human values create biases in data and 
algorithms, fake news and co nspiracy  theories?46  
Be that as it may, from a higher level, a strategic democratic alliance can provide a counterbalance to 
both the free-market  capitalism based privatized digital governance model , and  the authoritarian 
model. In the duel  for AI dominance and the  battle  to be the first to build a functioning multi -
 
38 See for example: https://www.wbur.org/onpoint/2021/03/09/vaccine -passports -public -health -tool-or-
invasion -of-civil-liberties   
39 See: Marietje Schaake, How democracies can claim back power in the digi tal world, MIT Technology Revie w, 
September 29, 2020 , https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/09/29/1009088/democrac ies-power -digital -
social -media -governance -tech -companies -opinion/   
40 Mauritz Kop, AI & Intellectual Property: Towards an Articulated Public Domain , 28 Tex. Intell. Prop. L. J. 297 
(2020)  
41 See: https://www.technologyreview.c om/2020/12/03/1012797/fair -value -fixing -the-data -economy/   
42 See also: https://yjolt.org/blog/legality -artificial -intelligence -contact -tracing -stop -coronavirus -us  
43 See against this background : https://www.netflix.com/nl/title/81254224   
44 See: https://www.npr.org/2021/02/09/965472049/the -capitol -siege -the-arrested -and-their -stories   
45 Ünver , supra  note  13. 
46 See in this light also: https://www.wired.com/story/opinion -ai-is-an-ideology -not-a-technology/   9 
 purpose quantum computer, the West desperately needs the Tech Giants from the Silicon Valley and 
Massachusetts innovation clusters.  
 
6. Two Dominant Tech Blocks  
Currently, two dominant tech blocks  exist : the US and China. The blocks have incompatible political 
systems. It is a battle between ideologies.47 Liberal democracy versus authoritarianism. Free m arket 
capitalism versus surveillance capitalism. Europe stands in the middle, championing a legal -ethical 
approach to tech governance. Its Member States  often  divided when it comes to Beijing : 12 of them 
participate in Xi Jinping’s Belt and Road program .  
It is of crucial strategic importance to proactively consider potential alternative scenarios.48 Future 
scenarios in which our desired coalition of democratic countries did not materialize for whatever 
reason. We can use scenario planning for this. Scenari o planning , or scenario analysis , is the 
development, comparison and anticipation of probable  future scenarios , together with  short - and 
longer -term  transitions .49 Impending s cenarios  meant to be used as thinking instruments.  
Alternatives to the creation of a strong democratic  Strategic  Tech Alliance are no alliance  or different 
alliances. Each  scenario  could bring both (trade) war and peace to the world. Please note that  
establishing a league of like-minded  democratic countries does not guarantee winning the race for AI 
and quantum supremacy.  Moreover , competition  and rivalry  between blocks could incentivize  
exponential innovation.  The race for AI supremacy  is not a zero -sum game.  
Does one rule out the other ? Could the US or the EU be both a partner and rival of China through 
smart partnerships? In theory, i t is a position that both the US and the EU could take. In tandem with 
bolstering alliances with our allies, we should -to a certain extent - be open to di alogue and 
cooperation with the regimes. We also have to consider  an unthinkable alliance of  EU-China -Russia 
‘against’ a pact between countries like US/Canada/UK/Israel/ Australia/ India/ South -Korea/ Japan.50  
Another scenario is a protracted Cold War for AI Supremacy with no winner between the US and 
China.51 A no winner takes all scenario would eventually mark  the Splinternet.52 On the one hand a 
China led internet, characterized by a top-down  approach to tech.  It would comprise of  countries 
that adopt Ch inese apps. Its rival would be a US influenced internet, including countries that adopt 
US built platforms and apps. From the server level, cloud computing and AI all the way down to the 
phone operating system level . Cyberbalkanization could result in two parallel worlds, each with 
distinct division s regarding technology, trade and ideology. In practice, this implies  two opposing 
ecosystems would exist, each using its own standards and architectures that are incompatible with 
one other.  
 
47 See also: https://edition.cnn.com/2021/03/04/asia/xi -jinping -china -npc-successor -intl-hnk/index.html   
48 See also: https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/event/the -global -quest -for-digital -sovereignty/   
49 Ron Bradfield, George Wright, George Burt, George Cairns, Kees Van Der Heijden,  The origins and evolution 
of scenario techni ques in long range business planning,  Futures,  Volume 37, Issue 8,  2005,  Pages 795 -812,  ISSN 
0016 -3287,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2005.01.003 . 
50 See also: https://www.cnas.org/publications/video/navigating -the-china -russia -partnership   
51 See also: https://edition.cnn.com/2021/01/05/europe/uk -aircraft -carrier -strike -group -intl-hnk-
mil/index.html   
52 See:  Mark A . Lemley , The Splinternet (July 30, 2020). Stanford Law and Economics Olin Working Paper #555, 
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3664027   10 
 In the event  China w ins the race for AI and quantum, it will have the power to overthrow the EU and 
the US.53 The world would see a new era of authoritarian surveillance capitalism. In the case that a 
strategic partnership of democratic countries led by the US and the EU will prevail, it may well  coerce 
China to adopt Humanist values.  
To prevent China Standards 2035 ,54 we need a coalition of democratic countries that bakes its values 
into its technolo gy and that sets worldwide interoperability standards for telecommunications, AI & 
quantum  infrastructures .  
 
7. Harms of Doing Nothing  
The described advantages of the establishment of an alliance must be weighed against 
disadvantages, unintended conseque nces and the harms of doing nothing.   
First, n o alliance means fragmentation and division, without synergetic effects. A lack of action  
entails  less chance of winning the race for tech dominance and securing  the chance to set and 
control global standards . Standards that  pres erve  democratic values. The danger of global autocratic 
values in technology and infrastructure increases in this analysis , because there is no en bloc  
counterbalance to emerging countries such as China, the country of the large numbers of consumers, 
hordes of AI talent,  and huge amounts of machine learning training data , regurgitated by labelling 
farms . China has massive  government budgets for the development of smart algorithms and 
quantum  technology  applications . Currently it’s everybody for himself; that won’t help us win the 
race. We need an alliance instead of division.  
Second, q uantum technology  enhances AI. Together with blockchain it  promises machine l earning on 
steroids. Quantum and  AI hybrids will give to the world a new perspective of science itself.  In this 
context, it is crucial to raise awareness of their incredible potential for good, and their anthropogenic  
risks. The Fourth Industrial Revolution will bring about  a world  in wh ich anything imaginable to 
improve , or worsen  the human condition , can be built  in reality .  
Authoritarian  countries obtaining this powerful technology and using it against us, poses serious 
national cybersecurity  (cyberwarfare, hacking)  threats.55 More importantly, the regimes would have 
the ability to impose their non -democratic values on us through technological expansionism. From 
our liberal -democratic viewpoint , this could lead to a dystopian scenario. AI driven facial recognition 
systems used for shadowing and social credit systems would become the standard. Surveillance 
machines are a dictator’s  dream. Authoritarian a -moral machina sapiens  will take over creation and 
invention. Privacy, mental security and freedom of thought will become a dist ant memory.  
Our society will be better off when we forge Democratic Alliances. A united democratic tech block 
has a greater chance of winning the race for AI & quantum dominance.  
Third, long term risks of underinvesting in 4IR technology are no less than  existential. The US needs 
to invest heavily in safe & responsible AI and quantum. The market cannot pull this off on its own. 
The state should take the lead and launch a mission oriented, 2030 US Standards plan , backed by 
 
53 See also: https://edition.cnn.com/2021/03/05/china/china -world -biggest -navy -intl-hnk-ml-dst/index.html   
54 See: https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/27/china -standards -2035 -explained.html   
55 See: https://jolt.law.harvard.edu/d igest/the -solarwinds -software -hack -a-threat -to-global -cybersecurity   11 
 large -scale funding .56 This plan should be sharply demarcated, and executed by golden triangle, 
public -private partnerships. These partnerships can be based on the triple helix innovation model, 
which guarantees synergistic effects between government, academia and business.  
The portrayed  advantages of bolstering an alliance, and actively shaping technology for good 
evidently outweigh the harms of remaining passive or indecisive. It is critical that the US does not 
hang back in a never -ending balancing of stakeholder concerns but that it i s confident in formulating 
a vision and focussed in accomplishing its well defined national and global policy objectives. By doing 
nothing the US will fall behind economically. The US and the EU should set out the path  along 
transatlantic lines and  guide their democratic allies toward a Strategic Tech Alliance.57 
 
8. Regulating 4IR Technology  
Regulating emerging technology is an unending endeavour. It is a n ongoing , cyclic process that 
follows the lifespan of the technology and its implementation.  How should Democratic countries 
construct  regulatory solutions that are tailored  to the exponential pace of innovation in the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution?  
A crucial first step is to map the risks and chart culturally sensitive ethical , legal and social  
implications (ELSI) , per 4IR technology.58 Then, universal principles, or core requirements,  that 
manage these ethical , legal and social  issues  and risks should be  considered , exchanged and 
discussed.59 
The second step is to i mplement agile, flexible governance solutions that can quickly adapt and 
respond to sudden changing conditions  and societal demands .60 In this light , the construction  of 
binding technology specific legal -ethical frameworks , accompanied by soft law instrume nts such as 
risk-based technology assessments61, audits and legal sandboxes  would be an  essential  regulatory 
intervention . Again, w e have  to differentiate, and make this regulatory effort per emerging 4IR 
technology. For example, a legal -ethical framework for AI should consist of joint, agreed upon core 
horizontal rules that are binding across industries.62  
 
56 See also: https://www.reuters.com/article/us -health -coronavirus -economy -breakingvi -idUSKBN29Y219   
57 See also: https://edition.cnn.com/2021/02/19/politics/joe -biden -foreign -policy -speech/index.html   
58 Kop, supra  note 22.  
59 Mauritz Kop, Regulating Transformative Technology in The Quantum Age: Intellectual Property, 
Standardization & Sustainable Innovation , 2 TTLF Ne wsletter on Transatlantic Antitrust and IPR Developments 
Stanford -Vienna Transatlantic Technology Law Forum, Stanford University 2020, 
https://law.stanford.edu/publications/regulating -transformative -technology -in-the-quantum -age-intellectual -
property -standardization -sustainable -innovation/  
60 See: Stefaan Verhulst, Introducing the Digital Po licy Model Canvas, http://thegovlab.org/introducing -the-
digital -policy -model -canvas/ ; and World Economic Forum, White Paper Digital Policy Playbook 2017: 
Approaches to National Digital Governance, 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/White_Paper_Digita l_Policy_Playbook_Approaches_National_Digital_Govern
ance_report_2017.pdf .  
61 See: Mauritz Kop, AI Impact Assessment & Code of Conduct , European AI Alliance (European Commission), 
May 29, 2019, https://futurium.ec.europa.eu/en/european -ai-alliance/best -practices/ai -impact -assessment -
code -conduct  and https://www.iaia.org/wiki -details.php?ID=26  and 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4200654?seq=1   
62 Kop, supra  note 2 1, 22 and 59 . 12 Step 3 is to complement  these overarching rules  by vertical, industry -specific requirements  -including 
self-regu lation - that fit in the existing Quality Management Systems for economic sectors, or 
domains, such as the Food industry, the Health sector, Energy, Finance and so on.63 The AI legislative  
approach can be applied , or linked  to quantum technology  and VR , to a certain level .64 Naturally, the 
distinctive  physical characteristics of quantum technology demand for an extra set of  core horizontal 
and for additional sector specific vertical rules.65 For each technology, the goal is to  harmonize 
quint essential core rules, preferably by means of codif ication  in a Declaration or a Convention .  
As mentioned earlier, shared (interoperability)  standards, benchmarks and certification play a  vital  
role in  regulating 4IR technology .66  
The envisioned horizonta l-vertical legal -ethical framework should address the identified risks 
associated with the technology , with  enforcement mechanisms tailored to low, mid and hi -risk 
applications .67 In addition , the framework should contain incentives for sustain able innovat ion.68 
These incentives  include balanced intellectual property laws69, mission -oriented  approaches driven 
by moon shot  thinking such as the cold war Apollo project, as well as  rules for healthy competition  
that prevent winner -takes -all effects and give room to both technology transfer  and the creation of 
vibrant start -up ecosystems . Besides ‘environmentally friendly ’, the term  ‘sustainable ’ also pertains 
to social ly inclusive , human centered digitization, democra cy, rule of law, and human rights.70 Lastly, 
the binding horizontal -vertical rules  should be flanked by quasi legal  instruments such as technology 
road mapping  tools .71  
Technology road mapping  tools like ex ante  impact assessments, best practices and moral guides can 
help raising awareness of the societal impact of 4IR technology.72 These concrete tools can assist us 
in mak ing sure we are  modelling  technology for good .73 Moreover, these guides  can offer support to 
companies in their endeavour to comply to , or anticipate on  legal, technical and agreed upon ethical 
requirements.74 To a certain degree , flexible tools can even be used as alternatives for non-existent 
or insufficient  hard laws.75 Thus, risk-based  AI & quantum impact assessments, performed by 
multidisciplinary audit teams, can assist in validating that real world AI , data, quantum & VR driven 
products and services  remain legal, ethical, social and technically robust throughout  their life -cycle.76 
63 See Kop, supra  note  22. 
64 For a detailed description of linking AI to quantum considering regulation of 4IR technology, see: Kop, supra 
note 2 2. 
65 See Kop, supra  notes 2 2 and 59.  
66 Kop, supra  note 12.  
67 Kop, supra  note 21  and 22.  
68 Kop, supra  note 21, 22 and 59.  
69 See: Mauritz Kop, The Right to Process Data for Machine Learning Purposes in the EU  (June 22, 2020). 
Harvard Law School, Harvard Journal of Law & Technology (JOLT) Online Digest 2021, Forthcoming, 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3653537  
70 See also:  Kop, supra  note 20. 
71 See also: Kop, supra  note 59.  
72 See Kop, Kop, supra  notes 21 , 22 and 40 . 
73 See for example: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/can -ai-identify -toxic -online -content/  and 
https://news.stanford.edu/2021/03/08/assessing -regulatory -fairness -machine -learning/   
74 See also: CAHAI feasibility study on AI legal standards, https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial -intelligence/ -
/the -feasibility -study -on-ai-legal -standards -adopted -by-cahai  
75 See also: Kop, supra note 2 2, Mark A. Lemley, The Contradictions of Platform Regulation (February 3, 2021). 
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3778909  and 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/01/15/1016183/ai -ethics -startups/   
76 Kop, supra  note 61.  13 Following these steps, risks can be de alt with and the positiv e aspects of the technology can be 
employed to make the world a bett er place.77 
Pleas e note that being an aut horitarian regim e isn’t always a bad thing. The regimes can be far more 
effective in battling climate change, since they have the luxu ry to avoid leng thy multi-stakeholder 
debates.78 Consensus is no t needed. In that respect they excel in centralization, decisiveness, 
efficiency and speed. Democrati c policy makers should build on these healthy habits.79 
In other words, being auth oritarian doesn’ t mean one can’t be succe ssful in addressing the big 
question s we face. Countries don’ t need to be democratic for t hat.  
9. Conclusion
The rac e for AI and quantum dominanc e isn’t just a competition in technology and market power. It 
is as mu ch a competition in norms, standards, principles and values.80 It is expected that the 
prevailing party will set global technology requirements/guidelines for decades to come.81 Whoever 
wins the race for AI & quantum supremacy will impose their values on the res t of the world though 
the distribution of their technology . Thes e technologies will become the dominan t platforms. 
We ar e living in a Golden Ag e of exponential technological innovation . Legal problems regarding 
human rights, algorithm ic bias and built- in discrimination, data acc ess, sharing and re-use may now 
be assumed to be general ly known to policy makers. We should chang e the story. We must urgently 
solve these problems and set global technology standards togeth er. Like-minded countri es with 
compatible political systems must collaborate on socio-economi c and ethical issu es surrounding AI, 
data and quantum technology . We hav e an ideo logical commitm ent to bake our democrati c values 
into ou r intelligen t systems. This way, society can ben efit from the benevolent sid e of the 4IR. 
Wha t should democratic governments do? To prevent authoritarianism from gaining ground, 
governments should do three things: (1) form a broadly scoped democratic Strategic Tech Alliance, 
(2) set worldwide core rules and standards for AI, quantum , 6G and VR, and (3) embed our common  
norms, princip les, values into the design o f our technology.
Wha t can you do ? You can participate by convincing your congresswomen o r congressmen that the 
time is ripe to bolster a strong internation al Strategic T ech Alliance. Besides that, you can make 
conscious sustainabl e living choices about products and services that you purchas e and use in your 
everyday live, and about (th e origin & environmental footprin t of, and democrati c values embedded 
in) the technology utilized in those products and services . A better planet starts with you . You can 
also help by spreading awareness about th e design decisions people around you -programmers, data 
scientists , managers, evangelists and business-leaders- can make. Conscious decisions that ensure 
4IR technology is implemented in a responsible and sustainab le manner.  
77 Note that innovation by itself cannot fix all the problems of humanity, see: Ünver , supra  note  13. 
78 See also: https://www.bro okings.edu/blog/order -from -chaos/2020/12/23/the -risk-of-john -kerry -following -
his-own -china -policy/   
79 See also: https://www.technolog yreview.com/2021/01/01/1015533/covid -lessons -for-climate -change -
emissions -renewables/   
80 Kop, supra  note 21.  
81 See: https://www.ces.tech/Articles/2020/Whoever -Leads -AI-Will-Lead -the-World.aspx   14 The architecture of intelligent systems should articulate values that we consider important as a 
society, from the first line of code.  Following this path, we can avoid a dystopian future  and make 
technology a greater force for good . 
*** fin ***  