1
DIGITAL GOVERNANCEEarlier this year we undertook a field study of Krishna district of Andhra Pradesh (AP), together with 
collaborators from Microsave, to understand the experience and perceptions around digital gover-
nance reforms. Krishna, and AP more generally, are considered as among the leading areas to adopt 
digital technologies, including for ID and payments, and to reform public service delivery over the 
past decade. Most government services and subsidies are now linked to Aadhaar, India’s national bio-
metric ID system. AP has also taken steps to minimize exclusion due to technology and has imple-
mented real-time monitoring to improve service delivery.   
Our three surveys—of households, ration shop owners, and bank correspondents—find widespread 
support for digital governance reforms, including the use of Aadhaar authentication to receive food 
rations through the public distribution system (PDS) and social pensions through the panchayat, as 
well as for digital land records. Technology provides an opportunity to make government more effi-
cient and effective, improving the interface between people and the state. 
However, we also find some areas for improvement. There is scope to improve authentication expe-
rience, especially for the elderly, and to strengthen the network of business correspondents to ex-
pand the reach and convenience of banking services, as well as to improve the process of on-boarding 
claimants for pensions and rations.  
KRISHNA DISTRICT IS AN INNOVATION HUB FOR DIGITAL 
GOVERNANCE 
• Aadhaar is integrated into all services provided by the government, effectively making it 
mandatory for receiving public subsidies and transfers.
• Andhra Pradesh has introduced portability. PDS beneficiaries and social pension recipients 
can now collect their benefits from any Fair Price Shop or panchayat. Customers are empowered, 
and it is much easier for internal migrants to access their benefits.  
• In an effort to solve connectivity issues, government-supplied ePoS devices can accommo-
date up to four SIM cards, with two paid for by Krishna district administration.
• A centralized digital governance center in AP allows for real-time monitoring of public trans-
fers and services to help resolve problems expeditiously. Digital Governance:
Is Krishna a Glimpse 
of the Future?
Alan Gelb, Anit Mukherjee, and Kyle NavisCGD NOTE 
 NOV 20182
DIGITAL GOVERNANCE• Andhra Pradesh has established a dedicated mech-
anism to carry out random beneficiary surveys, 
asking users to rate services on a scale of 0 to 10. This 
provides beneficiaries with an opportunity to provide 
feedback and helps the government to identify prob-
lems and take remedial actions.
HOUSEHOLD SURVEY DESIGN
• We covered 562 households representing all admin-
istrative sub-districts and selected using a simple ran-
dom sampling method at the village level. The median 
age is 60 years old and median monthly household in-
come is INR 2500.
• Two-thirds of our survey respondents are female; 79 
percent of respondents were located in rural areas and 
21 percent in urban areas. Figure 2 illustrates age distri-
butions by location and sources of household income. 
RESPONDENTS EXPRESS A STRONG PREFERENCE FOR THE NEW 
DIGITAL SYSTEMS
• When asked about their preferences, respondents have highly favorable opinions of the gov-
ernment’s digital reforms in PDS, social pensions, and land reforms (figure 3).
• Land owners nearly universally prefer the digital land management system and report that 
it has eased the process of land settlement, sales, information gathering, and loan and insurance 
applications. Tenant farmers, however, are less enthusiastic about the changes and report that it 
has done little to improve their experiences with crop loans and insurance.
• Digitization has increased government efficiency for delivering services, and real-time moni-
toring has allowed implementers to respond to challenges and solve problems much faster. 
FIGURE 1 – Location of survey
By Shadowxfox - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https://com-
mons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=52746277
FIGURE 2 – Sample statisicsKrishna
Andhra 
Pradesh3
DIGITAL GOVERNANCE• Government surveys to collect user feedback have allowed the government to address is-
sues faced by beneficiaries, although the beneficiary-driven complaint mechanism has been 
underpublicized and thus leaves room for growth.
• A human backup system has helped to resolve problems of technology failure; the effect 
may be inconvenience but apparently not exclusion. In particular, the Village Revenue Officer 
(VRO) acts as designated backup for authentication. 
• There is a clear relationship between prob-
lems faced by beneficiaries to authenticate 
and their negative perception of the new 
system.1 Figure 4 shows how the balance of 
negative opinions tends to increase with au-
thentication difficulties. PDS beneficiaries who 
had to authenticate their fingerprints twice 
were 31 percent more likely to say the new sys-
tem is worse than those who need only one at-
tempt, while those who took three or more at-
tempts were 44 percent more likely to say that 
the new system was worse than the previous 
one. Likewise, compared to those who could 
easily authenticate, social pension beneficia-
ries who needed two attempts on average were 
30 percent more likely to say the new system is 
worse.
• Authentication experience is also consis-
tently reflected in beneficiaries’ percep-
tions about ease of use. Table 1 shows how the 
ratio of respondents who find the new system 
worse increases as they find it occasionally dif-
ficult or difficult.
1  The probabilities reported here are calculated using an  
    ordered logit model and are statistically significant within  
        a 95 percent confidence. FIGURE 3 – Percentage which think the new system is better for… 
FIGURE 4 – Opinions of the new systems by 
average number of authentication attempts4
DIGITAL GOVERNANCE• Qualitative data indicates that the digitization of government transfers has increased usage 
of formal banking services even among those households which already had accounts prior to 
the reforms.
• The digital reforms are expanding opportunities for women to take active roles in delivery 
systems. In the two other surveys, 73 percent of surveyed business correspondents (BCs) were 
female as well as 36 percent of surveyed Fair Price Shop owners. Interestingly, a vast majority of 
women BCs listed respect from the community as a major motivation to work in this capacity, 
reflecting the unmet need for a trusted financial intermediary especially for the rural poor.
BUT THERE ARE STILL CHALLENGES THAT NEED TO BE ADDRESSED
• Beneficiary perceptions reflect impatience over authentication. PDS beneficiaries who re-
quire more than one fingerprint attempt on average to authenticate their identity are ful-
ly 45 percent more likely to find the new system occasionally difficult or difficult. As with 
any new technology, there will be an adjustment period, but qualitative evidence suggests that 
the full suite of exception management tools is not being utilized effectively by ePoS operators.  
• Direct benefit transfers may not always be the preferred solution by beneficiaries obtain 
their benefits. AP has experimented with many methods of pension delivery, including through 
the post office and through bank accounts. The current method of direct distribution through 
local panchayat offices is strongly preferred by beneficiaries over either of the two previous op-
tions. In both cases, the top reasons cited for the preference were better regularity and receiving 
the correct amount, and the VRO is at hand to resolve authentication problems. This example 
suggests the value of adapting service delivery mechanisms to the preferences of beneficiaries.
• The underutilization of bank correspondent services suggests that there is much room for 
growth in their coverage, as the numbers below reveal:Better Worse Total
Easy 56.5 2.4 58.9
Occasionally difficult 13.9 20.4 34.3
Difficult 1.1 5.7 6.8
Total 71.6 28.4 100.0TABLE 1 – Ease of use and opinions
Is the new 
PDS system 
easy to use?Opinion of the new system
(Pearson’s χ2 = 237.3, p = 0.000,  n = 545)
      90       43     12        9
percent of respondents con-
sider bank branches their 
most convenient method of 
withdrawing cashpercent live within 
two kilometers of a 
bank branchpercent report using BCs for any 
kind of transactions, in spite of 
the increase in the number of BCs 
from 2014 onwardspercent report 
using bank 
correspondents on 
a monthly basis5
DIGITAL GOVERNANCE• Publicizing grievance redressal mechanisms would further empower beneficiaries and 
provide another useful source of feedback for improving digital reforms. While Krishna 
District already has several mechanisms in place to collect feedback, there is low awareness of the 
user-driven tools such as the toll-free number for registering complaints.
• While land record digitization is extremely popular among land owners, tenant farmers 
remain largely marginalized. It is difficult for them to prove their tenancy and obtain the Cer-
tificate of Cultivation that is required for various government incentives for agriculture. Govern-
ment should focus efforts on educating landlords and bank officials to ensure that tenant farmers 
can also access the benefits of land record digitization.6
DIGITAL GOVERNANCEWWW.CGDEV.ORGALAN GELB is a senior fellow and director of 
studies at the Center for Global Development
ANIT MUKHERJEE  is a policy fellow at the  
Center for Global Development
KYLE NAVIS  is a policy analyst at the Center for 
Global Development
This work is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons  
 Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 license.Ideas to Action: Independent 
research for global prosperity