Working Paper 489 
July 2018Digital Governance in Developing 
Countries: Beneficiary Experience 
and Perceptions of System Reform in 
Rajasthan, India
Abstract
India is at the forefront of  the use of  digital technology to transform the way in which citizens 
interact with states. This paper provides a picture of  the perceived impact of  digitization reforms in 
Rajasthan, based on a survey of  beneficiaries of  several benefit programs. We find that, on balance, 
the reforms appear to have improved perceptions of  service delivery despite some difficulties 
during the digitization process and the possibility—which we cannot fully assess with our data—
that there could have been some degree of  exclusion. The proportion of  people preferring the 
new systems, at 40–60 percent, far exceeded the proportion who expressed a preference for the 
old system (5–12 percent). In the case of food and cooking gas subsidy reforms, the reason for 
the preference is relatively clear—they considered that the new systems gave them greater control 
over their entitlements and reduced the ability of  others to claim their benefits or divert them. The 
main problems arise from biometric authentication. Shifting pensions from postal delivery to bank 
deposits is overwhelmingly supported, partly because of  better regularity. Reforms in Rajasthan also 
had two cross-cutting goals: financial inclusion and women’s empowerment. Our survey confirms 
that virtually all respondents have bank accounts, often two or more per family, as do all heads of  
household who are officially mandated to be women. Two thirds of  these women had not owned 
bank accounts before the reforms. Mobiles emerge, however, as a male preserve. This suggests a 
further frontier for policies and programs to shift India towards a digital society—ensuring that all 
people have the capacity to access and to use digital technology.
www.cgdev.orgAlan Gelb, Anit Mukherjee, and Kyle Navis
JEL: H10, H11, O10, 030, 031, 035, 038Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this working paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Working Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Digital Governance in Developing Countries:  
Beneficiary Experience and Perceptions of  System Reform in 
Rajasthan, India
Alan Gelb
Center for Global Development
Anit Mukherjee
Center for Global Development
Kyle Navis
Center for Global Development
We thank MicroSave for their collaboration, especially for their support on 
the household survey and preliminary analysis.
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in support of  this work.
Alan Gelb, Anit Mukherjee, and Kyle Navis, 2018. “Digital Governance in Developing 
Countries: Beneficiary Experience and Perceptions of  System Reform in Rajasthan, 
India.” CGD Working Paper 489. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. 
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/digital-governance-developing-countries-beneficiary-
experience-and-perceptions-system
The data and replication files for this paper are available here: https://www.cgdev.org/
sites/default/files/digital-governance-developing-countries-rajasthan-code.zip . More 
information on CGD’s research data and code disclosure policy can be found here: www.
cgdev.org/page/research-data-and-code-disclosure .Contents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 1 
2. Digital Governance Transformation in India  ................................ ................................ ..........  2 
3. Rajasthan’s Digital Governance Reforms: Survey Design and Data Collection  ................  4 
3.1 The Bhamashah Program: The Opportunity and Challenge for Research  ..................  4 
3.2 Data and Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  8 
3.3 Description of the Sample  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 10 
4. Perceptions of Service Quality by Program  ................................ ................................ ...........  12 
4.1 PDS – Direct Biometric Authentication for In- Kind Delivery  ................................ ... 12 
4.2 PAHAL: From In -Kind Subsidies to Direct Bene fit Transfer for Cooking  
Gas ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  17 
4.3 Social Pensions: From Postal Delivery to Direct Benefit Transfer into  
Bank Accounts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  20 
4.4 Financial Inclusion and Women’s Empowerment: Have Reforms Had  
Any Impact?  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  22 
5. Conclusion and Implications for Policy  ................................ ................................ .................  27 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 31 
Annex 1: Sampling Frame  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  33 
 
 
 1 1. Introduction  
Digital technologies are transforming the way in which citizens interact with states across the 
world. Previous systems which, especially in developing countries, were often personalized 
and operated at the communal or local level, are being superseded by new, more remote, 
delivery mechanisms as digital technology, in particular, for identification and payments, is engaged to reform public service delivery. The costly, and sometimes difficult, changes in 
admi nistrative processes and delivery mechanisms are motivated by the ultimate objective of 
making governments more inclusive, efficient and accountable. The success of the reform process, therefore, depends critically on whether the delivery of public service s have, or have 
not, improved along these three dimensions (Gelb & Diofasi Metz, 2018; Atansah et.al., 
2017).  
Governments face complex challenges as they expand the use of digital technology in public 
services. They have to address issues of identification , targeting of beneficiaries and delivery 
mechanisms in a coherent way. Previously disparate data systems, sometimes with 
conflicting information, must be integrated, while the inevitable date entry errors will need to 
be resolved. Even with the best commu nications efforts, many people will have limited 
understanding of the new systems. Some will not be able to use them effectively, requiring protocols for managing exceptions and speedy dispute resolution. All these challenges, and 
many others, make it even  more important that the new systems, once bedded down, 
perform better than the old ones. This, in turn, makes it even more important to be clear on 
the problems —how serious are they, and how will digitization solve them?  
India is one of the countries at the forefront of this transformation, bringing together three 
key technology -based pillars —digital ID, financial inclusion and mobile coverage —to 
reform systems of governance and improve state capacity. Full use of digital systems requires that people can be authenticated digitally and, with nearly 1.2 billion registrations, the 
Aadhaar biometric ID program has achieved almost universal enrolment. It is now being 
used, with other digital applications, to reshape large scale public programs such as food 
rations and fertilizer distribution, as well as the delivery of government payments such as 
pensions and scholarships. It is also a key component in energy subsidy reform, especially the move from in- kind subsidies to financial transfers for household purchase s of LPG 
cooking gas (Mittal et.al., 2017). While the LPG program is national, most of the other 
programs are implemented by states, and these are moving at different speeds and taking 
somewhat different approaches to reform.  
India is therefore a veritabl e laboratory to understand the impact of digital governance at 
both the macro and micro levels.  
India’s reforms are widely debated, in particular the use of Aadhaar and Aadhaar based 
authentication, in public service delivery and financial inclusion (Kher a, 2017; Abraham 
et.al., 2017). With only a few exceptions (notably Muralidharan et.al. 2016), the literature on 
the experience and perception of beneficiaries vis -à-vis digital governance reform is still 
largely anecdotal. This paper aims to narrow this i nformation gap by investigating the digital 
delivery transformation in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Rajasthan is not the most digitally 2 advanced state in India—that title reputedly goes to Andhra Pradesh (the site of our next 
piece of research) —but neither is it bringing up the rear. Started in 2014, the “ Bhamashah ” 
program seeks to create a digital platform for delivery of public services for all residents of the state who receive benefits financed by the state government. We investigate the 
perceived im pact of this transformation in the system of delivery of public benefits, subsidies 
and transfers through a household survey. To put the scale of Rajasthan in perspective, its 
area and population compare with those of Germany.  
The rest of the paper is orga nized as follows. Section 2 outlines the background and context 
of India’s digital governance reform. The approach of the study and design of the data 
collection is described in Section 3. In Section 4, we present the survey results on the 
experience and p erceptions of beneficiaries of three large scale government programs, and 
consider the impact of reforms on financial inclusion and women’s empowerment. Section 5 
concludes with a summary of findings and policy implications of the study.  
Indian states vary widely, in terms of their demographic, cultural and economic 
characteristics, and there is no guarantee that the conclusions of the study carry over to other 
contexts, even if they are reasonably accurate for Rajasthan. Moreover, the imp act of any 
reform depends crucially on the nature and scale of the previous problems —the better the 
previous system was managed, the smaller are the potential gains from reform. For example, biometric deduplication of Pakistan’s voter rolls in 2015 resulte d in the de -listing of almost 
40 percent of registered voters as duplicates and fakes, but this would not be expected from a similar effort in an established democracy. However, the approach taken in the survey has 
been to ask respondents to respond to que stions on the strengths and weaknesses of the 
previous and the new systems as well as indicating which they preferred. This provides an 
opportunity to understand how the systems operated, at least from their perspectives. The 
answers may therefore convey s ome useful information for other cases considering similar 
reforms.  
2. Digital Governance Transformation in India  
Digital governance reform in India rests on three pillars popularly known as the “ JAM 
trinity ” (Government of India, 2016). This includes (i) the Jan Dhan program, the 
government’s financial inclusion mission to increase access to bank accounts, (ii) the biometric ID Aadhaar, and (iii) mobile phones. From mid -2015, the financial inclusion 
program known as Jan Dhan Yojana (JDY) has opened nearl y 311 million bank accounts, 
helping India achieve 80 percent coverage of those older than 15 years in 2017 compared to 
only 53 percent in 2014 (Demirgüç -Kunt et. al., 2018,). Following a nationwide rollout in 
2011, the Aadhaar program has registered nearl y 1.2 billion individuals on its biometric 
database, achieving almost universal coverage in just over five years. Finally, mobile phone 
subscriptions increased from 17 per 100 inhabitants in 2007 to 85 in 2016, achieving almost universal access within a de cade (International Telecommunications Union, 2018). The 
relatively low cost of data -enabled value added services is providing an opportunity to 
integrate mobile services into the overall digital governance framework, especially for 
government -to-people (G2P) payments and subsidies.  3 Building on these three different, though related, platforms, both federal and state 
governments have undertaken large -scale restructuring of the subsidies and transfers under 
their jurisdiction. In social pensions and other ca sh-based programs, payments to 
beneficiaries are now sent directly to their Aadhaar linked bank accounts through the Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) mechanism. For LPG cooking gas, rather than mandate low prices 
for cylinders sold to households, the governme nt now delivers the subsidy component 
directly to bank accounts of eligible consumers who pay the market price for the cylinder. 
This is effectively a voucher -type system. Finally, for food rations through the public 
distribution system (PDS), the federal government mandated the use of biometric 
authentication at Fair Price Shops (FPS), the point of distribution, with the objective of 
reducing leakage and diversion that was reputed to be endemic in the previous system. 
Digital technology is therefore being used in different ways across a spectrum of delivery 
mechanisms —cash, voucher, and in -kind.  
These changes have been implemented in a relatively short period of time. In PDS for 
example, under the old system, families were entitled to receive subsidized fo odgrains if they 
possessed a “ ration card ” which contained details of its individual members. Similarly, 
households received subsidized cooking gas cylinders if they were duly registered with state -
owned oil marketing companies. The transactions were recor ded in physical booklets that 
were issued to the beneficiaries of individual schemes. Beneficiary lists were maintained in databases managed by implementing departments and agencies of both the federal and state 
governments. These lists were widely believe d to contain duplicate entries or non- existent 
beneficiaries, leading to widespread corruption and leakage in the distribution of government subsidies (Overback 2016; Dutta and Ramaswami 2011; Khera 2011).  
In an attempt to remove the anomalies in the deli very of public subsidies, the new system 
has progressively incorporated digital technology for identification of beneficiaries and keeping record of transactions. For the distribution of PDS foodgrains, households in 
Rajasthan were mandated to re- register their ration cards in a digital format during the 
Bhamashah registration process. In addition, they also had to provide Aadhaar numbers of 
all the individual members which enabled them to biometrically authenticate at the FPS and 
collect their food rations . The list of subscribers of LPG cooking gas was initially 
deduplicated by matching names and addresses, and genuine subscribers were assigned a 
unique beneficiary number or LPG ID. Aadhaar was made mandatory for new cooking gas 
connections while existing consumers were encouraged to link their LPG ID with Aadhaar. (Mittal et.al. 2017). All DBT programs, including social pensions, required beneficiaries to 
provide an active bank account and a mobile number, items that many of them did not have 
before. The d igital transformation therefore is not only in government systems and 
processes, but also for people to adapt to this new digital governance architecture.
1  
                                                      
1 This can be quite challenging; for example, for an illiterate population accustomed to identifying banknotes by 
color and size to adapt to digital money: http://www.bbc.com/capital/story/20140904 -more- to-money- than-
meets -the-eye?icid=cap.tvl.sto.cross- site-series .bc.life -in-color_week2   4 The reforms have been quite controversial and a subject of much debate in academic and 
policy circl es, not only in India but globally. In addition to concerns over privacy and data 
protection, questions have been raised over the utility and efficacy of implementing Aadhaar authentication to in large government programs (Khera, 2017; Dreze et.al., 2017).  There has 
also been a hot debate on the fiscal savings from Aadhaar -enabled programs, with the 
government offering substantial estimates and others disputing them (George & Subramanian, 2015; Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 2016). Several issues  remain 
unresolved, not least due to the unavailability of systematic data on the impact of the 
reforms on actual beneficiaries of the program.  
Leaving aside the question of fiscal savings, the challenge is to improve the quality of 
delivery of services t hrough digital reforms without excluding legitimate beneficiaries. While 
one common theme is help remove duplicate, non- existent or inactive entries from the list 
of beneficiaries across programs, there were also specific issues that the new digital 
infras tructure intended to address. In PDS and PAHAL for example, diversion of subsidized 
rations and cylinders and variability in the timing of their distribution was believed to be 
pervasive in the old system. Pension delivery through the postal system was sai d to be 
unreliable, and it was asserted that delivery agents sometimes charged “fees” for their service. On the other hand, it is also possible that the new systems could be exclusionary or cause inconvenience to beneficiaries, due to problems in biometric  authentication for PDS 
rations, or connectivity failures. For PAHAL or pensions, where benefits are transferred directly to bank accounts, limited access to banks and the time -cost of withdrawing money 
could cause additional hardship under the new digital system.  
Evidence on the impact of these reforms on the quality of service delivery is scarce, while 
that on exclusion is mostly anecdotal. This paper aims to narrow this gap in the literature by 
empirically testing hypotheses on the functioning of the pr evious and the new systems using 
a new dataset of beneficiaries who have been impacted by the reforms in Rajasthan, and covering both urban and rural areas of the state.  
3. Rajasthan’s Digital Governance Reforms:  Survey 
Design and Data Collection  
3.1 The Bhamashah Program: The Opportunity and C hallenge for 
Research2 
Bhamashah is, as far as we know, the first nuclear -family -level identity system in India. It was 
first conceptualized by the Rajasthan government in the year 2008 and rolled out at scale 
from 2 014 onwards. The Bhamashah scheme registers each family with a unique family ID 
number and issues a family card which lists individual members along with their Aadhaar numbers. It also captures other socio -economic and demographic characteristics during the 
                                                      
2 Authors are grateful to Arshi Aadil of MicroSave for her inputs into this section  5 registration process, thereby creating a comprehensive database for residents of Rajasthan 
following the principle of “one family, one identity.”  
As in a number of other digital reforms, implementation preceded legislation. The Rajasthan government gave legal backing to Bhamashah program through “ The Rajasthan Bhamashah 
(Direct Transfer of Public Welfare Benefits and Delivery of Services) Act of 2017. ” 
Following the passage of the legislation, the Bhamashah family identification number has 
been made manda tory for beneficiaries to avail their entitlements from over 150 schemes 
that are wholly or partially funded by the Government of Rajasthan.
3 Families who do not 
receive any public benefit are not required to register in the program. However, with more 
services being included under the ambit of the Bhamashah program, the proportion of 
households registered is likely to increase over time.  
The process of registration is depicted in Figure 1. Under the scheme, a centralized data warehouse called the Bhamasha h Resident Data Hub (BRDH) maintains the family level 
information, determines eligibility for public benefits and keeps a digital record of delivery of entitlements for both individuals and families. More than 56 million people (80 percent of 
the Rajasthan  population as per census 2011) and 15 million households (83 percent of 
estimated total households) had been enrolled under the Bhamashah scheme by December 
2017 Those that have not enrolled include those who may have chosen not to do so since do 
not rece ive any of the government benefits listed under Bhamashah as well as segments of 
the population who may have been left out during the registration, such as migrants and those residing in remote areas of the state. On the delivery side, since 2014 nearly 40 0 
million transactions had been routed through the Bhamashah platform transferring nearly $2.9 billion in government payments, and enabling them to be tracked down to the 
individual beneficiary level.
4  
Figure 1 . Bhamashah enrolment process  
 
    
  
                                                      
3 A full list of schemes and current status is available from the official Bhamashah website: 
http://bhamashah.rajasthan.gov.in/content/raj/bhamashah/en/home.html  
4 http://bhamashah.rajasthan.gov.in/content/raj/bhamashah/en/home.html  (Accessed April 26, 2018)  
Beneficiary  
applies for 
Bhamashah 
Card  
  
Government 
camp or 
private e -
Mitra  
Forms/documents 
are uploaded online  
Verification conducted 
at block and state 
level; entered into the 
BRDH database  
Bhamashah family 
card generated and 
dispatched to 
beneficiaries  
6 The design of the Bhamashah program is based on a “ whole of government approach”  
under the direct supervision of the Chief Minister’s office and therefore enjoys a high level 
of political support. On the implementation side, it brings together the three technology 
platforms —ID (Aadhaar), banking and the mobile system. Each member of the household 
is listed on the family card with their respective Aadhaar numbers. The bank account of the designated head of household is registered on the family card and all cash transfers are 
delivered into this account. Finally, the family card is linked with one active mobile number, 
thereby bringing all the three platforms together in an integrated fashion. Moreover, against 
the backdrop of a strongly p atriarchal society, the program mandates that the designated 
head of household be a woman. It thus aims to promote women’s empowerment by making them the primary recipient of all transfers from the government, both cash and in- kind. This 
is seen as an espe cially important spillover from the move towards digital governance in the 
state. While it cannot realistically be expected to revolutionize gender norms immediately, it 
is hoped that its impact on these and on women’s agency, will be visible in the years to 
come.  
Rajasthan’s digital governance reform represents both an opportunity and a challenge for 
efforts to understand the perceived impact of digital service delivery. Most existing studies 
consider the impact of digital reforms in the context of a particular scheme or sector, such as the LPG program or the PDS (Mittal et.al, 2017; Dreze et.al., 2017). In contrast, Bhamashah 
provides an opportunity to look at an effort to reorganize and consolidate a number of 
disparate programs around the theme of a nuc lear family.
5 Such a step could be the 
precursor, for example, to more extensive consolidation, even to the point of a family -based 
universal benefit program. But Bhamashah is not itself a major benefit program in the sense of pensions or the PDS. The only  two benefits specifically related to it are an upfront 
registration payment of Rs. 2000 to BPL families, and premium support for the BSBY health insurance program. Both are discussed in detail in a separate report
6 but are not the main 
benefit programs co nsidered in this paper.  
The challenge arises because the experience of consolidation into Bhamashah—at the same time as the PDS, pension and other programs were being digitized and reformed —will 
inevitably influence people’s views of the reforms as a whol e and, by extension, views on the 
digitization of the major individual programs. Those not eligible for benefits had no reason 
to enroll, although the program is now being extended as a requirement for other services, 
such as state driving licenses. The mo tivation for families to enroll varied. The most 
important reason was the threat of denial of benefits, along with the demonstration effect of 
mass enrollment drives conducted by the state government. Nearly 70 percent of the survey 
respondents cited these  as the main reason for Bhamashah registration. In addition, nearly 
60 percent reported that the monetary incentive of Rs.2000 influenced their decision to 
                                                      
5 We use the words family and household interchangeably and colloquially refer to the head of the family as the 
“Bhamashah head of household ” in subsequent discussion.  
6 http://www.microsave.net/files/pdf/171212_Household_Perception_Impact_of_Bhamashah_Digital_
Governance_Reforms_in_Rajasthan.pdf  
 7 enroll in the program—even though only 40 percent of eligible beneficiaries reported having 
received  the amount.  
However, the processes of digitization and restructuring benefits into the Bamashah program were not smooth. As described in greater detail elsewhere, they created uncertainty 
and inconvenience for many people and may also have led to some ex clusion of legitimate 
beneficiaries (MicroSave, 2017). While the government made significant effort to include as 
many families as possible through local registration camps and enrolment agents (known as 
E-Mitra -s), it is possible that some categories were  not fully covered, especially migrants or 
those who could not prove residency as required to access state programs. Since our survey is designed to capture the experience and perception of beneficiaries who have enrolled in 
Bhamashah, we are not able to f ully understand the possible extent of exclusion, or how it 
does, or does not, relate to the digitization process.  
Most households found enrollment into Bamashah relatively easy, but digitization errors, mostly in the form of manual data entry errors duri ng enrollment, caused inconvenience to 
exisiting beneficiaries. As many as 10 percent of households needed to visit E -mitras —local 
businesses that provided assistance to navigate the new system —to rectify mistakes on their 
Bamashah cards. While enrollment was supposed to be free, 19 percent of the households 
reported having to pay E -mitras at some point during Bamashah registration. Data errors 
were a serious concern —an immediate repercussion of incorrect data, such as faulty birth 
dates, could be the reduc tion or halting of pension benefits. As noted in Section 4.3 below, 5 
percent of pensioners reported that their pensions were stopped temporarily during the 
changeover to the direct transfer system. When this happened, those affected sometimes did 
not know  how to rectify the problem.  
Perhaps most significantly, the process of digitization of NFSA beneficiaries sowed 
confusion and anxiety. Starting in 2012, local workers and officials had assisted the 
government to digitize ration cards. In the process, the  number of eligible BPL beneficiaries 
had reached 53 million as against the target number of 44.6 million. The government then conducted a large -scale verification exercise in parallel with the Bamashah registration 
process and eliminated approximately 9 million households. The combination of errors and 
the influence of local politics during the verification process probably resulted in significant 
exclusion of legitimate beneficiaries, or at least of people who believed themselves to be 
eligible for progra ms.  
One lesson from Rajasthan’s experience is therefore that digitization brings many challenges, 
including the problem posed by inconsistencies across different lists of beneficiary data. 
Even if the reformed systems are expected to work more smoothly th an those they replace, 
the transition from old to new system needs to be well managed, including the resolution of grievances, if the reform is not to be viewed in a negative way.  
We have tried in this study to distinguish between the “Bhamashah experience ” and other 
transitional factors that may have colored opinions on the reforms and —our main focus —
experience with the service delivery from digitized programs. But we cannot be completely 8 certain that opinions on these different aspects of the reform proce ss can be reported in a 
totally separated manner.  
3.2 Data and Methodology  
As described in the previous section, the delivery of public services in India is undergoing 
rapid change with the implementation of the JAM framework —Jan Dhan (financial 
inclusion ), Aadhaar and mobile. Different programs have designed the reforms in various 
ways, depending on their objectives and intended outcomes. Delivery system reforms fall 
broadly into three categories: (i) biometrically authenticated physical uptake, or BAPU, as 
seen in in PDS and subsidized fertilizer delivery; (ii) cash transfers on proof -of-purchase as 
in the reform of cooking gas subsidies (a voucher -like mechanism); and (iii) direct benefit 
transfer (DBT) of social pensions and scholarships and other monetary payments from the 
government into beneficiary bank accounts. The two main goals of these reforms have been 
fiscal savings (which we do not consider in this paper) and improved delivery of transfers and subsidies to ultimate beneficiaries.  
States have further innovated on these platforms and shaped program design and delivery mechanisms taking into account the situation on the ground. In addition to improving 
service delivery, the reforms in Rajasthan aimed for two further cross -cutting objectives: 
greater financial inclusion and the empowerment of women (Figure 2). With a focus on 
three major programs, this provides a framework of five major objectives to be investigated through the survey.  
Figure 2 . Objectives of Rajasthan’s reforms  
 
9 The field surve y of beneficiaries of government programs was carried out between May and 
July, 2017. The sample included a total of 633 households spread across all seven 
administrative divisions of the state. We selected a representative district from in each 
division, two blocks (one each urban and rural) in each district and, within these, randomly 
selected villages and wards for enumeration, dividing the total sample for the district in proportion to its rural -urban population ratio. The geographical distribution of t he survey is 
summarized in Figure 3. The full survey design is explained in Annex 1 and the full 
questionnaire available from the link below.
7  
Figure 3 . District, block , and sample for Rajasthan survey  
 A detailed questionnaire, administered to the selected families, gathered information on the 
socio -economic status of the family, their experience with the Bhamashah enrolment process 
and their perception of the changes in the modes of program delivery. It was emphasized at 
the outset that this was an independent survey without any involvement of the government 
(no officials accompanied the survey or monitored results) and respondents were 
encouraged to provide their honest assessment without the threat of any repercussions for 
their expressed opinions. The questionnaire was structured to gather scheme -wise 
information from beneficiaries with the objective of distinguishing between the various delivery mechanisms and modes of technology usage, including for authentication, bank transfers and mobile phones. In addition, we included questions on the use of banking 
services and mobile technology, with special attention to the role of women. This allows us 
to analyze the data from the lens of women’s economic empowerment through design of the 
                                                      
7 See the full questionaire here: 
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/Rajasthan_Bhamashah_Questionnaire_Final.pdf  
10 programs on one hand and the extent of digital empowerment through use of mobile 
phones on the other, as well as financial inclusion.  
The structure of the questionnaire followed some simple principles. First, we tried to be neutral in the construction of questions —asking for a view on whether the quality of service 
delivery through the new systems was seen to be better, the same, or worse than that of the previous arrangements. Since the changes are relatively recent, the pos sibility of recall bias is 
low. Second, respondents were invited to provide the reasons for their opinions. The 
response options for these questions included choices related to several of the hypotheses 
about the workings of the old and the new systems noted previously. For example, it is 
sometimes argued that shifting from pensions hand -delivered by postal officials to direct 
pension deposits into a bank account will improve the regularity or completeness of 
payment, but improvement is only possible if the se had been problematic in the previous 
system. On the other hand, the most likely problem with the new direct deposit system is the 
time and effort needed to cash out the proceeds at a possibly distant bank branch. Including 
such considerations in respons e options provides a way to test hypotheses about the 
perceived strengths and weaknesses of both the previous and the new systems.  
3.3 Description of the S ample  
In terms of social and economic characteristics, the sample appears to represent a broad 
cross -section of the state population. Respondents were divided about equally between the 
rural and urban sectors. Since the Bhamashah mandate has designated females as heads of 
household, we oversampled women; nearly two- thirds of our respondents were the 
Bham ashah head of household. This is a significant number given the cultural constraints of 
interviewing women in a private setting in Rajasthan.  
In terms of economic characteristics, 40 percent of respondents reported below poverty line (BPL) status, in line with overall guidelines. Just over 40 percent of all households surveyed 
(including urban) did not own any agricultural land. Another 30 percent reported having less 
than half an acre of land and therefore can be classified as marginal farmers. In terms of  
reported income, nearly 10 percent of households reported receiving less than Rs.2000 per 
month ($30 at current exchange rate); these we termed “destitute” to distinguish them from 
the broader BPL group. Just over 80 percent of households in our sample ea rned between 
Rs.2000 and Rs.10,000 a month ($150) while around 7 percent were above this threshold. 
This distribution of income appears to reflects the reality on the ground, where there are still 
many very poor families and few high earners. There is a re asonable degree of correlation 
between these various measures of social and economic status, as well as between them and other indicators, such as possession of a mobile phone.  
  11  
Table 1 . Selective s ummary of the s ample  
  Frequency  Percent  
Location  Urban  310 49.0 
Rural  323 51.0 
Gender  Male  226 35.7 
Female  407 64.3 
Land ownership  Do not own land  262 41.4 
Less than 0.4 acre  199 31.4 
More than 0.4 acre  172 27.2 
Monthly f amily income  < INR 2000  63 10.0 
INR 2000 -INR 5000  261 41.2 
INR 5000 -INR 10000  263 41.6 
INR 10000 and over  46 7.3 
BPL Card status  Yes 256 40.4 
No 377 59.6 
Family has at least one 
mobile phone?  Yes 594 93.8 
No 39 6.2 
How many bank accounts 
does the family have?  0 1 0.2 
1 94 14.9 
2 333 52.6 
3 126 19.9 
4 or more  79 12.4 
 
In terms of income -related indicators and APL/BPL status, there is no overwhelming 
difference between urban and rural respondents. However, the districts from which the sample was drawn show a fair amount of heterogeneity. Income per head in Bhilwara, the 
richest district sampled, is roughly twice as high as in Churu, the poorest district. The 
sectoral composition of economic activity also differs across districts, with industry and 
commerce more dominant in the richer ones and agriculture more pronounced i n the 
poorer.  
In order to assess the experience and perception of changes in the mode of delivery of 
public services, these need to be received by a fair number of households. Out of 633 
households, 535 received PDS (85 percent), 413 received the PAHAL co oking gas subsidy 
(65 percent) and 126 received old -age pensions (20 percent). Almost all households surveyed 
received at least one technology -enabled benefit and some received several. This does not 
necessarily imply that families are receiving benefits w hen they should not be; for example, 
APL families are also eligible for PDS rations although their ration allocations are 
substantially lower than those of BPL families.  
Other notable features of the sample are the degree of Aadhaar coverage and financial 
inclusion. Aadhaar was universal, as might have been expected since these were program 12 beneficiaries. Every household had at least one bank account and nearly 95 percent of 
households owned at least one mobile phone (Table 1). As explained below, this degr ee of 
financial inclusion had not prevailed prior to the reforms —it points to the considerable 
success of the rollout of both biometric ID and financial inclusion initiatives within a short 
period of time. As bank and mobile linkage with Aadhaar becomes universal, the 
government will be in a position to use this framework for other schemes, such as fertilizer and rural credit. Our survey results are a pointer to whether the existing mechanisms are 
working as expected and what can be done to make them better  from both the system and 
beneficiary standpoint.  
4. Perceptions of Service Quality by Program  
In each of the three different classes of programs that we investigated, namely, in -kind 
distribution (PDS), vouchers (PAHAL) and cash transfers (social pensions ), between 40 and 
60 percent of beneficiaries had an unambiguously positive perception of the reforms (Figure 4). Twelve percent of PDS beneficiaries, and only a few percent of cooking gas subsidy 
voucher (PAHAL) and social pensions reported that the new s ystem was worse than the 
previous one. We consider each of the programs in more detail below.  
Figure 4 . Beneficiary perception of technology enabled delivery of services  
 
4.1 PDS – Direct Biometric Authentication for In- Kind Delivery  
4.1.1 Process of Digi tization  
In the recent past Rajasthan’s PDS system has undergone several significant changes to its delivery mechanism. In 2012, the government mandated the digitization of ration cards to 
weed out false and duplicate beneficiaries. By all accounts, howeve r, the process did not go 
as planned, with complaints of mishandling of data and erroneous entries creating significant inconvenience for the beneficiaries. Following the passage of the National Food Security Act 
(NFSA) in 2013, there was a further effort to reclassify families based on BPL or APL status 
in accordance with the new financing formula announced by the federal government. Our 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%PAHAL (N=411)Pension (N=126)PDS (N=535)
Better Neutral Worse Don't know/Can't say13 qualitative focus group discussions captured a sense of frustration on the part of the 
beneficiaries with the frequency of administrative directives and a lack of transparency in the 
revision of the eligibility list for PDS.  
Bhamashah registration —including linking ration cards to Aadhaar, bank account and 
mobile numbers —was yet another process that the beneficiaries neede d to go through to 
obtain their PDS quota. In contrast to previous attempts to reform the PDS, the new system 
requires beneficiaries to biometrically authenticate themselves at the FPS and directly 
interact with the new technology - enabled framework. At th e same time, dealer margins were 
increased several -fold from their previously very low levels, to compensate for the smaller 
degree of diversion expected from the new system. Margins were increased to roughly 5 
percent of the market prices of the products.  We understood that without this increase many 
dealers would have ceased business.  
4.1.2 Beneficiary perception of digitization  
As noted, our survey finds that just over 40 percent of PDS beneficiaries prefer the new 
system better than the old one while 12 percent find it worse. Why do they express these 
views? Almost all of those who preferred the new system cited increased agency , that under 
the new system no -one was able to take their rations on their behalf (Figure 5). This does 
not, of course, prove that rations were actually diverted under the old system (we did not 
actually measure how much they received), but it indicates su bstantial concern that they were 
not reaching the entitled beneficiaries. The second most frequent reason cited was 
satisfaction with using new technology. Despite frustrations with the new system (as further 
discussed below) this suggests a good deal of s upport for digital governance more broadly.  
Interviews with PDS dealers provide some anecdotal support to the proposition that 
diversion had been reduced. When faced with the question of whether the digitization of the 
system, combined with higher margins , had changed the social or economic position of 
dealers, one responded: “Before, in the old system, I was considered a thief when I stole, and also when I did not steal. Under the new system, I am considered more as a businessman.”  
What about the 65 respondents who say the new system is worse than the previous one? 
Most of their problems appear to relate to the biometric authentication process. Responses 
suggest that barely a quarter of the beneficiaries are authenticated at the first attempt 
although 96 p ercent said that they were usually authenticated in four attempts or less (Table 
2). Only 6 respondents out of 535 stated that fingerprint authentication “never works.”  14  
Figure 5 . Reasons for b etter p erception of n ew PDS s ystem  
 
Table 2.  Distribution of the number of attempts required for fingerprint 
authentication  
On average, how many attempts 
does it take for fingerprint 
authentication?  Number  Percentage 
of Total  Attempt 
Success 
Rate  Cumulative 
Percentage  
Once  127 23.74  23.74%  23.74  
Twice  253 47.29  62.01%  71.03  
3 or 4 times  133 24.86  85.81%  95.89  
5 or more times  16 2.99 72.73%  98.88  
Never works  6 1.12 ---- 100 
Total  535 100   
 
4.1.3 Beneficiary E xperience of D igitization 
Ease of authentication is a significant predictor of satisfaction. Ordered logit regressions 
show that people who report the need for three to four attempts to authenticate are 17 
percent more likely say the new system is worse than those who report succeeding in only 
one or two attempts.8  
                                                      
8 The econometric analysis referenced in this paper utilizes univariate order ed logistic regression models to 
compute linear predictions, and then report marginal probabilities for given ordinal categorical outcome variables 
(Long & Freese, 1990). We only report statistically significant (at α = 0.05) marginal probabilities and app ly a 
Brant (1990) test as a robustness check to ensure that the proportional odds assumption is met, and do not report 
any linear prediction which fails the Brant test.  
 0 50 100 150 200Awareness of entitlementReceive more quantityPay less money than beforeEnjoy using technologyNo one takes my ration on my behalf
219 respondents; Multiple responses possible15 What would happen if fingerprint authentication failed to work? A majority (49) responded 
to the question by saying that they would be “denied rations.” As discussed further below, 
this does not always appear to mean that they would actually fail to receive rations, but at  the 
least it points to considerable frustration over the time and effort required to get them. The 
other major reason for negative perceptions was the need to make multiple visits to the FPS 
due to connectivity problems. Both authentication and connectivi ty failures are credible 
concerns that need to be addressed if the new system is not to inconvenience, or even 
exclude, genuine beneficiaries.  
Further insight comes from a more detailed look into responses to the question. (Table 3). Row 1 shows the responses from those who only reported having been “denied ration.” The 
remaining rows show whether the person “denied ration” had recourse to any corrective action,  including under an exception management protocol. Respondents were provided 
with multiple optio ns, including returning another day or bringing someone else from the 
family to the FPS. Another possible choice was the use of an alternative authentication 
protocol, such as an OTP sent to a linked mobile number.  
The results suggest that perceptions of “worse” are strongly associated with onerous 
processes that require extra time and effort, particularly the need for repeated visits to obtain 
rations. The option to use a mobile OTP does not seem to have been used frequently. 
However, not one of the four respondents who cited the use of the OTP rated the new 
system as worse, suggesting the need for a rapid exception -management protocols to be 
implemented when biometric authentication does not work.  
Table 3 . Authentication failures and perception of reform s 
Authentication failure experience  Perception of Aadhaar authentication for PDS  
(number of respondents)  
Better  Neutral  Worse  Don’t 
know  Row 
Total  
Denied ration (only)  5 18 18 1 42 
Denied ration + another family 
member comes to take ration - 5 1 - 6 
Denied ration + used mobile & OTP 
authentication  - 2 - - 2 
Denied ration + need to visit again 
next day/after some time  1 5 13 - 19 
Denied ration + need to visit again 
next day/after some time + another 
family member comes to take ration  4 4 2 - 10 
Denied ration + need to visit again 
next day/after some time + another family member comes to take ration 
+ used mobile & OTP 
authentication  1 2 - - 3 16 Whether the new systems cause eligible families to be denied rations due to authentication 
failures is a topic of much debate in India (Khera, 2017). Unfortunately, the framing of our 
question limits the information we can obtain from the answers. From Table 3, in response 
to the question of what happens if authentication fails, 82 out of 535 respondents stated that 
they would be “denied rations.” However, there is no relationship between “denied” and the 
number of fingerprint authentications needed; many a nswer “denied” even when they say 
authentication works after one or two attempts. This suggests that some answered the 
question as a hypothetical “what if.” Some who cite “denied” also consider that the new 
system is “better” than the old one and many cons ider it neither worse nor better (Table 4). 
Respondents could check several responses in addition to “denied,” such as bring another family member or come back another day, suggesting that “denied” may, in some cases, have 
been interpreted as a temporary d elay in obtaining rations. Nevertheless, there is a clear and 
significant relationship between “denied” and the view that the new system is worse, suggesting that the response does indeed, at the very least, reflect a negative experience for 
many.  
Table 4 . Opinion of new system when “denied rations” is the response  
Opinion  NOT 
“denied 
rations”  “Denied 
Rations”  Total  
Better  208 11 219 
Neutral  204 36 240 
Worse  31 34 65 
Do not know as never received rations  10 1 11 
Total  453 82 535 
 Have the reforms impacted differently on different social or economic groups? We had 
expected to find fingerprint authentication more difficult for the elderly, farmers and the 
poor, and also expected some systematic relationships between social and economic 
variables and views on service delivery. But there are not as many strong and consistent 
patterns as we had anticipated in our econometric analysis of the survey data. Authentication 
is reported as more difficult by rural respondents, especially those w e classified as destitute, 
but BPL respondents as a whole are more likely to say that authentication is easy than APL respondents. Landowners, especially marginal ones with less than one acre, are less likely to 
say that the new system is better than those  without land, but this result does not carry 
through to larger landowners. We find that authentication is harder for families without 
mobile phones, hinting at unfamiliarity with technology as one possible reason for less 
favorable perceptions. Indeed, Bhamashah heads of household who read messages and make 
mobile calls are more likely to like the new system better (Figure 6). This suggests a link 
between digital literacy and perception of the digital reforms, a noteworthy result also from a 
gender perspec tive. “Early adopters” who had enrolled in Aadhaar before it began to be 
used for PAHAL were less likely to cite a preference for new technology as a factor 
motivating their preference for the new PDS system. Moreover, counter to expectation, 
these early a dopters were actually more likely to report difficulties with authentication. 17 However, only some 20 percent of the total number of responses could be cross -classified in 
this way.  
Figure 6 . Opinion of the new PDS system by Bhamashah  
Head of Household mob ile literacy  
 
Our impression from the data is that experience is important in shaping attitudes to the 
reform and that there is considerable variation in experience that cuts across status and 
personal characteristics. This could reflect heterogeneity in experience across the different sampled communities, for example, a more or less skilled PDS fingerprint operator, although 
the limited size of our data set precludes statistical assessment of differences between sites. It 
could also be that the reference point for the reforms —experience under the old system —
differs systematically across groups and individuals so that greater reported difficulties in 
navigating the new system do not necessarily translate into an assessment that the new system is worse than the old one. We return to this question when considering responses to 
the reform of the LPG and pension systems.  
4.2 PAHAL: From In-Kind Subsidies to D irect Benefit Transfer for 
Cooking Gas 
4.2.1 Process of D igitization  
From 2013 onwards, India has undertaken a significant reform of its cooking gas subsidy program. The direct benefit transfer for LPG (DBTL), known as PAHAL, currently covers 
over 190 million beneficiaries and is considered the largest direct cash transfer program in 
the world. PAHAL is a federal government scheme managed by the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and implemented by the three state -run oil marketing companies 
in charge of distribution of cooking gas to consumers.  
The reform strate gy is described in detail by Mittal, Gelb and Mukherjee 2017 and will only 
be re -capped briefly here. PAHAL imposed a cap of 12 subsidized cylinders per household 
per year and moved from subsidized to market pricing for domestic cylinders. The subsidy 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%YesNo
Better Neither better nor worse WorseDoes the 
Bhamashah 
head of 
household 
operate the 
mobile phone?18 was provided in the form of a direct cash transfer to designated bank accounts. These had to 
be linked with a unique LPG ID, thereby creating a de -duplicated list of consumers. Aadhaar 
was not used for the first stage of de -duplication and was not mandatory for receiving the 
subsidy for existing consumers but new LPG connections are seeded with Aadhaar from 
inception. However, the policy has been to nudge all consumers to link their Aadhaar and 
active mobile numbers with the LPG database.  
The objective of this  direct benefit transfer (DBTL) approach was to eliminate the incentive 
for dealers to divert subsidized cylinders to the black market. Under the old system, this could be done without the knowledge of the consumers for whom the subsidies were 
intended. Th e reform also put in place an information portal through which consumers were 
able to monitor and track the status of deliveries initiated by them.  
The Ujjwala program that followed on from PAHAL has provided nearly 30 million new cooking gas connections to rural women from mid -2016 onwards on a nationwide scale. The 
program requires them to open a bank account if they do not have one already and to link it with Aadhaar so that the subsidy amount can be transferred directly when they purchase a 
cylinder. F or many rural women, this has been their first experience with both clean fuel and 
the formal banking system.  
Our survey sought to capture the perception of the new mechanism and the challenges faced by beneficiaries in accessing subsidies transferred to their bank accounts.  
4.2.2 Beneficiary Perception and E xperience of Digitization  
Overall, as shown in Figure 4, 45 percent of beneficiaries said that the new system was better 
than the earlier method of obtaining subsidized cooking gas, with very few respondents 
expressing a negative opinion of the reform. The positive perceptions are overwhelmingly 
due to two factors (Figure 7): the easy availability of cylinders with less waiting time for refills and a reduction in black market diversion of cooking gas. These responses confirm 
that diversion was indeed seen as a problem under the old system, although it may be 
difficult to get an exact idea of its extent. However, 52 out of the 185 respondents who liked 
the new system also indicated as a reason that they were able to receive other benefits in the 
same bank account. This suggests that the PAHAL transfers have acted as a catalyst for 
them to use the banking system. Among the few who had a negative opinion, the most 
common reason was the high upfront payment for the cylinder. This is a valid concern, 
especially for the new connections for rural women from BPL families through Ujjwala.  19 Figure 7 . Reasons cited for liking the new PAHAL system  
 
PAHAL is implemented by the federal government and is not part of the Bhamashah 
program. Therefore, not all PAHAL subsidies (outside the Ujjwala prog ram) are delivered to 
a bank account which is in the name of a woman. While around 45 percent stated that the account belongs either to the Bhamashah head or to some other female member of the 
household, half of the accounts are those of the male member of  the household. This is 
particularly true of families in higher income groups and those owning land above half an 
acre. This is probably because clean cooking gas was the preserve of the relatively well -off 
both in urban and rural areas before the current drive to expand the LPG consumer base to poor families.  
Our econometric analysis suggests that BPL respondents are 14 percent more likely than 
APL respondents to say that the new system is better. Interestingly, women are 11 percent 
less likely than men t o have a positive perception, but we did not disaggregate the data on 
the basis of their ownership of bank accounts where the subsidy is transferred. In an apparently counter -intuitive result, respondents are more likely to have a positive perception 
of the new system the further they are from banks or other cash sources. Also, as the time it takes for a family to get cash increases, so too does the probability that the PAHAL subsidy 
goes to a female’s bank account. As might be expected, families who report receiving widow 
pensions are about 34 percent more likely to say that PAHAL subsidy goes to a female’s 
bank account.  
From these results, it is clear that the convenience of being able to access cylinders as needed 
rather than see the cylinders diverted to  the market by dealers generally outweighs any 
inconvenience of having to draw the subsidy from a bank account. The apparently 
counterintuitive result on distance to a bank branch may reflect greater vulnerability to 
diversion by more remote customers, who  previously had even less recourse when cylinders 
failed to arrive.  0 20 40 60 80 100 120I save the cash in my bank accountI get other benefits in the same accountNo shortage of cylinders and it is easily availableBlack marketing has reducedThere is less waiting time for cylinders now
185 respondents; Multiple responses possible20 4.3 Social Pensions: From Postal Delivery to Direct Benefit Transfer 
into Bank Accounts  
4.3.1 Process of D igitization  
India has an extensive system of social pensions as part of its welfa re program for the poor 
and the elderly, under the umbrella of the National Social Assistance Program (NSAP). 
Funded primarily out of the federal budget and administered by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD), the program currently has over 33 million beneficiaries nationally, or 
approximately 2.5 percent of the total population. At present, the NSAP beneficiaries 
comprise mainly of Old Age Pension (NOAPS), Widow Pension (NWPS) and Disability 
Pension (NDPS) Schemes. The benefit itself is small —the fede ral government contributes 
between Rs.200 -500 ($3 -7.5) per month and state governments may contribute an equal or 
greater amount to increase the benefit.  
Rajasthan has approximately 5 million NOAPS, 1 million NWPS and 0.5 million NDPS 
beneficiaries. Pensi ons have traditionally been delivered using money orders or in cash 
through postmen. While this ensured doorstep delivery for people with limited mobility, it 
also created inconvenience due to irregularity of delivery and commissions charged by postmen (Mi crosave, 2017).  
To address these issues, the Rajasthan government started the process of digitizing the list of pension beneficiaries from 2015 onwards, seeding their Aadhaar numbers in the pension 
database and linking them with their bank accounts. The two -fold objective was to eliminate 
ghost and duplicate entries from the list of beneficiaries and improve pension delivery to 
bona fide beneficiaries in the form of direct transfer of benefits to their bank accounts. Our 
survey looked at pension beneficiar ies’ perceptions of the new delivery system and their 
experience of obtaining pensions through Aadhaar -linked bank accounts.  
Of our sample, 21 percent report having a NOAPS beneficiary in their family, while only 3 
percent receive a NDPS payment and 7 per cent a NWPS pension. Even though the number 
of pensioners is less than the number of survey respondents, a few interesting results emerge 
from the responses. Of the beneficiaries whose pensions are currently deposited directly into their accounts, nearly 8 0 percent reported that they have experienced a change in the mode 
of delivery. Just over 20 percent did not experience a change in the system, presumably because they started receiving pensions after the new direct bank transfer system had been 
put in pla ce. The most common prior mode of pension delivery was through the postman 
delivering at home (71 percent) while around a quarter of the beneficiaries personally went 
to the post office to collect their pensions.  
Following the change in the delivery to di rect transfer, almost all beneficiaries (93.6 percent) 
reported going to the bank personally to collect their pensions. This is true for both 
categories —those who experienced a change in the system as well as those who were already 
onboarded into the new s ystem (Table 5). This also shows that cash withdrawal from banks 
remain the most preferred option for pension beneficiaries under the new system, with very 
little use of either E -mitras or banking correspondents.  21 Table 5 . Mode of withdrawal of pension  
 How  do you withdraw pensions now?  
Mode of 
delivery 
changed?  I go to the 
Bank  Send someone 
else to the 
bank  Withdraw 
from e -
Mitra  Withdraw 
from BC  Row t otal 
No 26 0 0 1 27 
Yes 92 4 2 1 99 
Column t otal 118 4 2 2 126 
 
4.3.2 Beneficiary Perception and E xperience of Digitization  
From Figure 4, the overall perception of the delivery reform seems to be overwhelmingly 
positive. Nearly two -thirds of the respondents felt that the new system is better than the old 
one, while around one -third were indifferent between direct bank transfer s and postal 
delivery. Very few were negative even though, as noted previously, 5 percent of pensions were temporarily stopped when the new system was introduced.  
Disaggregating the sample by BPL/APL status, we find that the positive perception of 
pension delivery reform was higher by nearly 25 percentage points for BPL beneficiaries as 
compared to non- BPL (Figure 8). Per the earlier discussion, NSAP pensions in Rajasthan 
involve relatively small transfers and therefore are likely to be more important for persons 
below the poverty line. The support for the direct bank transfer from BPL beneficiaries 
therefore suggests that the reform has had a positive impact on the poorest sections of the 
society.  
In contrast to PDS and PAHAL where the reasons for the bene ficiary’s preference for the 
new system are clear, it is a little less obvious what is driving the strong positive perception regarding the change to the direct bank transfer system for pensions. Just over 16 percent of 
respondents felt that they got the f ull pension amount now compared to before, but 5 
percent held the opposite view. Regularity seems more important. About one -third of the 
respondents reported that the regularity of pensions has changed; of these, 85 percent 
reported that pensions have become more regular. These beneficiaries are more likely to say that the new system is better (comparing responses with those who were neutral) at the 5 percent level of statistical significance using a Chi- square test.  
The low number of “worse” responses mea n that we are only able to compare responses 
statistically between those who thought the system was “better” or “neither better nor 
worse.” Respondents who reported enjoying new technology (as a justification for liking the 
new PDS system) were 17 percent more likely to say that the new pension system is also better. There is no clear relationship with distance to a bank branch, with those close and far 
away more likely to prefer the new system of direct transfer. BPL families are 22 percent 22 more likely to say that it is better than non -BPL families, although again, this only implies 
ambivalence rather than dislike.  
Figure 8.  Perception of pension d elivery reform – by BPL c ategory  
 
4.4 Financial Inclusion and Women’s Empowerment: Have Reforms 
Had Any Impact ? 
India has made remarkable strides in financial inclusion over the last decade. Data from the 
Global FINDEX Survey indicates that bank account ownership for persons aged 15 and 
above has increased from 35 percent to a remarkable 80 percent between 2011 an d 2017. 
Seventy -seven percent of women in this age group had a bank account in 2017 compared to 
only 26 percent in 2011. Indeed, the gender gap in financial access (as measured by ownership of an account) has also closed rapidly from 20 percent in 2014 to only 6 percent 
in 2017. In contrast to some other countries like Kenya, Tanzania and Bangladesh, where 
increases in financial inclusion have paralleled growth in the use of mobile money, almost all 
of the increase in India has been through formal banking i nstitutions, following the launch 
of the Jan Dhan Yojana (JDY) in mid -2014. As the report notes, “this policy benefited 
traditionally excluded groups and helped ensure inclusive growth in account ownership” 
(Demirgüç -Kunt et. al., 2018, pp.19)  
Data on fina ncial inclusion from our survey in Rajasthan strongly corroborate these national 
level findings. Our analysis indicates that bank account ownership at the household level is 
now universal for the sample. A significant majority of households have more than one bank 
account and the number of households with multiple accounts is greater for rural compared 
to urban areas of the state (Figure 9).  
  0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%non-BPLBPL
Better Neutral Worse Don't know/Can't sayN=65
N=6123 Figure 9 . Number of b ank a ccounts per household  
 
Both financial inclusion and women’s empowerment are objectives of the Bhamashah 
program. As noted above, the approach to digital governance in Rajasthan has mirrored the 
overall JAM framework, with an additional layer of unique ID assigned to each family 
registered under the program. Bhamashah also mandates that a woman has to be designated 
as the head of the family and the database has to include her bank account and Aadhaar number. This provides the architecture of transferring benefits directly to her Aadhaar linked 
bank account and provides the option of linking the mobile number of any family member 
in the database to receive information on service delivery and payments.  
Table 6 . Income profile of women who opened bank accounts  
Monthly family 
income  Percentage of women 
who newly opened 
bank accts  Percentag e of full 
sample (N=633)  
< INR 2000  7 10 
INR 2000 –INR 5000  39 41 
INR 5000 –INR 10000  47 42 
INR 10000 and over  8 7 
 
Our data indicates that nearly 66 percent of women heads of household opened bank 
accounts at the time of Bhamashah registration. This indicates a huge push towards financial 
inclusion through the design of the program (Figure 10a). Almost 90 percent of these 
accounts have also been linked to Aadhaar (Figure 10b). Moreover, most of the women who opened bank accounts are in the bottom three income categories of the survey, indicating 
that the process of financial inclusion was highly equitable, and covered t hose women who 
would have otherwise probably been left out of the formal banking system (Table 6). The 050100150200
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Urban Rural24 move towards digital programs appears to have improved both access and equity in 
extending the financial system to the hitherto unbanked women of Rajasthan.  
Figure 10a . Share of new accounts of women  
head of households  
 Figure 10b . Linkage of Aadhaar with bank 
account of Bhamashah head of household  
 
 Further analysis builds on this finding. Only one -third of all Bhamashah heads of household 
had bank accounts before the launch of the program. Designated Bhamashah head of household for BPL families were 18 percent more likely to have had a bank account prior to 
Bhamashah registration than non- BPL families. On the other hand, women in landowning 
families are 15 percent less likely to have opened a bank account to receive the PAHAL 
subsidy than those who did not own land. Although women generally are 15 per cent less 
likely to have opened a bank account to receive the PAHAL subsidy, women in BPL families 
are 15 percent more likely to say they opened a bank account to receive the PAHAL subsidy. 
This probably reflects the expansion of cooking gas connections to poorer rural women 
through the Ujjwala program, as noted in Section 4.2 above.  
While it is too early to comment definitively on the impact of digital governance on women’s 
empowerment, our data points to some signs of progress and as well as constraints.  Our 
analysis indicates that women are indeed accessing financial services, with 54 percent of 
households reporting that women travel to withdraw cash most often, even more so when 
the cash point is not very close. However, as the distance to the cash point becomes longer, 
they are more likely to be accompanied by a male member of the family (Figure 11). 
Responses indicate several reasons why women may be accompanied, including the need for transport as well as the fact that many women are still not familia r enough with banks to 
transact on their own. Further investigation would be useful to better understand the constraints on women’s agency and economic empowerment.  34%66%Did Bhamashah head have a bank 
account before registration?
Yes No90%2%8%Is the bank account of Bhamashah 
head linked with Aadhaar?
Yes No Don’t know/Can’t Say25 Figure 11 . How distance affects the gender of cash withdrawers  
 
There is still a wide gen der gap in digital literacy, taking the ownership and use of mobile 
phones as an indicator. In our survey, 94 percent of households possess a mobile phone and 
75 percent reported that the number is mapped to the Bhamashah card. However, only 58 
percent of all households include someone who can read or write text messages and in only 
20 percent of households does the Bhamashah head of family use the mobile phone (Figures 
12a and 12b).  
Figure 12a.  Proportion of f amilies with digitally literate members  
 
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100< 1 km1 km to 5 km5 km to 10 km> 10 kmWho draws cash most frequently by distance?
Male Female
Can't read or write 
SMS
28%
Can read SMS 
but not write
14%Can read and 
write SMS
58%Someone in the family can read/write SMS?26 Figure 12b . Proportion of families with digitally literate (woman) head of family  
 
With the shift towards digital delivery of services, digital literacy is becoming a baseline 
competency for citizens and particularly for women if they are to take control of their 
finances and reap the full benefit of digital governance. In an increasingly digital 
environment, owning a mobile phone should be a boon for households.  Indeed, our data 
shows that the families who own a mobile phone are more likely to find authenti cation easy 
and to have received the Bhamashah enrolment incentive. Also, when the Bhamashah head 
of household (almost always a female) can read messages and make phone calls, they are 
more likely to say the new PDS system is better. These findings are sum marized in Table 7 . 
Table 7 . Digital capability and experience of digital governance  
Family possesses at least 
one mobile phone  Authentication is easy  Received Bhamashah 
enrollment incentive  
Yes 72% 41% 
No 54% 17% 
Bhamashah head of 
household reads SMS 
and makes calls?  Think the new PDS system 
is better  Takes less time to obtain 
cash  
Yes 50% 88% 
No 40% 74% 
 Digital literacy has therefore emerged as a significant barrier to achieving the goals of 
women’s empowerment in particular and equitable digital governance more generally. While 
the basic architecture is now in place, the focus needs to shift to remove the constraints that 
people face in accessing services. This can take the form of changes in design of programs as 
well as their implementation. On balance, and recognizing also the problems, survey results 
suggest that the perception of digital governance i n Rajasthan is relatively positive. The Yes
20%
No
80%Does Bhamashah head of family (i.e. women) 
read SMS/make calls?27 challenge will be to maintain support for the program and further improve the experience of 
beneficiaries engaged with this new way of interacting with the state.  
5. Conclusion and Implications for Policy  
The reforms  in Rajasthan are, of course, only one slice of the remarkable shift towards 
digitally -enabled programs that is being rolled out across India, combining Aadhaar, financial 
inclusion and mobile communications. The reforms are on a massive scale, with Rajasthan 
alone comparable to Germany in terms of area and population. While the LPG program is at 
national level, most programs are implemented by states, and these are shaping their reforms 
at different speeds and in somewhat different ways. India is therefore  a laboratory for digital 
reforms of governance and service delivery. There is no guarantee, of course, that 
Rajasthan’s experience will carry over to other states, but all evidence is useful, including for 
the many other countries that are also moving tow ards the use of digital technology for 
program delivery.  
How should we assess the reforms? One criterion could be greater efficiency, as measured 
by lower fiscal and implementation costs for comparable services. Another could be better service delivery, a s seen by the clients of the programs. There may also be some cross -
cutting objectives that are seen as desirable in their own right, such as financial inclusion and women’s empowerment. And, of course, we need to take into account the transitional costs 
associated with the shift towards digital programs. Debate on the reforms has been 
contentious in India, but with still limited empirical evidence there has perhaps been more 
sound than light. In this study, we have tried to narrow the evidence gap, at leas t in the area 
of service quality, by surveying a sample of households in Rajasthan to see whether they 
consider the new systems to be better or worse and to understand the reasons for their 
opinions. We did not engage with the state government on possible changes in the fiscal 
costs of the programs.  
Rajasthan is neither the most digitally -advanced state nor the least. It is distinctive in having 
reorganized its programs, including for PDS and pensions, into the state -level Bhamashah 
scheme centered on the nuclear family. This offers both an opportunity and a challenge for 
research. The opportunity arises because one of the goals of Bhamashah is to empower 
women by designating them as the head of the household for program purposes, adding 
another dimension to the objectives. The challenge is to distinguish views on changes in the 
efficiency of PDS, pension and other delivery systems from those on the (sometimes 
painful) reorganization process into digital programs within the Bhamashah system. We have 
tried to  distinguish views on these questions, but cannot be completely confident of success 
because the difference might not always be clear to the people affected by the changes.  
Our conclusion on reorganization into digital programs is that this has not been 
straightforward. Data errors and inconsistencies need to be resolved and identifiers need to 
be seeded correctly into beneficiary rolls. In Rajasthan, the problems were compounded by 
the need to trim back the numbers of BPL families that access PDS following  the 
unintended expansion of this category; rolling back the number was a less than transparent 
process and led to the exclusion of some people who believed (correctly or otherwise) that 28 they should have been included. Pension payments were temporarily interrupted for about 5 
percent of beneficiaries during the transition. A number of respondents expressed 
reservations about the private -sector based model of assistance (E -mitras) that was supposed 
to help people to navigate the difficulties of moving to the  new digital service delivery 
platform. Few of those entitled to the Rs. 2000 sign -on bonus for the Bhamashah program 
appear to have received it; few were aware of the other benefit —health insurance —offered 
by the program. Transitions need careful preparation, with effective communication and 
particular attention to the effective management of disputes and grievances.  
Despite these difficulties, on balance the reforms appear to have improved service delivery. The three programs covered are of different typ es: PDS provides in -kind subsidized rations 
while PAHAL has transitioned LPG subsidies from prices to a voucher -type program of 
direct deposits into bank accounts. The pension reform shifted the mode of delivery from 
manual payment through the post office towards direct deposits into bank accounts. 
Together, these three programs cover essentially all of the possible mechanisms (in- kind, 
voucher and money) for providing subsidies and benefits. In all three programs, the 
proportion of people preferring the ne w systems, at 40 –60 percent, far exceeded the 
proportion who expressed a preference for the old system (5 -12 percent). This is a 
significant finding from the study.  
Why did people express these preferences? In the case of PDS and PAHAL the answer is 
clear—they considered that the new systems gave them greater control over their 
entitlements and reduced the ability of others to claim their benefits or divert them. Especially considering the inconveniences associated with the new systems —having to travel 
to banks to collect the PAHAL subsidy and having to be authenticated to receive rations —
this confirms that diversion was indeed seen as a serious problem under the old systems by many beneficiaries. The results cannot prove that diversion was actually reduced , but if it 
was not, or had never existed in the first place, it is difficult to see why respondents answered as they did. It would also be hard to justify the large increased in dealer margins 
that were considered necessary to sustain the ration system be cause of fewer opportunities 
to divert benefits.  
In the case of pensions the answer is a little less clear; while an expressed improvement in the regularity of pension delivery is a significant predictor of preference for the new system, 
only about one third of respondents reported improved regularity. T here were also more 
cases of pensioners asserting that they received a greater proportion of their pensions under 
the new system than the reverse, but the numbers are small. However, the preference for the 
new system is overwhelming, with very few indicati ng a preference for post office delivery. 
The responses indicated some other positive responses, such as the ability to use bank 
accounts for other purposes and, in some cases, a liking for new technology.  
These results are encouraging for the new approac hes. They suggest that —as found in other 
cases —most people welcome technology provided that it is seen to deliver useful services 
(Gelb & Diofasi Metz, 2018). Of course, there will always be some people who have 
difficulties in navigating the new systems ( see below) and who will need assistance.  29 On the negative side, in addition to transitional costs the responses confirm some 
weaknesses in the new systems. For PDS, by far the greatest problems were those associated 
with authentication. Although 96 percent of respondents indicated that they were generally 
authenticated after 3 -4 fingerprint attempts or less, only 24 percent were usually 
authenticated at the first attempt. This performance is far inferior to that presented in the Aadhaar proof -of-concept stu dies released in 2012.
9 Moreover, failure to authenticate meant, 
at the very least, severe inconvenience, with beneficiaries required to bring other family 
members or come back another day. Dealers did not seem to be trained in Best -Finger -
Detection; neith er did they implement backup protocols such as iris or OTP. In none of the 
few cases in which such protocols were followed did respondents rate the new system as 
worse than the old one. Connectivity was also a problem for PDS, though less serious than 
authentication. The main concern with the LPG program was the upfront cost of cylinders, 
a serious issue especially as the program is rolled out to poorer households through the Ujjwala scheme targeted at poor women in rural areas.  
There are clear lessons for other biometric programs. Especially if authentication at point -of-
service is considered to be essential (and this needs careful case -by-case justification), it is 
vital to ensure a wide range of options and to train providers properly. It is notable that 
Andhra Pradesh, possibly the most advanced state in the use of digital delivery, has mandated a human option as a last resort; the Village Revenue Officer is required to 
authenticate on behalf of a villager unable to do so.
10 More research is needed on 
authentication in the field.  
Are difficulties with the new systems resulting in people actually being denied entitlements, 
including food rations? Unfortunately, our survey is not able to throw a conclusive light on 
this critica l question. While quite a number of people respond that they would be “denied” 
rations if they fail to be authenticated, they were allowed to include multiple responses such 
as “told to come back another day”; moreover, many of those who responded “denied”  
reported that their fingerprints were verified in 1 -2 attempts or indicated a preference for the 
new system over the old one. It is therefore likely that some of the respondents interpreted the question as a hypothetical “what if” or interpreted “denied” as part of a set of steps to 
follow up after the failure. We are attempting to frame the question more precisely in 
ongoing research.  
Among the surprises, we had expected certain groups to fare better than others with the new systems. Farmers and the elder ly might have more difficulty in authenticating themselves for 
PDS using fingerprints than others; people located further away from banks might have 
been expected to be less positive about PAHAL or pension reforms that deposited benefits 
into bank accounts , especially as Rajasthan has not seen much growth in mobile bank 
                                                      
9 In these POC tests, for a single best finger the sum of Failure -to-Capture and False  Reject Rate was only 5 
percent for a False Accept Rate of 0.01 percent (the same as for a 4 -digit PIN). This suggests that about 95 
percent of people should have been authenticated at the first attempt (Gelb & Clark, 2013).  
10 Again, this echoes other stu dies, such as those on attitudes to e- Gates, which find that travelers are generally 
happy with automated recognition systems that speed transitions through airports, provided that there is human 
help at hand when they fail (Gelb & Diofasi Metz, 2018).  30 correspondents. But the differences in responses are less systematic than we had anticipated, 
suggesting that other factors, such as the variable expertise of operators, are more important. 
It is also possible that those far from banks were even less well served by the previous 
system, because of greater dependence on less regular delivery systems.  
 Finally, the results throw some light on the two cross -cutting objectives of financial 
inclus ion and gender empowerment. There is no doubt that reforms in Rajasthan have 
contributed to the massive boost in financial inclusion seen in India. Virtually all 
respondents have bank accounts, often two or more per family, as do all Bhamashah heads 
of hou sehold. Two thirds of these women had not owned bank accounts before the reforms. 
Responses also indicate that women are transacting on bank accounts, but often accompanied by males of the household. The most frequent reason given for this was that the wom an was not literate and that she had little or no experience in dealing with banks; 
transport was also a factor. Very few responses cited cultural factors —that it was not right 
for women to have bank accounts. Clearly, attitudes to women will take years to  evolve, but 
in the famously patriarchal context of Rajasthan this is encouraging.  
Mobiles emerge, however, as a male preserve. Most are held by men; many women are not 
able to read or write SMS’s or operate a mobile phone. Together with some evidence tha t 
those more connected and with more capacity seem to have been more able to navigate the 
reforms better, this suggests a further frontier for policies and programs to shift India 
towards a digital society—ensuring that all people have the capacity to acce ss and to use 
digital technology. Estonia, perhaps the world leader in this area, did exactly that, with public -private partnerships educating more than 100,000 people (almost 10 percent of the 
population) in how to navigate the new digital ecosystem. Raja sthan should do the same.  
 
 31 References  
Abraham, R., Bennett, E., Sen, N., & Buddy Shah, N. (2017). State of Aadhaar Report 2016 -17. 
IDinsight. Retrieved from http://stateofaadhaar.in/wp -content/uploads/State -of-
Aadhaar -Full-Report -2016-17-IDinsight.pdf .  
Atansah, P., Khandan, M., Moss, T., Mukherjee, A., & Richmond, J. (2017). When Do Subsidy 
Reforms Stick? Lessons from Iran, Nigeria, and India . Center for Global Development. 
Retrieved from https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/when -do-subsidy -reforms -
stick-lessons -iran-nigeria-and-india.pdf .  
Brant, R. (1990). Assessing Proportionality in the Proportional Odds Model for Ordinal 
Logistic Regression. Biometrics, 46 (4), 1171 -1178. doi:10.2307/2532457  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. (2016). Report of the Comptroller an d Auditor General 
of India on Implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme (Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh Yojana) . 
Union Government (Commercial) Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.cag.gov.in/sites/default/files/audit_report_files/Union_Commercial_Co
mpliance_Full_Report_25_2016_English.pdf   
Demirgüç -Kunt, A., Leora K., Dorothe S., Saniya A., & Hess, J.  (2018). The Global Findex 
Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution.  World Bank: 
Washington, DC. Retrieved from https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/#data_ sec_focus .  
Drèze, J., Khalid, N., Khera, R., & Somanchi, A. (2017). Aadhaar and Food Security in 
Jharkhand.  Economic & Political Weekly , 52(50), 51. Retrieved from 
http://www.im4change.org/siteadmin/tinymce/uploaded/Aadhaar%20and%20Food%
20Security%20in%20Jharkhand%20Pain%20without%20Gain.pdf .  
Dutta, B. and Ramaswami, B. (2011). Targeting and efficiency in the pub lic distribution 
system: Case study of Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra. Economic and Political Weekly , 
36(18), 1524 -1532  
Gelb, A., & Diofasi Metz, A. (2018). Identification Revolution: Can Digital ID be Harnessed for 
Development?  Center for Global Development: Washington, DC.  
Gelb, A., & Clark, J. (2013). Performance lessons from India’s universal identification 
program.  CGD Policy Paper , 20. Retrieved from 
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/biometric -performance -lessons -India.pdf .  
George, S. & Subramanian, A. (2016). Clearing the air on LPG. The Indian Exp ress. Retrieved 
from http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/clearing -the-air-on-lpg-direct -
benefit -transfer -subsidies/ .  
International Telecommunications Union. (2018). Statistics . International 
Telecommunications Union. Retrieved from https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -
D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.asp x.  
Khera, R. (2011). Trends in diversion of PDS grain. Economic and Political Weekly,  46(21), 106 –
114 
Khera, R. (2017). Impact of Aadhaar in Welfare Programmes . Retrieved from 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3045235 .  
Long, J.S. & Freese, F. (2001). Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables Using Stata . 
Stata Press Publication: College Station, Texas, pp 137 -142. 32 Mittal, N., Mukherjee, A., & Gelb, A.  (2017). Fuel Subsidy Reform in Developing Countries: Direct 
Benefit Transfer of LPG Cooking Gas Subsidy in India . Center for Global Development. 
Retrieved from https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/fuel- subsidy -reform -
developing -countries -india.pdf .  
MicroSave. (2017). Household Perception: Impact of Bhamashah on Digital Governance Reforms in 
Rajasthan . MicroSave: Lucknow, India. Retrieved from 
http://www.microsave.net/files/pdf/171212_Household_Perception_Impact_of_Bha
mashah_Digital_Governance_Reforms_in_ Rajasthan.pdf .  
Muralidharan, K., Niehaus, P., & Sukhtankar, S. (2016). Building state capacity: Evidence 
from biometric smartcards in India. American Economic Review, 106 (10), 2895 -2929. 
Retrieved from https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20141346 .  
Overbeck, D. (2016). Leakage and corruption in India’s public distribution system. 
Manuscript.  Institute for Studies in Industrial Development, New Delhi. 
https://www.isid.ac.in/~epu/acegd2016/papers/DanielOverbeck.pdf  (Accessed on 
July 2, 2018)  
 
  33 Annex 1: Sampling Frame  
Quantitative r esearch c overage d etails  
• Sample size of 633 covered  
• 1 District per each of 7 admini strative division covered = 7 Districts  
• District selected on the basis of the proportion of population covered by National 
Food Security Act (NFSA) entitlement for food rations that is closest to the average 
for the administrative division  
• 2 Blocks per di strict (1 Rural & 1 Urban) selected on the basis of minimum deviance 
from district NFSA coverage  
• Villages and urban wards selected randomly (5 -6 Villages per block, 2 -3 urban 
wards)  
• Minimum of 86 respondents per block allocated in proportion to the urban- rural 
population share in the block.  
 
Qualitative research c overage d etails  
• Focus group discussions (FGD) and Key Informant (KI) interviews conducted in districts selected for quantitative survey  
• 4 Districts from 4 divisions covered to reflect the geograph ical diversity in the state  
• Minimum of 2 blocks covered in each district, chosen purposively to ensure socio -
economic diversity within the district  494459
444051
43 43464045 43 44 42Shahpura
Sahada
Hindon
Todabheem
Nathdwara
Kumbhalgarh
Ratangarh
Taranagar
Laxmangarh
Dhod
Phalodi
Balesar
Jhalrapaatan
Khanpur
Bhilwara Karauli Rajsamand Churu Sikar Jodhpur JhalawarNumber of  respondents – Blockwise (N=633)34 District  No. of FGDs/KIs  Member strength  Stakeholder 
interviews  
Rajasmand  9 43 7 
Bhilwara  9 36 4 
Jodhpur  6 36 2 
Karauli  7 46 3 
 
 