Digital Government and 
Corruption
The Impact of Citizen Oversight and 
InfObras on the Efficiency of the 
Execution of Public Works in Peru
Authors:
Gastón Pierri
Mariano LafuenteInstitutions for 
Development Sector
Innovation in Citizen 
Services Division
Office of Strategic Planning and 
Development Effectiveness
DISCUSSION 
PAPER Nº 
IDB-DP-832
November  2020Digital Government and Corruption
The Impact of Citizen Oversight and InfObras on the 
Efficiency of the Execution of Public Works in Peru
Authors:
Gastón Pierri
Mariano Lafuente
November  2020   Inter-American Development Bank. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/legalcode) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any non-
commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed. 
Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to 
arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB's name for any purpose other than for attribution, 
and the use of IDB's logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user and 
is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license. 
Note that the link provided above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. 
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the  
Inter-American Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent.  http://www.iadb.org
Copyright ©   2020Digital Government and Corruption: The Impact of
Citizen Oversight and InfObras on the Eﬀiciency of
the Execution of Public W orks in Peru
Gastón Pierri∗Mariano Lafuente†
Abstract
Digital government and citizen oversight initiatives have increased in number
in recent years. Governments have increased the numbers of virtual platforms that
display data on public works, and citizens have increased their voluntary participa-
tion in low-cost monitoring of these works. However, there is scarce literature on
the effectiveness of these initiatives. This study aims to contribute to the limited
evidence on the impact of citizen oversight in light of the above-mentioned digital
government initiatives. The study uses a regression discontinuity analysis to evalu-
ate the effect of the Citizen Oversight Monitors Program ( Programa de Monitores
Ciudadanos de Control - MCC) of Peru’s Oﬀice of the Comptroller. Using public
sources of administrative information and data from the InfObras platform of the
Oﬀice of the Comptroller1and the Investment Consultation ( Consulta de Inver-
sión) (Invierte.pe) application of the Ministry of Economy and Finance2, the study
examines the effects of the MCC on the costs and execution times of public works
in Peru. The findings suggest that although there is a significant impact in terms
of reducing cost overruns for works outsourced to construction firms, there are no
significant effects on results in terms of execution times of the works.
JEL Codes: H41, H54, I28, O15
Keywords: Monitoring, citizen, accountability, transparency, digital government, tech-
nology, public information.3
∗Gastón Pierri (gpierri@iadb.org) is an Economic Specialist with the Oﬀice of Strategic Planning
and Development Effectiveness of the Inter-American Development Bank.
†Mariano Lafuente (mlafuente@iadb.org) is a Modernization of the State Lead Specialist with the
Innovation in Citizen Services Division of the Inter-American Development Bank.
1For more information, see https://apps.contraloria.gob.pe/ciudadano/ .
2For more information, see https://ofi5.mef.gob.pe/invierte/consultapublica/
consultainversiones .
3This study would not have been possible without the support and collaboration of the Comptroller
General of the Republic of Peru, Nelson Shack Yalta. The authors are especially grateful for the support
provided by oﬀicials in the Oﬀice of the General Comptroller of the Republic ( Contraloría General de
la República - CGR), particularly Felipe Chacón, Prevention and Detection Manager; Fernando Ortega,
11 Introduction
Citizen oversight programs have gained popularity in recent years as a low-cost approach
topreventingcorruptionandimprovingthedeliveryofpublicgoodsandservices. Theidea
underlying such programs is that since members of the community are the beneficiaries
of a successful program, they have more incentives to monitor it than do disinterested
central government bureaucrats ( Stiglitz,2002). It is therefore relevant to evaluate the
impact of those programs on improving the eﬀiciency of the State.
ThisdocumentpresentsapreliminaryanalysisoftheimpactoftheCitizenOversightMon-
itors ( Monitores Ciudadanos de Control - MCC) Program of the Oﬀice of the Comptroller
of Peru ( Contraloría General de la República del Perú - CGR) on different findings of in-
terest related to the execution of public works in Peru (cost overruns, delays, and changes
in execution periods, among others). The document is based on data obtained from avail-
able public sources of administrative information. The MCC intervention only involves
works with a budget of less than PEN (Peruvian Soles) 10 million4, a threshold that allows
for a quasi-experimental analysis using a regression discontinuity model. From there one
will be able to understand the potential of the program to improve the results related to
public works.
This work also aims to contribute to closing the gap in the literature on the impact of
citizen oversight (the MCC program) in light of digital technologies for public information
(the InfObras platform, and the Invierte.pe application, also known as the Invest Con-
sultation or Consulta de Inversión ). The most abundant evidence agrees that access to
information reduces the costs of collective action for citizens. For example, Olken(2007)
shows that corruption declines when citizens have more information on infrastructure
expenditures.
Accordingly, the dissemination of information that users clearly perceive as actionable, in
coordination with measures that actively foster collective action, has an influence on the
incentives of public oﬀicials and the providers of State services. In this way, strategies
that combine the use of technologies with citizen participation mechanisms are promising,
given that they succeed in amplifying the voice of collective action beyond the local
setting and, at the same time, strengthen the capacity of the State to respond to citizens’
demands ( Fox,2015). The MCC program combines both aspects by making the use of
the information available on technology platforms such as InfObras and the Invierte.pe
application actionable for citizen oversight through citizen monitoring visits to public
works.
The document is divided into seven sections, including this introduction. The second sec-
tionreviewstheliteraturerelevanttocitizenoversightofpublicworksandinterventionsto
detect corruption. The third section contextualizes and describes the MCC intervention.
ManagerforSocialControlandComplaints; JenniferPérez,AdvisortotheCGR;PatriciaGuillénNolasco,
Assistant Manager for Citizen Participation; and Lilian López Suárez, Assistant Manager for Project
Management. The authors also thank Roberto de Michele, Principal Specialist on Modernization of the
State and the leader of the Transparency and Integrity Group of the IDB; and Alexandre Veyrat-Pontet,
Senior Specialist in Modernization of the State for the IDB in Peru. This study was made possible
thanks to support from the IDB’s Transparency Fund (AAF) through the Institutional Strengthening of
the Comptroller General of the Republic technical cooperation operation (PE-T1398) and the Project
to Enhance Control Services for Effective, Preventive, and Enabling Control for Public Management
(PE-L1240) of the CGR and the IDB.
4Equivalent to US$3 million based on the exchange rate as of December 31, 2019.
1The fourth section describes both the sample and the quasi-experimental methodology
used. In the fifth section, an initial descriptive analysis is conducted and the selection of
the variables of interest is justified. The sixth section presents the results of the design of
the discontinuity regression in order to show the impact of the MCC program on those
variables. The seventh and final section puts forth the conclusions from the study.
2 Literature Review
The branch of the empirical literature related to this evaluation analyzes whether citizen
oversight of public oﬀicials or providers can improve their effectiveness. This body of
researchgoesbackto Olken(2007), whoprovidesoneofthefirst experimentalestimatesof
the effects of anti-corruption community-based monitoring (CBM) policies in the context
of the construction of roads in villages in Indonesia. The author used a field experiment
in which villages were randomly assigned to three treatments:
1.Auditing: The risk of auditing for expenditures on roads increases to 100 percent
from a baseline of 4 percent.
2.Invitations: Villagers are invited to “accountability meetings” where the effective-
ness of local public expenditure is discussed.
3.Invitations plus anonymous comments: The previous treatment is conducted, but
in addition the local population is permitted to make anonymous observations to
the national government about local public expenditures.
Olken(2007) observes that the first treatment reduced missing expenses by approximately
30 percent. In contrast, it seems that the second and third treatments were not effective
in this context. The author argues that the failure of community monitoring can be
partiallyexplainedbyobstructionbylocalgovernments. Invillageswhereinvitationswere
distributed without interference by those governments, the effects were not as reduced as
much. In addition, the author shows that community monitoring reduced the proportion
of funds assigned to the payment of salaries. This result suggests that the capture of
local elites plays an important role in the failure of community monitoring. Policies are
only effective when citizens have direct incentives to prevent the bad allocation of public
funds. Inthepresentstudy, incontrastto Olken(2007), itisaStateentitythatdirectsand
coordinates the citizen participation program, giving more credibility to the monitoring
and avoiding its capture by local elites.
In a different context, Bjorkman and Svensson (2009) find that a community-based mon-
itoring program is indeed effective. These authors studied the provision of public health
services in rural areas of Uganda and implemented a randomized controlled trial (RCT),
which is very similar to the second treatment in Olken(2007). The effects of this treat-
ment on health results and the measures for the use of resources by local public oﬀicials
were positive. In particular, the mortality rates of children under age 5 declined sub-
stantially in the treated areas. Bjorkman and Svensson (2009) maintain that, in contrast
toOlken(2007), they were careful to avoid having elites obstruct the policy that was
adopted. In addition, the rural inhabitants had direct incentives to prevent the waste of
resources that could be used to improve their own health results.
Bjorkman and Svensson (2010) conducted a follow-up to Bjorkman and Svensson (2009)
with the aim of understanding why different studies produce contradictory findings on
2the effectiveness of community monitoring interventions. They found that in ethnically
fractionalized communities, the Bjorkman and Svensson (2009) intervention had not been
effective. Therefore, their findings for that year seemed to be driven by the effect of the
intervention on homogenous communities. The authors maintain that those findings un-
derline the importance of adapting citizen monitoring interventions to the characteristics
of each community. The MCC program evaluated in the present document overcomes the
diﬀiculties detected by Bjorkman and Svensson (2010) regarding heterogeneous effects
linked to characteristics of communities by systematizing citizen oversight via a technical
survey to evaluate the quality of the public works.
For their part, Banerjee, Banerji, Duflo, Glennerster, and Khemani (2010) evaluated an
intervention related to community monitoring of public education in rural India. The
intervention attempted to improve the local policies responsible for the operation of the
schools studied (in this case, Village Education Committees - VECs). To do this, a local
nongovernmental organization (NGO) sent representatives to meet with the citizenry and
helped them carry out this supervision effectively. They implemented three different
treatments and evaluated them through an experiment:
1.Information: Representatives from the NGO organized meetings to disseminate in-
formation about the role of the VECs in the manner of the information component
of theBjorkman and Svensson (2009) treatment, though with some additional ele-
ments in their participant component.
2.Information and community audits: Identical to the first information treatment,
but in this case the villagers also received scorecards on which they could evaluate
the quality (perceived) of local education services. They were trained in how to
correctly use these scorecards, and the results of the scores were disseminated at
the information meetings of the VECs. This treatment was very similar to the
intervention by Bjorkman and Svensson (2009).
3.Information, community audits, and self-suﬀiciency: Identical to the second infor-
mation and community audit treatment, but here the villagers received one week of
basic training to enable them to train others. It was assumed that this had to be
done in their village through “field lectures” that they conducted.
Unfortunately, the first two interventions failed in all of the areas and none achieved the
intermediate results that measure the intensity of the community monitoring. Finally,
there was no significant effect at all on learning results. By contrast, the third intervention
did improve educational results. Since the intensity of the community monitoring did not
change in response to this intervention, the authors maintain that the intervention’s self-
suﬀiciency component must account for all of its impact. In general, in this document,
it is suggested that the community monitoring policies that depend on volunteers within
the village can do better than those directed by persons from outside the community, in
this case the representatives from the NGO. Accordingly, one of the major conclusions
of this study resembles that of Olken(2007), who demonstrated that vertical audits –-
those conducted byauditors from the government-–do better than communitymonitoring
policies. Another conclusion is that, for this monitoring to work, citizens must be able
sanction corrupt and evasive government providers. In Banerjee et al. (2010), parents
could not do anything about the poor quality of education except complain. This could
explain why the villagers were not interested in participating in the VEC systems, even
aftertheinterventionsoccurred. Alongthosesamelines, theMCCprogramstudiedinthis
3document overcomes the diﬀiculties of community monitoring of Banerjee et al. (2010) by
making its findings actionable. In other words, those findings generate consequences, to
wit, sanctions against the entities in charge of the public works.
For their part, Berman et al. (2017) evaluate a community monitoring program carried
out in Afghanistan that is very similar to the CGR’s MCC program analyzed here. The
local NGO Integrity Watch Afghanistan (IWA) recruited citizens and assigned them the
task of monitoring public works projects. The authors evaluated this program through
a field experiment that centered on a sample of only 22 roads that connect a total of 77
villages (the median road connected four villages). Berman et al. (2017) implemented a
two-level random design: five roads and the villages connected by them were assigned to
a control group and did not receive the IWA program, while the rest were assigned to a
treatment group. The IWA program was implemented in approximately 80 percent of the
villages connected by the treated roads, while in the rest it was not implemented. The
authors contracted an engineering team to measure the quality of the roads, their main
outcome of interest. They also surveyed the local population and asked them to evaluate
the quality of the roads studied in the sections near their villages. Their intervention was
carried out from 2011-2015 and the quality of the roads was measured in 2011, 2013, and
2015.
In general, the authors found that the IWA program had positive effects on the quality of
the roads, according to the analysis carried out by the engineers it contracted. The effects
of the intervention were scattered among the roads subject to treatment, as much near
the treated villages as those not treated, although connected with the former. Berman et
al.(2017) provided qualitative evidence that the informal disclosure of auditing reports
in the villages played a crucial role in this process (because the findings by the monitors
of corruption could set off protests, for example).
One of many recent working papers that analyze interventions similar to those of Olken
(2007) andBjorkman and Svensson (2009) is that of Sexton(2017), although in this
case its relevance is even greater, since the intervention was carried out in Peru. In
a field experiment, treated villages received training on accountability directed toward
community leaders. All of the meetings were conducted by the Peruvian NGO Grupo
Propuesta Ciudadana . At the meetings, the participants received high-level information
about how local governments function. They were also trained in how to form part of pre-
existing participation mechanisms. First, they learned about the participatory budgeting
process, which consists of meetings between citizens and municipal bureaucrats from
the district during which the local population can communicate its priorities regarding
municipal expenditures. Second, they learned about the process known as “recall”, a
mechanism that allows the local population to initiate a referendum to remove mayors
prior to the completion of their mandate.
Unlike what was expected, Sexton(2017) found that his intervention reduced citizen par-
ticipation in the participatory budget meetings while at the same time increasing the
prevalence of recalls and informal protests. Because the last two forms of citizen partic-
ipation are generally considered the most damaging, the author presented those results
as undesired and counter-productive. In terms of municipal eﬀiciency, the treatment had
a negative effect: it reduced the proportion of municipal budgets that were actually ex-
ecuted. Unfortunately, the fact that the evaluation only studied the short-term effects
of his intervention impedes the identification of potential long-term effects. A difference
between the MCC program evaluated in the present document and that of Sexton(2017)
4is that here the monitoring is coordinated and implemented by a State entity (the CGR),
which gives the program more institutionalization and seriousness. In addition, in the
MCC the monitoring to assess the quality of the public work is conducted through a tech-
nical survey, although a simple one, which is more objective and actionable than oversight
through community meetings and subjection valuations.
Another interesting study related to the present one is Lagunes (2019), who investigated
the monitoring of public works in urban Peru with a focus on interventions that directly
empower NGOs and not individual citizens. The intervention consisted of involving the
Peruvian NGO Proética in the monitoring of certain local governments. This intervention
was evaluated experimentally at the district level. According to its design, in the control
group the CGR sends a message to municipalities in the district reminding them that
they must enter information about execution of the projects on the InfObras platform.
The treatment group receives the same message as that sent to the control group, but,
in addition, Proética investigates the execution of the public works. In addition, during
a period of two years the municipalities receive a total of four letters from Proética and
from the CGR reminding them that these investigations are in progress and that the CGR
will be notified of their main findings.
Lagunes (2019) estimates the effects of the intervention on two elements -the costs and
the delays of the infrastructure projects- using data from InfObras that are based on
reports by municipalities in the district. The author estimates that the treatment had a
very significant effect on project costs, which were substantially reduced. In accordance
with the specification, these effects could achieve as much as a 50 reduction. This is the
main finding, and it suggests that in general the intervention was extremely effective. A
difference between the study by Lagunes (2019) and the MCC program is that the latter
directly involves the citizens in social oversight, and they can have more incentives than
NGOs to conduct more effective monitoring to the extent that they are the potential
beneficiaries of the public works. On the other hand, as discussed earlier, there are some
problems with the data used for this evaluation, problems that that MCC evaluation
looks to resolve by complementing and improving the data. In addition, the evaluations
conducted by the MCCs are more objective, since they consist of collecting technical
information and presenting evidence (photos) of the status of the work visited.
Another study of the evidence from citizen monitoring programs is Freire, Galdino, and
Mignozzetti (2020), who analyze the effect of a cell phone application that enables citizens
to monitor school construction projects in Brazilian municipalities. The application asks
users to send information about construction sites, facilitates access to this information
by independent engineers, and contacts the oﬀices of mayors to report delays in projects.
The findings show that the application has no impact on school construction indicators.
In addition, it is observed that the politicians do not respond to individual requests.
The findings raise doubts about the impact of community monitoring of the performance
of public services and suggest that the interventions directed towards other groups or
focused on different topics can produce better policy results. One hypothesis derived
from those findings is that the absence of sanctions against mayors when they ignore
individual requests disincentivizes improvement in the execution of the works. Therefore,
it is important that citizen monitoring programs be coordinated and supported by State
entities with supervisory power and the power to act.
From the research summarized in this section, it can be deduced that open government
policies that promote citizen monitoring and access to public information are two types of
5reforms that reduce the costs of collective actions by citizens, something which the studies
agree upon. However, there is even more room to generate more rigorous evidence on
citizen monitoring and to overcome the diﬀiculties exposed in the evaluations reviewed,
which is precisely what is proposed on these pages, First, in contrast to the programs
described previously, the MCC initiative is implemented and coordinated by a principal
oversight entity of the Peruvian State, the CGR, which provides greater credibility and
institutionality. Second, as previously indicated, the findings reported by the MCCs are
actionable, since they can result in sanctions against the agencies executing the works in
question. Third, the evaluation of the status of the public works by the MCCs is based
on a technical questionnaire supported by evidence (photos). In this way, the reports by
the MCCs are more objective than those of other citizen monitoring programs, which are
usually based on community meetings that are more diﬀicult to evaluate. Fourth, the
MCC program has less of a possibility of being captured by local elites, since recruitment
is generally done virtually and the volunteers do not usually visit works in their own
localities.
Finally, this document contributes to generating evidence about the scarce number of
“strategic social oversight interventions” ( Fox,2015), especially in the region. These
interventions aim to establish the relevance of the institutional capacity of the State to
respond to the voices of the citizenry. In other words, they combine the power of access
to information, both to motivate collective action as well as to influence the State, with
a State capacity strengthened to respond to that collective action. The combination of
these strategies helps to mutually empower the “voice of the people” and the mechanisms
for action through a synergy between the State and society.
The MCC program evaluated in this document combines a mixed strategy that takes
advantage of the information from the InfObras platform and the Invierte.pe application
complemented by monitoring visits to the public works. In this way, the mutually em-
powering coalitions of actors in support of accountability, both of the State as well as
society, can break the vicious circles as needed to achieve effective monitoring ( Fox,2015).
3 Context and Description of the Program
3.1 Context
The CGR is a high-level auditing entity of the Peruvian State, Its mission is to “direct,
supervise, and execute the monitoring of public entities to contribute to the effective,
eﬀiciency and transparent use of public resources”. This oversight includes supervision of
all expenditures on public works throughout the country. Traditionally, the CGR’s work
had consisted of conducting ex post monitoring of the correct use of public resources.
But since 2017, as a result of regulatory changes, it has moved towards ensuring greater
implementation of monitoring tools to prevent corruption. The oﬀice that audits public
worksistheOﬀiceforManagementoftheMonitoringofBasicPublicServicesoftheCGR.
In principle this could audit all public works, but as it has limited resources, the oﬀice
only audits large projects. For their part, small projects, especially those in the interior
of the country, have not been subject to auditing in recent years. The MCC program, led
by the CGR’s Prevention and Detection Oﬀice, was designed to address this gap.
The MCC is a low-cost auditing program carried out by volunteers from the areas of each
project. Initially, it was assumed that it should monitor public works corresponding to
6the Reconstruction with Changes ( Reconstrucción con Cambios - RCC) program, which
refers to initiatives to rebuild infrastructure that had been destroyed by flooding from
the coastal El Niño in 2017. However, given that the RCC suffered long delays, the CGR
decided to use the MCC to monitor all of the small public works projects in the country,
regardless of their purpose.
This program recruits citizens (monitors) through campaigns in newspapers and on radio
and social networks. Most monitors are recruited through social networks, which is why
most are university students from large cities. Once a citizen asks to be a MCC volunteer,
thatpersonmusttakeabrieftrainingcourseprovidedbytheCGR.Thosewhodonotpass
an exam at the end of the course cannot participate. The CGR also conducts background
checks of candidates to exclude those who might enter into the program with malicious
intentions
Once recruited, the monitors are grouped into pairs. Each pair of monitors is assigned a
public works project and has the task of visiting it once a month. During these visits, it is
assumed that the monitors will audit the progress of the project and produce reports for
the Oﬀice for Management of the Monitoring of Basic Public Services, as well as for one of
the 25 regional oﬀices in the country. On the basis of these reports, and with verification
of the important information about execution the works provided by public sources such
as InfObras and the Invierte.pe application, the oﬀices can decide whether to conduct a
large-scale audit of a project, which at the end of the process can lead to the imposition of
fines or imprisonment. In this way, the MCC program, together with the inputs provided
by public information sources, contributes to the CGR’s governmental oversight actions.
The overall objective of the program is to contribute to the improvement of governmental
oversightservicesinordertopromoteeffectiveandeﬀicientuseofresourcesofthePeruvian
StateAspartofthemeasuresdirectedtowardimprovingeffectiveandeﬀicientmonitoring,
the project supported a series of key actions for conducting this study, including (1) an
innovative and evidence-based implementation policy strategy, which included the design
and creation of the laboratory for government oversight and the innovation of processes;
(2) improvements to InfObras to strengthen social monitoring; and (3) improvements to
the effectiveness and coverage of the Citizen Oversight Monitors (MCC) program. In
addition, the program involved the design of an impact evaluation of the MCC.5
3.2 Characterization of the Citizen Oversight Monitors
This subsection presents some of the characteristics of the volunteers (candidates and
certified)fortheMCCprogram. Theyarereachedthroughvirtualrecruitmentcampaigns,
mainly social networks, which means that most of those attracted to the program are from
urban areas and have advanced degrees, as seen in Table 1.
5Notwithstanding that an experimentaldesign had been initially planned, this study decided to exploit
the possibility of considering preliminary effects through a regression discontinuity design, as described
in the document. Likewise, a knowledge generation strategy has been proposed on issues of digital
government and control. For more information on three of the assessment initiatives currently being
implemented, see: https://www.iadb.org/Document.cfm?id=EZSHARE-1392852158-75 .
7T able 1. Descriptive Statistics on Citizen Oversight Monitors, 2019
Candidates Certified Monitors
Number of volunteers 11,706 2,184
Percentage with post-secondary education 94% 96%
Percentage from urban districts 84% 73%
Percentage from provincial capitals 53% 46%
Average age 30.78 28.01
Sex (percentage of men) 65% 48%
Percentage of engineers 29% 22%
Average training score - 17.97
Visits per monitor 0.11 0.87
Source: Prepared by the authors based on MCC data.
According to data provided by the CGR, relatively few of the works are located in urban
areas or provincial capitals, even though that is where most of the volunteers come from.
Among the works eligible for the MCC in 2019, 66 percent were located in rural districts
and 73 percent outside provincial capitals. Because of this the program has a severe lack
of volunteers in rural areas, where most of the works are located.
AscanbeseeninDiagram1, alargenumberofcandidatessignedupfortheMCCprogram
in 2019; however, only a certain number of candidates were certified as monitors.
Diagram 1. Recruitment for MCC in 2019
Source: Prepared by the authors based on data from the MCC program.
84 Evaluation Methodology and Sample
4.1 Regression Discontinuity Design
This document will evaluate the impact of the MCC program on various quality indica-
tors for public works through the use of regression discontinuity design (RDD). RDD is
a rigorous quasi-experimental approach that can be used to estimate the effects of treat-
ment in a non-experimental test environment where that treatment is determined by an
observed “assignment” variable that exceeds a designated threshold or cut-off point.
In terms of the design of the MCC program, it is possible to use an RDD to analyze
its impact. Specifically, in this design one takes advantage of the program rule that
works monitored by the MCC must have a maximum budget that does not exceed PEN
(PeruvianSoles)10million. Inthisway, onewillbeabletoanalyzethedifferenceinresults
between works that receive and do not receive MCC visits around the indicated budget
threshold. This discontinuity is represented mathematically by the following equation:
Xbudget={
1ifBudget ≤PEN 10 M
0ifBudget ≥PEN 10 M(1)
In this case, the simplest model to apply is the following.
Ywork=α+ρXbudget+ϵ (2)
Where ρis the parameter of interest and Yworkrepresents the outcomes of interest at the
level of the work, which will be discussed in more detail later.
An important aspect of RDD is that the assignment of treatment is interpreted as random
intheneighborhood ofthediscontinuity. Thismeansthat fora segmentofthe population,
it is assumed that being marginally above or below the threshold is something that is
beyond the control of the individual and that cannot be manipulated. In the case of
the MCC program, it can be assumed that this condition is met, since the works in the
sample determine their initial budget prior to the launch of the MCC program. Therefore,
the oﬀicials responsible could not know that there would be volunteers from the MCC
program who conducted visits to their works. In addition, the visits were coordinated by
the CGR, without possibility that the responsible oﬀicials would have had knowledge of
them.
4.2 Description of the Sample
As can be seen in Map 1, the sample and the distribution of the eligible works by district
arebroad. Inanyevent, thevisitsconducteddependontheexistenceofmonitorsavailable
to do so.
9Map 1. Location of W orks Eligible for the Citizen Oversight Monitors
Source: Prepared by the authors based on data from InfObras.
Table 2 describes the sample used in the analysis according to the budget of the work
by category (works eligible and not eligible for MCC visits). In total, only 905 works
were visited during 2019. Of the works visited, 96.9 percent were eligible for the program
as a result of having a budget of less than PEN (Peruvian Soles) 10 million; only 3.1
percent were works with a higher budget that were thus ineligible for the program. Those
latter works, because of their very high budget, do not pose a problem for the regression
discontinuity design, as they are not considered in the analysis because they are not
around the threshold of eligibility.
T able 2. W orks of Local Governments in All the Districts of the Country
Budget Intervals for W orks Visited Percentage of T otal
MCC Eligibility by the MCC W orks Visited W orks
Eligible 877 96.9% 324.773
(Budget less than PEN 10 million)
Not Eligible 28 3.1% 8.915
(Budget more than PEN 10 million)
T otal 905 100% 333.68
Source: Prepared by the authors based on data from the Ministry of the Economy and
Finance’s Investment Consultation (Invierte.pe) application.
104.3 Data
4.3.1 Description of the Databases Used
The databases of interest for the study were generated by combining different information
sources in order to assemble a complete database. The main source of information of the
explanatory variable outlines the data on visits to works by the MCC in the first wave of
theprogramin2019. Withrespecttothepublicworks, themainsourceofinformationhas
been InfObras. However, given that InfObras did not have specific data important for the
analysis, it was decided to incorporate additional information from the public application
called “Consulta Inversiones - Invierte.pe” of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance
(Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas -MEF).Finally,informationoncomplaintscontained
in the Willay system6was also taken into account in order to create a corruption indicator
at the district level. All of these databases were combined to obtain a complete panel of
information about the works.
4.3.2 Deployment of Citizen Oversight Monitors
As mentioned earlier, an essential database for the study is that which was created with
information on the deployment of monitors, which provides details about the visits by
MCCstoworksduring2019. Thedatabasehasinformationbothaboutthework(variables
found in InfObras) as well as the visits: type (initial, periodic, or final), date, national
identity document ( Documento Nacional de Identidad - DNI) of the monitor in charge of
the visit, and variables related to the report on situations of noncompliance detected by
the monitors. For the RDD analysis, the treatment group is made up of the works eligible
for visits by the MCCs (that is, those works with a budget of less than PEN (Peruvian
Soles) 10 million). The control group is made up of works ineligible for visits by MCCs
(that is, those works with a budget above PEN 10 million). Given the design of the RDD
analysis, works with budgets higher or lower than but very near the threshold of PEN 10
million are compared so that this resembles a local experimental design.
4.3.3 Data from InfObras
InfObras is the main source of information on public works in Peru. This analysis uses
the InfObras database updated until July 2020. The outcome variables for the study
obtained from InfObras are the following:
1.Physical progress of the work: Real/programmed progress of the work in “concrete”
terms (percentage).
2.Stoppage of the work: binary variable that indicates if the work has been stopped.
3.Extensions of the work: binary variable that indicates if those responsible for the
work requested an extension of the deadline for execution of the work.
4.3.4 Data from the Invierte.pe-Consulta de Inversión Application
As mentioned previously, additional information was also extracted for the open-source
application Consulta Inversión-Invierte.pe of the MEF.7This complements the InfObras
6Willay is a system by which Reception and Admission Analysts record complaints from citizens
electronically.
7The National System for Multiannual Planning and Management of Investments, known as In-
vierte.pe, allows for planning and selecting strategic portfolios of projects based on the needs of the
11data in that it provides information about the viability of the work; the viable amount,
that is, the budget approved by the MEF (useful for estimating an outcome of interest
for the study, such as the cost overruns); the status of the investment; and the specific
subcategories of the MEF to identify the typology of the works.
The database is constructed using the stock of all the investment projects initiated in
Peru since 2011. This includes 90 percent of the projects in InfObras as well as works
that are subject to a viability diagnostic or which already have been deemed as viable but
whose execution has not yet started. This information is provided in the public website
of the MEF at the district level.
Thisdatabaseindicatestheinitialbudgetandtheupdatedcostofeachinvestmentproject.
Comparing these variables allows for obtaining a measure of the cost overruns that is used
as an additional outcome of interest to conduct the quasi-experimental analysis. This
indicator is computed as a percentage value in the following manner:
Cost overruns =Updated cost - Viable amount
Viable amount
4.3.5 Willay
InformationoncomplaintsprovidedbytheWillaydatabaseisalsoconsideredasavariable
ofinterestforthedescriptiveanalysis. Thisinformationallowsforobtainingthenumberof
complaints against the district municipality reported for each district. Citizen complaints
are related to administrative deficiencies or acts of corruption by public oﬀicials. This
variable provides an estimate of the incidence of corruption at the district level and will
only be used for the descriptive analysis because, for the moment, this indicator is only
available at the departmental level, since the most important information is in a text
format.
5 Descriptive analysis
This section will provide a detailed descriptive analysis of the information and the vari-
ables of interest for the study. The information comes from different administrative
databases, which means that, when combining the observations, information can be lack-
ing because of its absence in some of these databases. On the other hand, this analysis
takes into account information about the works executed and approved from 2001 to 2020.
5.1 Description of the W orks
Table 3 shows the number of observations for which there is information in InfObras. In
addition, the information in InfObras is complemented by additional information con-
tained in Invierte.pe. This study uses observations that have information in both sources:
Invierte.pe and InfObras.
population and for facilitating the development and evaluation of projects. For more information, see
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/teams/EZ-PE-LON/PE-
12T able 3. Observations in InfObras
Information in InfObras Number Percentage
on the W ork?
Has information 350,236 80.94
Does not have information 82,490 19.06
T otal 432,726 100.00
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
Table 4 shows the distribution of works by execution modality: direct administration or
outsourced. Outsourced works are those executed by construction firms that win the
bids. Works executed by direct administration are those executed by the State entity
itself (for example, the municipality). Most of the works (61.91 percent) are outsourced
and the rest (38.09 percent) are administered directly.
T able 4. Modality of Execution of the W ork
Modality Number Percentage
Direct administration 31,419 38.09
Outsourced 51,071 61.91
T otal 82,490 100.00
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
Regardingthegeographicdistributionoftheseworksintheperiodfrom2012–2019, Figure
1 shows that 13 of the 24 departments outsourced more than 50 percent of their works.
Of those departments, Tumbes had the most, with more than 90 percent of its works
outsourced, followed by Ica, with 90 percent, and Ucayali, with more than 80 percent.
Of the 12 departments that did not mostly outsource out their works, Moquegua had the
fewest with a little more than 10 percent of its works outsourced, followed by Cusco and
Puno, both with less than 20 percent.
13Figure 1. Percentage of W orks Outsourced by Department
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
Regarding the modality of execution of the works by level of government during the
2012–2019 period, Figure 2 shows that outsourced works tend to dominate all levels, with
more than 50 percent of the works of local and regional governments and the national
government using this modality. Although 40 percent of the works have been executed
through direct administration, these only account for 20 to 30 percent of expenditures on
public works, since these works tend to be on a scale smaller (in terms of both budget
and population) than outsourced works, as can be seen in Figure 3.
Figure 2. Percentage of W orks Outsourced by Level of Government
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
14Figure 3. Percentage of W orks Outsourced by Budget
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
Information contained in the CGR’s Willay system allows for accessing information on
complaints by citizens. This variable is useful to obtain outcomes of interest for the
analysis. Figure 4 shows the number of complaints recorded by department. As would be
expected, the largest departments have the most complaints.
Figure 4. Complaints by department, 2018-19
Source: Prepared by the authors based on Willay data.
Althoughnumerouscomplaintsarefiled, notallofthemareacceptedandgeneratealarms.
Figure 5 shows the number of complaints that generated alarms by department. It can be
observed that the departments with the most alarms were Lambayeque and La Libertad,
which were also the departments that had the largest number of complaints, behind Lima
andArequipa. AndeventhoughLimaandArequipahadthelargestnumberofcomplaints,
the proportion of alarms in those departments is lower than in the other departments.
15Figure 5. Alarms Deriving from Complaints, by Department, 2018–2019
Source: Prepared by the authors based on Willay data.
6 Results
This section describes the effects of the MCC program on the outcomes of interest men-
tioned previously in relation to public works. Those effects have internal validity, specifi-
cally within the budget threshold of PEN (Peruvian Soles) 10 million, and therefore must
be considered to be “local”.
6.1 V alidity of the Analysis
One of the most important assumptions in using the regression discontinuity design is
that there was no strategic change in the behavior of the works around the threshold.
This means the assignment of treatment (in this case, visits by the MCC) is interpreted
as random in the neighborhood of the discontinuity. For a segment of the population, it
is assumed that being marginally above or below the threshold is something that is out
of its control.
In the context of this study, one of the advantages of the program is its implementation
ex post to the design and approval of the monitored projects and, consequently, the
availability of its budget. As a result of this, those responsible for the works have not
been able to know prior to determination of the budget about the potential involvement
of the MCC program, or that, depending on the budget, their works would or would not
have been subject to monitoring visits. Under those circumstances, it is not feasible to
manipulate the budget of the works in order to avoid monitoring by the MCCs.
To rigorously prove that there indeed was no manipulation of the analysis, the density
test of (McCrary ,2008) is used to test the density of the assignment variable before and
after implementation of the program in order to demonstrate that there are no variations
attributable to it. Here, the results show that there is no variation in the assignment
variable before and after the start of the MCC program. The proportions of units below
and above the threshold are maintained during the years prior to and after the program.
16The results are shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6. McCrary Density T est
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
6.2 Polynomial Regression with Visits
Figure 7 shows the adjusted values of the regression of MCC visits over the threshold
variable (budget = PEN 10 million) and the budget of the works of local governments in
districts visited by the MCC (the x axis is on a logarithmic scale). This first figure uses
as a sample all of the works in the database. It can be seen that the PEN 10 million
threshold rule is complied with.
Figure 7. MCC Visits, All W orks
17Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
Note: The figure shows each work in universe x, according to its original recorded budget.
The works to the left of the threshold line of PEN 10 million are those eligible for the MCC
program. The figure shows that the works with a budget of less than PEN 10 million have
received monitoring visits, which is why the line to the left of the threshold line is higher than
the curve to the right of that line.
The figure shows the discontinuity in the PEN 10 million threshold, which is used for
the analysis because it maintains the relationship with the visits variable, which is the
variable that the discontinuity aims to identify.
Figure 8 uses the same variables as Figure 7 but filters the sample by reducing it to works
executed by local governments and located in districts where MCC visits were conducted.
Going forward, this reduced and more exact sample will be used to estimate the effects
of the MCC program with the RDD model.
Figure 8. MCC Visits, with W orks Filtered
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
Note: The figure shows each work in districts with MCC visits in universe x, according to its
original recorded budget. The works to the left of the threshold line of PEN 10 million are those
eligible for the MCC program. The figure shows that the works with a budget of less than PEN
10 million have received monitoring visits, which is why the line at the left of the threshold line
is higher than the line at the right of that line.
6.3 Polynomial Regression with Cost Overruns
Figure 9 presents the adjusted values of the regression of the MCC visits over the cost
overruns variable and the budget of the works of local governments in districts visited
by the MCC (the x axis is on a logarithmic scale). As mentioned previously, the figure
filters the sample to reduce it to those works executed by local governments and located in
districts where MCC visits were conducted. The figure shows that the works with MCC
visits have less cost overruns than the others around the PEN 10 million threshold.
18Figure 9. Cost Overruns, with W orks Filtered
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
Note: The figure shows that the works to the left of the PEN 10 million budget threshold have
less cost overruns that the works with a budget above PEN 10 million.
Along these lines, it is also interesting to analyze cost overruns in accordance with the
work’s execution modality (direct administration versus outsourced). Figure 10 shows
the cost overruns in outsourced works in the filtered samples. In this case, clearer and
more interesting results can be seen between the works with and without MCC visits.
This result could indicate that the MCC program is more effective for works that are
outsourced.
Figure 10. Cost Overruns in Outsourced W orks, with W orks Filtered
19Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
Note: The figure shows that the outsourced works to the left of the budget threshold of PEN 10
million (eligible for the MCC) have less cost overruns than outsourced works that have a budget
above PEN 10 million.
Figure 11 shows the cost overruns in works under direct administration in the sample
with filters. In this case, one observes that there are no significant differences in cost
overruns between works directly administered and with MCC visits and works directly
administered but with no MCC visits.
Figure 11. Cost Overruns in Directly Administered W orks
Source: Prepared by the authors based on Invierte.pe data.
6.4 Regressions on Cost Overruns
Byvirtueofthediscrepanciesbetweentheresultsofthesamplesofoutsourcedanddirectly
administered works observed in the figures analyzed in the previous section, it was decided
to more robustly evaluate the treatment estimated by the RDD in the sample of works
executed under the outsourcing modality, since it seems that the MCC program had a
larger effect on those works. In total, 11,297 observations were considered, given that
the RDD only takes into account observations around the eligibility threshold (budget of
PEN 10 million); 1,540 of the observations are the ones near the threshold that are used
to estimate the local impact of the program.
Table 5 shows the coeﬀicients with standard errors of the RD Sharp estimator, using a
polynomial regression on the cost overruns defined as a percentage of the initial approved
budget. The effect of the program on the cost overruns was evaluated using a filtered
sample of outsourced works. As mentioned previously, the filtered works only include
works of local governments located in districts with MCC visits. The results show a
positive and significant impact of the MCC program on the reduction of cost overruns of
outsourced works.
20T able 5. Discontinuity Regression Analysis on Cost Overruns
W orks (with filters)
Coeﬀicient 0,09**
(0,05)
Observations 11.297
Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Statistical significance: *** p <0.01, **p <0.05, *p <0.1
6.5 State of Execution of the W ork
Another result analyzed is the state of execution of the work, especially if the work has
been stopped. Figure 12 shows that there is more stoppage of works visited by MCCs (to
theleftofthePEN10millionthreshold). Theeffectsarenotsignificant, andthedifference
is minimal, so the effects of the program on the state of execution are inconclusive. In
this sense, it seems that MCC visits do not have a relationship with the state of execution
of the works.
Figure 12. W orks Stopped, with Application of Filter
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data and Invierte.pe.
Another outcome of interest if the percentage of physical progress on execution of the
work. Figure 13 shows that works with MCC visits (to the left of the PEN 10 million
threshold) have a slightly higher percentage of physical progress than works without visits
(to the right of the threshold).
21Figure 13. Physical Progress of the W ork, with Application of Filter
(percent)
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
Finally, in terms of execution of the work, Figure 14 shows whether the work has had
extensions of its execution deadline. In this case, no significant differences are observed
between works with MCC visits (to the left of the PEN 10 million threshold) and works
without MCC visits (to the right of the threshold).
Figure 14. Expansion in Execution of the W ork
Source: Prepared by the authors based on InfObras data.
There are two reasons behind the effects found in cost overruns and not in the other
22variables. First is the nature of the oversight program. The MCC program focuses more
on monitoring cost overruns because they are more associated with corruption than are
variables such as the work’s execution time. Second, many of the causes of delays of works
are more associated with problems of technical analysis of preinvestment than with the
behavior of the implementing firm.
In general, the conditions linked to progress in execution of a work usually respond to
many factors and are related to, for example, deficiencies in preinvestment studies and
the development of technical standards – that is, prior to the start of execution – as well
as other controversies that can arise during the process of executing the contract. In
this way, it is possible to assume that those other factors could have direct effects on
meeting the work’s execution deadlines, independent of the effect of the citizen oversight
or monitoring of the work.
For example, in the operational controls put in place for works within the framework of
the Reconstruction with Changes (RCC) Program, the CGR identified delays in physical
progress of slightly over 34 percent of works. On the other hand, with respect to the works
that were stopped, the CGR noted that the stoppage (which at the same time extends the
period of execution) in 51.6 percent of the cases corresponded to deficiencies in technical
standards and 19.4 percent to cases of force majeure, such as natural disasters, social
conflicts, etc.8
7 Conclusion
ThisdocumentanalyzedtheimpactoftheCGR’sMCCprogramontheeﬀiciencyofpublic
works in Peru. Taking advantage of the program design – which establishes that only
those works with an initial approved budget of less than PEN 10 million are eligible for
MCC monitoring – a discontinuity regression analysis was conducted to evaluate the local
effect of the program on works within the eligibility threshold. The findings of this study
are statistically significant for citizen monitoring in the presence of digital government
initiatives such as InfObras and Invierte.pe in terms of the eﬀiciency of public works.
In particular, the analysis finds that the program’s monitoring visits had a significant
impact of 9 percent in reducing cost overruns for the works executed by construction
firms. No such effect was identified in works executed by direct administration. Nor
were any impacts found in other variables of the analyzed results, such as the status of
execution of the work, its physical progress, and its delays. A possible explanation for
the findings is that, given the nature of the oversight program, it makes more sense for
the monitoring to focus on cost overruns, which can be directly related to corruption. By
contrast, variables such as the physical progress of the work and its period of execution
are more related to external factors like deficiencies in the pre-investment studies and
the preparation of technical standards, which are more diﬀicult to control. In this sense,
the findings show that the MCC program is an effective strategy to detect cost overruns
of works of up to PEN 10 million and in this way help to reduce corruption through
cost-effective monitoring.
This document contributes to closing the gaps in the literature related to the impact of
citizen monitoring programs on the supply of public goods and services. This is possible
8For more information on the reports of the CGR control operations and government control,
see https://apps5.contraloria.gob.pe/sroc/wfrm/Inicio.aspx and https://appbp.contraloria
.gob.pe/BuscadorCGR/Informes/Inicio.html .
23because the document generates evidence on the effect of strategic social oversight inter-
ventions that combine access to public information via digital government tools (InfObras
and Invierte.pe) with citizen monitoring mechanisms (the MCC program) that make the
use of the information actionable. In addition, the study shows that this type of program
produces synergies between the governmental oversight exercised by the high-level audit-
ing entity (the CGR) and society, since the above-mentioned oversight is complemented
by a low-cost program that helps to expand coverage to public works that, in the absence
of this program, could not be supervised.
Finally, although this program has brought about promising results for social monitoring
of the eﬀiciency of public works, there is still a need to produce rigorous evidence on its
effectsonthequalityofworksaswellasevidencethatcontributestoimprovingthecurrent
design of the initiative itself. Toward this end, it is proposed that steps going forward
include advancing with an experimental evaluation of the MCC program that proposes
improvements to its design and that extends to other results related to the quality of the
works. This involves proposing the evaluation of three treatments: (1) the status quo of
the MCC (the program in its current form); (2) local monitors (the recruitment of direct
beneficiaries of the works to sign up as MCCs); and (3) improvements in the questionnaire
used by the MCCs to evaluate the works. Each of these three treatments will be evaluated
for two different stages during execution of the works: one group will evaluate during the
bidding and assessment of the technical standards, and another will evaluate during the
execution period itself (as is currently done). It is hoped that this experimental evaluation
will provide evidence-based proposals to improve the MCC program with an eye towards
promoting anti-corruption actions in the execution of public works in Peru.
24References
Banerjee, A. V., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Khemani, S. (2010). Pitfalls
of participatory programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in education in
india. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy ,2(1), 1–30.
Berman, E., Callen, M., Condra, L. N., Downey, M., Ghani, T., & Isaqzadeh, M.
(2017). Community Monitors vs. Leakage: Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan.
(mimeo)
Bjorkman, M., & Svensson, J. (2009). Power to the people: evidence from a randomized
field experiment on community-based monitoring in uganda. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics ,124(2), 735–769.
Bjorkman, M., & Svensson, J. (2010). When is community-based monitoring effective?
evidence from a randomized experiment in primary health in uganda. Journal of
the European Economic Association ,8(2–3), 571–581.
Fox, J. A. (2015). Social accountability: what does the evidence really say? W orld
Development ,72(1), 346–361.
Freire, D., Galdino, M., & Mignozzetti, U. (2020). Bottom-up accountability and public
service provision: Evidence from a field experiment in brazil. Research Politics ,
7(2).
Lagunes, P. (2019). Guardians of Accountability: A Field Experiment on Corruption
Ineﬀiciency in Local Public W orks. (Working Paper)
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test. Journal of econometrics ,142(2), 698–714.
Olken, B.A. (2007). Monitoringcorruption: evidencefromafieldexperimentinindonesia.
Journal of political Economy ,115(2), 200–249.
Sexton, R. (2017). The Unintended Effects of Bottom-Up Accountability: Evidence from
a Field Experiment in Peru. (Working Paper)
Stiglitz, J. (2002). Participation and development: Perspectives from the comprehensive
development paradigm. Rev. Development Econ. ,6(June), 163–182.
25