CGD Policy Paper 181 
September 2020Digital Technology in Social 
Assistance Transfers for 
COVID-19 Relief: Lessons from 
Selected Cases
www.cgdev.org
Center for Global 
Development
2055 L Street NW
Fifth Floor
Washington DC  20036
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of  the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0 
license.Many countries have launched unprecedented relief  packages to cushion the economic 
and social impact of  the COVID-19 pandemic. This short review considers some initial 
lessons emerging from selected countries around the use of  digital technology to implement 
these government-to-people (G2P) social transfer programs. Information is still limited on 
how well the programs have functioned; in particular, there is a dearth of  rapid demand-
side survey evidence on the experience of  beneficiaries receiving transfers and the likely 
magnitudes of  inclusion and exclusion errors. Nevertheless, the emerging picture provides 
some indications of  how investments in digital systems and their deployment along the 
social transfer value chain have been facilitating the response. Lessons from the COVID-19-
related scale-up of  social assistance can be harnessed by developing countries to rethink and 
strengthen the architecture of  social protection systems in the future.Abstract
Alan Gelb and Anit MukherjeeCenter for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this Policy Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Policy Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Digital Technology in Social Assistance Transfers for COVID-19 
Relief: Lessons from Selected Cases
Alan Gelb
Center for Global Development
Anit Mukherjee
Center for Global Development
We thank Robert Palacios and Charles Kenny for helpful comments on 
previous drafts.
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in support of  this work.
Alan Gelb and Anit Mukherjee, 2020. “Digital Technology in Social Assistance Transfers 
for COVID-19 Relief: Lessons from Selected Cases.” CGD Policy Paper 181. Washington, 
DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/digital-
technology-social-assistance-transfers-covid-19-relief-lessons-selected-casesContents 
I. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 1 
II. Role of Digital Infrastructure: ID, Mobiles, Payments, and Data Integration  ..................  3 
III. The Challenge of Delivering Social Assistance to the “New Poor”  ................................ . 7 
IV. Digital Tech nology Along the Social Assistance Value Chain— Emerging Lessons  ...... 8 
V. Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 16 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 17 
 
  1 I. Introduction  
As the COVID -19 pandemic continues to extract a toll on lives and livelihoods, 
many countries have launched unprecedented relief packages to cushion the impact 
on their people. By Ju ly 2020, 200  countries and territories had either implemented 
or announced social protection measures reaching over 1 billion people, ten times the number in March when countries began announcing measures to respond to the 
threat of the pandemic (Figure 1).
1 In scale and scope, the global response has been 
nothing short of extr aordinary , even if, as in most cases, it has not been possible to 
do more than provide limited support . The question is how effective ly, efficient ly 
and equitabl y the programs have been implemented, and how sustainable they  will be 
considering the heavy to ll of the pandemic on developing economies.  
The majority of these programs in developing countries are in the form of social 
assistance —conditional and unconditional transfers, child support grants and social 
pensions—broadly termed Government -to-People o r G2P payments. Especially with 
the constraints on in- person interactions due to the nature of the pandemic, many 
countries  have followed a ‘digital first’ approach, sometimes with alternative 
arrangements  for populations who are either out of reach of dig ital systems or unable 
to work with them.  The earliest measures have now been implemented for over three 
months and some initial evidence from a few countries is starting to emerge on how they are performing on the ground.  
 
 
 
 
1 For updated information on social protection programs initiated see 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33635   
 2 Figure 1 . Social protection responses to COVID -19 
 
 
Source:  https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33635   
In this paper, we do not provide detailed information on the individual programs, 
the measures taken and their coverage.  This is being done by others far more 
comprehensively than we can hope to do.2 The focus here is more specific: to 
consider some of the early lessons around the use of digital technology for 
COVID- 19 related G2P transfers.  We draw on a number of programs, including in 
India, Pakistan, South Africa, Namibia, Togo, Brazil and Columbia, and organize the 
analysis along the stages of the “social assistance value chain.”  The programs are 
drawn on selectively, to illustrate the use of technology at particular points in the 
 
2 For information on social response measures taken in response to COVID -19 and their features across 
countries see Gentilini et.a l. 2020, Palacios 2020 and Beazley, Durban and Barca 2020, as well as the country 
cases available at https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/g2px  and other material available at 
https://www.g2p -network.org/   
 
3 value chain —for example, soliciting and managing  applications for assistance , 
screening applicants, or using digital wallets to make payments to beneficiaries.   
While official disbursement data provides some indication of how quickly the 
programs have been able to respond,  there is a dearth of rapid demand -side survey 
evidence on the experience of beneficiaries  and the likely magnitudes of inclusion 
and exclusion errors.  Neverth eless, the early picture, including information from 
anecdotal reports, provides some indications of how countries’ investments in digital infrastructure and their use of digital systems have contributed to shape their response to the COVID -19 pandemic .  
II. Role of  Digital Infrastructure: ID, Mobiles, Payments, 
and Data Integration  
The potential role of digital in social protection extends through the entire value chain of activities associated with G2P programs and payments:  (i) informing 
potential benefi ciaries about programs, (ii) onboarding them (in cases where they are 
not already included in existing programs), (iii) identifying them, (iv) screening them for eligibility, (v) making payments, and (vi) following up to resolve problems and grievances (Fi gure 2).  Digital ID systems, mobile communications, and digital 
payment systems comprise three important building blocks  in the value chain ; 
together, they enable governments to identify potential beneficiaries, communicate with them, and transfer funds el ectronically.  This ‘digital trinity’  is sometimes 
referred to as the JAM, a name coined in India but useful in thinking about other 
countries as well.
3  
The other critical way in which technology has been shaping the COVID -19 
response has been through the  management of beneficiary registers (and other 
relevant databases) and the ability to communicat e between them to facilitate an 
integrated response.  Data integration, between the digital trinity and individual 
programs and,  also, between social program re gisters , and other relevant datasets, is 
the fourth dimension of digital infrastructure considered in this paper.   
 
3 The terminology JAM (for Jan Dhan financial account, Aadhaar ID and mobile) was first proposed in the 
Indian Economic Survey, 2014-15. For a global picture of the JAM and its use, see Gelb, Mukherjee and Navis, 
2020.  
 4 Figure 2. Social assistance value chain  
 
ID, Mobile and Payment Systems as a Measure of Digital Capacity  
Prior to COVID- 19, some countries had made sustained investments over many years in 
extending the basic digital infrastructure —creating nation- wide ID systems, facilitating the 
spread of mobile networks, and encouraging financial inclusion and digital payments 
systems, both general ones used for person -to-person (P2P) and commercial transactions , 
and particular systems  for social transfer s. In a number of developing countries, especially in 
Africa, mobile money had driven the adoption of digital payments, primar ily through 
facilitating P2P remittances and payments.  In some others such as India, with  “bank -based” 
financial systems, mobile wallets and other facilities linked to bank accounts offered similar 
digital payment services.   
But this transition was not com plete.  The “Citizens and States ” report published by the 
Center for Global Development sets out a mixed picture, with uneven progress in the digital 
trinity across countries and regions (Figure 3) and large segments of digital exclusion.  Low-
income countri es lagged in terms of access. In many countries, if you were poor, out of the 
workforce, with little education, and a woman, you were not likely to have a financial account.  Exclusion was correlated across the three dimensions, in the sense that people 
lacking one component —say, an ID —were less likely to have access to the other  two. 
Gender gaps in financial inclusion, and also in control over mobiles, were large in some 
countries, with Pakistan a notable example in both areas .  
  
5 Figure 3 . Digital t rinity  components by region, 2017 (percent) 
 Overall  Gender gap** 
World Bank Region* Has a 
national 
ID Has a 
financial 
account  Owns a 
mobile 
phone  Has a 
national 
ID Has a 
financial 
account  Owns a 
mobile 
phone  
East Asia & Pacific  97.1 72.3 90.5 -0.3 5.9 2.8 
Europe & Central Asia  96.4 65.3 90.8 -0.9 6.1 2.7 
Latin America & Caribbean  94.7 54.4 78.7 0.0 6.5 2.6 
Middle East & North Africa  93.0 35.2 82.6 3.1 19.0 14.5 
South Asia  93.3 69.9 67.7 2.7 10.6 21.6 
Sub-Saharan Africa  69.7 45.0 62.8 9.2 9.2 10.8 
* excluding high- income countries  
** calculated as percentage of men minus percentage of women  
Source: Findex 2017 and https://www.cg dev.org/publication/citizens -and-states -how-can-digital- id-and-payments -improve -state-
capacity  
Cash still played a major role in transactions, especially smaller ones made by poor people.  
Commercial a cceptance of digital payments has often lagged, especially among  smaller 
merchants who face a chicken- and-egg problem:  the incentive to invest in digital acceptance 
is less if there are not large masses of customers wanting to use it, as well as  inter-operable 
payme nts arrangements . Acceptance  had been identified as a critical problem in India, for 
example, a country which had made great strides in extending the JAM trinity across its 
population but where most payments to merchants were still made in cash.4 China appears 
to be a notable exception, with the rise of Alipay and WeChat Pay propelling massive  growth 
of ubiquitous card -less digital acceptance.5  
Digital Integration  
Even when countries had moved towards putting in place the digital building blocks  for 
individual G2P programs, their data registers were often not integrated to enable a coherent 
social protection response.6 Some countries were advanced in this area. B razil’s  social 
register, the Cadastro Unico , served multiple social programs and, li ke Pakistan’s National 
Economic and Social Registry (NSER) covered a wider range of households than enrolled in 
existing programs . Some countries , such as Turkey, could link personal records across a wide 
 
4 Reserve Bank of Indi a, 1919.  
5 For a description of China’s distinctive digital payments system see Klein 2020.  
6 Barca and Chirchir 2020 provide a detailed picture of an integrated social protection system.  6 range of  economic and social databases using the na tional ID number.7 This could provide 
information to supplement or update the social register, helping to distinguish potential 
social beneficiaries along multiple criteria.  
The degree of integration varied across countries, even those that had made larg e 
investments in digital infrastructure. Comparing South Asian countries, India was highly 
advanced in all three dimensions of the JAM , having moved, in 2013, to re -shape its subsidy 
system towards Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) deposits into bank accounts.8 But it 
maintained a diverse patchwork of programs and schemes, mostly implemented at state 
level, with separate registries and legal restrictions on data- sharing.  The cooking -gas subsidy 
provided to poor households was the only program implemen ted at national level.  Pakistan 
was less advanced than India on digital infrastructure  coverage, particularly in terms of 
financial inclusion, but maintained a relatively integrated data system, with the NSER and a 
wide range of other databases all keyed i nto the national ID number.  Bangladesh had 
achieved reasonably high ID and mobile coverage, and had seen considerable take -up of 
mobile money,  but there was little data integration across a multitude of social programs.9 By 
and large, in addition to scori ng lower on digital ID, mobile and financial access coverage, 
low-income countries had lower levels of data integration.   
These four dimensions of digital infrastructure— the digital trinity and data integration— can 
be considered as indicators of countries’  potential to respond rapidly and coherently to the 
crisis using digital mechanisms, channeling funds to affected people with minimal physical 
interaction and containing opportunities for multiple payments, fraud and diversion.   
  
 
7 Palacios 2020 notes that Turkey is able to link records across as many as 28 databases using the national ID 
number.  
8 The DBT approach covers a wide range of benefit programs and schemes, including LPG subsidies, 
scholarships and pensions. In FY20.21, some 880 million transactions for 386 schemes https://dbtbharat.gov.in/  
9 https://www.cgdev.org/blog/using -what -you-have-scale -payments -covid -response -early-indications -south -asia 7 III. The Challenge of Del ivering Social Assistance to the 
“New Poor”  
Prior to the COVID -19 pandemic, most countries maintained some combination of social 
insurance for formal -sector workers (sometimes a small group) and social protection systems 
covering the very poor. The latter  sometimes covered a large part of the population, as in 
South Africa where almost one in three citizens benefited from a pension, disability payment 
or child support grant. This left out the middle, a vast number of vulnerable people not 
enrolled in exist ing programs but frequently depending on informal employment and often 
internal migrants.  Many members of this “missing middle” were to emerge as “new poor” in 
the aftermath of COVID -19 shutdowns. Reaching this group has emerged as a central 
challenge for social protection.  
On payments, many existing social programs, perhaps the majority, had moved away from 
directly handing out cash to some form of digital transfer, at least for beneficiaries  who did 
not live in very remote areas . But fewer programs transferred funds through general -purpose 
bank or mobile money accounts that offered savings, p ayments and other financial services.  
With low levels of digital acceptance among merchants , most grants were simply cashed out, 
a process that would become more difficult during the COVID -19 lockdowns, creating 
further hardships for  vulnerable populations .  
To help cushion the impact of COVID -19, countries responded to the crisis in multiple 
ways.  Some increased support to enrolled beneficiaries under existing programs . Thus, for 
example, South Africa increased  child allowances, partly to offset the loss of school meals 
due to the shutdown and augmented its unemployment benefits .10 India increased food 
rations delivered through its extensive Public Distribution System (PDS) and waived co-
payments for subsidized LNG cooking gas provided to poor families through its Ujjwala 
program . Pakistan increased grants to poor women already enrolled in its Benazir Income 
Support Program.  
Some countries expanded access to existing programs while others created new programs to 
plug protection gaps among the “ missing middl e”. Some countries followed a combination, 
expanding rolls on the basis of existing information (which was recognized as neither 
comprehensive nor always accurate in the conditions of the COVID -19 crisis) while 
soliciting new applications. National and sub- national governments have used a combination 
of these approaches, together with in- kind support such as food parcels  and mobile 
kitchens.11 A further initiative in some countries has been measures to reduce the use of 
 
10 Unemployment insurance would normally be classified as social insurance but South Africa’s COVID -19 
modifications depart from insurance principles, shifting it towards social assistance. See 
https://home.kpmg/xx/en/home/insights/2020/04/south -africa -government -and-institution -measures -in-
response-to -covid.html  
11 For a detailed overview of the multiple measures put in place by India’s states see MSC 2020.  8 physical cash by expand ing the role of digital payments more generally, by raising transaction 
limits and reducing , or eliminating , charges .  
The new emergency support programs for the “missing middle” that have been launched by 
many countries, including South Africa, Namibia, Togo, Columbia, Brazil and Pakistan, have 
sometimes been able to draw on integrated  social registries that included a wider range of 
people than those already receiving benefits.  This was the case for the Ehsaas program in 
Pakistan and emergency aid in Brazil. I n other countries, such as South Africa and Namibia, 
they were not able to draw on such information and had to generate new beneficiary lists 
from scratch . The new programs were sometimes targeted to particular groups. India 
channeled payments to 200 milli on women holders of Jan D han bank accounts registered 
under the Aadhaar ID system , while Bangladesh announced a new program to provide wage 
support for workers in the garments sector who had lost their jobs. These are just some examples of countries trying  different strategies to identify vulnerable populations at risk of 
falling into poverty due to the economic disruption caused by COVID -19—a challenge that 
would need to be addressed in a timely manner.  
IV. Digital Technology Along the Social Assistance V alue 
Chain—Emerging Lessons 
Investments in digital systems have played a critical role in scaling 
up programs and payments 
Digital systems have facilitated the processing and payment of millions of grants across 
many countries, on a scale that would not have been remotely feasible without them.  
Technology has been applied to all parts of the “user journey”, from initial identification and onboarding to selection and payments.  Countries with stronger digital infrastructure, 
including ID and payment systems a nd social registers have generally been able to 
implement and disburse emergency assistance programs more rapidly than those without these assets (Palacios 2020). While most examples have been in middle- income countries, 
Togo offers an example of an “all -digital” emergency program in a low -income country.
12  
The facilitating role of digital systems should be emphasized, especially as much discussion 
centers on the ir limitations.13 Undoubtedly, the stresses imposed by the COVID -19 crisis 
have revealed areas for improvement. They will encourage a further push towards digitization in general, and towards digitized and more integrated social protection programs 
in particular.   
 
12 https://qz.com/africa/1867044/togo -digitizes -social -welfare -with -mobile -cash-transfer-
program/?fbclid=IwAR0r-   
13For example, https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/getting -cash-transfers -out-of-a-
jam/article31568674.ece  9 Backup processes are essential  
Innovative and flexible digital implementation can help to reduce the risk of digital 
exclusion.  For example, recognizing that some individuals, or even families, might not have 
mobiles, Namibia permitted up to ten emergency relief applications to be submi tted through 
a single SIM, with each application distinguished by its unique ID number.14 Nevertheless, 
even in countries that have made major digital investments, backups are essential, whether to 
reach populations with less digital access or capacity, ad judicate claims and grievances, or 
deliver emergency relief as a complement to digital payments.  Local bodies and NGOs have 
sometimes played vital roles in helping vulnerable individuals and groups who fall between the cracks in mainline systems.   
Especial ly in the context of the COVID -19 pandemic, systems relying on in -person service 
have also faced severe challenges. They have often been constrained by social distancing 
requirements, while the delivery of in -kind relief has sometimes involved long waiting lines 
and has not always been free of allegations of fraud and corruption.  South African social 
security offices, for example, were not able to process new benefit claims during the shutdown and have been operating at about one third normal levels after reopening, while 
questions have arisen over the integrity of food parcel distribution.
15 
No system is perfect —rather than being hailed as a complete solution, digital systems should 
be seen as a way to handle most claims quickly and efficiently, leav ing scarce and costly 
human resources available to service the fewer remaining cases.  
Digital campaigns can galvanize “active” beneficiaries 
Multi -media c ampaigns inviting applications for support can mobilize people and generate 
awareness.  Namibia, South Africa, Brazil, Pakistan and Togo all invited digital applications 
for emergency relief, to be made through mobiles, WhatsApp or websites.  All received very 
large volumes of applications in a short period , sometimes overwhelming channels . With a 
population of only 2.4 million, Namibia  needed to verify almost 2.3 million applications 
resulting in some 970,000 unique individuals identified as candidates for further screening.16 
The picture was comparable in the other countries —South Africa received 13 millio n 
applications, out of which around 6 million were deemed to be valid; in Pakistan, the Ehsaas 
program received 146 million SMS requests for assistance, out of which the number of 
unique claimants was found to be 48 million.  Some 1.4 million applications w ere received for 
Togo’s Novissi program, out of which almost 600,000, mostly women, would be approved.  
 
14 Namibia is one of the few countries in the world w here SIM registration is not compulsory. The mobile 
number is therefore a means of transmitting information rather than a financial address as in the case of mobile 
money where the number links to an account.  
15 https://www.groundup.org.za/article/get -inside -sassa -offices -you-must -sleep -outside -says-grant -applicant/ , 
and https://www.news24.com/citypress/News/councillors -accused -of-looting -food -parcels -meant -for-the-
poor-20200419  
16 Dokovic et. al. 2020.  10 Transferring funds to the accounts of “passive” beneficiaries saves these steps, as in the case 
of India’s transfers to 200 million female  Jan Dhan acco unt accounts.  But active 
communications are still needed; especially if the accounts are dormant, some beneficiaries 
may not be aware that they have received transfers.   
Digital onboarding and screening can work —up to a point  
In addition to digital onboard ing, the new emergency p rograms have relied on digital 
screening to handle their very large numbers of applications.  Beyond checking for 
uniqueness, South Africa, Namibia, Turkey, Pakistan and Brazil , among other countries,  
were able to screen applications against multiple criteria, using databases linked by the 
widely -held national ID number.17 In addition to selecting additional beneficiaries from the 
Cadastro Unico , Brazil’s public IT company  Dataprev18 cross -check ed claims against some 20 
constantly updated databases, including tax, social security, public employment, and 
Brazilians resident abroad. In Pakistan, applicants were checked against the NSER database 
and assigned a proxy -means -test poverty score, as well as reviewed against several other 
criteria, including tax records and public employment rolls.19  
South Africa and Namibia did not have a similar nation -wide poverty survey to rank 
applications but were able to screen them against a number of criteria, including  for 
uniqueness, tax and formal employment status (eligibility for unemployment compensation), 
as well as for existing coverage by social benefit programs.20 In all of these cases screening 
was facilitated by a widely -held national ID . Togo did not have a strong national ID system 
but was fortunate to have conducted a recent voter registration. Its voter roll had the 
advantage of including occupation and place of residence, both targeting criteria for the Novissi program . Digital screening has played a critical role in reducing opportunities for 
diversion and corruption and containing the fiscal costs of new programs introduced and implemented under extreme time pressure, especially in countries with higher levels of data 
integration.   
The examples also indi cate some of the limitations of digital onboarding and concern that 
the most vulnerable can be excluded because of a “digital divide”. A sizeable minority of 
people will lack access to , or control over,  mobile communications or the capacity to use 
them to apply for or to receive grants.  In-person application at social security was strongly 
discouraged for South Africa’s SRD grant, and although it was announced that volunteers 
 
17 For more information on country programs see Palacios 2020 a nd the country cases on the World Bank’s 
G2PX website.  
18 Empresa de Tecnologia e Informações da Previdência   
19 Brazil’s emergency program reached 66 million people; of these, 19 million beneficiaries had been enrolled 
under the Bolsa Familia program while 11 million more were identified through the Cadastro Unico. An 
additional 36 million had applied to the progra m (Assumcao 2020). Pakistan’s Ehsaas program covered existing 
Benazir beneficiaries as well as others applying for the support and identified as poor by the NSER. https://www.cgdev.org/blog/covid-19-pakistans -black -swan -event -digital-payments
 
20 Over several years prior to the COVID pandemic, Namibia had invested in a data exchange system along the 
lines of Estonia’s X -Road model. Van Staden 2017.  11 would be sent into poor communities to help with applications it is not clear how effective 
this has been.   
Gender inequities can sometimes be a particular  concern  for access . In normal conditions 
G2P programs have sometimes been designed to address gender gaps , to provide additional 
long term benefits by empowering women. However,  the urgency of the COVID -19 
responses can result in programs that fail to address the specific impacts of COVID -19 on 
women and girls.21 In Pakistan , for example, access to mobiles tends to be limited for 
women and many use mo biles registered in the name of a male household member.  This led 
to concerns that women who were not already covered by the Benazir program might have 
had difficulty in filing independently for an emergency grant (Bourgault and O’Donnell 
2020).  Early surv ey results provide some confirmation that this may have happened; in one 
report, 63% of men said they received increased government support compared to just 25% 
of women. 22  
Regarding digital screening, social registers, often depending on data collected some years 
previously, will not provide an accurate picture of current poverty status . In the present case, 
the problem is exacerbated by the economic dislocation caused by COVID -19. In Pakistan, 
it was decided that applicants within the two lowest ranges of NSER -based poverty scores 
could be rapidly approved for assistance but that those in the third lowest category needed 
to be referred to local union -level officials for further screening and priority classification.23  
Screening against other reference d ata becomes more difficult when they are of low quality 
or when high demands on the capacity of the originating agency make it harder to rectify 
errors rapidly. Disbursement of South Africa’s emergency grant was considerably delayed 
because of the difficul ty in checking eligibility against the records of the unemployment 
insurance fund to exclude those eligible for benefits under their programs . In response to 
widespread complaints, efforts were made to improve the data; some 30 percent of 
processed applica tions that had initially been turned down were subsequently approved.24  
Using digital systems for informing, on- boarding and screening beneficiaries therefore 
involves tradeoffs. High s peed and low cost are certainly huge positives, as is the ability to 
implement such processes on a large scale in a pandemic setting without requiring close 
human interaction.  The effectiveness of these approaches is increased if countries have made 
investments in high -quality, integrated data. But the examples also illustrate the tradeoffs . 
The reality of the digital divide means that special measures may be needed to ensure that 
women and poor and vulnerable groups have access to programs.  And screening against 
 
21 Zimmerman et. al. (2020)  
22 See https://data.unwomen.org/resources/surveys -show -covid -19-has -gendered -effects -asia-and- pacific  
23 https://www.cgdev.org/blog/covid-19-pakistans -black-swan -event -digital-payments  
24 See https://www.africanews.com/2020/06/18/coronavirus -south -african -social -security -agency -sassa -
declines -un-qualifying -coronavirus -covid -19-grant -applications/  and 
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/KBpdg7pz6QbqLEew  12 inaccurate data risks significant delays and large errors, even if they can subsequently be 
rectified.  
Digital payments  systems have pl ayed a vital role despite some 
limitations  
Countries have used a variety of approaches to deliver scaled -up payments to beneficiaries —
financial accounts (banks and mobile money), as well as digital vouchers, e- wallets and other 
mechanisms that do not offer  a full range of financial services. Some have taken advantage 
of the crisis to expand financial access, including by using tiered KYC to facilitate the remote 
opening of bank and mobile money accounts. A review of six countries with such active 
onboarding  programs found the potential for 60 million new accounts opened since the 
onset of COVID -19, approximately 4 percent of the global unbanked population 
(Glenbrook 2020). In some cases, remote opening had been permitted for the first time. 
Such regulatory s treamlining and innovation can be a positive legacy of the COVID period.  
Drawing on the infrastructure created for its DBT platform, almost all payments in India’s 
scaled up response have been made through bank accounts.  These are also the main 
mechanism for social and emergency payments in South Africa, while some important 
programs in Bangladesh, notably education supplements paid to mothers, are now made 
through mobile money. 25 In all three countries, routing social payments through bank or 
mobile money accounts has spurred financial inclusion, at least in terms of the number of 
accounts.  Togo’s Novissi program, which covered residents of three more urbanized  
“lockdown” areas, also engaged beneficiaries through a mobile money payment platform.   
Other countries have not sought to channel emergency payments through financial accounts, either because they have been seen as one- off relief measures or because other payment 
methods wer e considered to require less set -up time. Namibia used e- wallets very 
successfully, with 98 percent of transfers cashed out within a short time period. Such flexible 
e-wallet systems could be of interest for many countries but, of course, they require a 
widespread bank, ATM or agent ecosystem for cashing out the vouchers .
26  
In Pakistan, s ocial payments had previously  been delivered through custom arrangements  
including biometric verification,  though there has recently been a move to route them 
through multi -purpose accounts. With low financial inclusion, emergency payments to new 
Ehsaas beneficiaries have been delivered in cash at 17,000 dedicated payment points , also  
subject to biometric authentication.  While the COVID -19 response has triggered 
 
25 https://w ww.cgdev.org/publication/primary -education -stipends -bangladesh -do-mothers -prefer -digital-
payments -over-cash  
26 Banks in Southern Africa had developed the e -wallet system to be accessible by people both with and without 
bank accounts —funds can be sent to any  mobile device for cash -out at ATMs and selected commercial 
establishments. An additional advantage of the system in Namibia was that charges were paid by the originator of 
the wallet, rather than the recipient, simplifying the cash -out process. The banks waived charges to the 
government, absorbing the costs under their corporate social responsibility programs. https://www.fnbnamibia.com.na/eWallet/index.html
 13 innovations  in G2P payments systems which have succeeded in getting funds rapidly to 
people, only some country responses provide an impetus towards a sustainable digital 
payments system for the longer term.   
The main limitation of digital payments for COVID  relief is  the same as before the 
pandemic —a high propensity to cash out benefits immediately.  With increased payment 
volumes, t his has resulted in crowding at many pay- points, increasing the risk of contagion.  
Relative to the option of cash handouts from a limited number of public pay- points the 
flexibility of cash -out arrangements for financial instruments probably results in less 
crowding  and congestion as well as more space to manage liquidity.  In Namibia, for 
example, the transfer of e -wallets was broken into batches  to reduce crowding , so that 
beneficiaries would not all receive their notification at the same time. This also gave banks 
the ability to top up their ATMs several times each day.  Other countries such as Peru and 
India allowed phased cash withdrawal based on ID and bank account numbers, thereby 
reducing overcrowding at payment points reportedly with limited success.27 
A second  limitation, in some cases, has been the capacity of dig ital systems to handle large, 
sudden, increases in the number and value of payments.  This was reported as a problem in 
India, for example, with a sharp surge in transfers resulting in hig h rates of failures of cash-
out attempts through business correspondents using the Aadhaar -Enabled Payments System 
(AEPS).28 It was not clear whether the these reflect ed failures for individual attempts as 
opposed to actual payment failures (which could be lower) and whether they were  being 
driven by authentication failures , network limitations or inadequate incentives for banks and 
mobile business correspondents to process transactions . Recent large -scale survey evidence 
provides some useful insights.29 On the one hand, cash- out failure rates were found to be 
moderate, arou nd 11 -12 percent, and not too different across banks, ATMs and 
correspondents. On the other, many households had been slow to cash- out, citing concerns 
over health and crowded pay- points, while some who had cashed -out found difficulties in 
purchasing essen tial goods because of economic disruption. These impediments appear to 
have been more problematic than the cash- out failures themselves. Reflecting the principle 
that no system is perfect, households in India have been fortunate in being able to access 
both cash transfers and in -kind support through the ration system. The survey found that 
only 1 percent of poor urban households and 4 percent of poor urban households were not 
covered by one or other of these approaches.  
 
27 https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/finance -ministry -urges -jan-dhan -beneficiaries -
to-follow -schedule -for-withdrawal -avoid -rush -to-banks/articleshow/74967572.cms  
28 https://www.bloombergquint.com/ business/glitches-in -aadhaar- enabled -payment -system-amplified -as-
transactions-surge  
29 Swetha et al 2020. The survey, by Dalberg, covered 47,000 households across 15 states in two rounds. 
https://impactsofcovid.in/  14 Lower transactions charges spur digi tal payments but may not be 
sustainable  after the COVID -19 emergency 
Several countries have initiated emergency measures to encourage less use of physical cash 
during the pandemic. On March 19, Rwanda implemented a sweeping cut in fees for digital payments , mandating zero charges on a wide range of transactions and a tripling of the limit 
on the value of mobile wallet transfers.  Within a short time digital transactions had risen to 
450 percent of their previous values.
30 In Kenya, too, lower fees on mobile money 
transactions were followed by soaring digital payments which increased  from 44 percent to 
61 percent of financial transactions in the first two months of the crisis.31 These cases 
suggest that measures taken during the COVID -19 crisis can accelerate the transition from 
cash to digital payments, but it may be difficult to sustain such reductions in fees on a purely 
commercial basis over the longer run.   
Communication is central , even when s caling up existing programs  
By and large, scale- ups through exi sting systems have proceeded relatively smoothly.  They 
can take advantage of established beneficiary lists, awareness among beneficiaries, and 
payment rails laid down over many years.  Even then, examples show some of the difficulties 
that can accompany scaling up, in addition to the possibly limited capacity of the payments 
system.  Even if well- intentioned, rapid changes in cash- out arrangements can cause 
confusion —particularly in the context of strict COVID -19 lockdowns.  In South Africa, 
confu sion ensued over the scaling up of the child support grant, whe n the supplement 
shifted between payments per child and payments per provider.  Measures to separate out 
pension payments to reduce exposure of the elderly to crowded pay- points backfired when 
there were errors in restructuring beneficiary rolls and confusion in advancing the opening 
of certain pay- points.32 Clear, simple, communications are essential . 
Integration facilitates a coherent response —but raises concerns 
around data privacy  
With highly integrated social benefit systems linkable to other databases through the national 
ID, countries like Pakistan, South Africa and Brazil have been able to implement a 
coordinated response to reach a large number of people, screening for unique beneficiarie s 
and to ensure that beneficiaries are not receiving support from multiple programs. India 
offers a notable example of a highly digitized social protection system but one that is far less 
integrated.  
 
30 Carboni and Bester 2020.  
31 https://citizentv.co.ke/business/mobile -money -transactions-soar -9-4pc-covid -19-emergency -measures -
333402/ and https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iauQkjb1YLQ  
32 https://www.corona -older.com/pos t/unintended -consequences -of-changes -to-pension-delivery -amidst -
covid19-the -case-of-south -africa  15 As noted previously, India’s extensive and overlapping system of benefits offers high 
coverage across its poor population. And, with t he Aadhaar entrenched as the ID system 
serving all social benefit programs, it  can ensure that the beneficiaries for any one program 
are unique . But, because of legal restrictions on sharing databases, it cannot check, for 
example, that a woman receiving an emergency  COVID -19 payment into a Jan Dhan bank 
account is not also receiving other additional benefits or even that she is actually poor.  This 
has led to criticism that, even with a very large number of payment beneficiaries, many poor 
women might not be covered by this emergency program.33  
Another limitation revealed by India’s disconnected COVID -19 response is lack of 
portability.  The residence -based nature of its state- implemented programs has opened up 
major gaps in support, particularly for internal migrants. In Bihar state of northern India, the 
government announced a grant for returning migrants  provided that they pr oduced  a local 
bank account as proof of state residenc y. As a result, those who had opened bank accounts 
outside the state became ineligible for the transfer, even though they might have fulfilled 
other core criteria of the program.34  
These examples  point to a tension between the short- run imperatives of the COVID- 19 
response and longer -run concerns around privacy and data protection.  From the short- run 
perspective, the ideal  is a highly integrated national system with existing and new programs 
able to seamlessly onboard applicants for assistance and to allocate resources efficiently  
among them . While a conventional, survey- based national social and economic register can 
facilitate this, “static” data collected periodically rapidly becomes outdated , and it also may 
not reflect the disruption from the pandemic.  This increases the importance of also being 
able to screen against a wide range of dynamic “lifestyle” data, a process  facilitated by high 
coverage of a central ID system and the use of a common number (or possibly tokenized 
versions) across all personal records.35 As in Namibia, t hose applying for relief may be 
required to consent to the use of a wide range of personal data to cross -check their 
applications . In such cases, informed consent is provided, at least in a formal sense , but at 
the same time potential beneficiaries desperate for support may have little option to refuse.  
While the issues raised by dynamic screening go beyond the COVID -19 response, i t will be 
important to ensure that such emergency responses do not undermine measures to preserv e 
data privacy in the longer run. In Namibia, for example, special provisions were needed to 
permit data- sharing, pending the implementation of a general framework for data privacy.36 
The tension will only increase over time as an expanding digital footpri nt for citizens 
increases the ability of governments to draw on a wide range of data, potentially extending to 
real-time monitoring of activities such as mobile phone use patterns.  
 
33 See https://egc.yale.edu/sites/default/files/COVID%20Brief.pdf  
34 https://scroll.in/article/963164/bihars -promise-of -rs-1000-aid -is-little -solace -to-millions -of-returning -
migrant -workers  
35 Palacios 2020 discusses the growing potential for “dynamic” screening using a wide range of data sources, 
including on mobile phone use.  
36 Dokovic et.al. 2020.  16 V. Conclusion  
Digital mechanisms have played a central role in the massive expansion of social transfers in 
the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic. Experience to date has revealed the importance of 
investments in ID systems, mobile networks and financial inclusion, as well a s in data 
systems, in facilitating the response. Our review of country examples show strengths and limitations and point to areas where delivery mechanisms can be improved and mode more 
sustainable for the longer -term.  
Even with digital building blocks in  place, countries have needed to innovate to inform, 
identify, register and pay those affected by the pandemic.  Some have used the crisis to 
expand access to financial accounts; others have supplemented existing data on social 
beneficiaries by cross -refere ncing a wide range of information. Registering and screening  
beneficiaries through cross -referencing administrative databases (ID, tax, financial 
transactions, the use of mobile phones to communicate, offering more flexible payment mechanisms including onl ine opening of basic bank or mobile money accounts and digital 
wallets without SIM registration, and waiving cash- out fees have all contributed to a massive 
expansion of G2P systems globally.  
The COVID -19 period will undoubtedly spur further use of digital  mechanisms  to deliver of 
social protection.  Our review suggests that an important objective for policymakers in the 
post-COVID period will be to build on the capabilities developed during the crisis to  
strengthen sustainable social protection and payment systems that are both inclusive and effective, addressing the challenges faced especially by women who are often digitally disadvantaged. It also provides an opportunity for countries to lock in the gains in 
identification and coverage of beneficiaries, replacing the one- off type of assistance to the 
“new poor” and the “missing middle” by something more continuous and permanent, as in South Africa where the emergency grant is now proposed to be succeeded by a universal 
basic income grant.
37 At the same time, countries will need to address the challenge to data 
protection and privacy posed by more extensive and integrated data systems.  There is a need 
to rethink the social protection architecture altogether and the lessons from the COVID  
response provides a g ood starting point.   
 
37 https://af.reuters.com/artic le/southAfricaNews/idAFL5N2EK4Z4  17 References 
Assumcao, R. 2020. “ Innovation and Digital Technology challenges for Social Protection 
Extension in the COVID -19 Pandemic: The Case of Brazil.” Presentation to FINTECH 
Festival, July 23, 2020.  
Barca, V. and R. Chirchir. 2019. “ Building an Integrated and Digital Social Protection 
Information System” https://www.giz.de/de/downloads/giz2019 -en-integrated -digital -
social -protection- information- system.pdf  
Beazley, R., W. Durban and V. Barca. 2020 “Options for rapid delivery (payment) of cash 
transfers for COVID -19 responses and beyond.” Protection Approaches to Covid -19: 
Expert Advice Helpline. SPACE@DAI.COM   
Bourgault, S. and M. O’Donnell 2020. “ Women’s Access to Cash Transfers in Light of 
COVID -19: The Case of Pakistan.” https://g2p- network.org/womens -access -to-cash-
transfers -in-light- of-covid -19-the-case- of-pakistan/  
Carboni, I. and H. Bester. 2020. “When digital payment goes viral: lessons from COVID -
19’s impact on mobile money in Rwanda”. https://cenfri.org/articles/covid -19s-impact-
on-mobile -money- in-rwanda/   
Dokovic, Z., T. Munyika, C. Muleke, W. Muhwava, H. Mitala, and A. Forsingdal. 2020 
(forthcoming). “Civil R egistration System as an Enabler of Emergency Response to the 
Covid -19 Crisis: Namibia’s Emergency Income Grant.” ECA Technical Brief No. 2.  
Gelb, A., A. Mukherjee and K. Navis. 2020. “Citizens and States: How Can Digital ID and 
Payments Improve State Capacity and Effectiveness?” Center for Global Development, 
March. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/citizens -and-states -how-can-digital-id-and-
payments -improve -state- capacity  
Gentilini, U. et.al. 2020. “Social Protection and Jobs Responses to COVID -19: A Real -Time 
Review of Country Measures”. World Bank. 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/590531592231143435/pdf/Social -
Protection -and-Jobs-Responses -to-COVID -19-A-Real-Time -Review -of-Country -
Measures -June-12-2020.pdf .  
Glenbrook Partners. 2 020. “Emergency Disbursements During Covid -19: Regulatory tools 
for Rapid Account Opening and Oversight”.  
Klein, A. 2020. “China’s Digital Payments Revolution.” https://www.brookings.edu/wp -
content/uploads/2020/04/FP_20200427_china_digital_payments_klein.pdf   
MSC 2020. “ Addressing COVID -19 pandemic Learnings and good practices from Indian 
states – Round 3.” MicroSave Consulting. https://www.microsave.net/wp -
content/uploads/2020/06/MSC -Best-Practices -in-Indian -states -response- to-Covid -19-
Round -3_Websi te-1.pdf  
Palacios R. 2020. “ Scaling Up Social Assistance Payments as Part of the COVID -19 
Pandemic Response.” World Bank. 
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/655201595885830480/WB -G2Px -Scaling -up-Social -
Assistance -Payments -as-Part-of-the-Covid -19-Pandemic- Response.pdf  
Reserve Bank of India. 2019. Report of the High- level Committee on Deepening Digital 
Payments . May. 
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/CDDP03062019634B0EEF3
F7144C3B65360B280E420AC.PDF  18 Seekings, J. and L . Gronbach. 2020. “ COVID- 19 grant: We can learn from Namibia.”  
https://www.news.uct.ac.za/article/ -2020 -05-04-covid -19-grant -we-can-learn- from -
namibia   
Swetha, T., P. Sonderegger, P. Rao, and G. Gupta. 2020. “Efficacy of government 
entitlements for low -income families during Covid -19”. Dalberg.  
Van Staden, S. 2017. “Moving the Namibia Civil Registration and Identity System towards 
an Unified and Federated Service Oriented Population and Identity Management 
Platform.” Presentation to ID4Africa, Windhoek. 
https://www.id4africa.com/2017_event/Presentations/1- 2-
2_Office_of_the_Prime_Minister_Stefanus_van_Staden.pdf  
Zimmerman, J., M. May, E. Kellison and J. Klugman. 2020. “Digital Cash Transfers in t he 
Time of Covid -19: Opportunities and Considerations for Women’s Inclusion and 
Empowerment.” 
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/378931596643390083/pdf/Digital -
Cash -Transfers -in-Times -of-COVID -19-Opportunities -and-Considerations -for-
Womens -Inclusion- and-Empowerment.pdf  
 
 
Tools for Rapid Account Opening and Oversight, Ju  
 
 
 