Education Technology
for Effective Teachers
Education systems around the world are investing in technology to help 
teachers be more effective. In some cases, the results are exciting. In others, 
the impact of technology falls short of expectations or remains unevaluated. 
The closing of schools worldwide due to the COVID-19 pandemic has high -
lighted the importance of understanding how to leverage technology well. 
This note lays out four principles for investing in technology for effective 
teachers and six aspects of teaching where technology can boost teacher 
performance, together with examples of tested, promising, and cautionary 
experiences with teacher technologies. David K. Evans (Center for Global Development)
Teachers Thematic Group, World Bank, February 20211 Education Technology for Effective Teachers1
The Principles 
Principle 1: Technology is not the solution 
to the learning crisis. But technology can 
be the solution to specific micro-problems 
within the education system.
When considering technology investments, the key 
is to begin with a specific problem and ask, What’s 
the best way to solve this problem? And then to 
ask, can technology help in this case? Approached 
problem-by-problem, education systems can have 
realistic expectations of the promise of technology 
and ensure that they help teachers to help their 
students. 
Principle 2:  If you’re going to invest in 
technology, invest in the training, support, 
monitoring, and maintenance to make it 
work.
Technology investments often come with a signifi -
cant up-front investment. But it doesn’t make sense 
to invest in the hardware or the software without 
budgeting for all the supplemental services re -
quired to make the technology work. Systems of -
ten underestimate the degree of sensitization and 
training required for teachers—along with others in 
the education system, like principals and ministry 
staff—to buy into a new technology and then to use 
it effectively. 
Principle 3: Test the technology. 
 »Make sure it works. In an effort to use smart 
phones to monitor teachers in Haiti, the technol -
ogy ultimately failed.2 Government officials and 
partners alike have entered classrooms to see 
technology that may have worked once but was 
not in a place to be maintained. If the technology 
is beyond the infrastructure capacity of the weak -
est schools in the system, it won’t deliver results.3    »Make sure it is used.  An intervention that provid -
ed computers to classrooms in Colombia man -
aged to get the computers there, but teachers 
largely ignored them because the technology was 
not integrated with the curriculum.4 If teachers do 
not see the value of a technology, do not know 
how to use it, or are not comfortable using it, it 
won’t deliver results. The goal is not to maximize 
the amount of time the technology is used, but 
rather to ensure that it is used at the right times.
 »Make sure it increases learning. Even if the tech -
nology works and teachers use it, there is no guar -
antee that it will increase learning. In Kenya, a pro -
gram provided tablets to teachers. The tablets had 
teacher guides, audio and visual aids, and assess -
ments. Although many teachers used the tablets, 
the impact on student learning was no greater than 
for teachers who received printed teacher guides, 
despite a much higher price tag.5
Principle 4: Technology to monitor and 
manage teachers will only work with 
political buy-in. 
Monitoring technology cannot outdo collusion by 
teachers, school principals, and education officials. 
Teacher allocation systems only work if teachers 
participate in them. Many technocratically informed 
technology programs have failed even to get off  
the ground because of political opposition. Gov -
ernments need consultation and communication 
strategies that ensure that all participants – from 
administrators to teachers – see value in new in -
terventions. 
Technology, when wisely 
deployed, can provide 
benefits to teachers and to 
their students, but success 
is unlikely if teachers aren’t 
partners in the process.Education Technology for Effective Teachers2
Technology has the potential to help teachers to 
be more effective in reaching every student. Keep -
ing the principles in mind, here are six promising 
avenues for teacher-technology partnerships.
1. Coach and mentor teachers
A growing collection of evidence 
demonstrates the power of coach -
ing and mentoring teachers. In 
South Africa, in-class coaching 
was twice as effective at boosting student reading 
ability as a traditional professional development 
training at a centralized location.6 Why? Teachers 
who received coaching implemented better teach -
ing practices in their classrooms. But in many set -
tings ― both high- and low-income ― implementing 
a coaching system at scale proves challenging. 
The main reason is that for an effective coaching 
system, you need coaches with content knowl -
edge, pedagogical knowledge, and who have the 
skill to mentor other teachers effectively. In many 
education systems, either there aren’t enough ex -
cellent teachers to serve as coaches or there is a 
trade-off in removing those teachers from the 
classroom to serve as coaches. If they’re coaching 
teachers, they’re not teaching students.
Technology can make it 
easier to coach many more 
teachers than traditionally 
possible. In South Africa, the 
United States and Uganda, 
virtual coaches could provide 
essential support to more 
teachers.
Technology may be able to help. In the United 
States, there was no clear difference in effective -
ness between a dozen virtual coaching programs 
tested in different states and a host of in-person 
coaching programs.7Applying the Principles
In a pilot in South Africa, one set of teachers re -
ceived in-person visits from a coach three times a 
term, whereas another set received coaching virtu -
ally with weekly interactions via tablet. Every cou -
ple of weeks the “virtual coach” would check in to 
discuss instructional practice and check progress 
on the curriculum, and she would send a weekly 
motivational message to all teachers participat -
ing in the virtual coaching. Both kinds of coaching 
improved student learning equally at the end of a 
year. The real gain was that the virtual coach could 
reach far more teachers since she didn’t have to 
travel.8 Unfortunately, after two more years of the 
program, teachers with virtual coaches still deliv -
ered better student results than teachers without 
coaches, but in-person coaches delivered far bet -
ter results on a wider range of skills.9
For virtual coaching to deliver sustained benefits, 
a blended approach may be needed, building rap -
port between teachers and coaches with at least 
some in-person visits and then complementing 
those with virtual contact. While web-based or tab -
let-based virtual coaches do not observe teachers 
firsthand to give feedback, they can answer ques -
tions and give advice more frequently at lower 
cost. For some teachers, a virtual coach may feel 
more respectful of the autonomy of their class -
room. On net, virtual coaching may be an effective 
tool to strengthen teachers. In addition to helping 
education systems with the challenge of scaling, 
tablets can help coaches provide better feedback 
to teachers: In Uganda, tablets that coaches could 
use to input their classroom observations would 
then generate feedback which coaches could use 
to guide their discussions with teachers. After the 
introduction of tablets, coaches gave more specif -
ic guidance to help teachers with reading instruc -
tion.10
2. Complement teacher content knowl -
edge and pedagogical skills
Evidence from many countries 
demonstrates that teachers often 
lack mastery of the content they 
are supposed to teach.11 These Education Technology for Effective Teachers3
shortfalls in teacher knowledge may explain up to 
one-third of students’ failure to keep up with the 
curriculum.12 Technology presents opportunities for 
teachers to increase their content knowledge, to -
gether with their pedagogical skills. For example, 
the Teacher Education in Sub-Saharan Africa initia -
tive provides locally adapted resources used by 
teachers in several countries, and it gave rise to its 
own massive open online course (MOOC).13 Like -
wise, systems may experiment with teachers using 
global tools like Khan Academy, Coursera, Wikiver -
sity, or others to improve their mastery of math, sci -
ence, or other topics. Some of those tools give the 
added value of demonstrating how to explain chal -
lenging concepts in those subjects. In addition to 
making sure that teachers are aware of these re -
sources, education systems may consider formaliz -
ing their use within programs of continuing profes -
sional development and accreditation. Although 
not yet formally evaluated, some U.S. states have 
used online platforms for “micro-credentialing,” in 
which teachers can learn and gain mastery in indi -
vidual topics and receive professional recognition 
for it.14
In schools where teachers have limited pedagog -
ical knowledge and content mastery, providing 
them with detailed lesson guides – sometimes 
known as scripted lessons – has proven useful 
across many countries.15 In addition to providing 
content support, these guides can improve ped -
agogy by nudging teachers who might otherwise 
rely purely on lecture or call-and-response into a 
range of active learning exercises. In South Africa, 
teachers received detailed lesson plans via tab -
let.16 In Pakistan, a program provided guidance to 
teachers by tablet as well as screens installed in 
classrooms to show content that complemented 
the teachers’ lessons.17 One private company pro -
vides entirely scripted lessons via tablet and en -
courages teachers to follow the script strictly. The 
data on lesson delivery and evaluation results are 
then analyzed to improve process.18 On the whole, 
providing detailed, practical guidance to teachers 
can complement the talents and training they bring 
to the classroom. Using technology to deliver this 
guidance could make it easier for teachers to in -
corporate audio and visual aids as well as receive 
content updates. 3. Create virtual communities of prac -
tice for teachers
One motivator for professionals is 
the opportunity to collaborate with 
other experts. Despite being in a 
room filled with people, teaching 
can feel like a solitary profession, as teachers often 
have sole charge of students for several hours. Es -
pecially in smaller or rural schools, a teacher may 
be the only one in her discipline, lacking opportuni -
ties to compare notes on how to improve. Virtual 
platforms can help teachers learn from peers, 
share lesson plans, and engage in a professional 
community. These communities of practice are fea -
sible even in low-income countries: in Tanzania, a 
survey of secondary school teachers showed that 
three-quarters had smartphones, nearly two-thirds 
used WhatsApp regularly and one-third used Face -
book regularly.19  
In Kenya, teachers of English 
use Facebook groups both 
to ask each other content 
questions and to create social 
relationships. 
Few of these technology-based communities of 
practice have been formally evaluated, but ex -
amples of how teachers use these in practice 
can demonstrate what they find useful. In Kenya, 
teachers of English use Facebook groups both to 
ask each other content questions and to create 
social relationships.20 In Turkey, science teachers 
use WhatsApp groups to share pedagogical con -
tent knowledge, teaching practices, and to pro -
vide each other with emotional support.21 In Hong 
Kong, teachers use WhatsApp to share pictures of 
their blackboards and student writing so that col -
leagues can gain ideas and provide feedback.22 In 
some cases, these groups are actively organized 
and facilitated by the education system. In the vir -
tual coaching program implemented in South Afri -
ca, coaches facilitated a WhatsApp group in which 
teachers shared videos of themselves teaching 
and engaged in friendly weekly competitions to 
demonstrate excellent teaching.23 24After a similar 
program in India, teachers reported that they felt Education Technology for Effective Teachers4
positive peer pressure to perform well, shared 
problems, and received feedback and guidance, 
which initially came from the coordinator but ulti -
mately became a collective activity with the other 
teachers.25
These communities of practice don’t have to wait 
until teachers are on the job to begin. In Malay -
sia, one university encouraged teacher training 
students to use Facebook to share materials and 
ideas about teaching. The vast majority of par -
ticipants enjoyed doing this and said that they 
planned to continue using it once they entered ser -
vice as teachers. Students said that participating in 
the online community of practice made them want 
to be better teachers.26 Another preservice training 
program in Malaysia used WhatsApp to reflect on 
their teaching practice with other student teachers 
as well as a supervisor.27
4. Manage teachers effectively 
Students won’t learn if teachers 
don’t make it to school, and tech -
nology offers new opportunities to 
manage teacher attendance, ei -
ther supplementing traditional methods or replac -
ing them. In Pakistan, a staff of assistants visit 
schools but use tablets to verify teacher atten -
dance with a biometric device. The program has 
been used to monitor hundreds of thousands of 
teachers, and officials have followed up with tens 
of thousands of absent teachers.28
Technology can help to 
manage teacher performance 
– but for this to work, 
teachers have to be on board. 
When can efforts to use technology to manage 
teachers fail? First, education systems or donor 
partners may be tempted to implement technolo -
gy beyond what current infrastructure can support. 
In a low-income environment, an intervention in 
Haiti sought to use smartphones to monitor teach -
ers’ attendance and due to repeated delays and 
challenges with the software, ultimately failed to 
be implemented effectively.29 In a middle-income 
environment, one urban state of Brazil sought to have teachers use swipe cards when they entered 
and exited the classroom, but connectivity proved 
unexpectedly inconsistent and that aspect of the 
digital program was ultimately scrapped. Second, 
programs that are purely focused around top-
down monitoring may elicit resistance in teachers 
or even administrators. To draw an example from 
health, one program encouraged health workers 
in India to timestamp their arrival to and depar -
ture from work, in exchange for monetary incen -
tives. Over time, a number of the timestamp ma -
chines were destroyed; some appeared to have 
been hurled into a wall.30 Without buy-in over time 
from teachers and administrators, any program is 
doomed to fail. Beyond the physical destruction, 
administrators ultimately increased the exempt 
days for health workers, taking the teeth out of the 
program. The tablet monitoring and support pro -
gram in India described above may offer a solution 
in giving teachers more than just monitoring: It of -
fers a peer support group as well.
5. Deploy the teacher workforce effec -
tively
Many countries send too many 
teachers to some schools and too 
few to others. One study found 
that more than a quarter of the 
variation in teacher allocation could not be ex -
plained by the number of students.31 In Ghana, just 
forty percent of teacher allocation could be ex -
plained by enrollments.32 In Malawi, a new data 
system is allowing the government to map where 
all of its teachers are and to classify schools based 
on the characteristics that make teachers want or 
not want to be stationed there (road access, elec -
tricity, distance to a trading center).33 A database 
like this can allow the government to experiment 
with incentives for teachers and prioritization of un -
derstaffed schools and monitor subsequent prog -
ress. In Ecuador and Peru, governments are testing 
electronic systems to provide candidates with bet -
ter information about schools and communities to 
improve the fit of teachers to schools.34Education Technology for Effective Teachers5
Technology can help improve 
teacher working conditions, 
such as by speeding up salary 
payments. 
6. Increase the attractiveness of the 
teaching profession
Teachers in many countries face 
challenging working conditions. 
Salary payments are delayed, they 
have limited recourse with griev -
ances, and the stature of the profession is dimin -
ished.35 In what is now South Sudan, a simple elec -
tronic payroll system (using Excel) made it possible 
for teachers to receive their pay at the school rath -
er than having to travel to the county headquarters, 
dramatically reducing travel time and cost.36 Elec -
tronic systems hold the promise of allowing teach -
ers to submit concerns or complaints either anony -
mously or discreetly to higher authorities. Finally, traditional technologies like television and radio 
can boost the reputation of the profession. In Chile, 
a program used those media to encourage high 
performing youth to enter the teaching profession. 
Together with scholarships for top students, the 
program appears to have increased students’ in -
terest in teaching and parents’ interest in their chil -
dren becoming teachers.37 Technology has the po -
tential to improve both the status and the conditions 
of the teaching profession.
Technology across these six areas can clearly be 
complementary. Coaching and mentoring teachers 
will be even more effective when they have tools 
to improve their pedagogy (such as structured les -
son plans) and gain mastery of the content they are 
to teach. Systems that improve the quality of life 
for teachers (improving allocation of teachers and 
timeliness of salary payments) increase the palat -
ability of systems that monitor teacher attendance 
and performance. Ultimately, technology can be a 
valuable complement to the best efforts of an edu -
cation system’s teacher workforce.Education Technology for Effective Teachers6
Endnotes
1 Thank you to Melissa Adelman, Cristobal Cobo, Ezequiel Molina, Elizabeth Ninan, Tracy Wilichowski, and especial -
ly Tara Béteille for substantive feedback on this note.
2 World Bank. 2015.
3 Baker T, Tricario L, Bielli S. 2019. Making the Most of Technology in Education: Lessons from School Systems 
around the World. Nesta Foundation.
4 Barrera-Osorio, F, Linden LL. 2009. The Use and Misuse of Computers in Education: Evidence from a Randomized 
Experiment in Colombia. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4836.
5 Piper B, Simmons Zuilkowski S, Kwayumba D, Strigel C. 2016. Does technology improve reading outcomes? Com -
paring the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of ICT interventions for early grade reading in Kenya. International 
Journal of Educational Development 49: 204-214.
6 Cilliers J, Fleisch B, Prinsloo C, Taylor S. 2019. How to improve teaching practice? An experimental comparison of 
centralized training and in-classroom coaching. Journal of Human Resources.
7 Kraft MA, Blazar D, Hogan D. 2018. The Effect of Teacher Coaching on Instruction and Achievement: A Meta-Analy -
sis of the Causal Evidence. Review of Educational Research 88(4).
8 Kotze J, Fleisch B, Taylor S. 2019. Alternative forms of early grade instructional coaching: Emerging evidence from 
field experiments in South Africa. International Journal of Educational Development 66:203-213.
9 Cilliers J, Fleisch B, Kotze J, Mohohlwane N, Taylor S, Thulare T. 2020. Can Virtual Replace In-person Coaching? 
Experimental Evidence on Teacher Professional Development and Student Learning in South Africa.
10 Brunette T. 2019. Technology enhanced coaching improves quality of feedback in Uganda. SharEd: RTI Interna -
tional’s shared resources for international education.
11 Bold T, Filmer D, Martin G, Molina E, Stacy B, Rockmore C, Svensson J, Wane W. 2017. Enrollment without Learning: 
Teacher Effort, Knowledge and Skill in Primary Schools in Africa. Journal of Economic Perspectives.
12 Bold T, Filmer D, Molina E, Svensson J. 2019. The Lost Human Capital: Teacher Knowledge and Student Achieve -
ment in Africa. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8849.
13 Acquah S, Nyaaba M. 2019. Access, Use and Challenges of Adopting TESSA Science OER by Basic School Sci -
ence Teachers in Ghana. European Journal of Research and Reflection in Educational Sciences. See also Stutch -
bury K, Chamberlain L, and Amos S. 2019. Supporting Professional Development through MOOCs: the TESSA 
experience. Pan-Commonwealth Forum 9.
14 DeMonte J. 2017. Micro-credentials for Teachers: What Three Early Adopter States Have Learned So Far. Ameri -
can Institutes for Research.
15 Piper B, Sitabkhan Y, Mejia J, Betts K. 2018. Effectiveness of teachers’ guides in the Global South: Scripting, learn -
ing outcomes, and classroom utilization. (RTI Press Publication No. OP-0053-1805). Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI 
Press.
16 Kotze J, Fleisch B, Taylor S. 2019.
17 Beg SA, Lucas AM, Halim W, Saif U. 2019. Beyond the Basics: Improving Post-Primary Content Delivery through 
Classroom Technology. NBER Working Paper 25704.
18 Anderson J. 2018. The controversial Silicon Valley-funded quest to educate the world’s poorest kids. Quartz Janu -
ary 22, 2018.
19 Liana LH, Ngeze LV. 2015. Online Teacher Communities of Practice: A Proposed Model to Increase Professional 
Development in Tanzania. Journal of Informatics and Virtual Education 3(1).
20 Bett H, Makewa L. 2018. Can Facebook groups enhance continuing professional development of teachers? Les -
sons from Kenya. Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education.
21 Cansoy R. 2017. Teachers’ Professional Development: The Case of WhatsApp. Journal of Education and Learning 
6(4).Education Technology for Effective Teachers7
22 Hargreaves A, O’Connor MT. 2018. Leading Collaborative Professionalism. Centre for Strategic Education Semi -
nar Series Paper #274.
23 Kotze J, Fleisch B, Taylor S. 2019.
24 Alsofrom K. 2020. How video-clip technology works to improve the teaching of reading.  Initial findings from case 
studies in the Early Grade Reading Study II. Wits University.
25 Nedungadi P, Mulki K, Raman R. 2018. Improving educational outcomes & reducing absenteeism at remote villag -
es with mobile technology and WhatsAPP: Findings from rural India. Education and Information Technologies 23(1): 
113-127.
26 Kabilan MK. 2016. Using Facebook as an e-portfolio in enhancing pre-service teachers’ professional develop -
ment. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 32(1).
27 Yee BC, Nawi AM, Abdullah T. 2016. Supporting and Improving Reflective Practice among Pre-Service Teachers 
Through WhatsApp. Jurnal Pendidikan Nusantara. Special Edition: 53-72.
28 Ansari A. 2018. Sindh School Monitoring System. Background Note for South Asia Education Report. World Bank.
29 World Bank. 2015. HAITI: Can Smartphones Make Schools Better? From Evidence to Policy note.
30 Banerjee AV, Glennerster R, Duflo E. 2008. Putting a Band-Aid on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian 
Public Health Care System. Journal of the European Economic Association 6(2-3): 487-500.
31 Majgaard K, Mingat A. 2012. Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Comparative Analysis. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.
32 Bashir S, Lockheed M, Ninan E, Tan JP. 2018. Facing Forward: Schooling for Learning in Africa. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
33 Asim S. 2018. A Smarter Way to Keep Teachers in Malawi’s Remote Schools. World Bank Blogs: Education for 
Global Development. January 22, 2018.
34 Elacqua G. 2019. Using new technologies and behavioral economics to improve equity and efficiency in teacher 
allocation in Latin America. Presentation at the World Bank.
35 Evans DK, Yuan F. 2018. The Working Conditions of Teachers in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. RISE Confer -
ence.
36 Goldsmith C. 2011. Teachers’ pay: making the pipe work; the role of improving teachers’ payroll systems for edu -
cation service delivery and state legitimacy in selected conflict-affected countries in Africa. UNESCO.
37 Bassi M, Covacevich C. 2012. How can we bring the best talent to the classroom? Preliminary results of Elige Edu -
car. IDB Education Briefly Noted No. 19. Inter-American Development Bank.