Original Paper
Effectiveness and Parental Acceptability of Social Netw orking
Interventions for Promoting Seasonal Influenza Vaccination Among
Young Children: Randomiz ed Controlled Trial
Qiuyan Liao1, PhD; Richard Fielding1, PhD; Yee Tak Derek Cheung1, PhD; Jinxiao Lian2, PhD; Jiehu Yuan1, MA;
Wendy Wing Tak Lam1, PhD
1University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (Hong Kong)
2The Hong Kong Polytechnic University , Hong Kong, China (Hong Kong)
Corr esponding Author:
Qiuyan Liao, PhD
University of Hong Kong
7 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam
Hong Kong
China (Hong Kong)
Phone: 852 3917 9289
Email: qyliao11@hku.hk
Abstr act
Backgr ound: Seasonal influenza vaccination (SIV) coverage among young children remains low worldwide. Mobile social
netw orking apps such as WhatsApp Messenger are promising tools for health interv entions.
Objecti ve: This was a preliminary study to test the effectiveness and parental acceptability of a social netw orking interv ention
that sends weekly vaccination reminders and encourages exchange of SIV-related views and experiences among mothers via
WhatsApp discussion groups for promoting childhood SIV. The second objecti ve was to examine the effect of introducing time
pressure on mothers’ decision making for childhood SIV for vaccination decision making. This was done using countdo wns of
the recommended vaccination timing.
Methods: Mothers of child(ren) aged 6 to 72 months were randomly allocated to control or to one of two social netw orking
interv ention groups recei ving vaccination reminders with (SNI+TP) or without (SNI–TP) a time pressure component via WhatsApp
discussion groups at a ratio of 5:2:2. All participants first completed a baseline assessment. Both the SNI–TP and SNI+TP groups
subsequently recei ved weekly vaccination reminders from October to December 2017 and participated in WhatsApp discussions
about SIV moderated by a health professional. All participants completed a follow-up assessment from April to May 2018.
Results: A total of 84.9% (174/205), 71% (57/80), and 75% (60/80) who were allocated to the control, SNI–TP , and SNI+TP
groups, respecti vely, completed the outcome assessment. The social netw orking interv ention signif icantly promoted mothers’
self-ef ficacy for taking children for SIV (SNI–TP: odds ratio [OR] 2.69 [1.07-6.79]; SNI+TP: OR 2.50 [1.13-5.55]), but did not
result in signif icantly impro ved children’ s SIV uptak e. Moreo ver, after adjusting for mothers’ working status, introducing additional
time pressure reduced the overall SIV uptak e in children of working mothers (OR 0.27 [0.10-0.77]) but signif icantly increased
the SIV uptak e among children of mothers without a full-time job (OR 6.53 [1.87-22.82]). Most participants’ WhatsApp posts
were about sharing experience or views (226/434, 52.1%) of which 44.7% (101/226) were categorized as negative, such as their
concerns over vaccine safety , side effects and effectiveness. Although participants shared predominantly negative experience or
views about SIV at the beginning of the discussion, the moderator was able to encourage the discussion of more positi ve experience
or views and more knowledge and information. Most interv ention group participants indicated willingness to recei ve the same
interv entions (110/117, 94.0%) and recommend the interv entions to other mothers (102/117, 87.2%) in future
Conclusions: Online information support can effectively promote mothers’ self-ef ficacy for taking children for SIV but alone
it may not sufficient to address maternal concerns over SIV to achie ve a positi ve vaccination decision. However, the active
involvement of health professionals in online discussions can shape positi ve discussions about vaccination. Time pressure on
decision making interacts with maternal work status, facilitating vaccination uptak e among mothers who may have more free
time, but having the opposite effect among busier working mothers.
Trial Registration: Hong Kong University Clinical Trials Registry HKUCTR-2250; https://tin yurl.com/v ejv276
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 1 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX(J Med Internet Res 2020;22(2):e16427) doi: 10.2196/16427
KEYW ORDS
influenza vaccination; social media; interv ention; children
Introduction
Seasonal influenza creates a substantial annual global disease
burden. Young children are the most vulnerable age group [1,2],
having higher viral loads and shedding the virus for a longer
period than adults, making them important influenza viruses
vectors to other household members [3]. Seasonal influenza
vaccination (SIV) for children is therefore regarded as the most
important measure to protect both children and the wider
population [4] but uptak e rates remain low in many countries
[5-7]. In Hong Kong, families of children aged 6 months to 12
years recei ve a subsidy under the Childhood Influenza
Vaccination Subsidy Scheme (CIVSS) to recei ve SIV from
private-sector general practitioners. This polic y remo ves
financial barriers by making the vaccine completely free for the
parents of target children, although some general practitioners
demand an additional small administration fee. Despite the
CIVSS, SIV uptak e among young children in Hong Kong
languishes around 30% [8,9]. Finding ways to impro ve SIV
uptak e thus remains crucial to reducing community influenza
spread.
Sending vaccination reminders through mobile phone–based
short message services (SMS) has been shown to promote
vaccination uptak e, including routine immunization and SIV in
children [10-13] but reported effect sizes were small. A
systematic review found that participants generally complained
that mobile phone SMS reminders were limited by formats and
character set [14]. The proliferation of mobile messaging apps
and smartphone use has made mobile messaging functions more
flexible compared with traditional SMS. In Hong Kong,
WhatsApp messenger is used by over 80% of the population
[15] through the high penetration of smartphone use [16]. In
addition to providing flexible messaging functions like message
structure, formats, and length, WhatsApp also permits social
netw orking functions through creating multimember online
discussion groups.
Existing vaccination reminders for promoting childhood SIV
uptak e have usually contained information on influenza infection
risks and SIV benef its [13,17,18], key variables in cogniti ve
theories of behavior change [19]. However, studies suggest that
people inflate risk from vaccination relati ve to risk from natural
infection possibly due to biased media coverage of vaccine risk
[20] or omission bias, the tendenc y to belie ve that an error of
omission is less serious than that from commission [21].
Therefore, merely providing information on influenza infection
risks and influenza vaccination benef its may be insuf ficient to
overcome concerns about vaccine-related risks, an important
impediment to SIV uptak e [8]. According to dual-processing
models, information is not processed systematically and
deliberati vely but is widely influenced by heuristic cues that
require less effort to reach a quick and efficient decision [22,23],
particularly when participants feel uncertain and lack cogniti ve
resources such as time and energy to make a decision. Previousstudies suggest that parental decision making for children’ s
vaccination is extensi vely modif ied by knowing other parents’
vaccination decisions, indicating a strong social normati ve
influence [8,24]. Others’ behavior provides important behavioral
cues for social learning or imitation by indicating social
appro val, relieving safety concerns, and increasing confidence
in specif ic choices [8,24]. Therefore, knowing that other parents
take their child for SIV can encourage hesitant parents to do the
same. This knowledge and experience sharing becomes more
practical with messaging apps that enable social netw orking
functions. However, few studies have examined the potential
for social netw orking interv entions to promote parental decisions
about SIV for their children.
Studies in behavioral economics and neuroscience have
suggested that introducing time pressure in decision making
could increase decision makers’reliance on heuristic cues for
decision making, mainly through the mechanisms of acceleration
(ie, switching to simpler strate gies to speed up decision making)
and selecti vity (ie, automatically omitting certain information
and favoring certain information) [25-27]. It is also suggested
that while individuals can efficiently integrate different cues to
reach an optimal decision under some time pressure, those under
high time pressure can only use limited cues that are more salient
for them (eg, heavily relying on negative cues) when making
decisions [25,28]. Furthermore, time pressure may induce
different affective states depending on individual capability to
cope with the time limit and their cogniti ve load [26,27]. For
individuals who percei ve being able to make a decision within
a time limit and have more cogniti ve resources to perform the
decision task, time pressure could make them energetic and
active in seeking risk reduction strate gies. Otherwise, time
pressure may induce stress that subsequently leads to more
reliance on anecdotal cues rather than statistical information in
decision making and thereby impairs their final decision [26,29].
Whether introducing time pressure can promote vaccination
uptak e or not may depend on how parents percei ve the time
pressure introduced in the vaccination decision. Hong Kong
runs an annual influenza vaccination campaign (October to
December) that recommends parents obtain SIV for their
children aged 6 months to 12 years at least 2 weeks before the
winter influenza season (January to March), allowing for
sufficient time for the body to produce antibodies following
vaccination. Therefore, the recommended optimal SIV windo w
is from October until 2 weeks before the end of December
annually , and as the winter influenza season approaches the
optimal windo w diminishes, making vaccination decision
making for parents naturally time-constrained. This provides
an opportunity to test the effect of introducing time pressure to
parental SIV decisions.
This preliminary study tested the effectiveness and parental
acceptability of social netw orking interv entions through the use
of WhatsApp discussion groups for promoting children’ s SIV
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 2 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXuptak e in Hong Kong. The specif ic objecti ves of this study were
as follows:
•Examine the effectiveness of regularly delivering
vaccination reminders and encouraging sharing positi ve
SIV decisions and experiences through WhatsApp
discussion groups in promoting target children’ s SIV uptak e
•Examine the effect of adding time pressure to parental SIV
decisions (reminding parents about the remaining optimal
SIV windo w)
•Conduct content analysis of WhatsApp discussion posts
during the interv ention period to examine how participants
responded to childhood SIV and their interactions with the
group moderator through WhatsApp discussions
•Examine acceptability to participants of using WhatsApp
discussion groups as an example of social netw orking
interv entions for promoting child health
Methods
Overview
This study recei ved ethical appro val from the institutional
review board of the University of Hong Kong/Hospital Authority
Hong Kong West Cluster (reference number UW 17-003) and
was registered with the Hong Kong University Clinical Trials
Registry [HKUCTR-2250]. Participants were randomly allocated
to either the control group, which recei ved no interv ention, or
one of two social netw orking interv ention groups that recei ved
weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp
discussion groups with a time pressure component (SNI+TP)
or without a time pressure component (SNI–TP) incorporated
into the vaccination reminders. The interv ention lasted for the
8 weeks of the Hong Kong government SIV campaign. Both
interv ention groups were also encouraged to share their positi ve
vaccination decisions and experiences via their respecti ve
WhatsApp group with group members and a group moderator
during the interv ention period. A supermark et voucher valued
at US $12.80 was given to every participant to impro ve response
rate in the follow-up survey [30].
Participants, Group Allocation, and Baseline
Assessment
Since mothers in Hong Kong are the primary decision makers
or signif icantly contrib ute to decision making with fathers for
children’ s immunization [8], this study only targeted mothers
with at least one child aged 6 to 72 months to avoid confounding
by gender effects. Other inclusion criteria were (1) Chinese
communication fluenc y, (2) having a Hong Kong
netw ork-connected smartphone with internet access, and (3)
having installed or being willing to install WhatsApp on their
mobile phone. These inclusion criteria were intended to limit
subjects to be primarily of Chinese ethnicity (who comprise
approximately 93% of the Hong Kong population) to further
minimize confounding by culture and language effects. Subjects
were excluded if their eligible children had medical
contraindications for immunization. Subjects were recruited
before the 2017-2018 CIVSS campaign started and excluded if
their target child(ren) had already recei ved SIV for the
2017-2018 season. Eligible subjects were identif ied andrecruited from previous samples of population-based
random-dialed household telephone surveys and community
outreach conducted by a commercial polling compan y
previously used for successful population-based surveys [8,31].
All potential subjects were screened in a short telephone
intervie w to confirm eligibility and obtain verbal consent for
study participation. Each consenting subject was later called by
a part-time telephone intervie wer for an approximately
10-minute telephone baseline assessment intervie w. The baseline
assessment collected data on participants’ and their children’ s
SIV history , sociodemographic characteristics, participants’
intention to take children for SIV during the 2017-2018 CIVSS
campaign, and baseline risk perceptions regarding childhood
influenza and the influenza vaccination. Before each telephone
intervie w, the intervie wer opened a sealed envelope which
contained a random allocation sequence generated by computer
to determine the subject’ s group allocation. Subjects who were
allocated to an interv ention group were notified that they would
be participating in a WhatsApp discussion group during the
interv ention period to recei ve weekly vaccination reminders
and share their views and experiences about SIV with other
mothers and a group moderator . This being a preliminary study
to test the effectiveness of social netw orking interv entions for
promoting childhood SIV uptak e, we aimed to recruit 200
subjects for the control and 80 subjects for each of the two
interv ention groups, allowing for a 30% dropout rate in each
group, to detect an approximately 20% increase in vaccination
uptak e among the social netw orking interv ention groups relati ve
to the control with a power of 80% and 95% confidence interv al.
To balance confounding between study arms and control group
size, block ed randomization [32] was used to allocate
participants to one of the three arms, using a ratio of 5:2:2 for
group allocation. Neither participants nor part-time intervie wers
performing subject recruitment and allocation could be blinded
to subject allocation but the intervie wers who conducted baseline
assessment were blind to the interv ention arm (with or without
time pressure) participants occupied. The assessor of the primary
outcome was blinded to all participant group allocation.
Inter ventions
Vaccination Reminders
The vaccination reminder comprised three messages. Message
1 introduced the CIVSS and doctors’ recommendations for
children’ s SIV, message 2 addressed children’ s risk of seasonal
influenza and benef its and safety of SIV for children, and
message 3 addressed the number of days remaining for the
recommended vaccination timing (days remaining from the date
when the vaccination reminder was sent out to the date 2 weeks
before the winter influenza season). While the vaccination
reminders for SNI–TP and SNI+TP contained message 1 and
2, message 3 (the time pressure component) was only included
in the vaccination reminders for SNI+TP participants. All
messages were constructed using information from the official
websites of the Hong Kong Centre for Health Protection and
World Health Organization and local published studies [33-35]
and delivered in graphical format through WhatsApp. The
messages contained mainly textual information, but graphical
information was also incorporated to represent some key themes
(eg, doctor’ s recommendation, eligibility of CIVSS, and days
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 3 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXremaining for optimal SIV windo w) and efficacy of SIV, aiming
to impro ve audience comprehension and their attention and
interest to read [36,37]. All messages were pretested using
think-aloud intervie ws with 10 eligible mothers to ensure their
readability via a mobile phone and comprehensibility without
inducing negative feelings. Multimedia Appendix 1gives the
finalized messages in both the Chinese and English, but only
the Chinese version was used in the interv ention. Weekly
vaccination reminders were assumed to be effective without
increasing respondents’ information load with a preference for
recei ving vaccination reminders during afternoon [14].
Therefore, vaccination reminders were sent to the interv ention
groups midafternoon on different weekdays, weekly over the
CIVSS campaign period from October to December 2017. The
first vaccination reminder was delivered 2 weeks after the
CIVSS started and the last one delivered on December 18, 2017,
2 weeks before the winter influenza season began. Overall, a
total of 8 vaccination reminders were delivered to the
interv ention groups over the 8-week interv ention period.
WhatsApp Discussion Groups
In addition to delivering weekly vaccination reminders, a
WhatsApp discussion group was also set up to provide positi ve
peer support for mothers to make better -informed SIV decisions
regarding their children. To control group size and facilitate
group discussion, participants allocated to the interv ention
groups were then randomly allocated to one of two SNI–TP and
two SNI+TP WhatsApp discussion groups, each comprising
approximately 40 mothers. In each WhatsApp discussion group,
mothers could post their opinions and concerns about influenza
and SIV and freely communicate with other mothers and the
group moderator about their experiences of personal and child
influenza vaccinations. The project moderator monitored and
facilitated the group discussions on a daily basis following
standardized guidelines (Multimedia Appendix 2). In addition
to delivering weekly vaccination reminders via WhatsApp
discussion groups, the moderator also sent one additional
message on a weekly basis to enforce exchange of positi veviews and experience about SIV. The moderator also addressed
any questions, concerns, or misunderstandings raised about
influenza and influenza vaccination if these were not first
addressed by other mothers within the groups. Posting content
irrele vant to influenza and influenza vaccination was
discouraged. Participation rules were set and delivered in the
discussion groups immediately after the groups were created.
Participants were informed that those violating the participation
rules, such as using offensi ve statements and harassment, would
be expelled from the discussion group. All members
participating in the WhatsApp discussion groups were
encouraged to use Chinese for communication. Voice messages
were discouraged, and members were advised not to disclose
names and other personal information to protect privacy. The
WhatsApp discussion groups were closed by the project
moderator 2 weeks after the last vaccination reminder was sent
out.
Outcome Assessment
In April and May 2018 after the winter influenza season, all
participants were again contacted to report information on their
children’ s SIV uptak e before and during the 2017-2018
influenza season. For participants who had more than one child
eligible for CIVSS, the vaccination status of each eligible child
was recorded. Mother’ s intention to take their children for SIV
in the next 12 months was also recorded. Risk perceptions
regarding seasonal influenza and SIV for children were assessed
again to examine whether any changes in perceptions occurred
after the interv entions. Participants’ opinions about the
interv entions and their willingness to recei ve vaccination
reminders via WhatsApp in the future were asked to assess the
acceptability of the interv entions. In addition, a total of 20
participants from the interv ention groups were contacted from
May to July 2018 for in-depth intervie ws to explore their
opinions about interv entions and the acceptability of using
WhatsApp for promoting children’ s health. Figure 1illustrates
the study procedure and timing.
Figur e 1. Timeline and study procedure. CIVSS: Childhood Influenza Vaccination Subsidy Scheme.
Data Analysis
Pearson chi-square tests were first conducted to compare
participants’ demographics, baseline perceptions, history of
influenza vaccination, and their target child’ s characteristics by
interv ention arm to assess randomization and by follow-up
status to assess selection bias.Assessment of Primary Outcomes
Children’ s SIV uptak e rate in 2017-2018 was calculated for
each group and compared between groups using the Pearson
chi-square test. Both the SIV uptak e of all target children aged
between 6 to 72 months and that of the youngest target child’ s
SIV were compared across groups, because among families
with more than one target child, the youngest one tends to be
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 4 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXnot vaccinated [9]. The interv ention effect on children’ s SIV
uptak e was also examined by stratifying the analyses by
participants’ educational attainment, work status, and household
income to identify potential sociodemographic effect modif iers
previously reported to be associated with parental acceptance
of influenza vaccination for their children [38-40].
To further assess the effects of the interv entions on vaccination
uptak e, a generalized estimating equation (GEE) logistic
regression model was conducted to examine the following
questions: (1) Did SIV outcome differ by interv ention arm
(interv ention effect)? (2) Did SIV outcome change from baseline
to follow-up (time effect)? (3) Did change of SIV outcome by
time differ by interv ention arm (interv ention × time interaction)?
GEE can accommodate cases with missing outcome measures
at some time points (cases with outcome measure at one time
point will be counted) and the correlation between the outcome
measures at different time points (ie, the baseline and follow-up
SIV uptak e) [41]. Potential effect modif iers (eg, participants’
demographics) identif ied in the univariate analysis would be
additionally included in the GEE to test its interaction effects
with both the time and interv ention on the outcome.
In the GEE analysis, participants’ youngest target child’ s SIV
status during the follow-up period was used as the outcome.
Since the final SIV uptak e of the target child(ren) of participants
who dropped out at follow-up was unavailable, intention-to-treat
analysis was used as a conserv ative and sensiti vity analysis by
treating the lost outcomes as not vaccinated over the specif ic
CIVSS campaign to compare with the complete case analysis.
Assessment of the Secondary Outcomes
Excepting for effects on children’ s SIV uptak e, interv ention
effects on parental perceptions regarding influenza and SIV by
interv ention arm were also assessed using chi-square and similar
GEE logistic regression modeling. All WhatsApp group posts
were archi ved by the project moderator immediately before the
WhatsApp discussion groups were closed.
The mean number of posts per participant was calculated while
the distrib utions of participants’ frequenc y of posting across
discussion groups were compared using Kruskal-W allis
equality-of-populations rank tests. All discussion posts were
examined to further explore participants’ responses to the
vaccination reminders, their perceptions and attitudes regarding
influenza and influenza vaccination, and how they interacted
with peers and the group moderator during the communication
process.
All posts were analyzed and coded by two researchers
independently using content analysis. Each post was coded for
the following categories: role (moderator or participant), format
(text, picture, emoji, or hyperlink), cybersupport (eg, sharing
views or experience and emotional exchange) and discussion
topics (eg, vaccine effectiveness, vaccine safety , and side
effects). More than one code could be assigned to each post. A
coding scheme for cybersupport and discussion topics was
drafted and developed by the first author based on literature on
online psychosocial support [42,43] and parental decision
making for childhood influenza vaccination and vaccinationattitudes [8,24] and refined throughout data analysis and the
discussion of the research team.
The refined coding scheme was then used in NVivo 12.0 (QSR
International Pty) by the first author and a trained research
assistant to independently code all the posts again. The interrater
agreement between the two coders was assessed; the Cohen
kappa was less than 0.6, indicating low agreement, which was
then resolv ed by joint discussion between the two coders.
How the moderator’ s involvement in the WhatsApp discussion
could change the discussion direction about SIV among
participants was also analyzed by plotting the time sequence of
cybersupport behaviors of participants and the moderator in
each discussion group. Parental acceptability of the interv ention
was first assessed by describing participants’ opinions about
the interv entions and their willingness to recei ve vaccination
reminders via WhatsApp in the future. In addition, thematic
coding was conducted to identify themes and categories relating
to parental acceptability of the interv entions and using
WhatsApp Messenger for child health promotion emer ging from
the in-depth intervie ws. All quantitati ve data were analyzed
using Stata 15.1 (StataCorp LLC) while the textual data were
analyzed using NVivo 12.0.
Results
Participants
A total of 365 mothers in the control, SNI–TP , and SNI+TP
groups completed the baseline assessment, of whom 85.9%
(174/205), 71% (57/80), and 75% (60/80), respecti vely,
completed the outcome assessment. Two participants of the
SNI/–TP left the group in the first week of the interv ention
without giving any reasons and another 2 participants of the
SIN/–TP left in the fifth week of the interv ention for violating
participation rules with offensi ve statements when arguing over
SIV for their children. Participants of the interv ention groups
were more likely to drop out from the outcome assessment than
were the control (χ2
22=8.0, P=.02), but those who completed
the baseline assessment and outcome assessment did not differ
by interv ention condition in terms of their demographics, their
target child’ s characteristics, past SIV uptak e, baseline SIV
perceptions, and intention to take child for SIV (Table A of
Multimedia Appendix 3). Almost all participants used
WhatsApp on a daily basis across the interv ention arm (Table
A of Multimedia Appendix 3).
Inter vention Effects on the Target Child’ s Seasonal
Influenza Vaccination Uptak e
The youngest target child SIV uptak e rates were 37.9% (66/174),
33% (19/57), and 38% (23/60) in the control, SIN–TP , and
SNI+TP groups, respecti vely. Chi-square tests indicated that
the interv entions did not have signif icant effects on either the
youngest target child’ s SIV uptak e or all target child(ren)’ s SIV
uptak e (Table 1). It also shows that the youngest child’ s SIV
uptak e appeared to be greater in the SNI+TP group for
participants who did not have a full-time job (χ2
22=5.31, P=.07),
suggesting that participants’ work status may be a potential
effect modif ier (Table 1and Multimedia Appendix 4).
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 5 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXGEE analysis was conducted to further take into account the
time effect (SIV uptak e rate changed from the baseline to the
follow-up) and its interaction with the interv ention condition
as well as its interaction with both interv ention condition and
participants’ work status. Results showed that the youngest
target child’ s SIV uptak e rate signif icantly increased from the
baseline to the follow-up (OR 3.13, 95% CI 2.14-4.57) in all
groups, but such increase was shown to be signif icantly less inthe SNI+TP group than the control (OR 0.27, 95% CI 0.10-0.77)
after adjusting for participants’ work status. Participants’ work
status signif icantly interacted with both the time and interv ention
effects, with the target child’ s follow-up SIV uptak e increased
signif icantly more among participants who did not have a
full-time job than the control (OR 6.53, 95% CI 1.87-22.82;
Table 2). The intention-to-treat analysis yielded a similar
conclusion (data not shown).
Table 1. Seasonal influenza vaccination uptak e rates among target children at the follow-up by interv ention condition.
PvaluecSNI+TPb(n=60), rate
(95% CI)SNI–TPa(n=57), rate
(95% CI)Control (n=174), %
(95% CI)Characteristic
.80 38.3 (26.0-51.8) 33.3 (21.4-47.1) 37.9 (30.7-45.6)SIVd, youngest target child
.78 SIV uptak e, all target childr en
38.3 (26.1-51.8) 33.3 (21.4-47.1) 37.4 (30.2-45.0) All
21.7 (0-8.9) 21.7 (0-9.4) 4.0 (1.6-8.1) Partial
Demographics, youngest target child
Educational attainment
.56 46.7 (28.3-65.7) 33.3 (15.6-55.3) 37.1 (25.9-49.5) Secondary or below
.66 30.0 (14.7-49.4) 33.3 (18.0-51.8) 38.5 (29.1-48.5) Tertiary or above
Household income (HK$ [US $0.13])
.27 36.0 (18.0-57.5) 20.0 (6.8-40.7) 37.0 (27.1-48.0) 40,000 or below
.89 40.0 (23.9-57.9) 43.7 (26.4-62.3) 38.8 (28.4-50.0) More than 40,000
Work status
.10 16.7 (5.6-34.7) 31.8 (13.9-54.9) 37.6 (27.8-48.3) Full-time
.07 60.0 (40.6-77.3) 34.3 (19.1-52.2) 38.3 (27.7-49.7) Part-time/unemplo yed
aSNI–TP: social netw orking interv ention group who recei ved weekly vaccination reminders without time pressure component.
bSNI+TP: social netw orking interv ention group who recei ved weekly vaccination reminders with time pressure component.
cPvalues were calculated using Pearson chi-square test.
dSIV: seasonal influenza vaccination.
Table 2. Assessment of the interv ention effects on child’ s influenza vaccination uptak e using generalized estimating equation logistic regression.
Pvalue Odds ratio (95% CI)Beta (SEa)Independent variables
Inter vention
.59 0.82 (0.38-1.71) –0.20 (0.38)SNI–TPb(vs control)
.65 1.27 (0.65-2.47) 0.24 (0.34)SNI+TPc(vs control)
<.001 3.13 (2.14-4.57) 1.14 (0.19) Time effect: follow-up versus baseline
.95 1.00 (0.36-2.73) –0.002 (0.51) Time × SNI–TP
.01 0.27 (0.10-0.77) –1.29 (0.53) Time × SNI+TP
.56 1.15 (0.72-1.83) 0.14 (0.24) Work status (part-time/unemplo yed vs full-time)
.96 0.97 (0.30-3.17) –0.03 (0.60) Time × SNI–TP × part-time/unemplo yed
.003 6.53 (1.87-22.82) 1.88 (0.64) Time × SNI+TP × part-time/unemplo yed
aSE: standard error .
bSNI–TP: social netw orking interv ention group who recei ved weekly vaccination reminders without time pressure component.
cSNI+TP: social netw orking interv ention group who recei ved weekly vaccination reminders with time pressure component.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 6 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXInter vention Effects on Participants’ Perceptions of
Influenza and Seasonal Influenza Vaccination
GEE analysis was also conducted to examine whether change
in participants’ SIV perceptions from the baseline to the
follow-up differed by interv ention condition. Results showed
that there were signif icant interv ention effects on the change ofparticipants’ percei ved self-ef ficacy in taking children for SIV,
with participants of the SNI–TP (OR 2.69, 95% CI 1.07-6.79)
and SNI+TP (OR 2.50, 95% CI 1.13-5.55) groups reporting
more increase in confidence in taking their children for SIV
than did the control participants (Figure 2and Table B of
Multimedia Appendix 3).
Figur e 2. Change in participants' percei ved self-ef ficacy for taking child for seasonal influenza vaccination by interv ention condition. SNI–TP: group
that recei ved weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups without a time pressure component; SNI+TP: group that
recei ved weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups with a time pressure component; SIV: seasonal influenza
vaccination.
Content Analysis of WhatsA pp Discussion Group Posts
From four WhatsApp discussion groups including two SNI–TP
groups and two SNI+TP groups, after excluding posts irrele vant
to influenza, vaccination, or children’ s health (2.7% [12/446]
of the total posts), 434 posts from participants were retrie ved
over 8 weeks, on average 13.6 posts per group per week.
Overall, 58.1% (93/160) of the participants who joined the
WhatsApp discussion groups participated in the online
discussion, on average 3.08 posts (SD 5.90) per participant
(Table C of Multimedia Appendix 3). There was no signif icant
difference in the distrib ution of number of posts made by
participants across the four discussion groups (χ2
23=2.72,
P=.44). Of the 434 relevant participant posts, 119 (45.8%) were
made after office hours, but all posts seeking information or
opinions were addressed within 24 hours. The project moderator
delivered 203 posts in total, apart from weekly vaccination
reminders, for the four discussion groups, on average 6.34 posts
per group per week. Most posts were textual but graphical
information, hyperlinks of news articles, and emoji were also
used (Table C of Multimedia Appendix 3). All relevant
participant and moderator posts excluding the weekly
vaccination reminders were coded for themes and categories
relevant to cybersupport and discussion topics.Cybersupport
Of 434 participant posts, 226 (52.1%) were coded as sharing
experience or views, 119 (27.4%) as seeking information or
opinions, 106 (24.4%) as sharing knowledge or information,
and 66 (15.2%) as emotional exchange (Table 3). The experience
or views shared by participants were categorized as being
negative (101/226, 44.7%) or positi ve (87/226, 38.5%) based
on whether the experience or views had a positi ve or negative
effect for motivating SIV uptak e [19]. Posts categorized as
seeking information or opinions were often asking the moderator
questions but some also involved sharing experience or views
(Table 3). Sharing knowledge or information is distinguished
from sharing experience or views because the former mainly
refers to providing information support for vaccination decision.
Emotional exchange reflected, for example, participants’
expression of appreciation after recei ving information from
others, worry or concerns (over vaccine safety), feeling doubt
or confusion due to different opinions, and difficulty in making
vaccination decisions, mostly comprising the use of emoji icons.
Of 203 moderator posts, most were sharing knowledge or
information followed by encouraging information, experience
sharing, and encouraging vaccination planning (Table 3).
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 7 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 3. Quotes about cybersupport from the WhatsApp discussion groups.
Quotation Cybersupport and number of posts
Participant posts (n=434)
Sharing experience or views (226/434, 52.1%)
Negative (101/226, 44.7%) • I also do not take my child for flu vaccination because it can be worse if he got a fever after
taking vaccination. I have to work and don’t want to take leave to take care of him (after vacci-
nation).
Positi ve (87/226, 38.5%) • I took my 3-year -old son for flu vaccination today . He also took the flu vaccination when he
was two years old. I think it is necessary . Now, we cannot overlook the risk of influenza. In ad-
dition, the viruses change more and more easily . It is necessary to give children the prevention.
We should take our children for the vaccination even if there is no subsidy from government.
Neutral/Mix ed (39/226, 17.3%) • I’m indecisi ve...Don’ t know whether I should take my child for the vaccination.
Seeking information or opinions (119/434,
27.4%)• I want to ask: it is my baby’ s first flu vaccination. What can be the maximum time interv al be-
tween the two doses of flu vaccine?
• Is it true that one has to take flu vaccination every year once he/she takes the first flu vaccination?
Sharing knowledge or information (106/434,
24.4%)• There are still some quadri valent influenza vaccines at Dr XXX in Yuen Long. The vaccination
is free there. You may call the clinic for more information if your child hasn’ t recei ved the vac-
cine. They provide flu vaccination during week ends.
Emotional exchange (66/434, 15.2%) • Thank you for sharing the information.
• I’m considering (whether to take my child for flu vaccination (or not) feeling uncertain.
Moderator posts (n=203)
Sharing knowledge or information (144/203,
70.9%)• All children aged 6 months to 8 years who have never recei ved flu vaccine or those who just
recei ved one dose of flu vaccine at their first-time vaccination should recei ve two doses of flu
vaccine.
Encouraging information and experience
sharing (42/203, 20.7%)• Mothers who have taken your child for influenza vaccination can share your experience!
Encouraging vaccination planning (21/203,
10.3%)• According to our survey, most parents indicated intention to take their children for flu vaccination.
Mothers who have such intention are encouraged to plan your child’ s vaccination early .
Encouraging information seeking (20/203,
9.9%)• We understand that the people in the public have different opinions about influenza vaccination.
We should carefully evaluate the evidence and the sources of the information. Surely , as a parent,
you are the main decision maker for your child’ s flu vaccination. You are encouraged to discuss
with your family doctor if necessary .
Sharing experience or views (14/203, 6.9%) • I remember , at the second time when I took my daughter to take flu vaccination, she cried out
as soon as she saw the nurse. But, we can’t care too much about her crying because the vaccination
can protect her from diseases.
Discussion Topics
The main discussion topics among participants’ posts are shown
in Table 4. The most common participant discussion topics were
vaccination decisions followed by vaccination clinic and cost,
vaccine safety and side effects, and vaccine effectiveness (Table
4). Most participant posts on vaccination decisions met criteria
for being categorized as positi ve vaccination decision (intending
to take/planning to take/have taken children for SIV during the
interv ention period) (69/134, 51.9%) while the remaining were
coded as being negative or hesitant about seeking opinions for
vaccination decision. Most participant posts on vaccination
clinic and cost comprised information shared by participants in
support of SIV vaccination (48/63, 76.2%) with the remainderabout seeking information on vaccination clinic or cost.
Participants raised a number of concerns over vaccine safety ,
side effects, and vaccine effectiveness or had doubtful or
negative vaccination attitudes. These concerns or views about
SIV seem to mostly reflect beliefs that SIV could weak en
immunity , distrust about how the vaccine strain was estimated
every year, and a perception that vaccination is not a natural
process. Vaccination experience is distinguished from
vaccination decision or plan because it mainly refers to
participants’ feeling about the vaccination process (eg, injection
pain) or after vaccination (more or fewer illnesses). Most
participant posts on medical eligibility of SIV and first-time
influenza vaccination belonged to seeking information or
opinions.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 8 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXTable 4. Quotes from main discussion topics of participant posts (n=434).
Quotation Discussion topics and number of posts
Vaccination decision (134/434, 30.9%)
Positi ve (69/134, 51.5%) • I will take my child for flu vaccination.
• I also have book ed an appointment to take my son for flu vaccination.
Negative (40/134, 29.9%) • I won’t take my child for flu vaccination because there is still some negative news.
Being hesitant or seeking opinions for vaccination
decision (25/134, 18.7%)• I am considering (whether to take my child for flu vaccination).
• Then, should I take my child for flu vaccination?
Vaccination clinic and cost (63/434, 14.5%)
Sharing information (48/63, 76%) • Dr XXX at Kwai Fong, trivalent vaccine is free and quadri valent vaccine cost HK$60.
My child just took the vaccination yesterday , and they still have some available
vaccines.
Seeking information (15/63, 24%) • Which clinics provide free flu vaccination (for children)?
Vaccine safety and side effects (62/434, 14.3%)
Concerns over vaccine safety and side effects (40/62,
65%)• Is it true that one needs to take influenza vaccination every year once he/she recei ves
the first flu vaccination and that all family members should recei ve influenza vacci-
nation once one member of the family recei ves the flu vaccination (otherwise it can
be worse)?
Being mixed or neutral/purely seeking information
about vaccine safety and side effects (16/62, 26%)• Different children may have different reactions to the flu vaccination.
• What can be the side effects of flu vaccination?
Sharing information for clarifying vaccine safety and
side effects (6/62, 10%)• It is misinformation that vaccination can cause autism. This rumor has been dismissed
many years before.
Vaccine effecti veness (52/434, 12.0%)
Concerns over vaccine effectiveness (26/51, 51%) • Now there are too many viruses/bacteria, and they change very quickly . This time,
we take the flu vaccination against this virus but later another new virus emer ges.
How can we ensure that the vaccination is effective?
• It depends on how accurate their guess on the vaccine strain is every year. If their
guess is wrong, the flu shot is a meaningless suffer.
• If one can still get sick even after taking the vaccination, why should he suffer from
an injection?
Sharing information for clarifying vaccine effective-
ness (16/51, 31%)• Although there is mismatch, the vaccine is still effective for preventing influenza
H1N1 or influenza B viruses.
• It (flu vaccination) is an additional protection for our children.
Being mixed or neutral/purely seeking information
about vaccine effectiveness (15/51, 29%)• Is it true that one can still get a cold even after taking the vaccination but can protect
against influenza?
• Can influenza vaccination protect one against serious complications due to influenza?
Medical eligibility for seasonal influenza vaccination
(40/434, 9.2%)• I thought to take my daughter for flu vaccination today but she has a running nose
and some cough. Is it OK for her to take flu vaccination?
Vaccination experience (33/434, 7.6%)
Positi ve (16/33, 49%) • My child has taken the flu vaccination and he still feels very good now.
Negative (12/33, 36%) • My elder daughter took the flu vaccination once but got more and severe sicknesses
that year. Since then, she has never taken flu vaccination...
Mixed or uncertain (5/33, 15%) • My two sons have taken the flu vaccination. One is 3 years old. He was given injec-
tion in the hip and he said no pain. Another is 7 years old. He was given injection
in the arm. He said it was very painful and the pain lasted for 2 days.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 9 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXQuotation Discussion topics and number of posts
• Vaccination is to inject germs into the body .
• Is it necessary to take flu vaccination if my child is always health y?
• Too many vaccinations are not good for children.Doubtful or negative vaccination attitudes (26/434, 6.0%)
• I would like to ask: it is my baby’ s first flu vaccination. The doctor said he needed
two doses of vaccines. Then what’ s the maximum time interv al between the two
vaccinations?First-time influenza vaccination (20/434, 4.6%)
The main knowledge and information shared by the moderator
was about vaccine effectiveness (30/144, 20.8%), vaccination
clinic and cost (27/144, 18.8%), vaccine safety and side effects
(25/144, 17.4%), medical eligibility for SIV (18/144, 12.5%),
and first-time influenza vaccination (15/144, 10.4%). The
moderator also provided social cues related to vaccination (eg,
doctors’ recommendation, other mothers’ decisions to take their
child for SIV, and vaccination statistics) to motivate vaccination
decision or planning (23/144, 16.0%).
Interactions Between Participants and the Moderator
During Online Discussion
To illustrate the change of participant cybersupport behaviors
as the moderator became involved in the online discussion,
participant cybersupport behaviors were categorized into three
types based on their potential effects on SIV uptak e: positi vecybersupport behaviors comprising sharing positi ve experience
or views, sharing knowledge or information and positi ve
emotional exchange; negative cybersupport behaviors
comprising sharing negative experience or views and negative
emotional exchange; and mixed or neutral cybersupport
behaviors comprising sharing mixed or neutral experience and
views, seeking information or opinions, and other emotional
exchange. Figure 3shows that although participants mainly
shared their negative experiences, views, or emotions (blue
bars) regarding SIV at the beginning of the online discussion,
with the moderator’ s involvement throughout the discussion,
the numbers of posts sharing positi ve experience or views,
sharing knowledge or information, and positi ve emotional
exchange (red bars) increased. However, the discussion dynamic
also indicates a less active participation in the discussion among
the participants as the discussion proceeded.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 10 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXFigur e 3. Change of cybersupport behaviors among participants by time and moderator’ s involvement. SNI–TP1 and SNI–TP2: groups that recei ved
weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups without a time pressure component; SNI+TP1 and SNI+TP2: groups
that recei ved weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups with a time pressure component; SIV: seasonal influenza
vaccination.
Parental Acceptability of the Inter vention
Of the 117 participants of the interv ention groups who
completed the outcome assessment, 115 (98.3%) reported
reading the discussion posts at least several times a week during
the interv ention period and 105 (89.7%) had read more than
one-half of all discussion posts. Over 80% (95/117, 81.2%)
indicated no concern over participating in the WhatsApp
discussion groups. Of those expressing concerns, the most
common concern was recei ving misinformation or irrele vant
information. Most (93/117, 79.4%) agreed that the information
from the discussion groups could impro ve understanding about
SIV. Around 60% (70/117, 59.8%) agreed that the information
was useful but 20.0% (23/117) reported the information was
insuf ficient for SIV decision making. Overall, 94.0% (110/117)
were willing to accept the same interv ention in the future, 84.6%
(99/117) would recommend the interv ention to other mothers,
and 87.2% (102/117) were satisf ied with the moderator’ s
information.
Post hoc qualitati ve intervie ws with 20 participants of the
interv ention groups were analyzed to clarify participants’in-depth opinions about the interv entions (Table D of
Multimedia Appendix 3). One main theme emer ging from the
intervie ws addressed perceptions of information from the
moderator comprising information attrib utes, benef it of
information provision, and lack of interest in information. Most
participants emphasized the positi ve attrib utes of the moderator’ s
information but a few complained that the reminders were too
repetiti ve and that the moderator’ s responses lacked details.
Two participants mentioned the unbalanced presentations of
the pros and cons of influenza vaccination, giving an impression
of hard sell. Benef its of information provision comprise
knowledge acquisition, moving to a contemplation stage,
promoting motivation for taking vaccination, and reminding of
vaccination planning. The second theme is percei ved advantages
of using WhatsApp for promoting child health comprising
convenience in information accessibility , better information
quality , and enhanced interaction with a health professional.
Few concerns over using WhatsApp for health promotion were
raised, mainly regarding recei ving unwanted advertising. On
perceptions of the time pressure component, most reported
feeling pressured into making a rapid decision, either a positi ve
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 11 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXor negative one, but others ignored or failed to notice the
shrinking optimal windo w of time. Contrib utors’ reasons for
not participating in the online discussion included percei ved
low confidence about giving information, avoiding arguments,
and percei ved low information need.
Discussion
Principal Findings
This social netw orking interv ention, involving sending weekly
vaccination reminders and encouraging exchanges of positi ve
experiences and information among participants via WhatsApp
discussion groups during an influenza vaccination campaign,
did not signif icantly enhance children’ s SIV uptak e. Two main
reasons may explain why a signif icant effect of sending regular
vaccination reminders was not identif ied. First, compared with
previous studies that used vaccination reminders to promote
routine childhood immunization [11,12], our study focused on
promoting an optional vaccine, childhood SIV; parents have
more risk-related concerns about optional vaccines [24]. Our
qualitati ve data indicated that although the positi ve attrib utes
of information from the moderator were appreciated by most
participants, the information provided mainly impro ved
knowledge, motivated contemplation, and increased vaccination
motivation. For participants who had already made the decision
to take their children for SIV before joining in the discussion
group, the information may have prompted vaccination planning
or been used as cues for taking action. For participants who had
antivaccination attitudes or were hesitant to take SIV, the
information was insuf ficient to change the psychological roots
of the antivaccination attitudes [44] or remo ve concerns over
vaccine risk and thereby cannot support a final decision for or
action on children’ s SIV. Second, compared with studies that
found a positi ve effect of sending regular vaccination reminders
for promoting influenza vaccination [10,13,17,18], vaccination
reminders were delivered by a health professional researcher
(the moderator) rather than a general practitioner on the primary
care team who had access to the target children’ s medical
records. Therefore, although information from the moderator
was percei ved by participants to be trustw orthy, it may have
been percei ved as less relevant to children’ s health care
compared with information recei ved directly from a general
practitioner and thereby had less impact on parental SIV decision
making. However, except for children with chronic conditions,
most parents and their children may not frequently interact with
a primary care team. Therefore, although this reflects one
potential weakness of our study , it may be more representati ve
of a real public health scenario for promoting childhood SIV.
Other studies suggest that even the health care providers’
position on vaccine safety is being increasingly questioned by
parents [45,46]. Health care providers need to communicate
carefully with vaccine-hesitant parents. Our study indicates that
the health professional’ s active participation and involvement
in vaccination discussions can create a more positi ve online
experience. The internet has become probably the main
information source shaping negative parental attitudes around
childhood immunization [47-49]. Active communication from
health professionals may be sufficiently effective to combatvaccine hesitanc y compared with attempts to control online
media misinformation [50,51].
Despite not increasing SIV uptak e among the target children,
the social netw orking interv ention was signif icantly effective
for promoting mothers’ self-ef ficacy in taking their children for
SIV. This is possibly due to the frequent posts of information
about the vaccination clinics and cost that were shared by both
moderator and participants through the online discussion.
Previous studies also have found that online information support
signif icantly increased parents’ percei ved self-ef ficacy in other
child health care practices [52-55] and that peer
experience-based information may be more likely to meet their
information needs [56,57]. As parents’ percei ved self-ef ficacy
for taking children for SIV is a signif icant predictor for
children’ s SIV uptak e [8], this is likely to facilitate future
childhood SIV uptak e. However, the discrepanc y between the
enhanced parental self-ef ficacy in taking child for SIV and the
unchanged SIV uptak e indicates that the direct effect of
percei ved self-ef ficacy on vaccination uptak e is weak [8].
Enhanced self-ef ficacy should combine with positi ve vaccination
attitudes to promote positi ve vaccination decision. However,
the moderator was found to be the main source of knowledge
and information about vaccine safety , side effects, and
effectiveness, while participants generally felt a lack of
confidence in sharing their personal knowledge, particularly
when there was a health professional (the moderator) in the
group. Because experience-based knowledge and information
from peers may be more powerful and persuasi ve for changing
parents’ attitudes [56,57], future studies should focus on how
to encourage peers to share positi ve experience-based knowledge
and information about vaccine safety , side effects, and
effectiveness for promoting childhood vaccination.
Including an additional time pressure did not signif icantly
enhance childhood SIV uptak e. However, subgroup analysis
showed that children’ s SIV uptak e signif icantly increased among
mothers without a full-time job while declining slightly among
mothers with a full-time job when the time pressure interv ention
was included. The qualitati ve data indicated that time pressure
pushed participants to make a rapid decision, but those decisions
can be either positi ve or negative. Unemplo yed and
part-time-emplo yed mothers may have more cogniti ve resource
to deliberate the pros and cons of influenza vaccination and
percei ve that they have the ability to make the decision within
time limit. Therefore, under some time pressure, they may
become more active in searching information to reduce the risk
of influenza and efficiently integrate different cues to reach a
positi ve vaccination decision. In comparison, working mothers
face more pressure from work for childcare [40] and thereby
tend to have more concerns over disrupti ve vaccination side
effects (proximal cost) than the risk of influenza (distal cost).
Working mothers may also place more weight on the value of
time taken from work to seek vaccination for their children [40]
and thereby the negative cues that favor inaction (not vaccinate
the child) may become more salient for them. As working
mothers may have fewer cogniti ve resources to decide whether
to take their children for SIV, the time pressure is likely to
induce stress in decision making. Therefore, time pressure may
enforce the influence of negative cues (eg, side effects of
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 12 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXinfluenza vaccination) on the vaccination decisions among
working mothers.
The content analysis of the WhatsApp discussion identif ied
several maternal concerns and misperceptions about SIV. Two
common concerns about vaccine side effects were that SIV was
needed annually once initiated and that all family members
should be vaccinated if one member was vaccinated. These
concerns seem linking to beliefs that SIV weak ens immunity .
This may be a misinterpretation of current recommendations
for annual SIV vaccination of all family members which should
be addressed in future SIV risk communications. Similarly ,
vaccine effectiveness was an issue because SIV does not ensure
100% protection and is worse where the SIV strain does not
match the actual circulating strain. SIV was percei ved to be
useless or wasteful by participants. This may also link to a
common distrust about how vaccine strains are predicted by the
vaccine scientif ic committee. Future risk communication should
clarify the accurac y of existing prediction for the main influenza
vaccine strain and the effectiveness of SIV in protecting against
not only risk of getting influenza but also complications of
influenza illnesses, and even when strains are not matched, SIV
can still offer some cross-immunity . Some participants refused
SIV due to their belief that vaccination is not a natural process.
Future risk communication should give a clear explanation about
the mechanism of influenza vaccination, which is a quasi-natural
process, by emphasizing similarities in vaccination and natural
exposures to specif ic immunogens—the former is simply a
controlled variant of the latter . For parents intending to take
their children for SIV, information about medical eligibility for
SIV, vaccination clinic and costs and how to arrange,
particularly the timing of the two vaccinations for children’ s
initial SIV, should be provided to enhance optimal timing of
SIV.
Despite being ineffective for increasing children’ s SIV uptak e,
the interv ention was nonetheless highly acceptable for most
participants. They appreciated the convenience of using
WhatsApp messenger as a channel for health communication
compared with sourcing information from websites or other
traditional health communication methods. In addition,
participants emphasized the importance of being able to interact
with a health professional and thereby have access to more
professional, trustw orthy, and personalized information through
WhatsApp. This indicates that the involvement of a health
professional in the online communication is highly valued by
parents and is likely to have greater impact if the health
professional is a primary care provider to the target population.
However, our study also indicates that audience segmentation,
based on parents’ prior beliefs about SIV, is necessary for
impro ving the effectiveness and acceptability of social
netw orking interv entions to achie ve behavioral change. Putting
people with different vaccination beliefs into one group may
lead to strong arguments which may negatively affect other
members’ participation in the discussion and the online
communication environment. Finding approaches that work to
bring resistant parents around to SIV requires further research.Limitations
This study had several limitations. First, we only recruited
participants who were users of WhatsApp or those who were
willing to install WhatsApp on their mobile phone and thereby
the sample may not be representati ve for the target population,
although the penetration rate of WhatsApp use was very high
in the population. Since almost all participants reported using
WhatsApp on a daily basis, the data did not have sufficient
variance to allow for examining the interv ention effects stratif ied
by WhatsApp use. Second, a discussion group specif ically for
influenza vaccination may dissuade those uninterested in the
topic, causing in-group biases. However, our analysis did not
find signif icant differences in participants’ demographics,
perceptions of SIV, and SIV history and intention across
interv ention arms. Third, this was a preliminary study to test
social netw orking interv entions effects on SIV uptak e and as
such the sample size was insuf ficient for detecting a small effect
size. Fourth, data on children’ s SIV uptak e were reported by
parents and could not be validated from children’ s medical
records and may be subject to social desirability bias. The survey
was emphasized to be anon ymous for participants to minimize
social desirability bias and impro ve response rate. Fifth, in the
WhatsApp discussion groups, out-of-of fice-hour discussions
were not promptly monitored and addressed. The time lag in
addressing participants’ questions or concerns may have affected
participants’ subsequent participation in discussions and thereby
SIV decision making. However, it is difficult to determine
optimal moderator input in the WhatsApp discussion given the
discussion group tried to encourage mutual support between
participants. Furthermore, the infrequent emotional exchange
among participants also indicated insuf ficient development of
attachment to and friendships between group members, which
could be a reason for why around half of the participants were
lurkers, silent and passi ve members in the WhatsApp discussion.
This represents to be a big challenge for the sustainability of
online discussion. Future studies need to examine how to
encourage information support from peers, moderate their
emotional interactions, and the optimized moderator
participation.
Conclusion
The social netw orking interv ention for mothers was ineffective
for increasing SIV uptak e among young children but did
effectively increase mothers’ percei ved self-ef ficacy for taking
their children for SIV. A combination of social netw orking
interv ention with added time pressure on decision making can
signif icantly promote children’ s SIV among non–full-time
working mothers, but among mothers working full-time, time
pressure may reduce SIV uptak e by reinforcing the influence
of negative cues on SIV decision making. Future social
netw orking interv entions should consider audience segmentation
using mothers’ working status and their prior SIV attitudes.
Mothers’ participation in the online discussion mainly involved
sharing concerns or negative views about vaccine safety , side
effects, and effectiveness and seeking information or opinions
to clarify these concerns. Mothers’ knowledge sharing and
information giving was mainly supporti ve of those intending
to take their children for SIV but seldom addressed concerns
about vaccine safety , side effects, and effectiveness, possibly
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 13 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderXdue to uncertainty around knowledge and information. The
moderator played an important role by providing knowledge
and information that addressed vaccine-related concerns and
shaped positi ve online discussions about vaccination. Finally ,our study indicates that WhatsApp messenger is a highly
acceptable medium for health communication among parents
in Hong Kong, but health professionals should be involved for
more effective health communications.
Ackno wledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the Hong Kong Government’ s Health Medical Research Fund (grant number 16150752).
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
Vaccination reminders (English and Chinese versions).
[PNG File , 1249 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
Guideline for monitoring and facilitating WhatsApp discussion for the moderator .
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 16 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
Multimedia Appendix 3
Supplementary tables.
[DOCX File , 27 KB-Multimedia Appendix 3]
Multimedia Appendix 4
Change of child's seasonal influenza vaccination uptak e by interv ention condition and participants' work status: (A) mothers with
a full-time job and (B) mothers without a full-time job.
[PNG File , 144 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4]
Multimedia Appendix 5
CONSOR T EHEAL TH checklist (V 1.6.1.).
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 2192 KB-Multimedia Appendix 5]
Refer ences
1. Guo RN, Zheng HZ, Li JS, Sun LM, Li LH, Lin JY, et al. A population-based study on incidence and economic burden of
influenza-lik e illness in south China, 2007. Public Health 2011 Jun;125(6):389-395. [doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2011.03.004 ]
[Medline: 21616513 ]
2. Palekar RS, Rolfes MA, Arriola CS, Acosta BO, Guidos PA, Vargas XB, et al. Burden of influenza-associated respiratory
hospitalizations in the Americas, 2010-2015. PLoS One 2019;14(9):e0221479 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0221479 ] [Medline: 31490961 ]
3. Tsang TK, Lau LLH, Cauchemez S, Cowling BJ. Household transmission of influenza virus. Trends Microbiol 2016
Feb;24(2):123-133 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.10.012 ] [Medline: 26612500 ]
4. Committee on Infectious Diseases. Recommendations for prevention and control of influenza in children, 2019-2020.
Pediatrics 2019 Oct;144(4):1. [doi: 10.1542/peds.2019-2478 ] [Medline: 31477606 ]
5. Low MSF , Tan H, Hartman M, Tam CC, Hoo C, Lim J, et al. Parental perceptions of childhood seasonal influenza vaccination
in Singapore: a cross-sectional survey. Vaccine 2017 Oct 27;35(45):6096-6102. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2017.09.060 ]
[Medline: 28958811 ]
6. Seo J, Lim J. Trends in influenza vaccination coverage rates in South Korea from 2005 to 2014: effect of public health
policies on vaccination behavior. Vaccine 2018 Jun 14;36(25):3666-3673. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2018.05.024 ] [Medline:
29739721 ]
7. De Oliveira Bernardo C, González-Chica DA, Stocks N. Impact of funding influenza vaccination on coverage among
Australian children: a national study using MedicineInsight, a large general practice database. Hum Vaccin Immunother
2019 Oct 07:1-6. [doi: 10.1080/21645515.2019.1664866 ] [Medline: 31526224 ]
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 14 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX8. Liao Q, Lam WWT , Cowling BJ, Fielding R. Psychosocial influences on parental decision-making regarding vaccination
against seasonal influenza for young children in Hong Kong: a longitudinal study , 2012-2013. Int J Beha v Med 2016
Oct;23(5):621-634. [doi: 10.1007/s12529-016-9551-1 ] [Medline: 26987657 ]
9. Legislati ve Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrati ve Region. 2018 May 18. Seasonal influenza vaccination URL:
https://www .legco.go v.hk/research-publications/english/essentials-1718ise06-seasonal-influenza-v accination.htm [accessed
2020-02-16]
10. Regan AK, Bloomf ield L, Peters I, Effler PV. Randomized controlled trial of text message reminders for increasing influenza
vaccination. Ann Fam Med 2017 Nov;15(6):507-514 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1370/afm.2120 ] [Medline: 29133488 ]
11. Ekhaguere OA, Oluw afemi RO, Badejok o B, Oyene yin LO, Butali A, Lowenthal ED, et al. Automated phone call and text
reminders for childhood immunisations (PRIMM): a randomised controlled trial in Nigeria. BMJ Glob Health
2019;4(2):e001232 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2018-001232 ] [Medline: 31139442 ]
12. Kazi AM, Ali M, Zubair K, Kalimuddin H, Kazi AN, Iqbal SP, et al. Effect of mobile phone text message reminders on
routine immunization uptak e in Pakistan: randomized controlled trial. JMIR Public Health Surveill 2018 Mar 07;4(1):e20
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/publichealth.7026 ] [Medline: 29514773 ]
13. Stockwell MS, Kharbanda EO, Martinez RA, Vargas CY, Vawdre y DK, Camar go S. Effect of a text messaging interv ention
on influenza vaccination in an urban, low-income pediatric and adolescent population: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2012 Apr 25;307(16):1702-1708. [doi: 10.1001/jama.2012.502 ] [Medline: 22535855 ]
14. Odone A, Ferrari A, Spagnoli F, Visciarelli S, Shefer A, Pasquarella C, et al. Effectiveness of interv entions that apply new
media to impro ve vaccine uptak e and vaccine coverage. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2015;11(1):72-82 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.4161/hv .34313 ] [Medline: 25483518 ]
15. Hootsuite. 2019 Jan 31. Digital 2019: Hong Kong URL: https://www .slideshare.net/DataReportal/
digital-2019-hong-k ong-january-2019-v01 [accessed 2020-02-16]
16. Census and Statistics Department. Thematic household survey report No. 67. Hong Kong: The Government of the Hong
Kong Special Administrati ve Region; 2018. URL: https://www .statistics.go v.hk/pub/B11302672019XXXXB0100.pdf
[accessed 2020-02-18]
17. Dombk owski KJ, Harrington LB, Dong S, Clark SJ. Seasonal influenza vaccination reminders for children with high-risk
conditions: a registry-based randomized trial. Am J Prev Med 2012 Jan;42(1):71-75. [doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2011.09.028 ]
[Medline: 22176850 ]
18. Stockwell MS, Hofstetter AM, DuRi vage N, Barrett A, Fernandez N, Vargas CY, et al. Text message reminders for second
dose of influenza vaccine: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics 2015 Jan;135(1):e83-e91. [doi: 10.1542/peds.2014-2475 ]
[Medline: 25548329 ]
19. Conner M, Norman P. Predicting Health Beha vior. Berkshire: Open University Press; 2005.
20. Black S, Rappuoli R. A crisis of public confidence in vaccines. Sci Transl Med 2010 Dec 08;2(61):61mr1. [doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.3001738 ] [Medline: 21148125 ]
21. Ritov I, Baron J. Outcome knowledge, regret, and omission bias. Org Beha v Hum Decis Proc 1995 Nov;64(2):119-127.
[doi: 10.1006/obhd.1995.1094 ]
22. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristic and Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press;
1990.
23. Slovic P, Finucane ML, Peters E, MacGre gor DG. Risk as analysis and risk as feelings: some thoughts about affect, reason,
risk, and rationality . Risk Anal 2004 Apr;24(2):311-322. [doi: 10.1111/j.0272-4332.2004.00433.x ] [Medline: 15078302 ]
24. Wang LDL, Lam WWT , Wu JT, Liao Q, Fielding R. Chinese immigrant parents' vaccination decision making for children:
a qualitati ve analysis. BMC Public Health 2014 Feb 07;14:133 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-133 ] [Medline:
24507384 ]
25. Ordóñez L, Benson L. Decisions under time pressure: how time constraint affects risky decision making. Org Beha v Hum
Decis Proc 1997 Aug;71(2):121-140. [doi: 10.1006/obhd.1997.2717 ]
26. Maule A, Hock ey GJ, Bdzola L. Effects of time-pressure on decision-making under uncertainty: changes in affective state
and information processing strate gy. Acta Psychologica 2000 Jun;104(3):283-301. [doi: 10.1016/s0001-6918(00)00033-0 ]
27. Huber O, Kunz U. Time pressure in risky decision-making: effect on risk defusing. Psychol Sci 2007;49(4):415-426.
28. Oh-Descher H, Beck JM, Ferrari S, Sommer MA, Egner T. Probabilistic inference under time pressure leads to a
cortical-to-subcortical shift in decision evidence integration. Neuroimage 2017 Nov 15;162:138-150. [doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.08.069 ] [Medline: 28882633 ]
29. Yang Z, Saini R, Freling T. How anxiety leads to suboptimal decisions under risky choice situations. Risk Anal 2015
Oct;35(10):1789-1800. [doi: 10.1111/risa.12343 ] [Medline: 25683655 ]
30. Khadjesari Z, Murray E, Kalaitzaki E, White IR, McCambridge J, Thompson SG, et al. Impact and costs of incenti ves to
reduce attrition in online trials: two randomized controlled trials. J Med Internet Res 2011;13(1):e26 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2196/jmir .1523 ] [Medline: 21371988 ]
31. Liao Q, Lam WWT , Cowling BJ, Fielding R. Parental perspecti ves on hand, foot, and mouth disease among children in
Hong Kong: a longitudinal study . Epidemiol Infect 2018 Feb;146(3):324-332. [doi: 10.1017/S0950268818000018 ] [Medline:
29386079 ]
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 15 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX32. Efird J. Block ed randomization with randomly selected block sizes. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2011 Jan;8(1):15-20
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.3390/ijerph8010015 ] [Medline: 21318011 ]
33. Chiu SS, Kwan MY, Feng S, Chan EL, Chua H, Wong JS, et al. Early season estimate of influenza vaccination effectiveness
against influenza hospitalisation in children, Hong Kong, winter influenza season 2018/19. Euro Surveill 2019 Jan;24(5):1
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2019.24.5.1900056 ] [Medline: 30722814 ]
34. Cowling BJ, Kwan MYW , Wong JSC, Feng S, Leung C, Chan ELY, et al. Interim estimates of the effectiveness of influenza
vaccination against influenza-associated hospitalization in children in Hong Kong, 2015-16. Influenza Other Respir Viruses
2017 Jan;11(1):61-65 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1111/irv .12399 ] [Medline: 27313064 ]
35. Feng S, Chiu SS, Chan ELY, Kwan MYW , Wong JSC, Leung C, et al. Effectiveness of influenza vaccination on
influenza-associated hospitalisations over time among children in Hong Kong: a test-ne gative case-control study . Lancet
Respir Med 2018 Dec;6(12):925-934. [doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30419-3 ] [Medline: 30442587 ]
36. Smerecnik CMR, Mesters I, Kessels LTE, Ruiter RAC, De Vries NK, De Vries H. Understanding the positi ve effects of
graphical risk information on comprehension: measuring attention directed to written, tabular, and graphical risk information.
Risk Anal 2010 Sep;30(9):1387-1398. [doi: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.2010.01435.x ] [Medline: 20561265 ]
37. Cardoso RL, Leite RO, de Aquino ACB. A graph is worth a thousand words: how overconf idence and graphical disclosure
of numerical information influence financial analysts accurac y on decision making. PLoS One 2016;11(8):e0160443 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160443 ] [Medline: 27508519 ]
38. Wang LD, Lam WWT , Fielding R. Hong Kong Chinese parental attitudes towards vaccination and associated
socio-demographic disparities. Vaccine 2016 Mar 14;34(12):1426-1429. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2016.02.006 ] [Medline:
26868081 ]
39. Hon KL, Tsang YCK, Chan LCN, Ng DKK, Miu TY, Chan JY, Hong Kong Society of Paediatric Respirology and Aller gy.
A community-based cross-sectional immunisation survey in parents of primary school students. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med
2016 Apr 07;26:16011 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2016.11 ] [Medline: 27053378 ]
40. Otieno NA, Nyawanda BO, Audi A, Emukule G, Lebo E, Bigogo G, et al. Demographic, socio-economic and geographic
determinants of seasonal influenza vaccine uptak e in rural western Kenya, 2011. Vaccine 2014 Nov 20;32(49):6699-6704
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2013.10.089 ] [Medline: 24462406 ]
41. Wilson J, Lorenz K. In: Chen J, Chen D, editors. Modeling Binary Correlated Responses using SAS, SPSS, and R. New
York: Springer; 2015.
42. Love B, Crook B, Thompson CM, Zaitchik S, Knapp J, Lefeb vre L, et al. Exploring psychosocial support online: a content
analysis of messages in an adolescent and young adult cancer community . Cyberpsychol Beha v Soc Netw 2012
Oct;15(10):555-559. [doi: 10.1089/c yber.2012.0138 ] [Medline: 22970826 ]
43. Cheung YTD, Chan CHH, Wang MP, Li HCW , Lam T. Online social support for the prevention of smoking relapse: a
content analysis of the WhatsApp and facebook social groups. Telemed J E Health 2017 Jun;23(6):507-516. [doi:
10.1089/tmj.2016.0176 ] [Medline: 27911654 ]
44. Hornse y MJ, Harris EA, Fielding KS. The psychological roots of anti-v accination attitudes: a 24-nation investig ation.
Health Psychol 2018 Apr;37(4):307-315. [doi: 10.1037/hea0000586 ] [Medline: 29389158 ]
45. Kestenbaum LA, Feemster KA. Identifying and addressing vaccine hesitanc y. Pediatr Ann 2015 Apr;44(4):e71-e75 [FREE
Full text] [doi: 10.3928/00904481-20150410-07 ] [Medline: 25875982 ]
46. Glanz JM, Wagner NM, Narw aney KJ, Shoup JA, McClure DL, McCormick EV, et al. A mixed methods study of parental
vaccine decision making and parent-pro vider trust. Acad Pediatr 2013;13(5):481-488 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1016/j.acap.2013.05.030 ] [Medline: 24011751 ]
47. Jones AM, Omer SB, Bednarczyk RA, Halse y NA, Moulton LH, Salmon DA. Parents' source of vaccine information and
impact on vaccine attitudes, beliefs, and nonmedical exemptions. Adv Prev Med 2012;2012:932741 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1155/2012/932741 ] [Medline: 23082253 ]
48. Tustin JL, Crowcroft NS, Gesink D, Johnson I, Keelan J. Internet exposure associated with Canadian parents' perception
of risk on childhood immunization: cross-sectional study . JMIR Public Health Surveill 2018 Jan 19;4(1):e7 [FREE Full
text] [doi: 10.2196/publichealth.8921 ] [Medline: 29351896 ]
49. Tustin JL, Crowcroft NS, Gesink D, Johnson I, Keelan J, Lachapelle B. Facebook recruitment of vaccine-hesitant Canadian
parents: cross-sectional study . JMIR Public Health Surveill 2017 Jul 24;3(3):e47 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.2196/publichealth.6870 ] [Medline: 28739557 ]
50. Witteman HO, Zikmund-Fisher BJ. The defining characteristics of Web 2.0 and their potential influence in the online
vaccination debate. Vaccine 2012 May 28;30(25):3734-3740. [doi: 10.1016/j.v accine.2011.12.039 ] [Medline: 22178516 ]
51. Stahl J, Cohen R, Denis F, Gaudelus J, Martinot A, Lery T, et al. The impact of the web and social netw orks on vaccination:
new challenges and opportunities offered to fight against vaccine hesitanc y. Med Mal Infect 2016 May;46(3):117-122.
[doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2016.02.002 ] [Medline: 26987960 ]
52. De Lepeleere S, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Cardon G, Verloigne M. The effect of an online video interv ention 'Movie Models'
on specif ic parenting practices and parental self-ef ficacy related to children's physical activity, screen-time and health y
diet: a quasi experimental study . BMC Public Health 2017 Apr 27;17(1):366 [FREE Full text] [doi:
10.1186/s12889-017-4264-1 ] [Medline: 28449658 ]
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 16 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX53. Merk el RM, Wright T. Parental self-ef ficacy and online support among parents of children diagnosed with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Pediatr Nurs 2012;38(6):303-308. [Medline: 23362628 ]
54. Shore y S, Ng YPM, Ng ED, Siew AL, Mörelius E, Yoong J, et al. Effectiveness of a technology-based supporti ve educational
parenting program on parental outcomes (part 1): randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2019 Feb 13;21(2):e10816
[FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/10816 ] [Medline: 30758289 ]
55. Hammersle y ML, Okely AD, Batterham MJ, Jones RA. An internet-based childhood obesity prevention program
(time2bhealth y) for parents of preschool-aged children: randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res 2019 Feb
08;21(2):e11964 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/11964 ] [Medline: 30735139 ]
56. Jang J, Dworkin J, Hessel H. Mothers' use of information and communication technologies for information seeking.
Cyberpsychol Beha v Soc Netw 2015 Apr;18(4):221-227. [doi: 10.1089/c yber.2014.0533 ] [Medline: 25803204 ]
57. Morris ME, Aguilera A. Mobile, social, and wearable computing and the evolution of psychological practice. Prof Psychol
Res Pr 2012 Dec;43(6):622-626 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1037/a0029041 ] [Medline: 25587207 ]
Abbreviations
CIVSS: Childhood Influenza Vaccination Subsidy Scheme
GEE: generalized estimating equation
SIV: seasonal influenza vaccination
SMS: short message service
SNI+TP: group that recei ved weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups
with a time pressure component
SNI–TP: group that recei ved weekly reminders to take their children for SIV via WhatsApp discussion groups
without a time pressure component
Edited by G Eysenbac h; submitted 27.09.19; peer-reviewed by N Levitz, F Timimi, V Patel, E Da Silva; comments to author 19.10.19;
revised version received 05.12.19; accepted 26.01.20; published 28.02.20
Please cite as:
Liao Q, Fielding R, Cheung YTD, Lian J, Yuan J, Lam WWT
Effectiveness and Parental Acceptability of Social Networking Interventions for Promoting Seasonal Influenza Vaccination Among
Young Childr en: Randomized Contr olled Trial
J Med Internet Res 2020;22(2):e16427
URL: http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
doi: 10.2196/16427
PMID: 32130136
©Qiuyan Liao, Richard Fielding, Yee Tak Derek Cheung, Jinxiao Lian, Jiehu Yuan, Wendy Wing Tak Lam. Originally published
in the Journal of Medical Internet Research (http://www .jmir.org), 28.02.2020. This is an open-access article distrib uted under
the terms of the Creati ve Commons Attrib ution License (https://creati vecommons.or g/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distrib ution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in the Journal of Medical Internet
Research, is properly cited. The complete bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://www .jmir.org/,
as well as this copyright and license information must be included.
J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 2 | e16427 | p. 17 http://www .jmir.org/2020/2/e16427/
(page number not for citation purposes)Liao et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX