eGovernment  
Benchmark 2017
Taking stock of user-centric  
design and delivery of digital  
public services in Europe
Digital
Single
MarketFINAL INSIGHT REPORT – VOLUME 1
A study prepared for the European Commission DG  
Communications Networks, Content & Technology by:
This study was carried out for the European Commission by
Capgemini, IDC, Sogeti, and Politecnico di Milano
      
 
For more information about this paper, please contact:
European Commission
Directorate General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
Unit F.4 Digital Economy & Skills’
Gianluca Papa – Project Officer for the eGovernment Benchmark
Email: gianluca.papa@ec.europa.eu
Project Team
Niels van der Linden – Principal Consultant, Capgemini
Project Manager eGovernment Benchmark
Email: niels.vander.linden@capgemini.com
Written and reviewed  by Dinand Tinholt, Niels van der Linden, Anouschka Groeneveld, Sem Enzerink, 
Cosmina Radu (Capgemini); Gabriella Cattaneo, Stefania Aguzzi (IDC); Florian Pallaro (Sogeti); Giuliano Noci, 
Michele Benedetti, Giulia Marchio, Luca Tangi (Politecnico di Milano).
Internal identification
Contract number: 30-CE-08484066/00-95 
SMART number: SMART 2016 - 0050
DISCLAIMER
By the European Commission, Directorate-General of Communications Networks, Content and Technology. 
The information and views set out in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily 
reflect the official opinion of the Commission. The Commission does not guarantee the accuracy of the data 
included in this study. Neither the Commission nor any person acting on the Commission’s behalf may be 
held responsible for the use which may be made of the information contained therein.
ISBN: 978-92-79-74294-1 
DOI : 10.2759/816781
© European Union, 2017. All rights reserved. Certain parts are licensed under conditions to the EU. 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 
eGovernment  
Benchmark 2017
Taking stock of user-centric 
design and delivery of digital 
public services in Europe
FINAL INSIGHT REPORT – VOLUME 1
A study prepared for the European Commission DG  
Communications Networks, Content & Technology5
Executive Summary
The digital transformation of governments across Europe is one of the cornerstones  
of achieving the Digital Single Market vision, as well as the broader EU2020 goals.  
The recent Ministerial Declaration emphasises the need to strive towards ‘open, efficient 
and inclusive, providing borderless, interoperable, personalised, user-friendly, end-to end 
digital public services to all citizens and businesses – at all levels of public administration1. 
The Declaration also includes ‘User-centricity principles for design and delivery of digital 
public services’. The 2017 benchmark provides not only an in-depth analysis of the pro -
gress made by European public administrations in their modernisation of service provi -
sion; it also delivers the ‘baseline’ against which the progress made by the actions under 
the new eGovernment Action Plan 2016-2020 can be benchmarked. 
This Insight Report presents the main highlights of the assessment of eGovernment 
services in 34 countries – the European Union Member States, as well as Iceland,  
Norway, Montenegro, Republic of Serbia, Switzerland, and Turkey – referred to as 
EU28+ throughout this report. The assessment of these services covers the priority 
areas of the eGovernment Action Plan. Each priority area is measured by one or more 
indicators, included in the so-called top level benchmarks:
■ User-centric Government:  assesses the availability and usability of public eServices 
and examines ease and speed of using those eServices. 
■ Transparent Government:  evaluates the transparency of government authorities’ 
operations, service delivery procedures and the level of control users have over their 
personal data. 
■ Cross-border Mobility: measures the availability and usability of services for  
foreign citizens and businesses. 
■ Key Enablers: assesses the availability of 5 functionalities, such as Authentic Sources 
and eID.
In order to evaluate these benchmarks Mystery Shoppers  are trained and briefed  
to observe, experience, and measure (public service) processes. After the Mystery  
Shopping exercise, results are validated by Member States.
 
This year’s measurement has selected a set of four  life events  that cover the most  
common domains of public services, representative for both businesses and citizens: 
■ Starting a business and early trading operations 
■ Losing and finding a Job 
■ Studying 
■ Family Life (new life event; measured for the first time)
Each life event is associated with a customer journey that businesses or citizens  
experiencing this life event will go through. They provide the starting point for  
the assessment by the mystery shoppers, who will provide a score on User-centric  
Government, Transparent Government, Cross-border Mobility and Key enablers for  
each of these four life events.
51 Talinn Ministerial Declaration on eGovernment, 6 October 2017, available online:  
http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/document.cfm?doc_id=47559 6Overall eGovernment performance in Europe
 
Overall eGovernment performance in Europe is moving in the right direction. The heat 
map in Figure 2 reveals that Malta, Denmark, Sweden, Estonia and Norway are the top-
5 countries that lead the way forward in Europe’s ambition to create a Digital Single 
Market. 
 
Out of the four benchmarks, the User-centric Government benchmark is most advanced. 
Results for the Transparent Government benchmark are less positive, and for instance 
for 1 in 2 services the level of transparency of service delivery processes is insufficient.  
The results of the Cross-border mobility benchmark are more encouraging, as they show 
solid improvements over the years. Finally, the Key Enablers benchmark scores lowest, 
and leaves most room for improvement (at 52%). > 75%
50 - 75%
< 50%
No data available
Malta Cyprus
Figure 1: Overall eGovernment performance in Europe 
 (equally weighting top level benchmarks for user centricity, transparency, mobility and key enablers;  
 EU28+, 2016)eGovernment Benchmark 20177User centricity: mobile friendly public services are picking up
The User-centric government benchmark scores 80% for the EU28+. The countries with 
the most user-centric services are Malta, Denmark, Portugal, Sweden and Austria. 
■ Overall online availability of services reaches a score of 82%. Business services and 
information are more online (87%) than the services in the life events of Studying 
(86%), Losing & Finding a Job (83%) and Family (71%). 
■ Usability, defined as online support and help functionalities, reaches 89% with a 
similar maturity trend of the life events as for online availability. 
■ Mobile friendly public services are picking up, on average 1 in 2 public websites is 
mobile friendly (54%). Contrary to the other indicators, public websites in the Busi -
ness life event score lowest (51%) and the Family Life services highest (60%).
Transparency: ample room to increase openness of public sector
& services
The Transparent Government benchmark stands at 59% for the EU28+. The highest 
scores are achieved by Malta, Estonia, Lithuania, Austria and Spain. 
■ Transparency of Public organisations involved in the service delivery in the life 
events is the highest scoring indicator for the Transparent Government benchmark, 
at 73%. Public Organisations in the Losing and Finding a Job life event are more 
transparent (at 82%) than public organisations in the other life events. 
■ The lack of transparency of service delivery processes (50%) is an important barrier 
to a further uptake of online public services. In particular the Family life event scores 
badly (35%) on this indicator with on average only 1 in 3 services providing sufficient 
information to users. 
■ The indicator on how personal data is used, can be corrected, and where complaints 
can be filed scores 53%. Only very few countries provide information on who has 
consulted personal data and for what purpose.
Cross-border mobility: solid progress bringing the Digital Single 
Market closer
The Cross-border Mobility benchmark stands at 63% for the EU28+, the countries that 
score highest are Malta, Sweden, Norway, Latvia and Austria. 
■ Cross-border business start-up services and cross-border services for students reach 
an online availability of respectively 73% and 74%. This implies information is well 
available for foreign online visitors (86%) and approximately 3 in 5 services is online 
available for foreign online users (60%). 
■ The usability for cross-border services – represented in this indicator as online help, 
support and complaint functionalities – stands at 78%. 
■ New in the benchmark are two new indicators that consider the possibility of using 
eID (22%) and eDocuments (34%). The data for these indicators was collected end 
of 2016 – ahead of the date of 29 September 2018 from which the eIDAS regulation 
comes into full force.8Key Enablers: potential to boost eGovernment services
The Key Enablers benchmark scores 52% for the EU28+, the countries with the best 
scores are Malta, Denmark, Estonia, Lithuania and the Netherlands.
■ Authentic Sources, the indicator that assesses to what extent personal data is  
pre-filled into online forms, holds at 47%. Progress was made on the business, job 
and studying life events compared to previous years, but especially services in the 
Family life event are deprived of pre-filled information (at only 22%). This also holds 
true for local and regional delivered services across all life events.
■ The indicator for eID reaches 52%. In practice, for 1 in 2 services it is not possible to 
use an eID. This is mostly due to the Family life event where in 2 of 3 services an eID 
solution is missing. 
■ The indicator for eDocuments reaches 61%. 
■ A new indicator for ‘Digital Post’ was added, to assess whether public authorities 
allow citizens to receive communications digitally only. The Digital Post indicator 
resulted in a score of 50%.  
Drivers for eGovernment performance: a benchlearning perspective
EGovernment performances are measured through penetration, which can be described 
as the extent to which use of the online channel is widespread among users of govern -
ment services, and digitisation, which has the purpose of synthesising in one value for 
each country a proxy of the digitisation level of the back offices and the front offices. 
Penetration at European level is 52%, but with a wide variety of results. Digitisation at 
European level is 65%, but in this case there is less variety in the results. Countries with 
a lower level of penetration and digitisation might learn from countries with similar 
contextual variables that have better performances in absolute indicators. By compar -
ing countries with similar environment-specific characteristics we are able to determine 
which countries perform above expectation and which countries perform below  
expectation, given the country-specific context. eGovernment Benchmark 2017
Table of Content10
Table of contents
1 INTRODUCTION 13
2 EGOVERNMENT BENCHMARK: WHAT HAS BEEN MEASURED AND HOW 16
3 OVERALL EGOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE IN EUROPE 18
4 USER CENTRICITY: MOBILE FRIENDLY PUBLIC SERVICES ARE PICKING UP 21
5 TRANSPARENCY: AMPLE ROOM TO INCREASE OPENNESS OF PUBLIC SECTOR AND SERVICES 25
6 CROSS-BORDER MOBILITY: SOLID PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING THE DSM 29
7 KEY ENABLERS: DRIVERS OF EGOVERNMENT ARE IN PASSENGER’S SEAT 33
8 DRIVERS FOR EGOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE: A BENCHLEARNING PERSPECTIVE 3711Table of Figures
Table of TablesFigure 1  Overall eGovernment performance in Europe  (equally weighting top level benchmarks 
  for user centricity, transparency, mobility and key enablers; EU28+, 2016) 6
Figure 2  Overall eGovernment performance in Europe  (equally weighting top level benchmarks 
  for user centricity, transparency, mobility and key enablers; EU28+,2016) 18
Figure 3  Results for top-level benchmarks per life event (EU28+, 2016) 19
Figure 4  Historical analysis for key indicators directly related to individual services (Average scores 
  for Business start-up, Losing & finding a Job, Studying; 2012;2014;2016; EU28+) 20
Figure 5  User centricity benchmark (for EU28+; 2016) 22
Figure 6  Mobile friendliness in EU28+; absolute performance 2016 vs. growth since 2014 22
Figure 7 Infographic on User Centricity 23
Figure 8  Can you monitor who has consulted your personal data and for what purpose? 26
Figure 9 Infographic on Transparency 27
Figure 10  Comparing national vs cross-border online availability of services in Business and 
  Studying Life event (EU28+; 2016) 30
Figure 11  Comparing national vs cross-border availability of eID in Business and Studying Life event 
  (EU28+; 2016) 30
Figure 12 Infographic on Cross-border mobility 31
Figure 13  Options of receiving Digital Post (% of relevant total; EU28+; 2016) 34
Figure 14  Authentic Sources key enabler per life event (EU28+; 2016) 34
Figure 15 Infographic Key Enablers 35
Figure 16  Absolute and relative performances 39
Table 1 Purpose of this report and coherence with study’s deliverables 12
Table 2 Overview of life events under assessment in 2016 1712
Who should read this report?
Anyone who is interested in how governments are coping with today’s societal 
challenges, and exploiting modern technologies in that challenge. 
Benchmarking is used to encourage mutual learning, to perform multilateral assess -
ments, and to contribute to further convergence of the policies of Member States of 
the EU, Iceland, Montenegro, Norway, Serbia, Switzerland and Turkey (EU-28+). It is an 
essential part of the response to current socio-economic challenges. The benchmark -
ing framework used here is founded on the key EU eGovernment priorities. The results 
build on a rich source of research data, using different methods, with strong collabora -
tion from Member States; they provide a robust and coherent insight into the current 
state of play of eGovernment in the EU-28+. This report offers insight into how public 
administrations are progressing in their digital transformation, and can encourage  
public services to provide faster and smarter responses. Benchmarking is the first  
step in an ongoing benchlearning and improvement cycle. This report is produced in 
conjunction with two other deliverables, a Background Report and open research data.
Insight Report  
(THIS report)Background Report Open research data
For whom?Government leadership Policy officers Academics & research 
communities
What?Key findings Detailed analysis of 
indicators and life eventsAll data collected in 
machine-readable format 
and method
PurposeSteer European and 
national eGovernment 
strategiesRealise direct 
improvements in public 
service deliveryStimulate re-use of data 
and in-depth analysis
Table 1: Purpose of this report and coherence with study’s deliverables13
Introduction
Insight Report  
(THIS report)Background Report Open research data
For whom?Government leadership Policy officers Academics & research 
communities
What?Key findings Detailed analysis of 
indicators and life eventsAll data collected in 
machine-readable format 
and method
PurposeSteer European and 
national eGovernment 
strategiesRealise direct 
improvements in public 
service deliveryStimulate re-use of data 
and in-depth analysis14Introduction 1
The digital transformation of governments 
across Europe is one of the cornerstones 
of achieving the Digital Single Market vi -
sion, as well as the broader EU2020 goals. 
The 2017 benchmark sheds light into the 
state-of-play of the digital transformation 
of European public administrations and the 
extent to which is ‘on track’ with regard to 
achieving these objectives. 
This year’s measurement gains further 
relevance when assessed against the back -
ground of the new eGovernment Action 
Plan 2016-2020 launched in April last year. 
The 2017 measurement not only provides 
an in-depth analysis of the progress made 
by European public administrations in 
their modernisation of service provision; 
it also delivers the ‘baseline’ against which 
the progress made by the actions under 
the new eGovernment Action Plan 2016-
2020 can be benchmarked. In doing so, 
the benchmark aims at providing – like 
every year—an assessment of the extent 
to which European public administrations 
are on track to achieving the 2020 vision of 
a Digital Single Market. The monitoring of 
the digital transformation of government 
is a key element to assessing the progress 
towards completing the Digital Single Mar -
ket (henceforth DSM) as well as the pursuit 
of a more “citizen-centric Europe”. 
The present  Insight Report  presents the 
main highlights of the assessment of 
eGovernment services in 34 countries – the 
European Union Member States, as well as Iceland, Norway, Montenegro, Republic of 
Serbia, Switzerland, and Turkey – referred 
to as EU28+ throughout this report. The 
benchmark is a yearly assessment that 
monitors the implementation of the  
eGovernment Action Plan’s priorities across 
Europe. For the 34 participating countries 
the assessment provides an overview of 
their own progress on eGovernment, as 
well as a ‘peer-comparison’ with the pos -
sibility to learn from the best practices and 
success stories in other countries that are 
in a similar situation. 
This report is accompanied by a Background 
Report , which provides a comprehen -
sive analysis of the results on the top-
level benchmarks, in each of the 2016 life 
events, as well as an extensive description 
of the peer-clustering exercise that has 
been performed to facilitate and encour -
age best practices transfer across Member 
States.
In the benchmark tradition, the life events 
measured in 2014 represented the focus 
of the 2016 exercise, as part of the biennial 
cycle of the benchmark. These domains 
were: Starting a Business, Losing and Find -
ing a Job and Studying. In addition to these 
and with the broader goal of providing 
further impulses to public administrations 
across Europe towards the modernisation 
of their service provision in new domains, 
a further life event was added this year: 
Family Life.eGovernment Benchmark 201715The analysis follows the lines of four top-
level benchmarks, covering important EU 
policy priorities:
■ User Centricity - indicates the extent 
to which a service or information con -
cerning the service is provided online.
■ Transparency  - indicates the extent 
to which governments are transparent 
with regard to 
a) the process of service delivery;
b) their own responsibilities and  
performance; and 
c) the personal data involved.
■ Cross Border Mobility  - indicates the 
extent to which customers of public 
services users can use online services 
in another European country.
■ Key enablers  - indicates the extent 
to which technical pre-conditions for 
eGovernment service provision are 
used.16eGovernment Benchmark: what 
has been measured and how 2
The EU eGovernment Benchmark evalu -
ates the priority areas of the eGovern -
ment Action Plan 2016-2018. Progress 
on every priority area is measured by one 
or more indicators, so-called top level 
benchmarks:
■ User-centric Government  assesses 
the availability and usability of  
public eServices and examines ease 
and speed of using those eServices. 
■ Transparent Government  evaluates 
the transparency of government au -
thorities’ operations, service delivery 
procedures and the level of control 
users have over their personal data. 
■ Cross-border Mobility measures the 
availability and usability of services for 
foreign citizens and businesses. 
■ Key Enablers  assesses the availability 
of 5 functionalities, such as Authentic 
Sources and eID.
All top level benchmarks consist of multi -
ple sub-indicators. These are in turn meas -
ured by a number of questions regarding 
the quality or quantity of eGovernment 
services on a specific aspect.
In order to assess all indicators, the cur -
rent benchmark uses  Mystery Shoppers  
who are trained and briefed to observe, 
experience, and measure a (public service) 
process. Mystery Shoppers act as prospec -
tive users and follow a detailed, objective 
evaluation checklist. Mystery Shopping 
was the method of choice for the assess -
ment of all top level benchmarks under 
review this year. 
After the Mystery Shopping exercise, 
results are validated by Member States.  This is an intense collaborative process 
with participating countries representa -
tives. Member States are included at the 
start and at the end of the evaluation: at 
the start in order to validate the sample 
and to identify key characteristics of the 
services under assessment; at the end to 
validate the research results in collabora -
tion with the responsible organisations 
in a country and possibly correct obvious 
erroneous findings.
This measurement has selected a set 
of eight life events that cover the most 
common domains of public services, 
representative for both businesses and 
citizens. Each life event is associated with 
a customer journey that businesses or 
citizens experiencing this life event will 
go through. They provide the starting 
point for the assessment by the mystery 
shoppers. These life events have been 
measured since 2012, with the exception 
of ‘Family Life’ which was measured this 
year for the first time. Table 2 provides an 
overview.
Each life event is measured once every 
two years. This two-year cycle allows 
countries to arrange follow up on the 
results and to implement improvements 
after each measurement. With the adop -
tion of the EU eGovernment Action Plan 
2016-2020 and in line with the objectives 
stated by it, this year’s measurement 
undergone a number of updates with 
regard to the method. Thus, this limits 
the degree of comparison with previous 
years. This report focuses on the results 
obtained in 2016 and where possible 
provides comparisons with previously 
obtained results in 2014 and 2012.eGovernment Benchmark 2017172016 (and 2014 and 2012) 2017 (and 2015 and 2013)
Business life eventsStarting a business and early  
trading operations Regular business operations 
Citizen life eventsLosing and finding a Job 
Studying 
Family Life (from 2016)Starting a small claims procedure 
Moving 
Owning and driving a car 
Table 2: Overview of life events under assessment in 201618
Overall eGovernment 
performance in Europe3
Overall eGovernment performance in Eu -
rope is moving in the right direction. The 
heat map in Figure 2 reveals 12 countries 
that are most advanced when combining 
the results for user centricity, transparen -
cy, cross-border mobility and deployment 
of key enablers. These countries have 
managed to make these services avail -
able online, mobile friendly, transparent, 
with support of key enablers, and for both country nationals as well as citizens and 
businesses from neighbouring countries 
for the majority of their public services re -
lated to business start-up, losing & finding 
a job, studying and family life. The top-5 
consists of Malta, Denmark, Sweden, 
Estonia and Norway. These countries lead 
the way forward in Europe’s ambition to 
create a Digital Single Market.
> 75%
50 - 75%
< 50%
No data available
Malta Cyprus
Figure 2: Overall eGovernment performance in Europe 
 (equally weighting top level benchmarks for user centricity, transparency, mobility and key enablers;  
 EU28+,2016)19eGovernment Benchmark 2017
Figure 3 presents the scores for the 
top-level benchmarks for each of the life 
events that were measured in 2016. The 
method for data collection was updated 
in 2016 with the result that only for a se -
lection of indicators it is possible to make 
a historical comparison. 
Figure 4 provides insight into how five of 
the more relevant indicators developed 
over time and reveal important trends. 
Summarising the results from both figures, 
with regard to European developments in 
eGovernment results, it is fair to say that:
■ User Centricity is the most ad -
vanced benchmark in Europe in 
2016, emphasising the focus of gov -
ernments to bring more public infor -
mation and services online.  If we 
look at the progress made as regards 
online availability of services in three 
life events that were measured con -
sistently since 20122 Europe records 
a 12 percentage point (p.p.) increase 
(from 73% in 2012 to 85% in 2016), 
with countries such as Luxembourg 
and Latvia even progressing with 60% and 63% respectively. The gap be -
tween least performing country and 
best performing country is also closing 
(from a 52 p.p. gap to 47 p.p. in 2016). 
Mobile friendliness of public websites 
is rapidly increasing – though still only 
1 in 2 public websites allow to properly 
read information and navigate public 
websites on a mobile device. 
■ Transparency of government  
organisations, service processes and 
personal data averages at 59% for 
the EU28+ in 2016. Results for Trans -
parency of service delivery processes 
(e.g. informing users on how long the 
process will take, response times, etc.) 
reveal that for 1 in 2 services the level 
of transparency is insufficient. As the 
eGovernment Benchmark has been 
stating since 2012, this is a key barrier 
for users to further continue their 
online journey and hence a must for 
governments to improve. On the posi -
tive side: results did increase for this 
indicator by 14 p.p. since 20123 with in 
particular countries like Germany (+46 
p.p. from 2012), Finland (+35 p.p. from 
2012) and Iceland (+32 p.p. from 2012) 
Figure 3: Results for top-level benchmarks per life event (EU28+, 2016)484 
63 
65 
62 81 
62 
0 
56 83 
60 
61 
52 73 
49 
0 
37 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
User centric
government
Transp arent
government
Mobility  
Key enablers Business2016 
Job2016 
Studying2016 
Family2016 
2	 For	the	life	events:	starting-up	a	business,	losing	&finding	a	job,	studying	that	were	measured	in	2012,	2014,	2016	on	the	same	set	of	research	questions.	
The overall results for 2016 also include a new life event called ‘family life’.
3 idem 
4 Cross-border mobility is not measured for life events ‘Losing and Finding a Job’ and ‘Family Life’
 203
taking the message seriously. Slovakia 
and Switzerland also made substantial 
progress (+33 p.p. and +27 p.p.) but 
still have some way to go to reach 
more acceptable levels with absolute 
scores lagging behind the EU average.
■ Cross-border service delivery is 
essential for the Digital Single 
Market and records solid improve -
ments over the years (+25 p.p. since 
2012).  This implies information and 
even services are becoming more and 
more available for EU citizens when 
starting up a business or commencing 
a study in another country. Results for 
the online availability indicator show 
that besides best performers Sweden 
and Finland (both 100% score), some 
countries have made huge steps over 
the past years: Latvia (+60 p.p.), Poland 
(+49 p.p.) and France (+45 p.p.) have 
improved their online channels for 
fellow Europeans. With online avail -
ability of cross-border services in 2016 being at roughly the same level that 
national services were in 2012, it will 
be of interest to see if cross-border 
service delivery can continue the steep 
growth curve it has shown over the 
past years. New indicators on cross-
border eID and eDocuments are in its 
infancy, but will be the accelerator for 
fully online cross-border services in the 
year(s) to come.
■ The deployment of key technologi -
cal enablers has most room for im -
provement (at 52%; EU28+) . In par -
ticular, services in the Family life event 
are lagging behind. When looking at 
the key enabler that is facilitating pre-
filling of online forms – the authentic 
sources indicator – it becomes clear 
that progress is not as fast as other 
indicators with only a 3 p.p. growth 
since 2012. The benefits for users and 
public authorities are evident (e.g. 
efficient, effective, time-saving) but 
insufficiently reaped.
Figure 4: Historical analysis for key indicators directly related to individual services (Average scores for  
 Business start-up, Losing & finding a Job, Studying; 2012;2014;2016; EU28+)0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
2012 2014 2016 Online availability 
Transparency service
delivery  
Cross-border Online
availability 
Authentic sources  
Mobile friendliness 21User centricity: mobile friendly  
public services are picking up4
The map of Europe depicted by Figure 
5 illustrates the state-of-play as regards 
user centricity. It shows best performing 
countries are Malta, Denmark, Portugal, 
Sweden, Austria, Norway, Finland and  
Germany (in green). With the Baltics, other 
Central European and Mediterranean 
countries (in orange) these are the most 
user centric countries in Europe. Room 
for improvement is mostly with eastern 
and south-eastern countries (in yellow and 
brown). 
A new element of user centricity is the 
assessment of mobile friendliness of 
public websites. Public Services need 
to connect with users where they are, 
now mostly in a mobile world. Mobile 
technology is becoming an increasing part 
of citizens’ platforms to find government information and communicate with their 
government. eGovernment services 
should be tuned towards this demand. 
Citizens expect government sites to be 
accessible and readable on their mobile 
device. Thousands of European public 
websites were automatically assessed on 
their mobile responsiveness, evaluating 
five common barriers. Figure 6 illustrates 
performance and progress for three life 
events that were assessed in both 2014 
and 2016. Even though still only 1 in 
2 public websites is mobile friendly 
in 2016, the scatter plot does reveal 
that countries are making substantial 
progress in designing their websites in 
mobile responsive manners. Sweden, 
Denmark, and the United Kingdom reach 
almost maximal scores on this indicator. 
Malta made huge progress (+76 p.p.). Key Insights
■ The top-level benchmark for user centricity lands at 80% for the EU28+. 
Countries with the most user-centric services are Malta, Denmark, Portugal, 
Sweden and Austria.
■ Online availability of services reaches 82%, with business services and 
information being more online (87%) than services in the life events Studying 
(86%), Losing & Finding a Job (83%) and Family (71%).
■ Usability – defined as online support and help functionalities – reaches 89% with 
a similar maturity trend of the life events as for online availability.
■ On average 1 in 2 public websites is mobile friendly (54%}. Governments seem to 
increasingly invest in mobile friendly websites as in 2014 the score was only 27%. 
Contrary to the other indicators, public websites in the Business life event scores 
lowest (51%) and the Family Life services highest (60%).eGovernment Benchmark 201722User centricity: mobile friendly  
public services are picking up
90 - 100%
80 - 89%
70 - 79%
< 69%
No data availableUser Centricity (online availability,
usability, mobile friendliness) in 2016
Malta Cyprus
Figure 5: User centricity benchmark (for EU28+; 2016)
Figure 6: Mobile friendliness in EU28+; absolute performance 2016 vs. growth since 2014
AT 
BE 
BG 
CH 
CY 
CZ 
DE 
DK 
EE 
EL 
ES 
FI 
FR 
HR 
HU 
IE 
IS 
IT 
LT 
LU 
LV 
ME 
MT 
NL 
NO 
PL 
PT 
RO 
RS 
SE 
SI 
SK 
TR 
UK 
EU28+ 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Increase compared to 2014  (for Business start-up, 
Losing & ﬁnding a Job, Studying) 
Mobile friendliness in 2016 (for Business start-up, Losing & ﬁnding a Job, Studying)   
User Centricity
Mobile friendly public services are picking up
 
“Online availability shows a 12 percentage 
point increase compared to 2012”
“1 in 2 public websites mobile friendly” Best performing countries  
MaltaOverall score 80%
“Can I use this service online?”
3% of all public services is delivered automatically
“Are there sufﬁcient online support  and help services?”
“Can I use my phone to access public services?”
“Solid indicator, most room for improvement on complaint procedures”Denmark Portugal Sweden Austria 
Online availability 
Mobile friendliness UsabilityOverall score 82% 87% 71%
83% 86%
Overall score 54% 51% 60%
53% 52%Overall score 89% 92% 84%
90% 89%Services have to meet users 
expectations, be needs based and user centric  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingThe gap between best performing and worst performing country in the category online availability is decreasing (from 52 pp gap in 2012 to a 47 pp gap in 2016)  
National level outperforms local level : The percentage of services 
available online at national level (65%) outperforms the percentage at local level (EU average under 50%)
The score for mobile friendliness 
almost doubled from 2014 to 2016Legend
VariaUser Centricity
Mobile friendly public services are picking up
 
“Online availability shows a 12 percentage 
point increase compared to 2012”
“1 in 2 public websites mobile friendly” Best performing countries  
MaltaOverall score 80%
“Can I use this 
service online?”
3% of all public services 
is delivered automatically
“Are there sufﬁcient online support  and help services?”
“Can I use my phone to access public services?”
“Solid indicator, most room for improvement on complaint procedures”Denmark Portugal Sweden Austria 
Online availability 
Mobile friendliness Usability
Overall score 82% 87% 71%
83% 86%
Overall score 54% 51% 60%
53% 52%Overall score 89% 92% 84%
90% 89%Services have to meet users expectations, be needs based and user centric   %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingThe gap between best performing and worst performing country in the category online availability is decreasing (from 52 pp gap in 2012 to a 47 pp gap in 2016)  
National level outperforms local level : The percentage of services 
available online at national level (65%) outperforms the percentage at local level (EU average under 50%)
The score for mobile friendliness 
almost doubled from 2014 to 2016Legend
Varia
Figure 7: Infographic Centricity on User25Transparency: ample room  
to increase openness of public  
sector and services5
Enhancing transparency of data and ser -
vices between public administrations and 
their customers within and across borders 
is believed to boost efficiency, account -
ability and contributes to trust in public 
sector entities. This is also in line with the 
increased demands and expectations of 
citizens and businesses across Europe 
who wish to understand how the services 
they access work as well as be informed 
regarding processing times, personal data 
consulted, public administrations’ mission 
and achievements. 
One of the indicators this benchmark 
evaluates is the transparency of personal data. In general, citizens and businesses 
see the possibility to access personal data 
online increase, as well as more possibili -
ties to notify governments in cases where 
data is incomplete or incorrect, to modify 
data and to complain. A new question was 
added to this assessment and the results 
are depicted in Figure 8. Counterbalanc -
ing the fact that public administrations 
will increasingly re-use personal data for 
personalisation and efficiency purposes, 
citizens should be allowed to view who 
has used their data and for what purpose.
Figure 8 Can you monitor who has con -
sulted your personal data and for what 
purpose?Key Insights
■ The top-level benchmark for Transparent Government stands at 59% (EU28+). 
Countries scoring highest on this benchmark are: Malta, Estonia, Lithuania, 
Austria and Spain.
■ Transparency of public organisations involved in the service delivery in the life 
events is the highest scoring indicator of this benchmark, at 73%. Organisations 
in the Losing and Finding a Job life event are more transparent (at 82%) than 
those in the other life events.
■ An important barrier to increasing take-up of online public services is the lack 
of Transparency of service delivery process. This indicator stands at 50% and in 
particular the Family life event scores badly with on average only 1 in 3 services 
providing sufficient information to users on e.g. timing of delivery, service 
progress and service performance (35%).
■ A higher level of transparency of how personal data is used, whether it can be 
corrected and where complaints can be filed could increase user satisfaction. 
This indicator holds at 53% and requires improvement across all aspects. Only 
very few countries provide information on who has consulted personal data and 
for what purpose.eGovernment Benchmark 201726Transparency: ample room  
to increase openness of public  
sector and services
The research reveals that for 3 in 4 
public services there is no information 
available for the user concerning who 
has consulted their personal data and 
for what purpose.  The most mature 
stage 4 is not reached by any country yet. 
Only very few countries have advanced 
features in place for their citizens and 
businesses: Austria, Sweden, Denmark, 
Norway and Latvia reach for some of their 
life events stage 3. This means one can 
monitor whether and when personal data 
was consulted and by which department/
organisation.
Finally, when viewing the results for 
the individual questions for the other 
transparency indicators (Transparency 
of public organisations, Transparency of 
service delivery) the following information 
requirements that are important to users 
need further improvement:■ Roughly 1 in 3 public organisations 
publishes results from user 
satisfaction surveys or deploys 
methods for monitoring the 
administration’s performance (34%; 
EU28+);
■ Where 73% of public organisations 
provide information online about the 
key policy making processes, only 37% 
informs users on their ability to 
participate  in these processes;
■ In half of public services users are 
not informed how long the entire 
process is going to take nor is a 
maximum  time limit set within which 
the public organisation has to deliver/
respond. 
■ Users also find difficulties tracking 
progress  during the course of a service 
application (50%; EU28+) nor can they 
easily find information about service 
performance levels  (42%; EU28+).Figure 8: Can you monitor who has consulted your personal data and for what purpose?Percentage of portals assessed
(Taking into account all life events)
74%0 = This information is not available4 = You can monitor whether and when your data has
been consulted, who (department/organisation) has
consulted the data and for what purpose
3 = You can monitor whether and when your data has
been consulted and who (department/organisation) hasconsulted the data
2 = You can monitor whether and when your data has been consulted
1 = You can monitor whether your data has been consulted8%13%5%0%Transparency
Governments need to do more  to match citizens demands for openness
“For family life 1 in 3 services
is transparent”“1 in 3 public organisations publishes results from user satisfaction surveys”“For 3 in 4 public services there is no information on who consulted personal data”
Best performing countries
Percentage of portals achieving level of transparency (Taking into account all life events)MaltaTransparency refers to openness, accountability and trust. 
“Is it clear how long the service process will take?”“How transparent is the public organisation”“Am I clearly informed on what is  happening to my personal data?”
This information is not availableYou can monitor whether your data has been consultedYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consultedYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consulted and who (department/organisation) has consulted the dataYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consulted, who (department/organisation) has consulted the data and for what purposeEstonia Lithuania Austria SpainPersonal data 
Overall score 59%
0%
5%
13%
8%
74%Service delivery Public organisations 
Overall score 50% 59% 35%
50% 56%Overall score 73% 72% 68%
82% 70%Overall score 53% 58% 45%
56% 55%  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingLegend
VariaTransparency
Governments need to do more  to match citizens demands for openness
“For family life 1 in 3 services
is transparent”“1 in 3 public organisations publishes results from user satisfaction surveys”“For 3 in 4 public 
services there is no information on who consulted personal data”
Best performing countries
Percentage of portals achieving level of transparency (Taking into account all life events)MaltaTransparency refers to openness, accountability and trust. 
“Is it clear how long the service process will take?”“How transparent is the public organisation”“Am I clearly informed on what is  happening to my personal data?”
This information is not availableYou can monitor whether your data has been consultedYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consultedYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consulted and who (department/organisation) has consulted the dataYou can monitor whether and when your data has been consulted, who (department/organisation) has consulted the data and for what purposeEstonia Lithuania Austria Spain
Personal data 
Overall score 59%
0%
5%
13%
8%
74%Service delivery Public organisations 
Overall score 50% 59% 35%
50% 56%Overall score 73% 72% 68%
82% 70%Overall score 53% 58% 45%
56% 55%  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingLegend
Varia
Figure 9: Infographic on Transparency29Cross-border mobility:  
solid progress towards  
achieving the DSM6
Cross-border mobility is one of the 
main objectives of the EU eGovernment 
Action Plan 2016-2020 and represents an 
important milestone towards realising the 
Digital Single Market. Achieving cross-
border mobility across Europe will on 
the one hand offer more opportunities 
for citizens to work, live, and study in any 
European country; on the other hand it will 
enable businesses to set up shop anywhere 
across Europe, thus boosting Europe’s 
attractiveness and competitiveness as 
location to invest and conduct business in.
With the new eGovernment Action Plan 
the EU28+ set out to remove the barriers 
standing in the way of the Digital Single 
Market and at the same time to “prevent 
further fragmentation arising in the context of the modernisation of public 
administrations” 5. Towards this end, the 
use of Key Enablers such as electronic 
Identification, electronic Documents in 
cross-border public sector transactions 
represents an important step to create 
seamless cross-border services. 
For this insight report two key conclusions 
are presented. First, for business and 
student services the extent to which 
services are online available across-borders 
is growing rapidly over the past years and 
now approaching the same level of services 
that are delivered to country nationals. 
However, there is also still a substantial 
14% of services that are ‘offline’, meaning 
not available (or readable) for cross-border 
users. 
5   Op. cit, The EU eGovernment Action Plan 2016-2020, page. 2. Key Insights
■ The top-level benchmark for cross-border mobility stands at 63% (EU28+) with 
the best performing countries being Malta, Sweden, Norway, Latvia and Austria. 
■ Cross-border business start-up services reach an online availability of 73%; 
almost at par with cross-border services for students (74%). This implies 
information is very well available for foreign online visitors (86%) and 
approximately 3 in 5 services is online available for foreign online users (60%).
■ The usability for cross-border services – represented in this indicator as online 
help, support and complaint functionalities – stands at 78%.
■ Two new indicators reveal the possibility of using eID and eDocuments in 
cross-border services. The 2016 benchmark for cross-border eID is 22% and 
for eDocuments 34%. The data for these indicators was collected end of 2016 
– ahead of the date of 29 September 2018 from which the eIDAS regulation 
comes into force.eGovernment Benchmark 201730To bring more services online in cross-
border delivery, and to continue the fast 
growth made over the past years, the key 
enabler eID is of vital importance. With the 
eIDAS Regulation coming into full force as 
of 29 September 2018 (the data for this 
benchmark was collected end of 2016), it 
might be that Member States will expand 
the application and recognition of noti -
fied eIDs in cross-border services starting 
already from the next measurement. Al -though there are more factors in play, this 
could have impact on the online availability 
of cross-border services. So despite the 
fact that eID currently is in a pre-mature 
stage in Europe (at 22%), and can also 
improve at national level (52%), both indi -
cators could benefit from this regulation. 
As a result, citizens and business would 
benefit from seamless online services in 
their own countries and across Europe in 
the coming years.Figure 10: Comparing national vs cross-border online availability of services in Business and Studying Life event (EU28+; 2016)
Figure 11: Comparing national vs cross-border availability of eID in Business and Studying Life event (EU28+; 2016)Service & 
information online
Information onlineCross-border services National services
Oﬂline2614
61 67321
eID available
eID not availableCross-border National
22
48 52
78Overall score 
73% 74% Overall score74%
79% 76% Overall score78%Overall score22%
24%29%* 14%
Best performing 
countries  
Malta Sweden Norway Latvia Austria 
Varia
The best performing countries being Malta, Sweden, Norway, Latvia and Austria
Better eGovernment services for nationals than for 
non-country nationalsOverall score34%
43%The opportunity of using online services in another country is 
growing for citizens and entrepreneurs
63%Achieving cross-border mobility will offer 
opportunities for citizens, enable 
business, and boost Europe’s 
attractiveness and competitiveness
Online availability 
“Can I use an online service 
in another EU country?”eID Cross Borders
“Is it possible to use my electronic identiﬁcation in another EU country?”
Cross-border service delivery records 
solid improvements over the years (+25 p.p. since 2012).Cross border use of eID is currently still in a pre-mature stage
Usability
“Can I ﬁnd sufﬁcient online support and help 
services in another EU country?”
Promising developments on the 
usability dimension of citizen cross-border serviceseDocuments Cross Borders 
“Is it possible to use electronic documents across borders?”
There are more online opportunities for businesses than for citizens to use eDocuments. Cross-border mobility
  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the two life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operations
StudyingLegendOverall score 
73% 74% Overall score74%
79% 76% Overall score78%Overall score22%
24%29%* 14%
Best performing 
countries  
Malta Sweden Norway Latvia Austria 
Varia
The best performing countries being Malta, Sweden, Norway, Latvia and Austria
Better eGovernment services for nationals than for 
non-country nationalsOverall score34%
43%The opportunity of using online services in another country is growing for citizens and entrepreneurs
63%Achieving cross-border mobility will offer 
opportunities for citizens, enable 
business, and boost Europe’s 
attractiveness and competitiveness
Online availability 
“Can I use an online service 
in another EU country?”eID Cross Borders
“Is it possible to use my electronic identiﬁcation in another EU country?”
Cross-border service delivery records 
solid improvements over the years (+25 p.p. since 2012).Cross border use of eID is 
currently still in a pre-mature stage
Usability
“Can I ﬁnd sufﬁcient online support and help 
services in another EU country?”
Promising developments on the 
usability dimension of citizen cross-border serviceseDocuments Cross Borders 
“Is it possible to use electronic documents across borders?”
There are more online opportunities for businesses than for citizens to use eDocuments. Cross-border mobility
  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the two life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operations
StudyingLegend
Figure 12: Infographic on Cross-border mobility33Key Enablers: drivers of 
eGovernment are in  
passenger’s seat7
A new Key Enabler on ‘Digital Post’ as -
sesses whether public authorities allow 
citizens to receive communications digitally 
only, and hence reducing paper mailings. 
Digital Post refers to the possibility that 
governments communicate electroni -
cally-only with citizens or entrepreneurs 
through e.g. personal mailboxes or other 
digital post solutions. This is often possible 
in cases of personal mailboxes or MyPages. 
There are 9 countries that have enabled Digital Post across all life events meas -
ured in 2016: Austria, Denmark, Estonia, 
Iceland, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, 
Sweden and Slovakia. Seven more have 
realised this functionality for three of the 
four life events (Belgium, Germany, Italy, 
Luxembourg, Latvia, Norway and Spain). 
Finally, the Figure 8 reveals that there is 
a gap between the national and regional/
local services with regard to Digital Post 
solutions. Key Insights
■ The top-level benchmark for Key Enablers reaches 52% (EU28+), leaving quite 
some room for countries to improve. Countries leading the way are Malta, 
Denmark, Estonia, Lithuania and the Netherlands.
■ The indicator for eID reaches 52%. In practice, for 1 in 2 services it is not 
possible to use an eID. This is mostly due to the Family life event where in 2 of 
3 services an eID solution is missing. Services concerning obtaining parental 
authority, acknowledging a child, obtaining birth certificates and pre-registering 
for marriage/partnership need improvements. In 16% of services it is possible to 
use a national eID and also access other services without re-authentication.
■ The indicator for eDocuments stands at 61%.
■ The new indicator ‘Digital Post’ that assesses whether public authorities allow 
citizens to receive communications digitally only, and hence reducing paper 
mailings, scores 50%.
■ Authentic Sources, the indicator that assesses to what extent personal data is 
pre-filled into online forms, holds at 47%. Despite progress on the business, job 
and studying life events compared to previous years – especially services in the 
Family life event are deprived of pre-filled information (at only 22%. This also 
holds true for local and regional delivered services across all life events.eGovernment Benchmark 201734A similar gap was already identified for 
online availability of services, that at local 
level is 17 p.p. lower compared to national 
services. For the key enabler authentic 
sources – enabling pre-filling of online 
forms – a similar observation can be made. 
In particular in the Family life event this 
indicator scores very low, where appar -ently in only 14% of services personal 
information is pre-filled. This can hamper 
a joined-up development of eGovernment 
services across all tiers and urges countries 
to ensure close collaboration with the local 
entities in order to achieve high quality 
eGovernment services and efficient deliv -
ery for all. Figure 13: Options of receiving Digital Post (% of relevant total; EU28+; 2016) 
Figure 14: Authentic Sources key enabler per life event (EU28+; 2016) 0% 10%20%30%40%50%
Business  Family  Job Studying 
for national services for local/regional services 
Personal information
preﬁlled
No informationpreﬁlledStudying Job Family Business
54 46 53 47 8614
51 49
Governments should make better use of digital key enablers to boost 
eGovernment services
Overall score 52%
Modernisation of public administrations towards 
providing faster and higher quality services needs to rely on key digital enablers
Overall score 52% 
57% 55*%67%* 30%“Is it possible to use 
electronic identiﬁcation?”eID
Users can only use 
eID in   1   of   2 
services 
Overall score 61% 75% 45%eDocuments
“Is it possible to 
use electronic documents?”
Progress can be observed with regard 
to losing and ﬁnding a job and starting up a business
Digital Post 
“Is it possible to send and receive 
digital post only – and reduce paper processes?”
Overall score 50% 
  8    countries have enabled 
Digital Post across all services 
and life eventsKey Enablers
Authentic sources 
“Are online forms pre-ﬁlled with data 
the Government already knows?”
Overall score 47% 58% 22%
52% 57%Almost   1    in   2 
online forms are pre-ﬁlled 
with data the government already knowsCountries leading the way are 
Malta Denmark Estonia Lithuania Netherlands
National outperformance with regard to digital post solutions (on average a gap of 9 percentage points)
Local and regional delivered 
services especially are deprived of pre-ﬁlled information 
54%
44%49%
53%  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingLegend
Digital post
Authentic sourceseDocumentseID
Online availability 
“Can I use an online service in another EU country?”
62% 61*%VariaFigure 15: Infographic Key EnablersGovernments should make better use of digital key enablers to boost 
eGovernment services
Overall score 52%
Modernisation of public administrations towards 
providing faster and higher quality services needs to rely on key digital enablers
Overall score 52% 
57% 55*%67%* 30%“Is it possible to use 
electronic identiﬁcation?”eID
Users can only use 
eID in   1   of   2 
services 
Overall score 61% 75% 45%eDocuments
“Is it possible to 
use electronic documents?”
Progress can be observed with regard 
to losing and ﬁnding a job and starting up a business
Digital Post 
“Is it possible to send and receive 
digital post only – and reduce paper processes?”
Overall score 50% 
  8    countries have enabled 
Digital Post across all services 
and life eventsKey Enablers
Authentic sources 
“Are online forms pre-ﬁlled with data 
the Government already knows?”
Overall score 47% 58% 22%
52% 57%Almost   1    in   2 
online forms are pre-ﬁlled 
with data the government already knowsCountries leading the way are 
Malta Denmark Estonia Lithuania Netherlands
National outperformance with regard to digital post solutions (on average a gap of 9 percentage points)
Local and regional delivered 
services especially are deprived of pre-ﬁlled information 
54%
44%49%
53%  %
Average of the scores achieved
on the four life events 
Starting a business 
and early trading 
operationsFamily life
Losing and 
/f_inding a jobStudyingLegend
Digital post
Authentic sourceseDocumentseID
Online availability 
“Can I use an online service in another EU country?”
62% 61*%Varia37Drivers for eGovernment 
performance: a benchlearning 
perspective7
The benchlearning exercise compares the 
eGovernment performance of different 
countries in order to understand which fac -
tors hamper innovation and how the key 
characteristics of a country might influence 
eGovernment performance. 
eGovernment performances are meas -
ured through  Penetration , which can be 
described as the extent to which the usage 
of online eGovernment services is wide -
spread, and Digitisation , which proxies 
the Digitisation level of the back-offices and the front–offices of governments. We 
refer to Penetration and Digitisation as 
the absolute indicators of the countries 
performance. 
By identifying the main factors that drive 
the innovation actions, we are able to draw 
different development paths that coun -
tries can follow. Insights in the possible 
development paths might allow countries 
to learn from best performers’ experiences. Key Insights
■ Penetration at European level is 52%, but with a wide spread among the 
different countries: there are countries close to 90% (Finland and Denmark) and 
countries with a percentage lower than 30% (Italy, Greece and Czech Republic).
■ Digitisation at European level is 65%, there are no countries with a percentage 
lower than 40%. The best performer is Malta (97%). Five countries (Greece, 
Hungary, Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania) have percentages lower than 50%.
■ eGovernment performances are correlated: countries with better performance 
in Digitisation seem to have better performance in Penetration and vice-versa.
■ The benchlearning exercise analyses countries with similar environmental 
characteristics, but with different Digitisation and Penetration levels. The 
benchlearning perspective allows us to explore performance levels, similarities 
and differences in context, and eGovernment implementation across different 
countries. 
■ A specific country can be considered in line with the European average when 
following the European trends of performance, underperforming when 
performing below expectations and outperforming when performing above 
expectations.
■ Underperforming countries might learn from countries with similar 
environmental characteristics but better performances in the absolute 
indicators.eGovernment Benchmark 201738To this end, the analysis aims to:
■ Assess and compare eGovernment 
maturity among the EU28 countries 
through two absolute indicators:  
Penetration and Digitisation.
■ Explore the meaning of each perfor -
mance level across different countries, 
by raising questions about how similar 
or different contexts influence  
eGovernment implementation.
Environment-specific characteristics influ -
ence eGovernment policies and strategies 
in each country. In this report we consider 
three categories of Environment-specific 
characteristics: 
■ Users’ characteristics:  this factor 
measures citizens’ willingness to use 
online services. It includes elements 
that enable citizens to use online 
channels, such as the citizens’ level of 
digital knowledge and the overall level 
of ICT usage, i.e. the variety of ac -
tivities performed by citizens that are 
already online. These activities range 
from using online content (videos, 
music, games, etc.) to modern commu -
nication activities, online shopping and 
banking.
■ Government characteristics:  the 
governance structure determines the 
coverage of eGovernment services, 
investments and efforts made in in -
novation practices. This factor includes 
the quality of governments’ action and 
the openness of data and information 
from an Open Government perspec -
tive. 
■ Context characteristics: This factor 
includes some of the external ele -
ments that may influence broader 
eGovernment application: the deploy -
ment of broadband infrastructure and 
its quality, the digitisation of business -
es and their implementation of online 
sales channels.
We refer to these environment-specific 
characteristics as the relative indicators of a country. When comparing relative and 
absolute indicators, three types of coun -
tries can be identified:
■ Average countries:  these countries 
perform in line with the European 
trends of performance.
■ Underperforming countries: these 
countries perform below expectations, 
compared to countries with similar 
environmental characteristics. 
■ Outperforming countries: these 
countries perform above expectations, 
compared to countries with similar 
environmental characteristics. 
Figure 16 shows the results of this analysis: 
each country is shown in terms of absolute 
performances (i.e. levels of Penetration 
and Digitisation) and relative performances 
(i.e. influence of environmental characteris -
tics on absolute performance). The arrows 
signal if a country’s score in either Digitisa -
tion or Performance is not what would be 
expected in terms of its environmental 
characteristics (i.e. relative indicators). If 
the arrow faces upward or to the right the 
country scores higher than expected, if the 
arrow faces downward or to the left the 
country scores lower than expected.
Countries with a lower level of Penetration 
and Digitisation can learn from countries 
with similar environmental characteris -
tics but better performances in absolute 
indicators.
The analysis shows three countries (Czech 
Republic, Hungary and Luxembourg) with 
relative performance below the expecta -
tions both in Penetration and in Digitisation. 
These countries all seem to have the con -
text, users and government characteristics 
to implement policies to obtain better over -
all performances in eGovernment services.
There are also countries Outperforming  
or Average with respect to one absolute  
indicator, but Underperforming with  
respect to the other.39Figure 16: Absolute and relative performancesNon-consolidated eGovFruitful eGov
Expandable eGovLOW MEDIUM HIGHLOW MEDIUM HIGH
10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Outperforming
in Penetration
Underperformingin PenetrationOutperforming
in DigitisationUnderforming
in DigitisationPenetration
LEGENDDigitisationUnexploited 
 eGov
RO
HR
LU
CZ
ITBEPTAT
MTLVLTFI
NLDK
EEEE
NLSE SE
ES
DECY
PLSIFR
EU28
BG
HU
ELSKIEUK
AverageeGovernment Benchmark 201740For Penetration, that applies to Italy,  
Germany, Belgium, Cyprus and Portugal. 
These countries all appear to have the con -
text, users and government characteristics 
to achieve better Penetration performanc -
es. These countries are required to make 
the most out of the relative characteristics 
to implement policies aimed at offer -
ing more eGovernment services to their 
citizens and/or raising awareness about the 
opportunity to benefit from eGovernment 
services.
For Digitisation, instead, Bulgaria, Croatia, 
Greece, Ireland, Slovakia and United Kingdom 
are the underperforming countries. These 
countries all seem to have the context, users 
and government characteristics to score 
better in Digitisation performances. These 
countries are required to invest in digitalising 
the back- and front-offices in order to have 
more efficient and effective procedures and 
a better services delivery.
There are also outperforming countries. 
These countries have Digitisation and 
Penetration absolute performances above 
what would be expected given their  
environmental characteristics. 
Estonia is the only country outperform -
ing in both Digitisation and Penetration. 
Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands and 
Romania are outperforming in Penetration; 
Austria, Latvia, Malta, Portugal and Spain 
are outperforming in Digitisation. It would 
be interesting to further study these coun -
tries and find more precise explanations 
for their performances. That exercise could 
offer best practices to be implemented in 
other contexts.41Country Acronyms (in alphabetical order)
1 AT Austria
2 BE Belgium
3 BG Bulgaria
4 CH Switzerland
5 CY Cyprus
6 CZ Czech Republic
7 DE Germany
8 DK Denmark
9 EE Estonia
10 EL Greece
11 ES Spain
12 FI Finland
13 FR France
14 HR Croatia
15 HU Hungary
16 IE Ireland
17 IS Iceland
18 IT Italy
19 LT Lithuania
20 LU Luxembourg
21 LV Latvia
22 MT Malta
23 ME Montenegro
24 NL Netherlands
25 NO Norway
26 PL Poland
27 PT Portugal
28 RO Romania
29 RS Serbia
30 SE Sweden
31 SI Slovenia
32 SK Slovakia
33 TR Turkey
34 UK United Kingdom
EU28+ Cluster of all listed countries in this listList of country acronyms  
 
European Commission
eGovernment Benchmark 2017
Taking stock of user-centric design and delivery of digital public services in Europe
Insight report
Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union
2017  - 42 pages.
ISBN: 978-92-79-74294-1 
DOI: 10.2759/816781
© European Union, 2017. All rights reserved. Certain parts are licensed under conditions to the EU. 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. KK-06-17-186-EN-N
DOI: 10.2759/816781ISBN 978-92-79-74294-1