29 MAY 2020 • VOL 368 ISSUE 6494     951S CIENCE  sciencemag.orgBy Michelle M. Mello1,2 and C. Jason Wang1,3 D
igital epidemiology—the use of data g
enerated outside the public health sy
stem for disease surveillance—has b
een in use for more than a quarter c
entury [see supplementary materi-al
s (SM)]. But several countries have t
aken digital epidemiology to the next level i
n responding to COVID-19. Focusing on core p
ublic health functions of case detection, c
ontact tracing, and isolation and quaran-t
ine, we explore ethical concerns raised by d
igital technologies and new data sources in p
ublic health surveillance during epidemics. F
or example, some have voiced concern that tr
ust and participation in such approaches ma
y be unevenly distributed across society; o
thers have raised privacy concerns. Yet c
ounterbalancing such concerns is the argu-me
nt that “sometimes it is unethical not to u
se available data” (1); some trade-offs may b
e not only ethically justifiable but ethically o
bligatory. The question is not whether to use n
ew data sources—such as cellphones, wear-ab
les, video surveillance, social media, inter-n
et searches and news, and crowd-sourced sy
mptom self-reports—but how.I
NNOVATIONS AGAINST COVID-19S
ome efforts involve escalations of exist-in
g techniques of digital epidemiology—for e
xample, using cellphone signals and social me
dia data to map the spread of the virus— w
hereas other, more innovative initiatives fo-c
us on implementing public health measures s
uch as isolation and quarantine.D
isease modeling and forecasting using m
achine learning and artif  cial intelligenceT
here is growing potential to use machine l
earning and big data to forecast disease s
pread and prioritize people for testing or l
imitations on movement. One controversial a
pplication during the COVID-19 outbreak h
as been the Chinese government’s require-ment that citizens in more than 200 cities ins
tall an Alipay app on their smartphones that a
ssigns a risk code to each person indicat-i
ng the extent to which they are permitted to m
ove around the community (see SM). The c
oding algorithm reportedly incorporates i
nformation on time spent at risky locations a
nd frequency of contact with other people. P
ublic dissatisfaction with the app arose f
rom lack of transparency about the reasons people were classified into particular groups a
nd mismatch with individuals’ own beliefs a
bout their risk level. Yet algorithmic clas-sif
ication and prioritization of individuals o
r localities may offer an alternative to hap-h
azard rollout of social distancing orders and C
OVID-19 testing.L
everaging and linking large datasets for c
ase identif  cationG
overnments have massive troves of citizens’ p
ersonal data at their disposal that can be u
sed to identify persons at increased risk of in
fection and prioritize them for investiga-t
ion by health officials. The Taiwanese gov-e
rnment linked immigration and customs d
ata on travelers (in batch files, after deleting i
rrelevant travel history) to National Health I
nsurance data on hospital and clinic visits to i
dentify individuals whose symptoms could b
e due to contracting the novel coronavirus d
uring travel to an affected area ( 2). That i
nformation was shared with health care p
roviders so that they could use it to make d
ecisions during patient visits, such as asking f
or additional history of present illness and or
dering a COVID-19 test.R
isk-based border securityT
aiwan developed an interesting alternative t
o blanket travel restrictions: individualized r
isk assessment. Travelers scan a QR code u
sing their smartphone, which leads to an o
nline travel declaration form that asks for t
ravel history and flight information, symp-t
oms of fever or respiratory infection, and c
ontact information in Taiwan. On the basis o
f their health and travel information, travel-e
rs are either sent a pass by text, asked to do h
ome quarantine for 14 days, or instructed to se
lf-isolate at home for 14 days ( 2).E
lectronic monitoring of quarantined and i
solated individualsN
ew Zealand, Thailand, and Taiwan use cell-p
hone location data to monitor movement o
f persons subject to quarantine or isolation o
rders. In Taiwan, for example, violators can r
eceive heavy fines or be ordered into facili-t
ies, but the government first messages indi-v
iduals to instruct them to return home and a
sks local police to check on them ( 2). China, P
oland, and Russia have gone further, using f
acial recognition software to monitor com-pl
iance with orders (see SM). Such measures, a
lthough intrusive, help reduce the need for l
abor-intensive, in-person monitoring. De-i
dentified location data from cellphones and s
ocial media apps can also be used to moni-t
or population-level adherence to social dis-t
ancing orders (see SM).D
igital technologies are also useful for su
pporting confined individuals. Remote m
onitoring through smartphones improves HEALTH AND ETHICS: COVID-19 
Ethics and governance for digit
al disease surveillanceT
he question is not whether to use new data sources but howWhe
ther to implement, h
ow to implementWhat is the alt
ernative?Whether t
o adopt a digital surveillance m
easure should be evaluated by refer-encing
 the counterfactual. What would be 
used instead of the technology, and is that mor
e or less desirable?L
east burdensome alternativeF
or its use to be justified, a digital t
echnology should be judged the least bur
densome alternative that would ac-c
omplish the public health objective. P
ublic oversightO
versight must include members of the 
public; focus on particular uses of the 
data, not just data transfers; and p
romote trustworthy, transparent, and c
onvincing justifications for the deci-sions t
aken.C
orrecting mistakesP
rocesses through which potential e
rrors can be challenged in the courts m
ay be modified, involving longer waits, l
ess robust hearings, and reduced ac-c
ess to counsel. Proving mistakes can be difficult wher
e a decision has been driv
en by an algorithm whose logic may not be tr
ansparent.Inequitie
s and biasInequitie
s persist in people’s access t
o the internet and cellphones. Even among 
those having access, disparities e
xist in who uses these technologies. T
hese disparities risk creating bias in n
ew data sets.1Center for Health Policy/Primary Care and Outcomes R
esearch, Department of Medicine, Stanford University S
chool of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 2Stanford Law S
chool, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Department of Pediatrics and C
enter for Policy, Outcomes and Prevention, Stanford U
niversity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. E
mail: mmello@law.stanford.eduP
ublished by AAAS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 06, 2022
INSIGHTS  |  POLICY FORUM95
2    29 MAY 2020 • VOL 368 ISSUE 6494s ciencemag.org   SCIENCEthe prospects for isolating and quarantin-i
ng people at home rather than in facilities. P
eople’s temperatures can be transmitted by w
earables, digital thermometers, or video, an
d health workers can regularly check on p
eople’s needs without exposing themselves t
o the risk of transmission. Communities, t
oo, can mobilize to assist those confined at h
ome, as is occurring in the United States t
hrough the neighborhood social networking a
pp NextDoor.E
nhanced contact tracingS
erious doubts have been raised about w
hether traditional methods of contact trac-in
g alone can arrest the COVID-19 epidemic. A
dding algorithmic contact tracing through a c
ellphone app or operating system is pro-p
osed to reduce transmission of the virus t
hrough instantaneous notification of con-t
acts (see SM) (3). A real-world experiment w
ith such an approach is under way in Singa-p
ore, where in March 2020 the government r
equested that citizens install a government-de
veloped smartphone app called TraceTo-g
ether. The app uses Bluetooth technology to e
xchange identifier numbers with the phones of
 other TraceTogether users within 6 feet of t
he user, sharing data with the government o
nly if the user becomes subject to contact t
racing because of a COVID-19 diagnosis (see SM
). As of late April 2020, similar apps have b
een rolled out in nearly 30 countries, and a
 high-profile effort by Google and Apple to de
velop standards is under way ( 4).T
he Israeli government has gone farther t
han Singapore, making use of infected p
ersons’ cellphone location data on an in-v
oluntary basis. Its approach sends texts to p
ersons who come into contact with known C
OVID-19 cases to inform them that they mu
st immediately quarantine themselves for 1
4 days (5). South Korea, too, has opted to use g
eolocation data without seeking consent. It p
ublicly posts information on where infected pe
rsons traveled in the days before their di-a
gnosis based on cellphone location data, c
redit card records, and surveillance video (
5). No names are included, but individuals’ ag
e, nationality, and sex are. Taiwan used i
tineraries of passengers who disembarked t
he Diamond Princess cruise ship to send text a
lerts to people residing in areas the passen-g
ers visited, asking them to self-monitor and n
otify officials of any symptoms. The recipi-e
nt list was compiled by using mobile phone b
ase station positioning.E
THICAL ISSUES RAISEDE
thical issues raised by digital epidemiology c
enter on a core tension: these new uses of p
eople’s data can involve both personal and s
ocial harms, but so does failing to harness the e
normous power of data to arrest epidemics.Respecting privacyM
any epidemiologic uses of new data sources d
o not implicate informational privacy to a g
reater extent than current commercial and r
esearch practices—although some people m
ay feel greater disquiet about governments us
ing their data than they do companies or a
cademics. Other uses involve larger poten-tia
l intrusions on privacy. Using cellphone l
ocation and text data, in particular, goes b
eyond what citizens of democratic nations a
re accustomed to. Everyday uses of public a
nd private data are typically not conducted w
ith personal identifiers attached. Moreover, e
xcept for use by law enforcement, data are n
ot ordinarily used for purposes of tracking d
own and imposing consequences on the sub
jects of the data. Contact tracing of the k
ind being carried out in Israel, by contrast, i
nvolves immediately imposing public health or
ders on those traced.R
especting autonomyR
espect for individuals’ autonomy generally requires 
asking them for permission to ac-cess 
their personal information and use it in par
ticular ways. Informed consent is a bed-rock 
principle of research ethics and medi-cal care 
and is expressed—albeit weakly—in T
erms and Conditions agreements for use of websites and 
apps, which ask users to agree to 
the company’s planned uses of their data. T
he consent issue has particular salience for 
contact tracing through cellphone re-cords 
because at least three alternative re-gimes—opt in, 
opt out, and mandatory—are possible, and 
different countries have made dif
ferent choices.E
quity concernsU
se of new data sources can improve repre-s
entation of some populations in epidemio-l
ogic analysis, including people who are un-d
errepresented in data from laboratories and h
ealth care providers because they cannot or
 do not access care. Nevertheless, inequi-t
ies persist across the globe in people’s access t
o the internet and cellphones. Even in ar-e
as with access, disparities exist in who uses th
ese technologies (see SM). These disparities r
isk creating bias in new data sets.M
inimizing the risk of errorT
he risk that governments will make errors i
n identifying areas and individuals at high r
isk of disease infection is heightened when u
sing new data because of three factors: sc
ope, speed, and sources. First, the use of l
arge datasets means that a much greater n
umber of people are under review than w
ould ordinarily be the case; errors in even a s
mall percentage of cases translate into l
arge numbers of people affected. Second, the p
ressure to develop and roll out apps and al-gorithms quickly during an emergency may m
ean compromises on testing and validation. B
ut erroneously flagging individuals or areas c
an involve serious social and economic bur-d
ens, such as stay-at-home orders and busi-n
ess closures. Mistakes also undermine trust a
nd waste limited public health resources (
6). Third, the sources of information in some n
ew datasets will be less reliable than tradi-t
ional disease reporters. Particularly given t
he spread of misinformation about disease o
utbreaks through social media, the need t
o validate data derived from internet news, s
earch data, and social media posts is acute. Se
lf-reports of perceived symptoms, too, may be
 inaccurate or incomplete and are not easy t
o corroborate (see SM).C
orrecting mistakes can pose special chal-le
nges during public health emergencies, un-d
erscoring the importance of taking steps up f
ront to minimize the risk of error. Ordinary p
rocesses though which citizens and busi-n
esses can challenge public health orders in t
he courts may be modified, involving longer w
aits, less robust hearings, and reduced ac-c
ess to counsel. Proving mistakes can also be d
ifficult when a decision has been driven by a
n algorithm because algorithmic logic is of-t
en not transparent.A
ccountabilityA
 key question is how to ensure that compa-n
ies and governments conducting and using e
pidemiologic analyses of new data sources a
re accountable for what they do. Democratic pr
ocesses ordinarily help ensure that policy-m
aking is reasonably transparent, the public h
as opportunities for input, and irresponsi-bl
e officials can be removed. But many initia-t
ives during COVID-19 have been undertaken b
y countries without strong democratic tra-d
itions and free-speech protections. Even in t
he United States, technological solutions are b
eing pursued by small groups of officials an
d tech company leaders working outside o
rdinary channels and public view. The need t
o make decisions quickly may justify such p
rocesses but increases concerns about re-spo
nsible practices.T
he potential for misappropriation of data c
ollected and methods developed for disease s
urveillance looms large. After all, the same a
pproaches that can be used for case identi-f
ication and contact tracing can be used to i
dentify and track a government’s political o
pponents (5). Such fears undercut trust in wh
at public health officials are trying to do, a
nd without public trust and participation, m
any key strategies for fighting infectious d
isease cannot succeed.P
OLICY RECOMMENDATIONST
wo principles should serve as lodestars w
hen considering the ethics of digital surveil-P
ublished by AAAS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 06, 2022
29 MAY 2020 • VOL 368 ISSUE 6494     953S CIENCE  sciencemag.orgILLUSTRATION: ADAPTED FROM THINKNEO/ISTOCK.COMlance during pandemics. First, the wisdom o
f adopting a digital surveillance measure s
hould be evaluated not in the abstract but by r
eference to the counterfactual. What would b
e used instead of the technology, and is that mo
re or less desirable? The counterfactual f
or COVID-19 involves mass shelter-at-home a
nd business closure orders, which impose s
erious liberty and economic deprivations an
d are, in most areas, completely noncon-s
ensual. Digital surveillance offers the pros-pe
ct of expediting the lifting of such orders an
d minimizing their use in future outbreaks (
3). It may have particular value for vulner-ab
le groups such as the elderly and persons w
ith chronic illness who may otherwise re-mai
n confined after others are released.T
he second principle is that for its use to b
e justified, a digital technology should be j
udged the least burdensome alternative that w
ould accomplish the public health objective (
7, 8). This principle has long driven t
hinking in public health ethics and l
aw. For disease outbreaks, what con-s
titutes the least restrictive alternative d
epends on the available public health re
sources, evidence concerning what b
ehaviors people will engage in with-ou
t coercive public health orders, fea-t
ures of the pathogen’s transmissibility, a
nd the stage of the epidemic. Even if su
ch a weighing points toward the im-p
osition of digital surveillance, the least r
estrictive alternative principle can h
elp minimize privacy intrusions—for e
xample, through data minimization (
identifying the narrowest possible set o
f data elements, especially identifiable o
nes, and the minimum duration and sc
ope of use required to achieve the ob-j
ective) (8). We consider applications of t
hese two principles to particular tech-n
ologies with value in combating the novel c
oronavirus and similar pathogens.U
sing algorithms in disease modeling a
nd risk classif  cationsT
he use of artificial intelligence techniques f
or disease forecasting raises minimal ethical co
ncerns if it uses individually deidentified d
ata. But using personally identifiable infor-m
ation in algorithms that assign risk scores or
 categories to individuals, such as in the case o
f the Alipay app, must be considered more se
riously because of the social consequences a
ttached to these determinations. Here, the m
ain concerns are the usual ones about algo-r
ithmic bias and error, and solutions offered f
or such problems in other contexts are ap-pl
icable. These include making code and da-t
asets publicly accessible and subject to peer r
eview and continuing to refine the model as ad
ditional data become available. Additional s
afeguards should include creating mecha-nisms for individuals to challenge algorithmic c
lassifications, making classifications time l
imited, and using classifications to support r
ecommendations rather than legal restric-t
ions on individuals’ movement.U
sing electronic monitoring to support c
onf  ned personsW
ider use of electronic monitoring to sup-p
ort individuals under confinement orders (
isolation, quarantine, or shelter at home) sh
ould be pursued. It is aligned with both p
ublic health goals (because supported in-d
ividuals are more likely to be able to stay h
ome) and the principles of solidarity and r
eciprocity, which recognize societal obliga-tio
ns to support those called on to sacrifice l
iberty to prevent harm to others. Electronic m
onitoring is less intrusive than in-person v
isits by public health workers, safer for w
orkers, and easier to scale, enabling officials t
o reach more people. For diseases that are o
nly transmissible when the infected person i
s symptomatic, virtually observed symptom c
hecks may speed individuals’ release from c
onfinement by quickly ascertaining when th
ey no longer present a danger to others. P
ublic health officials should move quickly to e
xpand use of virtual check-ins with persons c
onfined at home, prioritizing those most l
ikely to need assistance because of infection s
tatus, membership in a vulnerable group, an
d lack of social supports.U
sing electronic monitoring to enforce r
estrictions on movementT
he use of electronic monitoring to enforce c
onfinement orders and travel restrictions is m
ore problematic. In the United States, for e
xample, the Supreme Court has held that a
 judicial warrant must be obtained, after sh
owing probable cause to believe a person v
iolated the law, to search private cellphone records for law-enforcement purposes (see S
M). It is unclear how courts would ap-p
ly that precedent to enforcement of public h
ealth orders, but violation of some such or-d
ers is a crime.E
lectronic monitoring by use of cellphone B
luetooth data, bracelets, or video cameras wo
uld likely be more effective in detecting p
ublic health order violations than current m
ethods, which rely on police detection or p
olice response to complaints. The question is
 whether more enforcement is better. The be
nefits of stringently enforcing mass shel-te
r-at-home orders are not entirely clear, and t
he potential for strict enforcement—par-t
icularly through electronic eyes—to under-m
ine trust in government and stoke resis-t
ance is troublesome.T
he principles of the least restrictive alter-n
ative and proportionality ( 7) will be helpful i
n determining whether to use electronic en-f
orcement for public health orders in f
uture disease outbreaks. There is a s
trong argument in favor of monitor-i
ng bracelets for persons who present a
 high risk of harm to others if officials h
ave a reasonable suspicion that they wi
ll not comply with home isolation. It i
s less restrictive than the likely alter-n
ative for such individuals: confining t
hem in secure facilities. Even in this c
ontext, electronic monitoring should n
ot immediately trigger law-enforce-me
nt action; rather, the first inter-v
ention should be outreach by public h
ealth officials. They should seek to u
nderstand the reasons for a person’s n
oncompliance, which may include m
isunderstanding of the order or in-a
bility to satisfy basic needs such as f
ood and health care.T
he justification for electronic en-f
orcement attenuates as the gravity of poten-t
ial harm and likelihood of noncompliance s
hifts. For these reasons, population-wide s
helter-at-home orders present a weak case f
or using electronic surveillance for indi-v
idual enforcement purposes. However, us-i
ng electronic data to understand the extent o
f compliance at the population level—as is n
ow being done by using deidentified cell-p
hone data to measure travel distances from h
ome—is well justified. Such information i
nvolves little or no privacy intrusion and h
as helped public health officers understand w
hether they need to issue clarifications of w
hat is permitted and prohibited, tighten so
cial distancing orders further, or provide a
dditional economic and social supports to e
nable people to stay home.U
sing cellphone data for contact tracingF
or COVID-19, the arguments for using cell-p
hone Bluetooth data for contact tracing are 
P
ublished by AAAS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 06, 2022
sciencemag.org   SCIENCE95 4    29 MAY 2020 • VOL 368 ISSUE 6494INSIGHTS  |  POLICY FORUMc
ompelling. Because the virus is transmis-s
ible through casual contact for at least a f
ew days before onset of symptoms, people a
re unlikely to be able to recall all those t
hey may have exposed. Even if they could, t
he number of public health workers needed t
o perform contact tracing grossly exceeds t
he available supply. The most likely coun-te
rfactual is failure, or inability to fight the e
pidemic without longer-term social distanc-i
ng orders. Digital contact tracing offers an e
ffective, less burdensome alternative that is p
roportional to the threat. Not everyone has s
martphones, but using the technology can c
onserve scarce human resources for work-i
ng with those who do not.S
hould the technology be installed on a m
andatory, opt-out, or opt-in basis? The best a
vailable evidence suggests that for patho-g
ens with characteristics similar to COVID-19, a
n opt-out regime is the least restrictive al-t
ernative. Research using UK data suggests t
hat COVID-19 could be suppressed if 80% of sm
artphone users (56% of the overall popula-t
ion, assuming 70% smartphone penetrance) u
se the app (9). In a survey of U.S. smart-p
hone users, about 40% said they would defi-n
itely opt in to a contact tracing app, and just u
nder 70% said definitely or probably (figures w
ere slightly higher for UK users) ( 10); an-o
ther survey found much lower opt-in rates amo
ng U.S. smartphone users (17% definitely, 3
2% probably) (11). These numbers fall short o
f the mark, especially because human inertia w
ill mean some who are willing in theory do n
ot actually install the app. In Singapore—a s
mall nation with fairly high tolerance for g
overnment involvement in citizens’ lives—on
ly about 20% of smartphone users have i
nstalled the TraceTogether app ( 12).T
hus, although some endorse an opt-in s
ystem (3), and legislation proposed in the U
.S. would codify that approach (see SM), t
he available evidence justifies a consent r
egime that impinges further on individual au
tonomy. Bolstering the argument in favor o
f opt out is that users are offered reciprocal b
enefits: notification if they come into con-t
act with someone dangerous and assistance i
n protecting friends and family whom they m
ay have endangered.A
lthough some bioethicists argue that n
onconsensual collection of identifiable con-t
act data may be justified for COVID-19 to p
revent harm to others ( 8), opt out is ethi-c
ally preferable to mandatory use and likely t
o be sufficient. This setup uses choice ar-c
hitecture to allow those with strong pref-e
rences to act on them while not conflating p
hilosophical objections with simple inertia. St
udies of electronic health record sharing h
ave found that people tend to stick with the d
efault choice: Only 2 to 5% opt out of health i
nformation exchange (13). Although opt outs from smartphone data sharing may be higher ow
ing to lower trust in government ( 10), opt out
 should be tried and evaluated before m
oving to mandatory use. Opt-out rates can b
e minimized if public health officials and t
echnology companies collaborate to distrib-u
te plain-language FAQs that clearly explain h
ow the data will be collected and used and w
hat benefits there are for users.S
ome propose, as an alternative, that con-tac
t tracing technology should be mandatory b
ut have a “privacy-protecting” design in wh
ich the government receives a list of cases an
d a list of exposed persons but no informa-ti
on that permits association of particular c
ases and contacts (14). Such proposals are a
ntithetical to effective epidemiology because t
hey preclude use of the data to track the geo-g
raphic spread of a pathogen. Use of identifi-ab
le data by governments should be carefully l
imited but must be permitted. TraceTogether op
erationalizes the least restrictive alterna-t
ive principle by transmitting users’ data t
o officials only if an individual becomes i
nfected, and then only in specified ways. E
xecuting binding data-use agreements can f
urther ensure data minimization, and ex-p
erts have articulated several provisions that o
ught to be included (15). Among these must be
 the exit strategy—plans for terminating t
he use of data and destroying data when the pu
blic health need for them ends (see SM).P
ROCESS RECOMMENDATIONSW
hen any of these technologies are imple-m
ented, it should be through a thoughtful a
nd transparent process. We endorse prior c
alls for an oversight process by a body that i
ncludes members of the public and focuses on
 particular uses of the data, not just data t
ransfers (3, 8), and for “trustworthy public c
ommunication…providing transparent and co
nvincing justifications for the decisions t
aken”  (7) (see SM). South Korea and Tai-w
an’s examples illustrate that diligent trans-p
arency can cultivate high levels of trust in t
he government’s strategy ( 2) (see SM).B
ut such approaches are far from guaran-t
eed. For example, the situation in the United Sta
tes leaves much to be desired. A group of t
echnology companies convened by the White H
ouse to discuss potential uses of technology t
o combat COVID-19 has no evident agenda, p
ublic or stakeholder group representation, or
 set of guiding principles. Ethicists and l
egal experts do not appear to be involved. N
o processes (for example, adaptation of th
e notice-and-comment period used for ad-m
inistrative rule-making) have been created f
or the public to give input. Proposed uses of
 technology have percolated up through sc
attered media reports but not through of-f
icial channels. Communiques from compa-n
ies working on these technologies are short on details about how government would be in
volved. No mechanisms are in place for o
versight of tech companies as they pursue t
his work. The news media and watchdog o
rganizations will continue to be important m
echanisms for accountability, but effective o
versight requires access to full information a
bout what will be done, how, and why.S
turdy oversight structures are not easy t
o stand up in the middle of an emergency. W
ork will be needed after the COVID-19 t
hreat fades to ensure that we are better pre-p
ared next time. For example, federal health a
gencies could commission a report from t
he U.S. National Academies of Sciences, E
ngineering and Medicine recommending r
ules of the road for digital surveillance in p
andemics, and modifications could be made t
o state and federal privacy and emergency p
owers laws to facilitate its implementation.T
here has been much talk of harnessing the 
power and ingenuity of the tech sector t
o fight disease outbreaks, but “harnessing” implies 
carefully placed constraints and f
irm direction by a driver. We have yet to c
raft that yoke.         jR
EFERENCES AND NOTES 
1.  D. J. Hand, Big Data 6, 176 (2018). 
2.  C. J. Wang, C. Y. Ng, R. H. Brook, JAMA 10.1001/j
ama.2020.3151 (2020). 
3.  L. Ferretti et al., Science 368, eabb6936 (2020).  
4.  T op10VPN, COVID-19 digital rights tracker, 28 April 2
020; www.top10vpn.com/research/investigations/c
ovid-19-digital-rights-tracker 
5.  S. Hendrix, R. Eglash, Washington Post, 19 March 2020.  
6.  E. Vayena et al., PLOS Comput. Biol. 11, e1003904 (2015).  
7 .  Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Ethical Considerations in R
esponding to the COVID-19 Pandemic (Nuffield Council o
n Bioethics, 2020); www.nuffieldbioethics.org/assets/p
dfs/Ethical-considerations-in-responding-to-the-C
OVID-19-pandemic.pdf 
8.  Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Guide to the Ethics of S
urveillance and Quarantine for Novel Coronavirus (Nuf
field Council on Bioethics, 2020); www.nuf
fieldbioethics.org/assets/pdfs/Guide-to-the-ethics-o
f-surveillance-and-quarantine-for-novel-coronavirus.pdf
 
9.  R. Hinch et al., Effective configurations of a digital contact t
racing app: a report to NHSX (16 April 2020); https:/ /045.m
edsci.ox.ac.uk/files/files/report-effective-app-configu-r
ations.pdf 
10.  S. Altmann et al., Acceptability of app-based contact trac-i
ng for COVID-19: Cross-country survey evidence (4 May 2
020); https:/ /osf.io/6bn47/?pid=7vgq9 
11.  Washington Post/University of Maryland, National poll, 21 t
o 26 April 2020 (5 May 2020); https:/ /wapo.st/3frcv3v 
12.  Z. Doffman,  Forbes (12  April  2020); https:/ /bit.ly35EQjyx 
13.  M. M. Mello, J. Adler-Milstein, K. L. Ding, L. Savage, Milbank Q.
 96, 110 (2018). 
14.  C. Canca, Medium, 10 April 2020; https:/ /bit.ly/2YJmewn 
15.  Z. Emanuel et al.,  “A national and state plan to e
nd the coronavirus crisis” (Center for American P
rogress, 2020); www.americanprogress.org/i
ssues/healthcare/news/2020/04/03/482613/n
ational-state-plan-end-coronavirus-crisisA
CKNOWLEDGMENTSThe 
authors are grateful to C.-M. Chen, I-M. Parng, J.-H. C
huang, and H.-W. Jyan for generously sharing information a
bout measures adopted in T aiwan and to G. Lo and G. Wilson f
or research assistance.S
UPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS s
cience.sciencemag.org/content/368/6494/951/suppl/DC1P
ublished online 11 May 20201
0.1126/science.abb9045P
ublished by AAAS
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 06, 2022
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2020, American Association for the Advancement of ScienceEthics and governance for digital disease surveillance
Michelle M. MelloC. Jason Wang
Science, 368 (6494), • DOI: 10.1126/science.abb9045
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abb9045
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 06, 2022
