CGD Policy Paper 190 
November 2020Governing Data for 
Development: Trends, 
Challenges, and Opportunities
www.cgdev.org
Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Fifth Floor
Washington DC  20036
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0 
license.Governments that can successfully harness the world’s ongoing digital transformation and 
the data it produces can make better informed policy decisions and target their resources 
more effectively. To achieve this goal, they must establish clear rules about how data can 
be used across its lifecycle. Until recently, the development community has paid more 
attention to supporting government use of  digital tools and data than on how governments 
can manage data responsibly. This is now changing in line with a broader shift in societal 
views about the risks of  data misuse. To better understand how governments can use data 
to support economic development and inclusive growth while protecting citizens and 
communities against harm, we interviewed over 40 data policy experts from government, 
civil society, the private sector, development organizations, and the data privacy community 
over summer 2020. This paper synthesizes the views we heard into key themes and explores 
some of  the questions and challenges that a policy and research agenda aimed at supporting 
effective government data use should consider. Abstract
Michael Pisa, Pam Dixon, Benno Ndulu, and  
Ugonma NwankwoCenter for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this Policy Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Policy Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Governing Data for Development:  
Trends, Challenges, and Opportunities
Michael Pisa
Center for Global Development
Pam Dixon
World Privacy Forum 
Benno Ndulu
University of  Dar-es-Salaam; Former Governor, Central Bank of  Tanzania 
Ugonma Nwankwo
Center for Global Development
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Hewlett Foundation in support of  this work.
Michael Pisa, Pam Dixon, Benno Ndulu, and Ugonma Nwankwo, 2020. “Governing 
Data for Development: Trends, Challenges, and Opportunities.” CGD Policy Paper 190. 
Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/
governing-data-development-trends-challenges-and-opportunitiesContents  
Governing Data for Development Working Group  ................................ ................................ .. 1 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 2 
Theme 1: The need to b reak down silos  ................................ ................................ .....................  13 
Theme 2:  Promoting data governance as an enabler rather than hindrance  .......................  15 
Theme 3: Equitably distributing the value of data insights by “closing the loop”  ..............  17 
Theme 4: The benefits, hazards, and hurdles of data collaboration  ................................ ...... 21 
Theme 5: Establishing effective data protection frameworks  ................................ .................  25 
Theme 6: The need for greater global and regional coordination  ................................ ..........  33 
Theme 7: Developing the skills needed to govern data  ................................ ...........................  35 
Theme 8: The impact of COVID -19 ................................ ................................ ..........................  37 
Conclusion: Areas for future research  ................................ ................................ ........................  40 
Appendix 1: Complete list of interviews  ................................ ................................ ....................  42 
Appendix 2:  Selected interview quotes  ................................ ................................ .......................  44 
 
 
  1 Governing Data for Development Working Group  
This scoping paper is a preliminary input for a research program led by the Center 
for Global Development , with funding from the Hewlett Foundation,  that seeks to 
better understand how governments can use data to support innovation and 
economic development while protecting citizens and communities against harm.  The 
project is guided by a working group composed of the following experts:  
Co-Chairs  
Pam Dixon , Founder and Executive Director, World Privacy Forum   
Benno Ndulu, Professor of Development Economics, University of Dar -es-Salaam; 
Former Governor, Central Bank of Tanzania   
Working Group Members  
Adedeji Adeniran,  Director of Education and Governance Research/Senior Research 
Fellow, Centre for the Studies of African Econo mies 
Shaida Badiee , Founder and Managing Director, Open Data Watch  
Donatien Beguy , Population Scientist and Data Expert, UN- Habitat  
Stephen Chacha , Co-Founder and Executive Director, Tanzania Data Lab  
Somsak Chunharas , President of National Health Foundation in Thailand  
Vyjayanti Desai , Program Manager, Identification for Development  
Teki Akuetteh Falconer , Founder & Executive Director, Africa Digital Rights' Hub  
Drudeisha Madhub, Data Protection Commissioner, Data Protection Office, Mauritius  
David  Medine , Consultant, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor  
Santosh Misra , CEO, Tamil Nadu e -Governance Agency and Commissioner of e -
Governance, Government of Tamil Nadu, India  
Tom Orrell, Managing Director, DataReady  
Olasupo Oyedepo, co-founder and Directo r, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks  
Michael Pisa , Policy Fellow, Center for Global Development  
Isaac Rutenberg , Director, Center for Intellectual Property and Information Technology 
Law 
Omar Seidu,  Head, Demographic Statistics and Coordinator o f Data for SDGs, Ghana 
Statistical Services  
Rachel Sibande , Program Director, Data for Development, Digital Impact Alliance  
The authors would like to thank all the individuals who agreed to be interviewed for this 
project, whose names are listed in Appendix 1. While we are grateful for insights provided by 
interviewees and working group members, any mistakes  made in this paper  belong to the 
authors.  2 Introduction  
Governments that can successfully harness the world’s ongoing digital transformation and 
the resulting proliferation of new datasets, data types, and data ecosystems can make better 
informed policy decisions and target their resources more efficiently and effectively. To 
achieve this goal, they must establish clear rules about how data is collected, analyzed, used, 
and shared in a way that protects citizens from abuse while supporting innovation, development, and inclusi ve growth.  
The COVID -19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of governments having the ability 
to systematically access accurate and timely information and, in many countries, accelerated the shift towards a digital -first approach due to the need to ex pand the reach of the social 
safety net while providing services at a distance.
1 It has also highlighted the disadvantage 
faced by those unable to access the internet — a “digital divide” that closely mirrors existing 
inequalities.2 Finally, the pandemic  has brought to the forefront difficult questions about the 
limits that should be placed on governments and private companies that seek to use potentially sensitive data to monitor the spread of disease and target public health efforts.  
In all these ways,  the COVID -19 pandemic has held up a mirror to a world in which 
countries and communities are advancing unevenly on a path of digitalization while grappling with fundamental questions about how governments can best use data to achieve 
their policy aims and  how the value of data should be distributed throughout society.  
Although countries are digitalizing at vastly different speeds, the trend towards greater 
reliance on digital tools and data is unidirectional. In many countries, national governments 
are th e primary catalyst of this transformation through their increasing use of digital systems 
(including mobile applications, digital payments, and digital ID) to deliver services and 
provide social support.
 3  These systems generate massive amounts of data a nd rely on the 
integration of multiple databases to enable a more coherent social support response but also 
raise privacy concerns because of how they link information about individuals across 
different services.4 
At the same time, there is growing intere st among government officials to draw insights 
from data that is more granular and produced at a higher frequency than traditional official 
statistics, including administrative data, which government agencies generate through the 
operation of public servic es and, increasingly, data collected by the private sector. While 
integrating data from private and public sources can help governments fill knowledge gaps 
 
1 Gelb, Alan and Anit Mukherjee. Digital Technology in Social Assistance Transfers for COVID -19 Relief: 
Lessons from Selected Cases . September 2020.  
2 For data on the digital divide see the International Telecommunications Union’s ITU Facts and Figures (2019) .  
3 Gelb, Alan, Anit Mukherjee, and Kyle Navis. Citizens and States: How Can Digital ID and Payments Improve 
State Capacity and Effectiveness?  March 2020.  
4 Clark, Julia and Conrad Daly (World Bank). Digital ID and the Data Protection Challenge: Practitioner's Note . 
October 2019.  
 3 that official statistics alone cannot address, it also raises novel ethical, legal, and regulatory 
concerns for policymakers to contend with.5  
The purpose of this paper  
This scoping and synthesis paper serves as a preliminary input for a research program led by the Center for Global Development and guided by a working group of experts from government, civil society, the development community, and the data privacy communit y that 
seeks to better understand how governments can use data to support innovation and economic development while protecting citizens and communities against harm.  
As a first step in this process, we interviewed more than 40 people working to support 
public sector data use, including experts from government, civil society, the private sector, 
and academia.  
We asked these  experts for their views on what types of capacities, resources, legal 
frameworks, and institutional mechanisms countries should have in place to use data responsibly and effectively; the opportunities and risks created by greater public sector use of 
data created by the private sector; and whether the digital policy response to the COVID -19 
pandemic has changed how they think about these issues.  
In this paper, we present the views shared with us as faithfully as possible, while organizing them into a set of key themes raised. We also include a selection of quotes arranged by 
theme in the appendix. Before turning to these themes, we briefly set out the context for this 
work and note the limitations of our research.  
Data governance becomes political  
In rece nt years, mounting concerns about the global expansion of artificial intelligence (AI) 
and machine learning surveillance and awareness of how predictive analytics can lead to 
discrimination through poor or purposeful design have rekindled an old debate about how 
much governments and businesses should know — or can predict — about their citizens 
and customers.
6 This has in turn led to greater emphasis on the importance of countries 
having rules in place to govern how data is used across its lifecycle as wel l as mechanisms for 
redress in case of harm.  
The concept of data governance, which has existed since at least the 1960s when companies 
began to adopt data processing systems, is generally used to describe the practices and 
 
5 Humpherson, Ed. Joining Up Data for Better Statistics . September 2018.  
6 These debates are not new. For example, see discussions about the privacy implications of the U.S. social 
security system in the 1930s in Sarah Igo’s The Known Citizen: A History of Privacy in Modern America  (2018). 
On the dangers of predictive analytics see comments of the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) to the 
U.S. O ffice of Science and Technology Policy: Request for Information: Big data and the future of privacy  
(2014). For evidence on shifting public attitudes on the use of data, see th e CIGI- Ipsos Global Survey on 
Internet Security and Trust  (2019) and EPIC’s webpage on Public Opinion on Privacy .  4 systems used by private corporati ons to manage data as an asset. 7,8 Recently, however, the 
term has been extended to refer to the laws and policies governments enact to govern the 
use of data in society.9 For the purpose of this paper, we use the term to refer to the 
comprehensive set  of rules, policies, and procedures that guide how organizations manage, 
use, and share data internally and across data ecosystems — and note that the term 
“organizations” extends to both governments as a whole and individual public agencies.10  
Most data governance activities are highly technical. For example, the DAMA- DMBOK, a 
key reference book on the topic, puts data governance at the center of ten different data 
management activities, including integration and interoperability, storage and operations, and 
modeling and design.11 But because these activities collectively determine how organizations 
use and share data, including potentially sensitive data, data governance has become 
politically salient, with most debate centering on issues related to data privacy.  
Over the last decade, the adoption of data protection and privacy laws has accelerated 
dramatically. Since 2010, 64 countries have enacted new data privacy laws, bringing the total number of countries with such laws up to 144.
12 Most of the countr ies that enacted these 
laws in the last decade are low and middle -income countries (LMICs). Even in countries 
with well -established data protection and privacy regimes, however, the gap between having 
laws on the books and implementing them effectively is vast and the Data Protection 
Authorities (DPAs) responsible for overseeing these efforts are often under -resourced, 
according to several data privacy experts we spoke to.  
 
7 For example, 14 of t he first 15 website results generated by a Google search for “data governance” on October 
15, 2020 focused solely on the concept’s application to the private sector.  
8 Magnitude Marketing. A Brief History of Data Governance . June 2010.  
9 See for example, Foreign Policy’s Global Data Go vernance Part One: Emerging Data Governance Practices  
(2020).  
10 This definition draws on insights from the literature on data and information governance that extends from 
information management in industrial contexts (e.g., Deming‘s  Profound System of Knowledge ) to management 
of particular types of systems (e.g., Ostrom‘s Governance of the Commons ) and specific types of data (for 
management of  big data, see Soares’ Big Data Governance: An emerging imperative ).  
11 For the full list, see page 36 of the DAMA -DMBOK Data Management Body of Knowledge  book or the 
following image The DAMA Wheel . 
12 Greenleaf, Graham and Bertil Cottier.  2020 Ends a Decade of 62 New Data Privacy Laws . May 2020.  5 Figure 1 . Recent adoption of data privacy laws driven by low - and lower -middle 
income  countries13 
 
Note: Data from Greenleaf’s  Global Tables of Data Privacy Laws and Bills (6th Ed January 2019)  and Greenleaf 
and Cottier’s  2020 Ends a Decade of 62 New Data Privacy Laws . Additional research conducted by World 
Privacy Forum (2020).  
Embedding accountability and transparency into public data s ystems  
A consistent message heard from the experts we interviewed for this paper was that 
governments cannot fully reap the benefits that digital tools and data integration offer without creating and maintaining public trust — with the caveat that some go vernments may 
seek to forego the need to build trust by using data and digital tools to exert more control 
over their citizens.  
To build and maintain this trust, governments must embed accountability and transparency 
in public data systems and create clea r and enforceable rules to protect citizens’ rights that fit 
the technological, legal, and cultural context of their country. Achieving these aims will require sustained and flexible effort, given the rapidly changing nature of digital technology, 
as well as a new set of skills, roles, and institutions and the resources necessary to support 
their development.  
This task is demanding for the most digitally advanced countries and even more so for 
lower -income countries where resources are more limited, techni cal expertise is scarcer, and 
 
13 Figure 1 was updated after publication to add countries that have pending legislation and to remove countries 
that passed laws before 2010, due to some ambiguities in the data.  
6 rates of internet use are much lower.14 A 2014 paper by the Center for Global Development  
and the African Population and Health Research Center ( Delivering on the Data Revolution 
in Sub -Saharan Africa ) found that many sub- Saharan African countries lacked foundational 
“data building blocks” and often d id not collect “data that are intrinsically important to the 
calculation of almost any major economic or social welfare indicators,” including “data on 
births and deaths; growth and poverty; taxes and trade; sickness, schooling, and safety; and 
land and the environment.”15 More recent work by the World Bank and OECD suggests 
that public data systems in other regions also rest on weak foundations and that progress to 
strengthen them has been slow and uneven over the last ten years.16,17  
Governments that wish to integrate data from external sources but start from a weak foundation face difficult questions about what reforms to prioritize and where to direct 
scarce resources as they seek to modernize. Most of the experts we spoke to believe d that 
governments should first prioritize strengthening the collection of basic datasets before 
shifting focus to integrating data collected externally.
18 
Figure 2. Statistical capacity regional averages  
 
Source: World Bank Statistical Capacity Indicator Dashboard  
 
14 While over 80 percent of people in the United States and Europe have internet access, only 19 percent in sub -
Saharan Africa and 20 percent in South Asi a have access. From the World Bank‘s open data portal see 
Individuals Using the Internet (% of Population) for more information.  
15 CGD Data for African Development Working Group. Delivering on the Data Revolution in Sub- Saharan 
Africa . July 2014.  
16 World Bank. Statistical Capacity Indicator Dashboard . Data scores last released in 2019.  
17 OECD. Key trends in development co -operation for national data and statistical systems . August 2020.  
18 Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus , Director -General of the World Health Organization, echoed this sentiment at 
the October 19, 2020 opening session of the UN World Data Forum by calling on countries to improve civil 
registration and vital statistics “build a strong foundation for data sys tems around the world.” See his opening 
session speech here . 
 
7 The development community’s role  
The development community —  which we define broadly to include practitioners in 
international development institutions, bilat eral development agencies, and smaller 
development organizations as well as government officials focused on supporting 
socioeconomic development —  has spent considerable energy and resources helping 
governments expand connectivity, implement digital servic es, and improve the collection 
and analysis of data over the last twenty years. The focus on data collection has been even 
greater since 2015 when the United Nations recognized the need for “quality, accessible, 
timely and reliable disaggregated data” to a chieve and monitor progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).19,20 More recently, many development 
organizations have championed public -private data partnerships as a way to improve 
government access to data insights.21  
While the need to u se data responsibly has been part of the “data for development”  
conversation since at least the early 2010s, most development organizations, with some 
notable exceptions, have given much more attention to supporting the use of digital tools 
than they have  to how countries can govern the use of data and data ecosystems.22 This is 
now changing, however, in line with the broader shift in societal views about the risks of 
data misuse. Recent signs of this shift include:  
• The World Bank’s decision to dedicate s everal chapters of its upcoming World 
Development Report (“Data for Better Lives”) to data governance issues and the 
commitment made in 2019 by the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA) to support a new initiative on “Data for Policy” ai med at 
supporting the development of national statistical systems (NSS).
23,24,25 
• The United Nations Development Group (UNDG)’s issuance of guidance on data privacy, data protection, and data ethics for using big data to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Su stainable Development.
26  
 
19 United Nations. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development . September 2015.  
20 For additional information, also s ee the UN‘s A World That Counts: Mobilising The Data Revolution for 
Sustainable Development  (2014).  
21 For examples, see Theme 4.  
22 Since the early 2010s,  the responsible use of data has been part of the “data for development” conversation. 
Examples include the UN‘s emphasis on privacy in their publication  A World That Counts: Mobilising The Data 
Revolution for Sustainable Development  (2014) and UN Global Pulse’s Big Data for Development: Challenges 
& Opportunities  (2012) report. Responsible data use is also discussed through the World Bank’s focus on 
“analog complements” to the digital economy in its World Development Report: Digital Dividends  (2016).  
Development organizations that have been ahead of their peers in addressing the need for development and aid 
organizations to use data responsibly include Development Gateway  (see, in particular Increasing the Impact of 
Results Data  (2016)), UN Global Pulse , and DataReady . 
23 World Bank.  IDA 2019: S pecial Theme: Governance  and Institutions . May 2019.  
24 World Bank. Evolution in the data ecosystem – an idea that’s got legs . April 2020.  
25 World Bank. World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives . May 2020.  
26 UNDG. Data Privacy, Ethics and Protection Guidance on on Big Data for Achievement of the 2030 Agenda . 
November 2017.  8 • The African Union and the Internet Society’s launch of the 2018 “Personal Data 
Protection Guidelines for Africa” to facilitate implementation of the Union’s Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection established in 2014.
27 
• The call by the Committee for the Coordination of Statistical Activities for a Global Data Convention “for the safe and ethical use of data that establishes a social 
contract that strikes a balance between full use of data for develo pment and 
wellbeing and the protection of security, privacy, and human rights, and between 
commercial use and public good.”
28 
A challenging  external environment  
Countries that seek to establish systems that support using data in a fair, transparent, and accountable manner face several challenges outside of their control due to the structure of 
the global digital economy and geopolitical realities.  
The most important of these is the dominance of the world’s largest tech firms and their 
outsized role in collecting, storing, and processing data to create detailed profiles of their 
users by tracking online activity, location, and social graphs and using this information to 
target advertisements.
29 Despite growing pushback within civil society against the “track  and 
target” business model and ongoing efforts by the European Union to curb some of these activities, the situation is unlikely to change unless the United States and China, home to the world’s largest digital companies, take steps to rein in these pract ices on their own.
30  
The limited control that most LMICs have over big tech companies that operate within their 
borders has led to growing concerns about sovereignty and increasing interest in data 
localization laws that require firms that collect data ab out a country’s citizens to store or 
process that data within the same jurisdiction. In the past, governments have justified such 
laws on the grounds that they enhance cybersecurity and data protection but more recently 
have cited economic competitiveness concerns.  31 There is little evidence, however, that data 
localization laws further either aim.32,33   
Interest in imperfect solutions like data localization persists because global debates about data governance are still in a nascent stage, have focused largely on issues related to cross -
 
27 African Union & Internet Society. Personal Data Protection Guidelines for Afric a. May 2018.  
28 CCSA. Call for a Global Data Convention . October 2020.  
29 Pisa, Michael and John Polcari. Governing Big Tech’s Pursuit of the “Next Billion Users” . February 2019.  
30 For an example of civil society views on big tech, see Amnesty International’s  Surveillance Giants: How the 
Business Model of Google and Facebook Threatens Human Rights  (2019). For more information on EU efforts 
see the Financial Times‘ EU targets Big Tech with ‘hit list’ facing tougher rules  (2020).  
31 For example, see language on the benefits of data localization for building an AI sector in India in or the 
development of AI in the Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Justice B.N. Srikrishna. A Free and 
Fair Digital Economy: Protecting Privacy, Empow ering Indians  (2018).  
32 Bauer, Matthias, Martina F. Ferracane and Erik van der Mareltions.  Tracing the Economic Impact of Regulations on the Free Flow of 
Data and Data Localization. May 2016.  
33 Bhat, Ashi and Suneeth Katarki. India: The Debate –  Data Localiz ation And Its Efficacy . September 2018.  9 border data transfers, and solely reflect the priorities of wealthy countries.34 Despite efforts 
to create institutional mechanisms to support global coordination on data policy where 
LMICs can voice their concern s, little traction has been made.35  
As a result, the data policy landscape remains fragmented with the world’s most powerful 
economies taking different approaches, including the United States with its patchwork of sector -specific laws and regulations; the  EU, with its more comprehensive approach based 
on the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR); and China, which has implemented a 
GDPR -like framework for the commercial sector but whose government uses digital tools to 
support surveillance and stifle di ssent. The lack of global consensus on how countries should 
govern data, particularly in regard to data privacy and protection, makes it harder for 
individual countries to determine the right path.  
Research limitations  
Before turning to the themes that c ame up most frequently in our interviews, we note the 
limits of both our aims and research approach:  
• First, no two national data systems are identical and local context always matters. This raises a challenge for any project that seeks to examine these iss ues in a cross -
country manner. Although we focus mainly on LMICs, which face greater resource 
constraints, more limited access to data expertise, and less digital connectivity, and 
rely more on external support for their national statistical systems, many of the challenges discussed in this paper are experienced by countries regardless of their level of income or digital development.   
• Second, although we seek to highlight relevant research and initiatives whenever possible, this document is neither a syste matic literature review nor a comprehensive 
summary of issues related to using data for development. Because our goal is to faithfully reflect the conversations we had, we limit our analysis to topics our interviewees raised most frequently, at the cost of  touching lightly on other 
important topics like gender and data and the role of open data. The one area mentioned frequently by interviewees that we do not examine in depth is the shortage of funding needed to bring national statistical systems up to the level 
needed to meet and monitor the SDGs. We chose to omit discussion of this topic 
because it has been covered well in recent work by the OECD (“Key trends in 
 
34 See for example the G -20’s Initiative on “Data Free Flow with Trust” discussed in ITIF‘s Principles and 
Polic ies for “Data Free Flow With Trust”  (2019) and WEF‘s Data Free Flow with Trust (DFFT): Paths towards 
Free and Trusted Data Flows  (2020).  
35 Recent efforts to advance ideas to support global cooperation on data and digital policy include the UN 
Secretary -General‘s  High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation (2020), and Pathways for Prosperity’s Digital 
Diplomacy  (2020).  10 development co -operation for national data and statistical systems”) and PARIS21 
(“Financing Challenges for Developing Statistical Systems”).36,37  
• Finally, to allow interviewees to speak with greater candor, we gave them the option 
of speaking off -the-record. For that reason, some of the views expressed to us and 
presented in this paper are not dir ectly attributed to the speaker.  
What we heard 
Throughout the course of our interviews, the following eight themes came up most 
frequently.  
Theme 1: The need to break down silos  
Interviewees from both the data privacy and economic development communities lamented 
the lack of sustained engagement between the two groups and the way in which data privacy 
and economic development are often framed as opposing forces. Instead, most expe rts 
emphasized the synergies that could be gained through greater cooperation between the two fields. From a development perspective, the case for stronger cooperation is straightforward since lack of trust in digital ecosystems and the regulatory uncertai nty caused by poor 
implementation of data privacy laws can impede economic growth and development. 
Ongoing shifts in both communities have created an opening for greater convergence and 
collaboration at the national, regional, and global levels. Multilater al organizations, including 
the IMF, United Nations, and World Bank can play a role in supporting collaboration at the global level by investing resources, lending expertise, and being open to engaging more with data privacy experts.   
Theme 2: Promoting data governance as an enabler rather than a hindrance  
Efforts to promote good data governance will be ineffective if they are solely donor -driven 
rather than aligned with government priorities. This is especially the case if national policymakers  see data governance reforms as creating bureaucratic hurdles that impede 
useful innovation or divert resources from more immediate priorities. Development 
organizations can help convince government officials of the importance of good data 
governance by de monstrating: (1) how clear rules and reliable information can help 
policymakers achieve their objectives by facilitating data access, analysis, sharing, and 
appropriate re -use in a safe, transparent, and sustainable manner; (2) how those rules can be 
imple mented at reasonable cost, both in terms of government resources and compliance 
burden; and (3) how universal principles of data governance can be applied and implemented 
in a manner that is tailored to local realities and proportional to risks.  
 
36 Lange, Simon. OECD. Key trends in development co -operation for national d ata and statistical systems . 
August 2020.  
37 Calleja, Rachael and Andrew Rogerson. PARIS21. Financing Challeng es for Developing Statistical Systems: A 
Review of Financing Options . January 2019.  11 Theme 3: Equitably distributing the value of data by “closing the loop”  
In many development projects the value of data —  defined in terms of actionable insights 
that can be used to improve services and policy — does not flow back to the individuals, 
communities, a nd organizations who initially provide the data that underpins those projects. 
Instead, the data value chain effectively remains an open loop in which insights remain 
unshared with local communities from which the data was derived. Sharing analytical 
insights back to the communities where data is first collected can help government use data 
more effectively by strengthening the incentive to provide accurate data, helping communities develop the data skills, and creating a critically important feedback loop.  
Interviewees suggested a range of top -down and bottom -up solutions to achieve these goals. 
Some experts also suggested that companies should be required to return some of the 
monetary value produced from using data back to the countries and communities wh ere it is 
collected.  
Theme 4: The benefits, hazards, and hurdles of data collaboration  
There is broad agreement within the statistics community that, although conventional 
statistical methods will continue to play an important role, they are too time -consu ming, 
costly, and burdensome to satisfy the demand for higher frequency and more granular data alone. T ransforming national statistical systems to make better use of existing and secondary 
data is a large and expensive effort that requires staff at nationa l statistical offices (NSOs) to 
take on new responsibilities, develop new skills, and collaborate with outside actors. Public -
private data partnerships can provide value but also raise risks and legal hurdles that 
governments must develop new expertise to manage. Legal uncertainty about how to comply 
with existing regulations was cited as the biggest barrier to such partnerships.  
Theme 5: Establishing effective data protection frameworks  
The last ten years has seen a rapid acceleration in the adoption of data protection 
frameworks by LMICs. One key driver of this trend is the EU’s enactment of the GDPR in 
2016, since which it has become the de facto global standard for data protection and privacy 
rules. Many of the experts we interviewed, however, argued t hat the GDPR is a poor fit for 
lower income countries because of its complexity. This complexity helps explain the large 
gap between data protection "laws on the books" and the way in which those laws are 
implemented “on the ground” in most countries.  Wea k implementation in turn contributes 
to regulatory uncertainty, which experts cited as a major hurdle to forming successful data 
partnerships. Today, several LMICs are charting a new course by modifying  their approach 
to data protection to meet domestic ne eds and priorities, while accounting for the impact of 
data privacy laws on inclusive economic growth, and  in some cases extending beyond 
GDPR.  
Theme 6: The need for regional and global solutions  
Global agreement on a single set of data privacy principles  essentially exists today in the 
form of the OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data  12 and Convention 108+ .38 But agreement on actual implementation guidance that provides the 
necessary protection while being flexi ble enough so countries can apply the principles in a 
manner consistent with their needs, priorities, and capacities is lacking. Achieving such 
agreement would require greater coordination at both the global and regional levels among data protection author ities and governments. Currently, global and regional institutional 
arrangements to bring together data protection officials as a unified body remain 
underdeveloped and there is a need not only for greater institutionalization at the global level 
but also pathways for LMICs to have greater voice in discussions around global data 
protection standards and implementation. There is also a need for meaningful multilateral 
engagement between data protection authorities and organizations focused on supporting 
economic growth and better social outcomes, including the international financial 
institutions and sectoral multilaterals such as the World Health Organization.  
Theme 7: Developing the skills  needed to govern data  
Working on the legal aspects of data governance requires a unique combination of skills and expertise. The significant gap between the demand and supply of people with this expertise 
both within government and the private sector presents a major barrier to using data for development in most countries . Given the depth and specificity of the technical and legal 
knowledge that working on the multiple dimensions of data ecosystems requires, capacity -
building efforts will need to be long -term engagements. Experts suggested several models 
and emphasized tha t donors will have an important role to play. They also debated the 
degree to which governments should rely on external actors to provide this expertise in the medium -term.  
Theme 8: The impact of COVID -19  
Interviewees believed that the policy response to COVID -19 pandemic has changed how 
society thinks about the use of data and digital tools in at least three ways: First, by 
accelerating the shift towards a digital -first approach in many countries. Second, by pushing 
governments to rely more on the private sector for information to monitor spread of the 
disease. And third, by heightening public awareness about the need for data privacy by 
making them more aware of the degree to which their data can be used t o track their 
movements and behavior.  
 
 
Based on these themes, in the conclusion, we offer several suggestions for a research and 
action agenda.  
 
38 See the OECD‘s Guidelines on the Prote ction of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data  (last 
updated in 2013) and the Council of Europe‘s Convention 108+ . 13 Theme 1: The  need  to break down silos  
Interviewees from both the data privacy and economic development communities lamented 
the lack of sustained engagement between the two camps and the way in which data privacy 
and economic development are often framed as opposing forces.39 The general view was 
that this lack of collaboration has real costs that will grow over time unless steps are taken to 
bridge the two  communities. While the relationship between development 
organizations and privacy regulators has been largely one of avoidance or even antipathy in 
the past, several shifts are occurring that may change this.  
From a development perspective, the case for stronger cooperation between the two communities of practice is straightforward: While most countries have data protection and 
privacy laws in place, these laws are often poorly enforced, if at all. As awareness of the risks 
of data misuse increases and as the need to establish and preserve trust in digital tools and 
data becomes clearer, governments will find themselves under increasing pressure to reduce 
the risk of harm. Lack of trust in digit al ecosystems and regulatory uncertainty caused by 
poor implementation of data laws can both impede economic growth and development and 
addressing these barriers will become more critical as economies become increasingly digitized.  
International financial  institutions (IFIs) dedicated to supporting economic development, 
particularly the World Bank, already play a large role in setting digital policy priorities in the countries they work with by influencing the institutional reforms they pursue, the laws they 
enact, and the organizations they establish data partnerships with (Figure 3 from the OECD 
provides a breakdown of financial support for data and statistics by provider).
40 But these 
organizations have not systematically engaged on issues related to dat a privacy and 
protection until recently.    
 
39 For more on the relationship between data privacy and innovation see IFIP‘s Privacy as Enabler of Innovation  
(2020) and the NBER‘s Privacy and Innovation (2011).  
40 Lange, Simon [O ECD]. Key trends in development co -operation for na tional data and statistical systems . 
August 2020.  14 Figure 3 . Financial support for data and statistics by provider, 2016 -  2018 
 
Source: Key Trends in Development Co -operation for National Data and Statistical Systems. OECD 
Development Policy  Paper. August 2020 No. 31  
Despite the late start, the IFIs are likely to play an increasingly important role going forward, 
as they establish data protection and privacy standards for client countries to meet. For 
example, the World Bank is now developing  a set of minimum data privacy standards that it 
will eventually require countries to adopt or maintain before funding digital-  and data -related 
projects.   
This is not without controversy. Some interviewees noted instances in which IFI staff 
worked with g overnments on projects that raise data privacy concerns that they did not 
engage with relevant regulatory authorities to address. Others expressed concern that 
governments would become increasingly reliant on outside experts to provide the skills 
needed to  meet externally imposed standards. Most interviewees, however, supported having 
donors use their influence to promote better data protection and privacy practices if  they 
also take on the responsibility of helping governments build the requisite skills to meet these 
standards and coordinate their activities with the relevant data protection regulators.  
Just as some of the data rights experts we interviewed wanted development organizations to 
pay more attention to data protection and privacy, several of the  development practitioners 
we spoke to believed that DPAs are too often unwilling to account for the effect of 
regulation on economic outcomes and care more about levying punitive measures than 
helping organizations better understand how to comply with law s.  
While the DPA officials we interviewed recognized that this perception exists, they noted a 
shift towards greater pragmatism and highlighted how some leading DPAs have begun to 
stress the importance of creating and implementing data privacy laws that s upport the 
15 development of the digital economy.41 There is also increasing awareness among DPAs in 
high-income countries of the need to support LMICs in implementing their own data 
privacy laws as a way to encourage harmonization in support of a more global  digital 
economy. For example, the European Commission has stated that privacy issues will be “on 
the top of the agenda” of the EU - Africa Digital Partnership.42,43 
Finding the middle ground where experts from both the development and data privacy 
communit ies can constructively engage is crucial to creating a digital economy that is 
inclusive, fair, trustworthy, and supportive of innovation. Ongoing shifts in both 
communities have created an opening for greater convergence and collaboration, which 
needs to happen at the national, regional, and international levels. We discuss opportunities 
for greater regional and international collaboration further in Theme 6.  
Theme  2:  Promoting data governance  as an enabler 
rather than hindrance   
The experts we spoke to uniformly welcomed the development community’s increasing 
interest in promoting good data governance. But many also voiced concerns that efforts in this area would be ineffective if they are solely donor -driven rather than aligned with 
government prioritie s. This is especially the case if national policymakers see data 
governance reforms as creating bureaucratic hurdles that impede useful innovation or require resources to be diverted from more immediate priorities, like health, education, job creation, and  maintaining a social safety net.  
While aid providers in the humanitarian sector have long recognized the importance of data privacy and ethical data use in their work with vulnerable populations, most development 
organizations (including the multilateral development banks, bilateral aid organizations, and 
large foundations) have only recently started to prioritize these issues publicly.
44 Several 
experts lamented that some major donors still do not conduct appropriate due diligence 
around possible harms when investing in digital projects nor require their grantees to conduct data protection and privacy impact assessments.  
Despite these criticisms, there was widespread recognition among interviewees that large 
development organizations, particularly the World Bank, already play a determinative role in setting digital policy priorities in partner countries and most experts be lieved that donors can 
 
41 For example, the Global Privacy Assembly’s 2019- 2021 Strategic Plan  states that “The GPA wil l develop a 
clearer and broader narrative for a longer -term and more coherent approach to issues around the data protection 
aspects of regulation of the digital economy, including through closer engagement with relevant multilateral and 
international bodie s.” 
42 European Commission. Towards a EU -Africa Digital Partnership . December 2017.  
43 Similarly, the UK Information Commissioner's O ffice (ICO) aims to “develop stronger links with data 
protection authorities in Commonwealth countries via our leadership of the Common Thread Network. This will support and build capacity with other data protection authorities, increasing opportunities fo r international 
collaboration, particularly with emerging or fast -developing economies.”  
44 Key humanitarian documents on responsible include UN OCHA’s Data Responsibility Guidelines  (2019) and 
the ICRC’s Handbook on data protection in humanitarian action  (2020).  16 and should do more to promote transparent and accountable data use by providing advice, 
technical expertise, capacity -building services, and analytical frameworks that policymakers 
can draw on.  
The need for greater country ownership  
At the same time, many interviewees were torn between a desire to have donors play a more 
active role in promoting responsible data practices and a desire to give national policymakers 
greater say in designing programs financed by foreign aid, consistent with the tenet that 
country ownership leads to better and more sustainable outcomes.45  
Several experts drew attention to the Principles for Digital Development  and its emphasis on 
“designing with the user” as providing a useful guide for development practitioners working 
on digital projects but noted that many of the organizations who have endorsed the Principles apply them inconsistently, with one expert noting  that donor funding for digital 
policy is “not at all based on government priorities.”
46 
If policymakers enact data governance reforms solely in response to external pressure without believing in their value, they are less likely to carry them out effectiv ely or provide 
authority to the institutions created to implement them. Experts warned that this could 
hinder innovation by creating more regulatory uncertainty than had previously existed while 
failing to guard against unethical data uses.  
For policymake rs to see value in data governance, they must first see data as an asset whose 
maintenance is worth investing in — a view they are more likely to hold if they rely on data 
as an input to their own decision -making. As one expert mentioned, “once policymaker s see 
the power of good -quality data and become used to thinking about decisions in a certain 
way, it becomes addictive and can set up a virtuous cycle.” Contrarily, “if they are not using 
data as an asset,” requiring policymakers to pay attention to data governance is “just forcing 
them to do something they don’t value in the first place.”
47  
Beyond raising awareness of the risks of data misuse, the development community can help 
convince policymakers of the importance of responsible data use by demonstrat ing (at least) 
three things: First, how clear rules and reliable data protection mechanisms can help 
policymakers achieve their objectives by facilitating data access, sharing, and re -use in a safe, 
transparent, and sustainable manner. Second, how those ru les can be implemented at 
 
45 Savedoff, William. What Is “Country Ownership”? A Formal Exploration of the Aid Relationship . October 
2019.  
46 The Principles for Digital Development  are a “set of living guidance intended to help practitioners succeed in 
applying digital technologies to development programs” designed and endorsed by the world’s largest 
development organizations, including  The Bill and Me linda Gates Foundation, the Swedish International 
Development Agency (SIDA), the UN’s Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UN Development Program (UNDP), the World Bank, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and the World Health Organization 
(WHO ). 
47 Deepa Karthykeyan. Co -founder & Director, Athena Infonomics. Interview. June 16, 2020  17 reasonable cost, both in terms of government resources and compliance burden. And third, 
how universal principles of data protection and privacy can be applied in a manner that is 
tailored to local realities and proportional to ri sks.  
Demonstrating all three will require developing better evidence on the costs and benefits of 
different approaches to governing data use. It will also require designing systems that align with the technical, institutional, and funding capacity countri es possess and outlining a 
sequence of reforms that governments can follow to establish them. The wide variation in national data ecosystems argues for using a maturity model approach to assess government readiness to enact a graduated series of reforms th at require increasing levels of 
sophistication. The World Bank will propose a such an approach in its upcoming World Development Report, which will be published in early 2021.
48 
Theme  3: Equitably distributing the value of data insights 
by “closing the loo p” 
Because the digital divide closely mirrors existing inequalities, there is a significant risk that already disadvantaged groups will fall further behind unless steps are taken to ensure that the benefits of digitalization are fairly distributed across t he whole of society. Over the last ten 
years, the development community has sought to do this, focusing on three areas: (1) 
increasing access to the internet and digital tools; (2) strengthening government data 
collection so that everyone is counted; and ( 3) promoting greater access to public data to 
strengthen government accountability and transparency.
49  
Despite this work, a consistent theme in our interviews was that in many development projects the value of data —defined in terms of actionable insights that can be used to 
improve services and policy —  does not flow back to the individuals, communities, and 
organizations who initially provide the underlying data. Instead, the data value chain 
effectively remains an open loop in which insights remain unsha red with local 
communities.
50 While a handful of interviewees argued that the monetized value of data 
should be shared back with communities when it is used for commercial purposes, most experts focused on the importance of sharing insights generated.  
For example, one expert who works for a data intermediary in the health sector observed 
that “there is a lot of work being done with data that has little value for the local environment. When people want to analyze data, it is often not done in country because  the 
resources and skills aren’t there. The agenda is often not in the interest of the country and 
 
48 World Bank. World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives . May 2020.  
49 The UN report A World That Counts: Mobilising The Data Revolution for Sustainable D evelopment  (2014) 
highlights the need to improve data collection in lower -income countries to meet and monitor the SDGs and 
spearheaded a work program carried forward today by organizations like the Global Part nership for Sustainable 
Development Data (GPSDD)  Data2x, Open Data Watch  PARIS21  and SDSN TReNDS  and initiatives like 
Data4Now . 
50 Development Gateway highlighted the same problem, which it likened to a “broken link” in Increasing the 
Impact of Results Data  (2018).  18 external actors harness the true value of what is produced. I would be hard -pressed to 
identify analysis of routine health data done out of country that had in -country benefits, in 
terms of policy change or usable insights.”51 This observation is consistent with interviewees’ 
experiences across different sectors and with different types of organizations.  
A similar dynamic takes hold when donors choose to work outside of national data systems. 
As one expert who has overseen data projects in several LMICs noted: “t here is a significant 
challenge with donors going into countries to implement programs and conducting their 
own ‘extractive data’ exercises without eng aging with national statistical systems. The risk is 
that countries won't develop the ability to make use of data produced in their own borders 
and this will push development towards a de facto paternalistic relationship — and weaken 
country ownership –  because only donors will have the capacity to make use of the data.”52 
Another expert noted that governments must often jump over legal hurdles to get access to 
data collected by international organizations within their own borders, and that NSOs often 
lack the legal expertise to negotiate for this access.  
The open loop problem is not limited to cases involving foreign actors. Several interviewees working to strengthen data use by local communities noted their frustration that most NSOs 
and government agenci es focus much more on collecting data than on exploring how data 
insights might be used by local communities and rarely engaged with community leaders to 
determine what insights would be most valuable. Others noted that NSOs are often 
unwilling to consider  using new external data sources because of an overriding interest in 
controlling the quality of data used.  
Solutions for c losing the loop:  Top-down, bottom-up, and m eeting in 
the middle  
Sharing analytical insights back to the communities where data is first collected can 
strengthen a government’s ability to use data effectively in several ways. First, people who 
receive value back from the data they provide have a greater incentive to ensure that 
information is accurate. Second, having access to data in sights can help individuals and 
communities develop the skills needed to use this information as a guide to their decisions. 
Third, sharing insights back to communities supports the creation of feedback loops, which 
can help policymakers monitor the effect iveness of their policies on an ongoing basis and 
correct course as needed.
53  
Interviewees suggested a range of solutions to achieve this goal and noted that progress 
would require both top -down and bottom -up efforts.  
 
51 Grégoire Lurton. Data Science Lead, Bluesquare. Interview. June 9, 2020.  
52 Agnieszka Rawa. Managing Director, Millennium Challenge Corporation. Interview. July 24, 2020.  
53 For more on the potential role of feedback loops in development see USAID‘s A guide to Digital Feedback 
Loops   
(2019).  19 Top-down solutions  
Development projec ts rarely share data insights back to local communities because project 
developers have little incentive to do so. Changing this will require a shift in perspective and 
prioritization at high levels of government and development organizations towards a mod el 
of engagement that seeks to empower citizens not only as producers of data but also as effective users of data.
54 
As a first step, development organizations and government agencies should include clear ex -
ante commitments in contracts for data -driven projects about how insights generated from 
analyzing data provided by local communities will be shared with them in a usable  format that  
meets local needs.55 For example,  in Nigeria, the Logistics and Health Program Management 
Information Portal (LHPMIP) Project provided insights drawn from data collected across 
the country about the supply of HIV/AIDS treatments in the form of large printouts with 
charts and graphs posted at local health facilities.56  
Bottom -up solutions  
Bottom -up solutions focus on increasing participation at the local level to identify the 
problems that communities most want to solve, and support more active engagement in 
collecting the data needed to address them. 57 The Open Institu te in Nairobi, Kenya provides 
a powerful example of this model. The organization works directly with local communities 
to help them collect and visualize data pertaining to issues they want solve and then helps them engage with governments using the datase ts they have created as a tool to push for 
policy reform and better service delivery.  
 While participatory models have strong appeal, there are questions about how easily they can 
be scaled, given the time and resources required. As one expert noted, the p erceived value of 
data is mostly about automation and scale, but greater participation usually frustrates 
achieving both.
58 Ultimately, governments need to weigh the tradeoffs between data -driven 
projects that can be rolled out quickly and at scale versus those that rest on greater 
community engagement that are more aligned with the priorities of local communities.   
 
54 For related work see on empowering data users see the Pathways for Prosperity Commission‘s Personal data 
empowerment: restoring power to the people in a digital age  (2018).  
55 Some organizations already follow this model. For example, during its project design phase, Development 
Gateway  outlines a data management protocol focused on “getting as much data back into the hands of their 
government partners as possible, within regulatory constraints.” Josh Powell. CEO, Development Gateway. 
Interview. July 23, 2020.  
56 Olasupo Oyedepo. co -founder and Director, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks. Interview. June 9, 
2020.  
57 For more on community -led problem identification see the GovLab and Bertelsmann Foundation’s report: 
People -led Innovation: Toward a Methodology for Solving Urban Problems in the 21st Century  (2018).  
58 Sean McDonald. co- Founder, Digital Public. Interview. July 27, 2020.  20 Meeting in the m iddle: The potential role of citizen -generated data 
Developing scalable and sustainable models for greater local participation  in creating and 
using public data requires greater collaboration between national governments, subnational 
governments, and local communities. One approach to such collaboration cited by several interviewees is for governments to make greater use of citiz en-generated data, i.e., “data that 
people or their organizations produce to directly monitor, demand or drive change on issues 
that affect them” that is often produced “through crowdsourcing mechanisms or citizen 
reporting initiatives, often organized and  managed by civil society groups.”
59,60,61  
Citizen -generated data could help governments fill gaps in data collection more efficiently 
than traditional statistical methods in situations where there is a lack of trust between 
citizens and the government (e .g., FLOAT Beijing), or when an issue is not receiving enough 
attention from major institutions (e.g., HarassMap), or when crowdsourcing information is cost-effective (e.g., the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) relies on 
citizens to moni tor and assess water quality in their communities).
62  
For government officials to become comfortable using citizen- generated data, they must first 
be willing to accept certain tradeoffs, including have less control over how data is collected, 
its quality and accuracy, and in certain cases, if it was collected with consent. Several 
interviewees noted that NSO staff may be reluctant to use “messier” citizen -generated data 
even if the datasets produced are highly relevant. But there are ways for governments t o 
work with citizens to mitigate these risks. 63  For example, the EPA “provides a series of 
toolkits, quality assurance protocols, trainings, and engagement channels for volunteers” to 
promote better data quality.  
Another hurdle cited by experts is the d isparity in data skills available at national, 
subnational, and local levels, and the apparent unwillingness of many national governments 
to share data down to lower levels of government. If governments choose to integrate citizen -generated data into their  data strategy, they will need to engage more closely with 
local governments and address this skills gap.  
Despite these challenges, several countries are moving forward with integrating citizen -
generated data into their broader statistical work. For examp le, in Ghana, the NSO (Ghana 
Statistical Services) has developed a mobile -based app that citizens can use to report 
incidents affecting their local community including trash and illegal dumping sites, which will 
 
59 Wilson, Christopher and Zara Rahman. Citizen -generated Data and Governments: Towards a collaborative 
model . October 2015.  
60 Inter -American Development Bank. Interview. July 29, 2020.  
61 Omar Seidu. Head, Demographic Statistics & Coordinator of Data for SDGs, Ghana Statistical Services. 
Interview. June  19, 2020.  
62 See Float Beijing , HarassMap , and OpenSteetMap  for examples of citizen- generated data projects.   
63 GPSDD, Open Knowledge International, and Public Data Lab. Choosing and engaging with citizen generated 
data. 2019.  21 allow local governments to collect informati on at a high frequency and level of granularity to 
design policies and target services.64 
Theme  4: The benefits, hazards, and hurdles of data 
collaboration  
Governing effectively requires access to accurate and timely information. Traditionally, 
governments  have relied on official statistics produced by public agencies to guide their 
policymaking decisions. But the world’s ongoing digital transformation has resulted in a 
proliferation of new data sources, many of which provide data at a higher frequency and 
level of granularity than traditional statistical methods can match. Policymakers increasingly want their national statistical systems to generate insights at the same level of frequency, 
precision, and speed.  
There is broad agreement within the statistic s community that, although conventional 
statistical methods like censuses and surveys will continue to play an important role, they are 
“too time -consuming, costly, and burdensome” to satisfy this demand alone.
65 As noted in 
the Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data adopted in 2017, “national 
statistical systems face the urgent need to adapt and develop in order to meet the widening, 
increasing and evolving needs of data users, including for the full implem entation of the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.”66  
In most countries, NSOs play the primary role in organizing data collection, setting statistical standards across government, implementing statistical methods, and publishing the results.
 67 
While other government ministries may be responsible for producing statistics on specific topics, it is the NSO that “often acts as the central clearing house, bringing together the work of other statistical offices.”
68  
To meet the demand for more releva nt, timely, and granular data, NSOs increasingly seek to 
integrate secondary data (i.e. data that is not primarily collected for statistical purposes) into 
their work.69 For example, data from telecommunications companies about individuals' 
movements was a n important data source for COVID- 19-related work. Transforming 
national statistical systems to make better use of secondary data is a large, expensive, and 
 
64 Omar Seidu. Head, Demographic Statistics & Coordinator of Data for SDGs, Ghana Statistical Services. 
Interview. June 19, 2020.  
65 OECD. The role of national statistical systems in the data revolution . 2017.  
66 United Nations. Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Dev elopment Data . March 2017.  
67  Open Data Watch. Open Data Inventory . n.d. 
68 Ibid., n.d.  
69 “Secondary data can be defined as any data holdings containing information which were not primarily collected 
for statistical purposes. Thus, secondary data includes everything from national and local administrative or 
public -sector data (e.g. tax, social security, or education records, public registers and smart meter utility data, to 
name a few), private and commercial data (e.g. credit rating, utilities data or store loyalty card information)  and 
big and GIS data (e.g. credit/debit card purchase transactions, mobile phone CDR, satellite imagery, or ASI ship 
identification records).” Steve  MacFeely. In search of the data revolution: Has the official statistics paradigm 
shifted?  July 2020.  22 highly technical effort that requires NSO staff to take on new responsibilities and develop 
new ski lls. It also requires extensive collaboration with other government agencies and non-
governmental organizations including academic institutions, research organizations, and in some cases, private sector companies.
 70  
Administrative data  
Administrative da ta has historically been the most important source of secondary data for 
governments, which government agencies generate through the operation of public 
services.71 Sources of administrative data useful for supporting and monitoring progress 
towards the SD Gs include birth and death registries, health records, migration registers, and 
tax records. Because these data are collected through day -to-day business operations, they 
are often more cost -effective to collect than relying on censuses and surveys and can  also be 
more accurate, detailed and have better coverage.72  
Making effective use of administrative data depends on the ability to merge data across 
different systems without losing meaning. 73 But achieving interoperability across different 
ministries an d levels of government is a difficult challenge even for well- resourced 
governments. While some of the hurdles to interoperability are legal and political, involving a lack of trust between agencies or a desire to silo data for political advantage, others are 
technical, including inconsistent database design, tagging, and coding.
74   
Data collected by the private sector  
Much of the development community’s interest in using secondary data has shifted to data 
collected by the private sector, which government s can use to fill knowledge gaps that 
official statistics and administrative data alone cannot address, increasing the speed and 
precision with which they can respond to changing realities and citizen needs.  
In recent years, a growing number of development organizations have promoted data collaborations between the public and private sector as a way for policymakers to access 
 
70 Organizations like PARIS21 , UNSD,  GPSDD,  and Open Data Watch  are working with governments to help 
countries strengthen and modernize their NSOs and the broader national statistical systems in which they 
operate, including a number of organizations dedicated to supporting this process in lower income countries.  
71 In Latin America and the Caribbean -Africa Peer Exchange on Administrative Data  (2019), GPSDD defines 
administrative data as including “data collected for legal complia nce or for service delivery, data documenting 
government decisions, and data generated to support planning, implementation, and monitoring progress.”  
72 Rivas, Lisbeth and Joe Crowley. IMF. Using Administrative Data to Enhance Policymaking in Developing 
Countries: Tax Data and the National Accounts . August 2018.  
73 This definition of inter operability comes from Liz Steele and Tom Orrell in their publication: The frontiers of 
data interoperability for sustainable development  (2017) and is ci ted by Luis González Morales and Tom Orrell in 
GPSDD’s Interoperability: A practitioner’s guide to joining -up data in the development  sector  (2018).  
74 For a broad summary of the challenges of sharing administrative data across government see GPSDD‘s Latin 
America and the Caribbean- Africa Peer Exchange on Administrative Data  (2019). For an overview of the 
technical hurdles to in teroperability see GPSDD‘s Interoperability: A practitioner’s guide to joining -up data in the 
development sector  (2018).  23 information and insights that most governments are unable to produce on their own.75 The 
World Bank, which has championed several initiatives that involve public -private data 
collaborations including Development Data Partnership and Data4Now, has argued that 
“harnessing the full development potential of data entails repeated reuse of data,” including “data originally collected for comm ercial purposes for public policy (and reuse of public 
intent data by firms).”
76  
Governments are also increasingly turning to private companies and non -profit 
organizations that offer data integration, management, analysis, and visualization services.77 
These organizations can provide technical skills that would otherwise be unavailable to 
resource -constrained governments and often function as de facto data brokers, connecting 
actors in the national statistical systems with secondary data prov iders.  
While most interviewees believed that public -private data partnerships can provide value to 
governments and their citizens — and several were directly involved in supporting them — 
there was also broad agreement that these collaborations raise risks  that have not been given 
the attention they deserve.78 These include lack of transparency and controls on how 
companies might seek to use merged data for commercial gain and how integrating data from public and private sources can make it easier for gover nments to surveil citizens.
79 The 
latter risk is particularly important since most national data privacy laws exempt government 
activities related to national security, law enforcement, and preventing threats to public safety.  
Other interviewees pointed to  broader concerns raised by the intertwining of interests 
between governments and large tech companies that may make it more difficult for 
countries to hold these companies accountable.  
Several interviewees also argued that development organizations needs to do a better job 
monitoring and evaluating how data collaborations are used to further the public good.
80 
This includes being more transparent about the purpose for which data is being shared, the 
 
75 Recent ini tiatives that support public -private data collaborations include the Development Data Partnership  led 
by the Inter -American Development Bank, International Monetary Fund, and World Bank; the Data For Now  
Initiative led by the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, the World Bank, the United Nations 
Statistics Division, and SDSN TReNDS; and ongoing work by organizations like GovLab  and UN Global Pulse .  
76 Note that we are combining two separate quotes from pages 6 and 12 of the World Bank‘s 2021 World 
Development Report Data for Better Lives Concept Note  Concept Note.  
77 Examples include companies like BlueSquare  and Zenysis , and non- profits like Flowminder . 
78 The World Economic Forum’s Data Collaboration for the Common Good: Enabling Trust and Innovation 
Through Public -Private Partnerships  (2019) distinguishes between four types of risks raised by data collaboration: 
commercial risks, regulatory risks, security risks, and privacy and ethical risks.   
79 Regarding the former, “the social license of public sector data use may not extend to private sector use. 
Empirical research consistently suggests  public discomfort with the use of health data for commercial gain, or 
with commercial (for -profit) companies accessing their health data.” Angela Ballantyne. Big Data and Public -
Private Partnerships in Healthcare and Research . September 2019.  
80 For more on M&E for digital and data -related projects see: Development Gateway. Understanding Data Use: 
Building M&E Systems that Empower Users.  August 2018. And Digital Principles. Monitoring & Evaluating  
Technologies in Social Change Projects . n.d. 24 controls put in place to limit use beyond this purpose, t he risks of using certain types of 
potentially sensitive data, and the extent to which approaches like anonymization and 
aggregation might help mitigate these risks — and evaluating the safety and value of a 
project based on these criteria.  
Finally, sever al experts expressed concern that the asymmetry in resources and expertise 
between large tech companies and LMIC governments raises the risk that data sharing 
arrangements will be negotiated in the favor of the former and fail to include reasonable 
protect ions against data re -use beyond the originally intended purpose of data sharing.  
Hurdles to successful collaboration  
Despite growing interest in public -private data partnerships, “persistent barriers  are holding 
back public -private data sharing at scale.”81 A recent collaborative learning exercise led by 
the Global Partnership on Sustainable Development Data (GPSDD) identified four key barriers to public -private data sharing:  
• Lack of common standards limit interoperability and quality of insights  
• Weak legal and regulatory frameworks contribute to a lack of trust  
• Low capacity on the data holder and data user sides limits the scope for analysis and 
an understanding of what is possible and limits transparent communication with the 
public around manageme nt of privacy and security  
• Misaligned incentives and a limited body of evidence on the value of data prevents 
partners from agreeing on business models based on shared value  
 
In our interviews, the most frequently cited barrier to establishing a successful  data 
partnership was the need to comply with legal requirements related to data protection and 
privacy — and understanding what those requirements are. As one expert noted, “dealing 
with legal issues is Step 0.1 when setting up a data sharing partnership. ”
82 
The organizations we spoke to took different approaches to assess and manage the legal 
risks involved with sharing data in specific contexts. Some created their own assessment 
tools or relied on pre -existing templates like the GDPR’s data protection im pact 
assessment.83, 84  Others, like UN Global Pulse, have gone a step farther by providing public 
access to the tools they have created, including a Risk, Harms, and Benefits Assessment Tool 
and a Due Diligence Tool.85 Relatedly, the Contracts for Data Co llaboration initiative 
 
81 Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data. Unlocking Privately Held Data for Public Good . Final 
Report. July 2020.  
82 Tracey Li. Data Scientist and  Project Manager, Flowminder. Interview. July 7, 2020.  
83 EU GDPR Data Protection Impact Assessment . N.d.  
84 For example, before formalizing data sharing agreements for projects aime d that public sector of use telecom 
data, the Digital Impact Alliance applies its own risk assessment template, data governance, and security plans. 
Organizations that Digital Impact Alliance. Responsible Use of Network Data: Ensuring responsible, widespread 
access and use of network data for SDG decision -making . N.d. 
85 UN Global Pulse: Risks, Ha rms, and Benefits Assessment Tool , UN Global Pulse: Due Diligence Tool  25 provides an analytical framework and an online library of legal clauses to assist parties 
seeking to establish data sharing arrangements.86  
Despite the availability of these tools, several experts lamented what they saw as a lack of 
available guidance and noted that they had taken part in projects in which data sharing 
agreements were drafted on an ad hoc basis and without appropriate due dili gence. While 
this disconnect may be due to a simple lack of awareness of the tools that exist, a more basic 
problem may be that much of the existing guidance pertains to ensuring ethical and 
responsible data sharing, while organizations on the ground demand more guidance on the related but distinct legal aspects of data sharing, which must often be tailored to national 
frameworks.  
Interviewees suggested several ways to address these challenges including having DPAs play 
a more active role in public -private  data collaborations. We discuss this option and other 
ways to support compliance with data protection and privacy laws in the next section.  
Theme 5: Establishing effective data protection 
frameworks  
As human activity becomes increasingly digitized, the n eed to have rules in place to govern 
how data is used throughout its lifecycle and across different data systems becomes more 
important. The challenge facing governments is how to establish rules that protect citizens 
from harm while still allowing for use ful innovation.   
Modern approaches to data protection can be traced back almost a half century with the 
establishment of the Fair Information Practices in the United States in 1973 and the subsequent 
codification of and expansion on those principles by the OECD in the Guidelines on the 
Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data published in 1980.87  The years that 
followed were characterized by slow and steady diffusion and development of national frameworks for data protection, mostly in wealthier countries, based and building on these 
principles.  
Over the last two decades, however, and particularly in the last ten years, the number of countries that have adopted data protection legislation has significantly increased. Since 
2010, 64 coun tries, the vast majority of which are LMICs, have enacted new data privacy 
laws, bringing the total number of countries with such laws in place up to 146.
 88  
 
86 The Contracts for Data Collaboration  is a p artnership between NYU’s GovLab, SDSN Trends, University of 
Washington, and World Economic Forum.   
87 The Fair Information Practices  formed the early basis for European and US privacy law and underly most global 
privacy laws today. Dixon, Pam. A Brief Introduction to Fair Information Practices . December 2007.  
88 Greenleaf, Graham and Bertil Cottier.  2020 Ends a Decade of 62 New Data Privacy Laws . January 2020.  26 Table 1. Countries that enacted new d ata privacy laws between 2010 - 2020  
Region  Number of countries with 
data privacy laws and  bills Countries that introduced and passed data privacy 
legislation between 2010 – 2020 
Africa  23 Algeria (2018), Angola (2011), Botswana (2018), Chad (2015), 
Congo- Brazzaville (Republic of Congo) (2019), Côte d'Ivoire 
(2013), Egypt (2020), Equatorial Guinea (2016), Gabon (2011), 
Ghana (2012), Guinea (Conakry) (2016), Kenya (2019), Lesotho 
(2011), Madagascar (2015), Malawi (2016), Mali (2013), 
Mauritania (2016), Niger (2017), Nigeria (2019), São Tom é and 
Príncipe (2016), South Africa (2013), Togo (2019), Uganda 
(2019)   
Caribbean  13 Antigua & Barbuda (2013), Aruba (2011), Barbados (2019), 
Bermuda (2016), BES Islands (2010), Cayman Islands (2017), 
Curaçao (2010), Dominican (2013), Jamaica (2020), Saint Kitts 
& Nevis (2018), St. Lucia (2011), St. Maarten (2010), Trinidad 
and Tobago (2011)   
Latin America  7 Brazil (2018), Costa Rica (2011), Mexico (2010), Nicaragua 
(2012), Panama (2018), Philippines (2012), Peru (2011)  
Middle East  6 Abu Dhabi (2015), Bahrain (2018), Lebanon (2018), Qatar 
(2016), Yemen (2012), United Arab Emirates [sectoral, various incl, 2012, 2016]  
Asia 5 Bhutan (2017), Indonesia (2016), Malaysia (2010), Singapore 
(2012), Vietnam (2010), [China (2016) -  cybersecurity, partial 
only], [India -  ITA, partial only], [Enforcement of Thailand’s 
PDPA postponed until May 2021].  
Central Asia  4 Kazakhstan (2013), Tajikistan (2018), Turkmenistan (2017), 
Uzbekistan (2019)  
Europe  5 Faroe Islands (2010), Georgia (2012), Kosovo (2010), Turkey 
(2016), Ukraine (2011)   
Data from Greenleaf’s  Global Tables of Data Privacy Laws and Bills (6th Ed January 2019)  and Greenleaf an d 
Cottier’s  2020 Ends a Decade of 62 New Data Privacy Laws . Additional research conducted by World Privacy 
Forum (2020). Note: Two significant privacy bills which have been introduced but not passed are India’s 
Personal Data Protection Act (Tabled in Parliament December, 2019), and Zimbabwe’s Cybersecurity and Data 
Protection Bill 2019 (Gazetted March 2020).  
Several factors have driven the rapid increase in new data prot ection and privacy laws in 
LMICs in recent years, including: the catalytic effect of the EU GDPR; growing awareness 
of the risks of data misuse and the desire to create an enabling framework for responsible 
innovation; and the need to meet donor standards on data protection and privacy.  
The GDPR, which was enacted in 2016 and implemented in 2018,altered the global data 
protection landscape by providing a more rigorous model for protecting the privacy of individual data than had previously existed through mechanisms that strengthened indiv idual 
control over how data is used and made data controllers more accountable. The GDPR also explicitly incorporated the Privacy By Design  Principles, which seek to ensure “that personal 27 data are automatically protected in any given IT system or business practice” by default.89,90 
The GDPR helped catalyze the global expansion of data protection frameworks through its 
extraterritorial applicability discussed further in Box 1.  
Box 1 . The GDPR’s e xtraterritorial impact  
One of the most controversial elements about the GDPR is the extraterritorial scope of its 
approach to determining the privacy and security of data transfers to third countries, which 
requires the European Commission to determine whether non- EU countries “provide a level of 
protection for personal data which is comparable to those of EU law” as the basis for transferring 
data. Taken a step further, jurisdictions can further pursue a formal “adequacy decision.”91 If a 
country is deemed adequate by the EU, its ease of digital trade and  digital economy opportunities 
are better than jurisdictions without this designation. This has led to a push to achieve adequate 
compliance with the GDPR by governments outside of the EU, who want to ensure that their 
domestic companies are not competitive ly disadvantaged.  
The EU adequacy process, which began with the original EU Data Protection Directive (EU 
95/46), which was adopted in 1995, and continued with the GDPR, has long been criticized for its 
opaqueness. Several interviewees  expressed frustrati on that, in their view, the European 
Commission has not provided clear guidance on the basis of their adequacy decisions and 
highlighted that no LMIC countries in Africa or Asia have received an adequacy decision.92 They 
also expressed concern that a lack of adequacy could handicap smaller economies, as they will be 
less able to engage in digitally linked trade with the EU and may receive less investment as a result.  
 
Today, the GDPR is the baseline to which all other countries’ data protection framework are 
compared and every framework enacted in recent years reflects its influence.93 Ultimately 
though the GDPR is a European law designed to deal with European challenges from a 
European perspective. While the experts we spoke to recognized its im portance in providing 
a rigorous model for achieving data privacy, they also noted that the framework is challenging for governments to implement due to its complexity and high degree of 
 
89 European Data Protection Supervisor. Preliminary Opinion on privacy by design . May 2018.  
90 Privacy by Design evolved from early attempts to incorporate fair information practice principles directly into 
the design and operation of information and communications technologies (See Privacy by Design: Origins, 
meaning, and prospects for assuring privacy and trust in the information era  (2011)). Today, Privacy by Design is 
a method ology for proactively embedding privacy into IT, business practices, and networked infrastructures. The 
measures are designed to anticipate and prevent privacy invasive events before they occur.  
91 European Parliament and Council of the European Union. GDPR Third Countries . April 2016.  
92 To date the EC has only recognized a handful of countries as providing adequate protection: Andorra, 
Argentina, Canada, Faroe Islands, Guernsey, Israel, Isle of  Man, Japan, Jersey, New Zealand, Switzerland, and 
Uruguay. Adequacy talks are ongoing with South Korea. Notably, the US had an adequacy ”workaround“ in the 
EU-US Safe Harbor, which was deemed not acceptable in a series of famous court decisions generally known as 
Schrems I and II. For more information see Adequacy Decisions . 
93 Greenleaf, Graham and Bertil Cotter. 2020 Ends a Decade of 62 New Data Privacy Laws . January 2020.  28 prescriptiveness, and cautioned that it was a poor fit for LMICs with out significant 
modification.94 
A consistent theme in our interviews was that even when data protection laws exist “on the 
books," they may not be translated into "law on the ground," with the effect that protections for individuals and groups may remain w eak. The gap between written law and effective 
implementation exists even in the EU, where Member States are struggling to implement 
and enforce the GDPR, despite having had roughly 25 years of practice implementing a 
similar framework under the Data Prote ction Directive, which  contains many of the same 
provisions as the GDPR.
 95   
For most LMICs, the challenge of translating new data privacy laws into action is far greater. 
Interviewees emphasized three related barriers to effective implementation: the co mplexity 
of existing data privacy frameworks, the lack of the legal skills and knowledge needed to 
comply with data privacy laws across government, and a shortage of funding for DPAs.  
Why data privacy is seen as a barrier  
Poor implementation of existing data privacy laws or the absence of such laws can impede 
the use of data to improve development outcomes. Each of the development practitioners 
we spoke to had been directly or indirectly involved in projects that had either failed to start, 
been derailed,  or were significantly slowed by concerns related to data protection and 
privacy. The reasons for these outcomes varied across projects:  
Regulatory uncertainty:  Several experts noted that government officials in countries with 
newly established data prote ction laws often do not know how to comply with new 
regulations and therefore may refuse to consider engaging in projects that involve data sharing, even when those projects seem to comply with existing laws.
96 More generally, 
experts said that uncertainty  about how to act in accordance with existing data protection 
laws, or how to act in their absence, was a major impediment to developing successful data sharing projects — and that this uncertainty extends to both government officials and their 
development  partners.
  
Lack of technical tools and skills:  In addition to a lack of regulatory clarity, experts also 
noted a lack of understanding about how to implement technical solutions that could 
mitigate the risks of sharing potentially sensitive data. For example, one expert noted that 
assessments conducted in one sub -Saharan African country revealed that the NSO had 
steered away f rom data sharing projects, even when it was technically feasible to significantly 
 
94 For example, GDPR requires proof of compliance (Articles 6 and 7). Many times, this will require 
technological proof of compliance, such as keeping  digital logs of individual consent, or mapping and meta -
tagging microdata which requires extensive data mapping. Many LMIC digital start -ups are likely to find this type 
of compliance a challenging, if not insurmountable, obstacle.  
95 European Commission. Data protection as a pillar of citizens’ empowerment and the EU’s approach to the 
digital transition -  two years of application of the General Data Protection Regulation . June 2020.  
96 Josh Powell. CEO, Development Gateway. Interview. July 23, 2020.  29 limit the privacy risks involved, because NSO officials lacked training on how to anonymize 
data.  
Lack of a data protection framework:  Others noted how the absence of national data 
privacy laws can derail projects and investments as donor organizations have become increasingly unwilling to support da ta projects in countries that  lack these protections.
97 
One interviewee countered this by arguing that having a data protection framework in place 
is a poor predictor of whether governments will engage in data sharing partnerships and 
whether those partne rships will be successful, and that these outcomes depend more on how 
“progressive” regulators are and how clear their practical guidance is.   
Unwillingness to engage with Data Protection Authorities: Several  interviewees who 
were responsible for managing data sharing projects noted their reluctance to engage with 
DPAs for assistance, even when they had questions about how to comply with regulations 
because they were skeptical that a DPA could provide timely assistance and reluctant to risk 
slowing down the ir projects. Several other interviewees, however, reported that the DPAs 
they engaged with played a helpful role in clarifying how to comply with new regulations.   
The path forward  
The challenges facing governments in establishing and implementing data pri vacy 
frameworks that provide necessary protections while supporting innovation require comprehensive and system- wide solutions. Interviewees said that progress is most needed in 
the following areas:  
Putting global standards in local context: Choosing simplicity over complexity  
Governments with resource and capacity constraints must find ways to implement data 
privacy laws efficiently and effectively. For that reason, some experts suggested that 
governments should shift away from treating GDPR as the basis of their laws towards other 
frameworks that are less prescriptive, like the Council of Europe’s Convention 108+.
98 These 
experts noted that Convention 108+ , which is the only legally binding multilateral instrument 
on the protection of privacy  and personal data, retains high standards on protecting human 
rights while allowing governments greater flexibility in implementation.   
One obvious challenge is that many countries have already enacted complex data privacy 
frameworks influenced by the GDPR and they are unlikely to change their approach in the 
absence of a major shift in the global discourse on data privacy, which puts more pressure 
on regulators to translate existing laws in a manner that allows them to be effectively carried out. 
One w ay governments can do this is by translating  legislative principles into concrete codes 
of practice (or “codes of conduct”) that specify how data protection and privacy frameworks 
 
97 The World Bank’s Nigeria Digital Identification for Development Project  (2020) is a recent example.  
98 Council of Europe. Convention 108+ website . N.D.  30 can be operationalized in specific settings and contexts — a process that the GDPR spells 
out in detail in Article 40 and that many GDPR -influenced policy frameworks include a 
provision for.99,100  Such codes typically focus on one sector or industry and are developed in 
collaboration between relevant stakeholders and the regulator , usually the DPA, which is 
given the authority to enforce them. Each of the DPA officials emphasized the importance 
of such codes in allowing governments to translate "law on the books" to "law on the 
ground” in a practical manner tailored to local contex t.  
A strong, active, and pragmatic DPA  
Having a strong and active DPA that takes into account the effect of data privacy laws on 
innovation, enforces laws in a proportional manner, and can provide clear guidance on how 
to comply with existing laws is the best way to achieve the regulatory clarity that 
organizations seek. But achieving these aims requires both sufficient staffing and funding.  
 
Although cross -country data on how DPAs are funded is unavailable, there was broad 
agreement among interviewees th at the vast majority of DPAs in LMICs are insufficiently 
funded. This lack of resources makes it harder for them to carry out enforcement, develop 
guidance, build awareness, and attract staff with the appropriate skills, each of which is 
necessary for succ essful implementation of privacy laws. Several interviewees also 
emphasized the importance for DPAs to have real enforcement power, without which both 
government agencies and private companies are more likely to ignore them.   
Finally, several experts note d that DPAs should seek to cultivate a reputation for being 
pragmatic, solution- oriented, and eager to assist others in using data legally and responsibly. 
If they instead implement data protection laws in a punitive manner, organizations are more 
likely t o try to avoid engaging with DPAs when possible.   
LMICs charting new path on d ata protection  and privacy  
Today, several LMICs are charting new paths in data protection and privacy law by 
modifying  their approaches to meet domestic priorities and, in some cases, extending 
protections beyond those offered by the GDPR. For example, Kenya’s Data Protection Act 
of 2019 contains many elements of the GDPR but makes several adaptations.101 Notably, 
the definition of “data processor” under the Kenya law includes “public authority, agency, or 
other body,” which is broader than the GDPR’s definition. The affirmative inclusion of 
public agencies, combined with a requirement for organizations to conduct risk assessments 
for activities that have the potential to create high risk to the rights and freedoms of data 
subjects, suggests that the government of Kenya will be required to conduct data protection 
 
99 European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Article 40 GDPR: Codes of Conduct . April 2016.  
100 In addition to codes of conduct, voluntary consensus standards (VCS) are another important multi -
stakeholder standard that have received more attention in recent years. VCS can be used by jurisdictions that lack 
GDPR -like provisions for cre ating codes of conduct if a formal government entity has ownership of the process 
and can enforce the final standards. For more on VCS, see U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Federal 
Register: Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary Consensus Standards and in 
Conformity Assessment Activities . February 1998.  
101 Kenya Data Protection Act . November 2019.  31 impact assessments on its own programs, whic h is something that the GDPR does not 
require of EU member states.  
The way data privacy jurisprudence evolved in Kenya is also instructive, as it reflects the 
influence of civil society organizations, like the Nubian Rights Forum, whose legal challenge 
of Kenya’s public digital ID program (Huduma Namba) likely contributed to a fast -tracking 
of the data protection bill.102 
India’s draft Personal Data Protection Bill —  which builds off a landmark decision by the 
Indian Supreme Court in 2017 that established d ata privacy as a fundamental right and a 
white paper drafted by a committee of experts led by former Supreme Court justice B.N. 
Srikrishna —  advances the debate on national approaches to data governance by 
introducing several novel measures. 103  The Bill is also explicit about the relationship 
between data governance and economic growth, noting in its introduction that “it is necessary to create a collective culture that fosters a free and fair digital economy, respecting 
the informational privacy of indiv iduals, and ensuring empowerment, progress and 
innovation through digital governance and inclusion.”
104   
Although the Personal Data Protection Bill mirrors some aspects of the GDPR — for 
example, it establishes an independent data protection authority and certain privacy rights — 
it deviates in several important ways, including:  
• Broader definitions of personal and sensitive personal data: The draft Bill 
defines “personal data” as data “about or relating to a natural person who is directly 
or indirectly ide ntifiable . . . .” but, unlike the GDPR, does not take into account the 
“reasonable likelihood” that an individual will be identifiable.105 
• Criminalizing the reidentification of personal data: The Bill makes it a criminal 
offense punishable by up to three years imprisonment for anyone to knowingly or 
intentionally re -identify personal data that has been de -identified by a data fiduciary 
or a data processor.   
• Data localization: Unlike the GDPR, which eschews explicit data localization 
measures, India’s  draft Bill states that all “critical personal data” must be stored and 
processed only in India, while all “sensitive personal data” must be stored in the 
country but can be processed outside subject to certain conditions.  
India’s draft bill has come under  criticism from different angles. Some critics have argued 
that the Bill will undermine economic growth due to its limitations on data processing, 
 
102 Ikagai Law. Kenya’s Huduma Namba: Ambition Fraught with Risk . April 2020.  
103 India. The Personal Data Protection Bill . December 2019.  
104 Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) vs Union Of India Judgement . September 2018 (decision made in August 2017). 
White Paper of the Committee of Experts on a Data Protection Framework for India . December 2017.    
105 Covington & Burling LLP. India Introduces Updated Draft of Personal Data Protection Bill . February 2020.  32 perceived high compliance burden, and data localization requirements. 106 Others have 
complained that the Bill  grants to much power to the state because of “numerous vaguely 
defined exemptions on data regulation” that could enable greater state surveillance.107  
Despite these criticisms, the passage of the Personal Data Protection Bill, which is expected 
to occur (perhaps with modifications) in 2021, will have global consequences. Unlike most LMICs, India’s economy and population is large enough to give the countr y leverage over 
the world’s biggest tech firms, which are more likely to modify their business practices to 
comply with India’s law than they would be for smaller countries. In addition, other 
governments will pay close attention to how India’s approach works in practice to see if it 
provides a good model for data protection and privacy in a fast -growing and fast -digitalizing 
economy.  
Other countries are also taking steps to develop new approaches to data protection and privacy, at least on paper. For exam ple, Togo’s Data Protection Law passed in 2019 
stipulates that any merging (“interconnection”) of data must not violate human rights or 
privacy and sets out requirements for data controllers to obtain authorization for merging data.
108  
Whether these laws a re effective in practice and how they affect economic outcomes will 
depend largely on how they are implemented. This makes it important for DPAs to understand the economic implications of their actions and raises the value of guidance that 
can support flex ible and effective implementation.  
Box 2. Regarding the use of consent as a primary method of effectuating 
data protection  
Several experts argued that modern data protection frameworks, including  the GDPR , are 
fundamentally flawed in their reliance on in dividual consent  (though it is worth emphasizing that 
consent is one of six lawful bases upon which data can be processed under the Regulation) . One 
critic asserted  that many of the GDPR’s protections fall away once consent is granted, which puts 
an unreas onable burden on individuals, particularly those with limited digital literacy. Others 
argued that over reliance on individual consent creates a “missing the forest for the trees” problem 
by failing to address the potential for group harms that can arise fr om profiling and machine 
learning.109  
 
106 Burman, Anirudh. Will India’s Proposed Data Protection Law Protect Privacy and Promote Growth?  March 
2020.  
107 Basu, Arindrajat and Justin Sherman. Key Global Takeaways From India's Revised Personal Data Protection 
Bill. January 2020.  
108 See Articles 33 and 34. Togo. Data Protection Law  (in French). October 2019. For more on Togo’s law, see 
Dixon, Pam Africa’s Rising Leadership in Privacy  
109 Similar arguments are made in Group Privacy: New Challenges of Data Technologies  (2017) and The Data 
Delusion  (2018). However, other critics, especially in wealthy countries, strongly criticize the GDPR for stifling 
AI innovation due to its  prohibitive language regarding automated profiling.  33 Today, there is growing interest in data governance approaches that rely less on consent 
mechanisms. In its 2020 paper “Making Data Work for the Poor” the Consultative Group to Assist 
the Poor (CGAP) suggests two model s for ensuring that data is only used for legitimate purposes 
and in a manner that serves individuals’ interests: the first, would require organizations to pass a 
“legitimate purposes test,” and the second would require them to abide by a fiduciary duty 
requirement.110  
While these ideas have not been comprehensively adopted, the GDPR includes legitimate interest 
as one of the six lawful bases for processing data (Article 6(1)(f), as do many of the GDPR -inspired 
legal frameworks.111 And India's draft Personal  Data Protection Bill also  invokes the concept of 
fiduciary duty.  
 
Theme  6: The need for greater global and regional 
coordination  
Global or regional agreement on a single set of data privacy principles essentially exists today 
in the form of both the OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of 
Personal Data  and the Council of Europe’s Convention 108+ , which are well -established and 
widely approved.112 However, broad agreement on how these principles should be 
implemented is lacking. Many countries stand to benefit from guidance on how these principles can be applied in a way that is effective and flexible enough for resource -
constrained governments to tailor to their needs.    
Achieving agreement on such guidelines will require greater coordination at the global level.
113 But global and regional institutional arrangements to bring together data protection 
offici als are underdeveloped compared to those in other fields where cross -border spillovers 
are more pronounced, including finance and health. For example, there is no equivalent of an institution like the Financial Stability Board, which promotes coordination among 
national financial authorities and international standard -setting bodies, or the World Health 
Organization, which coordinates multiple country -level data flows.  
In the past few years, however, some of the world’s leading DPAs have taken steps to 
transform an active global community of DPAs into a model that more closely resembles a 
multilateral institution in composition and governance. The most significant development 
was the remaking of the International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy 
Commissioners (founded in 1979) from an annual conference into a year -round organization 
 
110 Medine, David and Gayatri Murthy. Making Data Work for the Poor . January 2020.  
111 A good discussion of how legitimate i nterests and lawful basis for processing interact in the GDPR may be 
found at the UK Information Commissioner's Office Guidance on this interaction, see What is the ‘legitimate 
interests’ basis?   
112 See the OECD‘s Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data  (last 
updated in 2013) and the Council of Europe‘s Convention 108+ . 
113 Looking at technology governance more broadly, the Pathways for Prosperity Commission proposed “key 
principles for a cooperative digital world” in its rep ort Digital Diplomacy –  Technology Governance for 
developing countries  (2020), including a bottom up approach starting with regional or like -minded cooperation.  34 called the Global Privacy Assembly (GPA) in 2019.The GPA is now crafting guidance on 
privacy policy, including in response to COVID -19, and its 2019 -2021 strategy aims t o 
enhance the organization’s role and voice in wider digital policy, including by promoting an “evolution towards global policy, standards and models.”
114  
To achieve this goal, the GPA will need to develop closer ties with other international bodies (e.g., the G -20, multilateral development banks, the IMF, and many UN agencies), whose 
work increasingly involves issues related to the digital economy and the use of data by both the private and public sectors.  Developing such ties would increase the GPA’s sta ture and, 
more importantly, support greater collaboration between the economic development and 
data protection and privacy communities of practice.  
There is a need not only for greater institutionalization at the global level, but also pathways 
for LMICs to have a greater voice in discussions on global standards. One way to ensure this 
is for the GPA to collaborate more closely with regional data privacy networks and other 
regional bodies with broader remits such as the African Union and ensure those bodie s are 
represented at key meetings.   
Unlike global bodies, which bring to together countries with very different characteristics, 
regional bodies draw their strength from convening countries that are more similar and 
therefore more likely to face comparabl e challenges. Regional coordination is particularly 
important for LMICs because on their own they lack the economic heft needed to influence 
global debates on data governance and the behavior of large tech firms. Regional bodies can 
also play an important role in pooling expertise and supporting peer learning efforts.  
Although a number of regional data protection and privacy networks exist, organizations and 
initiatives dedicated to supporting regional learning and advancing policy related to broader 
data governance issues in LMICs are just beginning to take shape.
 115 Most of these 
initiatives focus on Africa, including the Africa Digital Rights’ Hub, which promotes 
research and advocacy on digital rights; the Africa Data Leadership Initiative, “a peer 
netw ork designed for and by African policymakers, consumer rights advocates, and private 
sector stakeholders to ensure the data economy drives equitable growth and social progress 
across the continent”; the Centre for Intellectual Property and Information Tech nology Law 
based at Strathmore University in Nairobi, Kenya, which conducts research and training on digital policy issues; and ID4Africa, which has convened DPAs and digital identity 
 
114 Global Privacy A ssembly. Strategic Plan 2019- 2021. October 2019.  
115 Data privacy networks that include LMIC members include regional organizations like the African Data 
Protection Network and the Asia Pacific Privacy Authorities (APPA) Forum, and linguistic and cultural networks 
like the Ibero -American Network of Data Pro tection (RIPD), which includes Spain, Portugal, Brazil, and the 
Spanish- speaking countries in the Americas, and the Association francophone des autorites de protection des 
donnes personnelles (AFAPDP), which is a group of francophone DPAs. The Common Threa d Network is a 
network of DPAs in Commonwealth countries.  35 authorities in a series of public events aimed at bridging gaps between the two 
communities.116  
In South Asia, most digital policy research has focused on India, including work by the Data Governance Network at the IDFC Institute.
117 One organization with a more regional policy 
is LIRNEasia, which describes its mission as “cata lyzing policy change through research to 
improve people’s lives in the emerging Asia Pacific by facilitating their use of hard and soft 
infrastructures through the use of knowledge, information and technology.”118 In addition, 
the Association of Southeast A sian Nations (ASEAN) has created a Data Protection and 
Privacy Forum and a framework on digital data governance to “strengthen the governance of digital data in ASEAN with a view to promoting the growth of trade and flow of data 
within and among ASEAN Memb er States in the digital economy.”
119 
In Latin America, regional initiatives on data governance are less developed, despite a long 
history of civil society engagement on digital rights issues. 120 Centro Latam Digital (The 
Center for Digital Policy in Latin America), a think -tank focused on digital policy issues in 
Latin America, including data privacy and cybersecurity, was established in 2018.121 In 
addition, the Inter -American Development Bank (IDB) is increasing its focus on the topic, 
including through its Social Digital  program, which focuses on how digital tools can support 
better delivery of social services, and its work through its Modernization of the State 
program, which supports digital transformation of the public sector.122 
Theme  7: Developing the s kills needed to  govern data  
In many countries, there is a large gap between the demand and supply of individuals with 
the knowledge and skills required to govern the use of data. To date, most of the 
development community’s work to build data capacity has focused on bui lding basic digital 
literacy, programming, and statistical skills. However, there is a growing need for expertise 
on the legal and technical aspects of data use. 123 
Government agencies that want to use data from or share data with third parties must have 
the ability to negotiate complex contracts that prevent data from being re -used for 
unintended purposes and to monitor these contracts to hold other parties accountable. 
 
116 For more information, see Africa Digital Rights Hub , Africa Data Leadership Initiative , Centre for Intellectual 
Property and Information Technology Law, and ID4Africa .  
117 Data Governance Network  
118 LIRNEasia  
119 ASEAN Data Protec tion and Privacy Forum . ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance . December 
2018.  
120 Rodriguez, Katitza and Renata Avila- Pinto. Electronic Frontie r Foundation. Privacy Rights Activism in Latin 
America . September 2012.  
121 Centro Latam Digital  
122 IDB Social Digital. IDB Modernization of the State .  
123 See PARIS21’s Capacity Building 4.0  for an overview of the core competencies required by modern NSOs. 
Also see the UN Global Working Group on Big Data for Official Statistics’ Competency Fram ework for Big 
Data Acquisition and Processing  (2020).  36 Having this ability is particularly important when dealing with large tech firms, who c an 
bring greater resources and knowledge to bear in negotiations. If agencies lack confidence in 
their ability to negotiate contracts that are enforceable, equitable, and comply with existing 
regulation, they are more likely to turn down data sharing proje cts, even if those projects are 
ethically designed, legally compliant, and may produce valuable insights.  
To a surprising degree, interviewees noted that lack of legal data expertise often extends to 
the third -party data providers and intermediaries that LMIC governments work with. Staff at 
several of these organizations said that they struggle to find legal experts who can advise 
them on how to translate domestic law (and often the GDPR) into the local context in 
which they operate. One interviewee compla ined that development organizations spend too 
much time trying to “crowdsource” expertise on legal data matters from within the 
development community and argued that it is more effective to bring in “real privacy 
experts,” preferably on a pro bono basis when possible.124    
Working on the legal aspects of data governance requires a unique combination of skills and 
expertise, including an understanding of data protection laws and practices; data systems; and privacy risks raised by data use and how to mitigat e them.
125 Government officials that 
oversee data projects would also ideally have an ability to understand and manage the value of data as an asset and pose relevant questions that can be answered with data.
126,127 For this 
reason, there is growing interest in the official statistics community in creating a new 
profession and community of practice around the idea of “data stewards” to support collaborative data efforts.
128   
Because this skillset requires knowledge in several technical areas, it will take sign ificant time 
and investment to develop. Most interviewees believed that governments should prioritize developing this expertise for the reasons described above. But several argued that LMICs should address more urgent digital capacity needs – including the  need to develop basic data 
skills (e.g., numeracy and simple programming, data analysis, and data visualization skills)  -- 
before seeking to build legal data expertise. W ithout this fundamental skill base,  they argued 
the domestic digital economy would no t thrive, resulting in limited demand for those with 
narrower data governance skills.
129  
 
124 Tracey Li. Data Scientist and Project Manager, Flowminder. Interview. July 7, 2020.  
125 These competencies align with the role of “data privacy officer” or “data protection officer” (as referred to by 
the GDPR), which is growing in importance and demand. According to the International Association of Privacy 
Professionals (IAPP),  which oversees the Certified Information Privacy Professionals credential, there are now 
more than 50,000 privacy professionals in the world (up from only 14,000 in 2014), see 50K members: A 
landmark for the IAPP and global privacy . 
126 Stefaan Verhulst . co-Founder, The GovLab. Interview. July 20, 2020.  
127 For more on soft skills needed to effectively manage data for public good, see NYU and GovLab’s Data 
Stewardship project . 
128 GovLab. Wanted: Data Stewards. (Re -)Defining the Roles and Responsibilities of Data Stewards for an Age of 
Data Collaboration . March 2020. See also: UN World Data Forum Webinar. Data stewardship: A solution for 
official statistics' predicament?  March 2020.  
129 Donatien Beguy. Population Scientist and Data Expert, UN -Habitat. Interview. July 8, 2020.  37 Regardless of the approach taken, there was broad agreement that most LMICs would need 
to continue relying on donors and data intermediaries for legal data expertise f or the 
foreseeable future. There was also agreement that donors can help build legal data expertise among their partners by making capacity -building a more explicit priority of the data 
partnerships they support. This would involve setting clear goals abou t the knowledge that 
would be shared through a project and investing in training modalities to provide deeper 
expertise. It would also require donors to commit to sharing project data back with their 
government partners whenever it is legally allowable.  
Given the depth and specificity of the technical knowledge required, capacity -building 
efforts will need to be long -term engagements. Several interviewees suggested having 
governments and donors collaborate with major national academic institutions, governm ent 
training institutions, or regional coordinating bodies to develop self -sustaining centers of 
excellence, where training programs can be institutionalized and replicated, and where a 
cadre of experts can be developed. The shared regional Cybersecurity R esource Centers that 
CGAP is pursuing in several regions offers a possible model for this type of approach.
130  
Theme  8: The impact of COVID -19  
The COVID -19 pandemic and the digital policy response to it has changed how society 
thinks about the use of data and digital tools by accelerating the global trend of digitalization, 
highlighting fissures and deficiencies in public data systems that preexisted the crisis, and 
drawing attention to how greater reliance on digital tools can threaten privacy . 
The op portunities and risks of accelerating digitalization  
The importance of physical distancing during the pandemic has accelerated the shift towards 
a digital -first approach by governments. As one interviewee noted, whereas before the crisis 
having the abilit y to provide digital services was a “want” for governments, today it is a 
“need.”131 
Recent research by Gelb and Mukherjee highlights how governments have used digital 
systems — including digital ID, mobile communications, and digital payments, alongside 
data integration across social registers and other databases —  to expand the size and reach 
of the social safety net, while providing services at arms -length. They find that countries that 
had foundational digital platforms for digital ID and payments in pla ce before the crisis 
began, were better able to rapidly deploy social assistance than countries without those 
capabilities.  
 
130 For additional information see CGAP’s Regional Centers Can Help Low -Income Countries Build Cyber 
Resilience  (2020).  
131 Arturo Muente Kunigami. IDB. Interview . July 29, 2020.  38 As governments rely more on digital technology to provide services, it becomes imperative 
to ensure that all citizens can access se rvices online (usually on mobile devices).132 In 
addition, as governments seek to develop a more coherent and efficient social protection 
response by integrating beneficiary databases , they must grapple with the threats to 
personal privacy this creates.133 These challenges are even more acute when they involve the 
use of centralized digital ID systems that link individual identities to multiple services, such 
as health care, financial services, and education. Several interviewees noted concerns about 
the da ta privacy and protection risks associated with using centralized databases and the 
growing interest in decentralized models.  
NSOs struggle to meet  the demand for more and better information  
Throughout the pandemic, governments have sought information at a higher frequency and 
level of granularity than traditional statistical approaches can provide to monitor the spread 
of COVID -19, understand the economic impact of distancing requirements, and inform 
their policies. This has forced NSOs to engage with and  rely on other agencies and private 
sector companies to a much greater degree than before the crisis.  
Some NSOs have combined official statistics with administrative data about the number of 
health facilities and health workers in different regions to ass ess local capacity in handling 
COVID -19 outbreaks.134,135 Others, like the Ghana Statistical Services, have filled data gaps 
by using telephone surveys to gather household data on the impact of pandemic (e.g., are 
pregnant women receiving antenatal care? are  routine vaccinations being missed?) that go 
beyond what the Ministry of Health is collecting.  
More often, however, interviewees stressed that the pandemic has exposed the challenges of 
sharing data without preexisting data sharing agreements, noting that the NSOs they worked 
with were often unable to access administrative records from other agencies due to data privacy concerns. While some countries have used executive orders to enable data sharing across government agencies for the purpose of responding to COVID -19 as a way to move 
forward, in others, NSOs have been sidelined from discussions at the highest levels of government about using data to combat the pandemic.
 136  
 
132 See the work of Alliance for Affordable Internet  and World Wide Web Foundation  in making the internet 
increasingly accessible and affordable for everyone . 
133 Gelb, Alan and Anit Mukherjee. Digital Technology to Scale Up COVID -19 Social Assistance: What Have We 
Learned?  September 2020.  
134 UN DESA. Use of administrative data sources under COVID -19. April 2020.  
135 Raftree, Linda. Use of Administrative Data for the COVID -19 Response . June 2020.  
136 For example, in Colombia, a presidential decree allowed the statistical office access administrative record s and 
census records to combat COVID -19. See Multidimensional Poverty Peer Network. Using the MPI as a tool for 
crafting government responses to the Covid -19 pandemic  (2020).  39 New digital tools and tensions with privacy  
Although interest in public -private data  partnerships had been increasing before COVID- 19, 
the degree to which governments have sought to use data collected by the private sector to 
combat the pandemic marks an important shift.  
Early in the crisis, companies like Google, Facebook, Apple, mobile  network operators, and 
others responded to the demand for high- frequency information to track human mobility 
patterns and the spread of disease symptoms by sharing data or insights produced through 
use of their digital devices and applications.137 At the s ame time, governments increasingly 
turned to specialized companies who drew on data from various sources to analyze, monitor, 
and visualize mobility patterns, the spread of disease, and the health system response.138 
These collaborative efforts have created value for governments unable to produce the same 
information on their own. Several interviewees, however, expressed concern over instances in which public officials have used the urgency of the crisis to sidestep ex isting rules and best 
practices, including the need to conduct due diligence before sharing data with outside actors.  
Interviewees held differing views on how the pandemic would shape public attitudes about 
how much governments should know about their cit izens. But most believed that the crisis 
made the issue more immediate and real to people, in part due to early debates around the 
use of contact -tracing apps, which made them more aware of the degree to which their data 
could be used to track their moveme nts and behavior. One interviewee noted that the 
pandemic had brought data privacy concerns “from the fringes to the mainstream.”
139 
While most interviewees believed that heightened public awareness of these issues would 
make governments more accountable and force them to take additional steps to create and 
maintain public trust in digital tools and public data use, this optimism was tempered by two 
realities: First, governments who have lower levels of concern about civil liberties will 
invariably be drawn to use digital tools for surveillance. Second, the pandemic’s economic 
impact has reduced the fiscal resources governments can direct towards supporting better data governance.  
 
137 For example s of tech -based initiatives that companies have undertaken during the pandemic see:  
Using mobile big data to help inform the fight against COVID -19 in the Democratic Republic of Congo  and  
Addressing COVID -19 through Public -Private Data Partnerships - Where Do We Put New Testing Facilities?  
and Apple and Google’s COVID -19 tracking system will make its full US debut in new Virginia app . 
138 This includes companies like Cuebiq  and Dalberg Data Insights  which use telecom data to understand human 
mobility trends, and others like Bluesquare  and Zenisys  which help governments analyze, monitor, and visualize 
the spread of disease and health system response. See also COVID -19 outbreak response, a dataset to assess 
mobili ty changes in Italy following national lockdown  (2020) and Mobility Flows Analysis  (2020).  
139 Marelize Gorgens. Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, World Bank Group. Inte rview. July 23, 2020.  40 Conclusion : Areas for f uture research  
Although the eight themes discussed abov e cover a broad set of issues, each of them speaks 
to how governments can use data effectively and responsibly. Achieving this goal requires 
not only a new set of skills, roles, institutions, and resources, but also greater coordination at 
the global, regi onal, and national levels between different communities of practice and an 
openness by those communities to share lessons and learn from one another.  
Given the breadth of the issues involved, deciding where to prioritize reforms and target 
resources at ea ch of these levels will be challenging. We believe that research in the following 
areas, which flow directly from our interviews, will help policymakers prioritize their efforts 
and better understand the policy options available to them.  
Learning what dro ve successful data partnerships in response to 
COVID -19 
The COVID -19 pandemic and the policy response to the crisis represent a shock to national 
statistical systems that researchers can use to identify how effective past capacity -building 
and institutiona l development efforts have been in preparing national statistical systems for 
using secondary data. A research program that examines how different countries fared in using data to respond to the crisis and the reasons for that variation, including whether 
different capacity -building and institutional development programs were helpful in preparing 
for this challenge, would be valuable, particularly as the effectiveness of such training 
programs is often difficult to measure.
140 
Bringing greater transparency a nd evaluation to public -private data 
partnerships  
Given the increasing importance of public -private data partnerships, it is important to ensure 
that these efforts support inclusive development, which requires a better understanding of how to manage the di ffering incentives of the private and public sectors within such 
collaborations. To date, much of the effort spent on evaluating data partnerships has 
focused on cataloging successful use cases. While this can help highlight the value of 
merging data from public and private sources, a more rigorous approach to monitoring and 
evaluating (M&E) data collaborative projects is needed. And while a handful of 
organizations have developed M&E for data -intensive projects that assess the risks of using 
certain types of data and ways to mitigate that risk, it is clear from our interviews that more 
work is needed to promote broader take -up of these practices, including by national 
governments.   
 
140 Cite Paris 21 and OECD.  41 Examining new models of data protection and privacy through the 
lens of economic development  
Although data protection and privacy laws  are just one element of countries’ broader data 
governance frameworks, they tend to receive the most attention because they touch on 
politically sensitive issues. Today, an increasing number of  countries are modifying their 
approach to data protection and privacy to meet their domestic needs and priorities, 
including supporting economic growth and innovation. This includes both legal reforms and 
efforts to design codes of conduct that fit local contexts. Although the effect of these 
changes may not be well known for years, research aimed at understanding how these 
reforms work in practice would help policymakers better understand the available policy options available.   
Exploring  models for grea ter cooperation between the data privacy 
and development communities  
Researchers can support greater collaboration between the development and data privacy 
communities at the national, regional, and global levels by examining approaches used in other field s to bring experts with different professional backgrounds together to share 
knowledge and develop mutually -agreeable policy norms and guidance. A work agenda on 
this topic could also seek to create engagement opportunities between the two groups and facilitate dialogue by surfacing areas of misunderstanding and opportunities for coordinated 
action.  
 
Over the next year, CGD’s Governing Data for Development  working group will focus its efforts 
in three related areas. First, we will examine the approaches governments can take to 
increase transparency, accountability, and trust in public use of potentially sensitive data and 
how different approaches might affe ct their ability to meet broader socioeconomic goals. 
Second, we will review emerging best practices among LMIC governments that are tailoring data protection and privacy laws and regulations to their own needs, priorities, and 
capacities. Third, we will s eek to bring together experts from the development and data 
privacy communities of practice to work towards a shared understanding of the reforms, 
institutions, resources, and capacity -building efforts needed to support good data 
governance by national gov ernments. As part of this effort, we will also promote the 
development of institutional arrangements that provide a pathway for policymakers, experts, 
and civil society advocates from LMICs to contribute to global debates on standards, principles, and guid ance related to data protection and privacy.  
 
 
  42 Appendix 1: Complete l ist of i nterviews  
Adedeji Adeniran, Director of Education and Governance Research/Senior Research 
Fellow, Centre for the Studies of African Economies  
Joseph Atick, Executive Director, ID4Africa  
Shaida Badiee, Founder and Managing Director, Open Data Watch  
Krista Baptista, Senior Director, Center for Digital Acceleration, DAI Global  
Komal Bazaz -Smith, Digital Connectivity & Cybersecurity Partnership Project Director, 
Digital Frontiers, D AI Global  
Donatien Beguy, Population Scientist and Data Expert, UN- Habitat  
Mojca Cargo, Senior Manager, Public Sector Engagement, GSMA  
Stephen Chacha, Co -Founder and Executive Director, Tanzania Data Lab  
Somsak Chunharas , President , National Health Foundat ion in Thailand  
Vyjayanti Desai, Program Manager, Identification for Development  
Jonathan Dolan , Research Lead, Future State  
Teki Akuetteh Falconer, Founder & Executive Director, Africa Digital Rights' Hub  
Joaquín Jaime González Casanova Fernández , Directo r General, National Institute for 
Transparency, Access to Information and Personal Data Protection  
Amanda Glassman , Executive Vice President, Senior Fellow, and CEO of CGD Europe, 
Center for Global Development  
Marelize Gorgens, Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist , World Bank Group  
Priya Vora , CEO, Future State  
Johannes Jutting, Executive Head, PARIS21  
Al Kags, Founder , Open Institute  
Deepa Karthykeyan, co -Founder and Director, Athena Infonomics  
Paige Kirby , Senior Policy Advisor, Development Gateway  
Arturo Muente Kunigami , Modernization of the State Senior Specialist, Inter -American 
Development Bank  
Tracey Li, Data Scientist and Project Manager, Flowminder  
Grégoire Lurton , Data Science Lead, Bluesquare  
Drudeisha Madhub, Data Protection Commissioner, Data Protection Office, Mauritius  
Sean McDonald , co-Founder , Digital Public  
Kathleen McGowan , co-Founder, Future State  
David Medine, Consultant, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor  43 Jose Antonio Mejia, Moder nization of the State Lead Specialist, Inter -American 
Development Bank  
Claire Melamed, CEO, Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data  
Santosh Misra, CEO, Tamil Nadu e -Governance Agency and Commissioner of e -
Governance, Government of Tamil Nadu, I ndia 
Jade Nester, Director, Consumer Policy, GSMA  
Galia Nurko, Digital Specialist, Center for Digital Acceleration, DAI Global  
Victor Ohuruogu, Senior Africa Regional Manager, Global Partnership for Sustainable 
Development Data  
Tom Orrell,  Managing Directo r, DataReady  
Olasupo Oyedepo , co-founder and Director, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks  
Josh Powell, CEO, Development Gateway  
Agnieszka Rawa, Managing Director, Millennium Challenge Corporation-  President's 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief Partner ship (MCC -PEPFAR) Partnership  
Isaac Rutenberg, Director, Center for Intellectual Property and Information Technology 
Law 
Julia Schmidt, Policy Analyst, Statistics and Data Directorate, PARIS21/OECD  
Omar Seidu, Head, Demographic Statistics and Coordinator of Data for SDGs, Ghana 
Statistical Services  
Florencia Serale, Data Consultant and Co- chair, Open Data Charter’s Implementation 
Working Group 
Rachel Sibande, Program Director, Data for Development, Digital Impac t Alliance  
Jenna Slotin, Senior Director of Policy, Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data 
Ramiz Uddin, Head of Results Management and Data, a2i Programme, Bangladesh  
Stefaan Verhulst, co-Founder, The GovLab 
Jeanine Vos , Head of SDG Accelerator, GSMA  
Steve Wood, Deputy Commissioner (Executive Director, Regulatory Strategy), Information 
Commissioner’s Office (ICO), UK and Chair of the OECD Working Party on Data 
Governance & Privacy  
  44 Appendix 2:  Selected interview quotes  
Theme 1: The i mperative of breaking down siloes   
 
“Historically, data  has been a fragmented space  that needed  to be consolidated.  Groups focusing 
on data issues used to be able to operate in their individual siloes, but now,  in light of  the 
COVID -19 pandemic,  their work  is often  overlapping, for example, data protection and open 
data. NSOs have been largely absent from these discussions, but they have  a lot of legitimacy 
and can be instrumental in carrying out some of these discussions to consolidate these varying 
groups .”   
- Arturo  Muente  Kunigami, Inter -American Development Bank   
“The work the GPA has done so far has been to try to develop a better mechanism for civil 
society to interact with it. We’ve now set up a standing stakeholder panel for engagement and 
the Executive Committee is going to decide on who will sit on the panel in due course. We will 
have representatives from civil society, from businesses, from academia, and I think that will 
give more of a voice for the GPA to hear what those groups think are i mportant.”    
- Steve  Wood, Information Commissioner's Office   
“This notion that statistical agencies are the only custodians of all data is dead and outdated. 
Yes, they have census infrastructure, which is important, but that is only one part of the story.  
Every ministry today plays a role in collecting large amounts of information.”   
- Deepa  Karthykeyan, Athena  Infonomics    
“Over 300 data collaborative initiatives have emerged in the context of COVID. It’s great to 
have 300 plus  initiatives, but it would b e even better if there was coordination among them to 
minimize duplication.  At the moment, there is no sole coordinator. There is lots of energy to do 
something, but there is also a lot of fragmentation.”  
- Stefaan Verhulst, The  GovLab    
“I’m a big fan of community -based identification of questions because if answered they could 
deal with problems communities have. I also care about identifying metrics that communities 
care about  that can then be leveraged by data. How differently people will act when they have 
access to data is never contemplated. It’s always about analyzing because they have access 
to data, not necessarily because they understand the problem. The participatory model of 
problem definition should become the standard.”  
- Stefaan Verhulst, The  GovLab    
“A privacy ombudsman could look at different decision- making tools, and/or they could advise 
consumers about data uses. They would not be people who just look at algorithms, but they also 45 look at the practices of companies, the internet of things  device practices, and advise consumers 
when to stay away from specific products with problematic data practices. The privacy 
representative does not have to be a single person. It can also be a private, government or 
NGO, entity.”  
- David Medine, Consulta nt to CGAP  
“Interoperability remains a huge challenge across ministries and levels of government. Everyone 
has their own database  and each department has its own  particular way  of creating a dataset. 
Realizing this challenge, we launched a program called t he State Family Database to streamline 
and harmonize  the interoperability issues and to resolve the data disparity that exists across the 
departments. Essentially, we are trying to harmonize and synchronize all the federated 
databases.”   
- Santosh Misra,  Tamil Nadu e- Governance Agency  
“We realize that our ability as a country to build our data systems does not only depend on data 
produced by the national statistics office. It also depends on line ministries and data produced 
by civil society and other playe rs in the system. We conducted an assessment last year to check 
the quality of data produced across these areas and we realized that there are quality challenges, 
especially for the data coming from civil society. So we designed a project to work with civi l 
society, academia, the private sector, and the line ministries to co -create a data quality assurance 
framework. We expect by the end of this year, to have a framework for Ghana that guides all 
those in the data ecosystem on how to produce quality data.”  
 - Omar Seidu, Ghana Statistical Service  
“On the development side, the conversation around privacy has not been fulsome,  but on the 
privacy side there has been almost no conversation around development and that is an error. It 
is important for these stakeholders to come together.”  
- Joaquín Jaime González Casanova Fernández,  
National Institute for Transparency, Access to Information and Personal Data Protection   
Theme 2: Promoting data governance as an enabler rather than a 
hindrance  
“To bridge the gap between data protection laws on the books and their implementation on the 
ground, we need to make it clear that on the one hand yes, these regulations or policies are in 
place to prevent harm, but on the other hand they are meant to prevent harm within the  broader 
context of wanting to facilitate data, sharing data access, and data use to proactively address 
issues.”   
- Joshua Powell, Development Gateway   
 46 “The operators are held to very different standards than a range of other actors across the 
mobile  ecosystem, particularly in countries where there is no general data protection law.  We 
have been pushing for the development of a smart general data protection regulation that is 
horizontal, tech neutral, and has an independent regulatory body.”  
 - Jade Neste r, GSMA  
“We enforce the responsible use of data among those who have access to the datasets by 
ensuring that whatever data goes into our data portal has the right approval of the data owners. 
We do not store or publish personalized data sets. All our data is highly disaggregated and 
anonymized. We also work with the data producer for them to give consent. If datasets can be 
used by the public then they can be downloaded, if not, people can only use it in the portal. 
Unfortunately, there are limitations due to the lack of data protection in Tanzania, especially as it 
relates to using private sector data. Having guardrails and clear guidance on data protection 
would be helpful in moving forward.”  
- Stephen Chacha, Tanzania Data Lab  
Theme 3: Equitably distribut ing the value of data insights by 
“closing the loop”  
“There is a lot of work being done with data that has little value for the local environment. 
When people want to analyze data, it is often not done in country because the resources and 
skills aren’t th ere. The agenda is often not in the interest of the country and external actors 
harness the true value of what is produced. I would be hard -pressed to identify analysis of 
routine health data done out of country that had in- country benefits, in terms of policy change 
or usable insights. Bluesquare  is currently working to establish a stronger connection between 
health information systems and data analysts through data sharing agreements in which results 
will be fed back through the platforms used, so that th ey can be integrated in the tools used by 
decision makers in the country.”  
- Grégoire Lurton,  Bluesquare   
“There is a significant challenge with donors going into countries to implement programs and 
conducting their own ‘extractive data’ exercises without engaging with national statistical 
systems. The risk is that countries won't develop the ability to make use of data produced in 
their own borders, and this will push development towards a de facto paternalistic relationship -- 
and weaken ‘country ownership’ -- because only donors will have the capacity to make use of 
the data.”    
- Agnieszka Rawa, Millennium Challenge Corporation  
“For donors, it's increasingly important that their ministerial counterparts, their implementation 
partners, and the be neficiaries of their investments, have the tools to engage with data, and 
come to the decision- making table with data. Data is power but only if you know how to use it.”  
 - Agnieszka Rawa, Millennium Challenge Corporation  47 “When data is produced, during an emergency (e.g pandemic), through external partners’ 
support, such datasets are often hosted outside of the country. This creates certain hurdles for 
people in that country to access the datasets. Capacity to effectively negotiate data partnerships 
and acc ess is a major challenge.”  
- Anonymous  
“Minimal effort is often put into effectively disseminating data gathered because a lot of 
countries often don't have adequate capacity to analyze and visualize large datasets, in a very 
timely manner. So data is col lected and it can take several months to derive value from it for the 
average user.”  
 - Anonymous   
“Sometimes NSOs see themselves as custodians of data in a country but there is not much 
effort to open themselves up to scrutiny or provide access. It's lik e they are more interested in 
generating data rather than seeing whether the data they generate is useful.”   
- Donatien  Beguy, UN Habitat    
“Data value is not equitably distributed back down the chain. This is not because of any 
malicious intent; rather, i t’s often not important to project developers or planners. I worked on a 
project where we collected HIV/AIDS supply chain data across the country using mobile 
phones. Using this data, we printed out A3 size color printouts of charts and graphs displaying 
health data, for example, the total number of women who were accessing HIV treatment at a 
specific facility. These printouts were displayed inside health facilities. These charts were 
discussed with patients and staff in the facilities. Because of this feed back loop, we observed 
that the quality and timeliness of the data improved because the data was used by both the 
health facility staff and the patients. Unfortunately, the deliberate planning and inclusion of 
feedback loops is still not commonplace.”  
- Olasupo Oyedepo, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks   
“The perceived value of data is mostly about automation and scale, and participation is 
something that fundamentally frustrates that.  People talk about doing things  for good 
or for people or  for the public, but the design nomenclature has moved significantly beyond that 
and most of the best practices design  with. So, those kinds of systems inherently frustrate scale 
without thinking about devolution architectures.”   
- Sean McDonald, Digital Public   
“In Thailand, major hospitals often field requests from companies developing AI to access their 
big data.  But I worry that there will not be equitable sharing of the value and insights created 
from these partnerships.  Moreover,  Thailand requires cl inical trials to be registered.  But, many 
of the clinical trials are conducted by multilaterals. So, those trials are registered and stored in 48 other countries, and the dataset from Thailand is available in other  countries, but  is not 
necessarily always ava ilable to the people of Thailand.”  
- Somsak  Chunharas, National Health Foundation (Thailand)   
“How data is used and how people are compensated matters a lot for accuracy.  People collect 
data more accurately when it will be used.”   
- Amanda Glassman, Center  for Global Development   
“We have to be wary about who the audiences are for these platforms. The UN, for instance, 
has a whole host of open data platforms, but the reality is that only a small proportion of the 
world’s population will really be able to ut ilize that data. This brings to light the issue of data 
equity and open access to data. Open data still benefits those who are best positioned to 
leverage that data, monetize that open data to take advantage of standards, and take advantage 
of platforms. T here are inherent inequities in the current systems and models. Open data is 
great, but we  have to  recognize not everyone has access to this open data. So only a limited 
number of people can utilize the data.”   
- Tom Orrell,  DataReady   
“There are also capa city and intent issues. There is limited/no intent to empower data producers 
to be data consumers. To generate good data those demanding the data need to understand the 
correlation between data quality and who is generating them and what their incentives a re and 
be equipped to frame policies and tools that create a virtuous cycle on data collection and use.”  
- Deepa  Karthykeyan, Athena  Infonomics   
Theme 4: The benefits, hazards, and hurdles of data collaboration   
“There is a lot of the attention around enga ging with the private sector and using private sector 
data. My concern here is the failure to understand that the private sector has very distinct 
incentives from public sector.  Not thinking critically about those incentives and how those 
incentives may no t align with good practice and data privacy and ethics could be a big blind 
spot.”   
- Paige Kirby, Development Gateway   
“The Kenyan government engages foreign companies and those foreign companies sometimes 
have the upper hand in dealing with data. We have seen several  instances where the government 
has not benefited as much as it should have from data -intensive collaborations.”  
- Isaac Rutenberg, Center for Intellectual Property and Information Technology Law  
“There is not enough guidance on how to structure data -sharing agreements.  Bluesquare  is 
relying on a blend of guidelines from GDPR and clinical research standards.  For many 
intermediaries, templates for formal data sharing agreements would be most useful. In many 49 situations,  Bluesquare  is a data broker between the national system and other organizations that 
want to use the data.  So there is an urgency for  us to frame our data sharing work through more 
formal agreements.”   
- Grégoire Lurton,  Bluesquare   
"There are a range of  foundational  issues missing to accelerate data collaboration in a systematic 
way. Most existing collaborations are one -offs that are also unsustainable. There are also 
questions around how to establish and maintain collaborations that are responsible.”  
- Stefaan Verhuls t, The  GovLab   
“Integrating newer forms of data has proven difficult because the access question has not been 
solved. There are still issues around legality, competition, and compliance that even the most 
advanced NSOs are struggling to overcome.”   
- Johan nes Jütting, PARIS21  
“If you are not talking about the role of governments as data owners and generators and folks 
who govern data, then you are not talking about the problem at all. While the private sector and 
players like Facebook and Google generate la rge amounts of data and are important and 
wield  power,  the government must drive the conversation because they are designed to deliver 
welfare.”  
- Deepa  Karthykeyan, Athena  Infonomics   
“We were approached by  a mobile network operator saying they had data s ets from their mobile 
networks they felt could contribute to managing COVID. Unfortunately, no one knew how to 
go about this collaboration as there were several limitations.”   
- Stephen  Chacha, Tanzania Data Lab  
 “During the COVID pandemic, we provided dat a to the academic sector to aid in predictions. 
But, we also needed data from the telcos. This was very challenging because there weren’t any 
[data sharing] safeguards in place. So, when working with the telcos to help in the fight against 
COVID, we reques ted that they use their own internal standards on which to provide 
information.”  
 - Ramiz Uddin, Access to Information (a2i) of Bangladesh  
“COVID -19 brought to the forefront this issue of NSOs being  caught  between two different 
forces. First, they are bein g asked to make data available that they cannot make 
available.  Second, NSOs are trying to access administrative records from other entities to make 
statistical use of them, but they are unable to use them because other agencies also claim the 
protection of privacy of that data.  On one hand, you have NSOs trying to figure out how to 50 continue working, given that they  can't be on the ground due to COVID, and on the other 
hand  trying to figure out how to use data  from other sources to continue being relevant.”  
- Jose Antonio Mejia, Inter -American Development Bank  
“MNOs are supporting  governments in the COVID crisis  for the specific purpose of the 
COVID -19 response, providing dashboards, insights and reports that are specifically relevant 
and useful for decision making in the country.  This is why  operators and the G SMA are very 
hesitant about granting generic access to datasets, because then you lose that clear purpose, 
access may no longer be time -bound, and it’s harder to ensure accountability of that 
data. So, it has to be handled on a case by case basis to create a tailored solution that safeguards 
privacy end -to-end.”  
- Jeanine Vos, GSMA  
“Initially, people thought the pandemic would bring about change in data sharing, but by July we 
realized that it would be a lot more complicated. If the demand for data is not consistent, then 
we won’t move past the data -sharing barriers we are observing. There is a disconnect. You have 
people saying they needed help and guidelines, and then you have organizations producing 
guidelines that aren’t widely used.”  
- Jenna Slotin, Gl obal Partnership for Sustainable Development Data  
“As a result of data quality not being the same across different agencies, we’ve discovered that 
only a reduced level of interoperability can be achieved because the data quality is making it 
difficult to h armonize across systems. Data quality is key to interoperability. I worry more about 
the interoperability of data than the interoperability of systems.”  
- Joseph  Atick, ID4Africa   
Theme 5: Establishing effective data protection frameworks   
“It is important to try to write data protection laws in a way so that they are self -enforcing as 
much as possible and use regulatory technology to automate dispute or complaint processes. Try 
to build a system that puts the least burden on a data protection authority so as to overcome 
regulatory capacity issues.”   
- David Medine, Consultant to CGAP  
“In some countries, comprehensive laws modeled on GDPR get put on the books and then 
virtually nothing happens. So, in these cases it may be better to start off with s imple standards 
that companies and individuals can better understand and follow, and then build on these over 
time to more comprehensive laws.”  
- David Medine, Consultant to CGAP   
“The implementation strategy should look at leveraging industries, specific communities, to 
work with them in crafting guidance and frameworks that work well. For example, if a regulator 51 wants to craft guidelines in the health sector, they don’t necessarily need to have expertise in the 
health field, rather they can work with people in the health space to create the guidelines. This 
collaborative approach will yield guidelines that work well for everyone.”  
- Teki  Akuetteh  Falconer, Digital Rights Hub   
“The most important aspect in data protection is enforcement. Our data protection commission 
has the ability to prosecute people for breaches of the data protection act. This enables more 
people to consult the office prior to acting because of the fear that an organization or a ministry 
might be prosecuted for not respecting the data protection act in Mauritius.”  
- Drudeisha  Madhub, Data Protection Office, Mauritius  
“Our principals are good, but sometimes they are not able to adapt. This has proven to be the 
case during this pandemic. We must be flexible and provide ourselves with a mar gin of 
appreciation where we can decide to adapt and change principles to reflect what is happening on 
the ground. We need to be realistic.”   
- Drudeisha  Madhub, Data Protection Office, Mauritius  
“In the official statistics community, there is awareness o f the importance of standards, privacy 
and risk assessments. However, in broader government services and in the development field, 
I'm observing that there is more hope and focus for blockchain and AI, the shiny stuff, and less 
focus and priority on the foundational technology.”   
- Johannes  Jütting, PARIS21   
“We have noticed that even in countries with a data protection act, there is a tendency for 
governments to pull back from sharing data at all rather than potentially violating that policy.”   
- Paige Kir by, Development Gateway  
“Many Western standards are not always applicable in the global south. Yet, it remains attractive 
to adopt western standards because they are often considered the best practice. African 
countries are sometimes asked to dismantle the ir legacy deployments because it does not fit into 
a specific western standard, despite the fact that what they had been doing was working for 
them.”  
- Olasupo Oyedepo, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks   
“Getting a legal framework in place is a p riority. The challenge is that no one really specializes in 
this area in the development community or the official statistics community.   And if this is not 
your specialty, there is a lot to learn.”   
- Tracey  Li, Flowminder   52 “The idea that there should be stronger laws about data privacy and data usage is a given. But 
should they be as extensive and as comprehensive as GDPR?   From the challenges that  have 
been experienced by organizations following the introduction of GDPR, as well as seeing the 
barriers th at GDPR raises, and seeing how it doesn't always have the effect it was intended to 
have, we see that GDPR is a good idea on paper, but implementing it remains a challenge.”   
- Tracey  Li, Flowminder   
“We can't just take the European standards and apply them at large.  Even the architects of the 
GDPR recognize that they need to make some adjustments to the law because they now see that 
there are aspects they were too strict on and aspects where they were not strict enough.”   
- Marelize  Gorgens, World  Bank   
“In creating the minimum standards, the bank is trying to find that line between being rigorous 
and being  pragmatic. The bank recognizes that proportionality of risk is something they have to 
be mindful of  in two ways: one, have to do that which is the fairest to most people, and two, 
have to ensure that vulnerable populations have special protections in place.”   
- Marelize  Gorgens, World Bank   
“A maturity model is the best way of approaching this. It should be granular  enough  so 
everyone sees themse lves in it. It would be useful to have groups that conduct assessments of 
where countries are  in terms of maturity.”   
- Shaida Badiee, Open Data Watch   
“In the process of opening data, we address privacy issues. Our job is not difficult at the macro-
data l evel because there’s no personal information, but there are still privacy issues. We are now 
focusing on open data for surveys, census, and administrative data which goes into micro- data. 
Unfortunately, there are currently no global guidelines or procedure s for access to micro -data. 
We realized ODW could not take action alone, so we reached out to the UN which has now set 
up an interagency expert group on microdata with a subgroup looking into how we can establish 
guidelines for microdata.”  
- Shaida Badiee,  Open Data Watch   
“One of the challenges with data privacy and data standards is that there is plenty of focus work 
that needs to be done to create a framework at the national level.  It often extends beyond 
the donor sector’s scope,  which is why  it's impor tant to have other sectors involved.  There are 
also funding challenges. Data standards are often just  viewed as  a smaller activity that  is part of a 
larger program, rather than  being seen as  a major  problem and topic in its own right.”   
- Krista Baptista, DAI  
“The debate has focused too much on GDPR. This has forced us to focus on a very 
complicated set of rules that are geared toward a common market and are not necessarily geared 53 toward the protection of privacy and personal data as a human right . We need to figure out what 
it is that we are trying to protect and how we do it.”  
- Joaquín Jaime González Casanova Fernández,  
National Institute for Transparency, Access to Information and Personal Data Protection  
“There's just so much attraction to the  latest and greatest – such as AI -  among donors and big 
development actors, and that's something that probably needs to be dialed back significantly if 
we want to effectively move forward in the responsible data use space. ” 
- Josh Powell, Development Gate way 
“Regarding data sharing, there is a lot of “how to” guidance and a fair amount of technical 
guidance, but there is a gap in data governance guidance. There are many intermediaries whose 
business is built around technical guidance, but there are not many intermediaries on the 
governance side.”  
- Jenna Slotin, Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data  
“If you ask the people in the official statistics community, they will tell you the NSOs have the 
mandate to do quality assurance and standards -setting across the sectors and ministries; but in 
practice, they are not well -funded to do this effectively. Coming from the health sector, I felt like 
a civil society check might be more important than the statistics bureau doing the quality 
assurance in a horizontal way. One of the ideas behind doing the data compact was precisely 
that it would set up the statistics bureau as the standard -setting quality assurance entity. The 
sectoral ministry or subnational governments would be charged with producing the d ata with 
certain periodicity and quality and the statistics department would be the checker on behalf of 
the ministry of finance or the presidency.”  
- Amanda Glassman, Center for Global Development  
Theme 6: The need for regional and global solutions   
“Ther e are no clear guidelines on which adequacy is given. This lack of clarity is where the 
challenge comes in. The problem with adequacy is that it gives a certain leverage within which to 
interact with Europe. For a continent like Africa, which is building i ts market base, it is very 
important, especially because we still trade with Europe. If African countries are interested in 
adequacy, it is important for them to push these things at the continental level where it is more 
likely to be successful, rather th an it being left for individual countries such as Morocco or 
Mauritius, for example.”  
- Teki  Akuetteh  Falconer, Digital Rights Hub   
“The whole of government approach is what will determine whether something can succeed and 
move forward. This is where polit ical commitment and somebody spearheading an effort across 
government can be the defining factor. This is a crucial element in any of these digital 
transformation efforts that we hope to see put in place.”  
- Vyjayanti Desai, ID4D   54 “The ICO has had an inter national strategy since 2017.  Before  this, we were mostly focused on 
the continent of Europe. We realized there was more the ICO needed to do in terms of 
regulatory cooperation between other data protection authorities. We recognized  that data 
has no borde rs. Our international strategy links back to our regulatory role in the UK.  The 
public in Britain wants to know that their data is safe no matter where it goes in the 
world.  Promoting high standards of data protection globally benefits the ICO as  a regulat ory 
authority because it means we can work with other regulatory  bodies  to address the risks.  No 
matter where you look globally, the same issues appear.  The ICO  currently chairs the Global 
Privacy Assembly.  It used to be a regular annual meeting where reso lutions were agreed to and 
best practices were shared, but we have transformed it  into a  year-round  international 
organization because that  is what is needed.”  
- Steve Wood, Information Commissioner's Office   
“We support some of the GDPR cross -border data flow elements, but we are a bit more open 
to innovative  approaches. For example, we worked with ASEAN on their privacy  framework, 
but we also developed a regulatory sandbox called Regulatory Pilot Space  to try to enable 
cross  border  data flows and protect personal data in the region. This falls under the general 
ideals of the GDPR in that it's about accountability mechanisms, but it is not exactly like the 
GDPR.”  
- Jade Nester, GSMA  
“There is also an opportunity for organizations at  the regional level or continental level to bring 
together sectoral players in this space.  For example, a network of regulatory authorities  that 
already exist in certain sectors to support peer learning.  This enhances the credibility and value 
of work being done.”   
- Rachel Sibande, DIAL   
“We need to have an institutional approach to this rather than a problem and solution approach. 
We need to look at the regional level. We tend to look at this in terms of individual countries or 
the global level and make recommendations at t hose levels. But the reality is that the politics of 
this often play out at the regional level. So, I think if you're thinking about what sits between 
demand and supply, you need to think about institutions and you need to think about regional 
level instit utions.”  
- Claire Melamed, Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data  
“South- South Network is a great peer learning opportunity  that is fostering cooperation 
amongst low income countries well -positioned to understand each other’s challenges in public 
service delivery and share  insights  to solve them.”  
- Ramiz Uddin, Access to Information (a2i) of Bangladesh  55 Theme 7: Developing the skills needed to govern data   
“If you build capacity, it will not automatically mean you build leadership, trust, or 
accountability. However, you cannot build trust and accountability without doing capacity 
building alongside.”   
- Olasupo Oyedepo, African Alliance of Digital Health Networks  
"If you want to expand the mandates of governments to also think about data, if you  want 
governments to start thinking about generating better quality data  and also  governing data where 
we are protecting rights, we need to start with investing in resources and people that are 
equipped to handle and to think about these issues. Government s need to invest in people of 
adequate seniority who can make a case for this consistently, not just a one -off thing that is 
something to check off as part of donor compliance.  This is different than just hiring an external 
technical resource; rather, you are empowering someone within government to lead it.”   
- Deepa  Karthykeyan, Athena  Infonomics   
“In many national statistical systems, there is a lack of skills including nonconventional skills – 
such as management and negotiating the data -  data sharing sk ills, legal skills and data ethics. 
Even if these skills exist in the organization, it remains very spread out and isolated within 
specific teams, rather than being institutionalized. When there is a weak foundational data 
system coupled with a weak legal system, we see problems. The UNSD Global Working Group 
on Big Data -  to which PARIS21 is a participant -  is developing a maturity matrix that is looking 
at the different capacities from legal to technical capacity, and also holistic and soft skills. Our 
goal is to develop a training guide that statistical offices can use to assess their capacity.  
- Julia Schmidt, PARIS21  
“Even if the conditions for building capacity are in place, there still needs to be a clear path for 
people working at NSOs. Sometimes you have people who are skilled, but do not see a career 
prospect with the NSO. Getting the skills and building the skills capacity is one thing but having 
a system that can absorb the skilled labor is another.”   
- Donatien  Beguy, UN HABITAT   
“When you develop digital platforms, you need a digitally literate populations to leverage. 
For example,  with EdTech, you have teachers that cannot even leverage the platforms. So, we 
need to focus on areas that will galvanize mass adoption. We need to includ e digital literacy  into 
the curriculum  from a very young age.”    
- Adedeji  Adeniran,  Center for Study of Economies of Africa   
“If communities have data and learn how to analyze and  use the data, they can make the kind of 
arguments that need to be made for the government to act on their behalf.”   
- Al Kags, Open Institute   56 “The goal is not to prescribe how individuals should decide or should engage on a digital 
platform or in their digital lives, but rather to enable people to be informed consumers who can 
determine if they’re comfortable with sharing certain information with a digital platform.”  
- Galia Nurko, DAI  
“One of the key priorities on our side is that at all points in our engagement with government, 
we stress the importance of data privacy and work to ensure the government understands the 
importance of data privacy before we even engage.”   
- Mojca Cargo, GSMA  
“Data science is the ability to take data and statistics knowledge, apply it to a sectoral problem, 
and then complementing it with some progra mming skills. This expertise is very hard to find in 
many of our MCC partner countries. What we find is people trained in data programming and 
statistics. But we need a continuum of data expertise that includes: simple numeracy, simple 
analytics [using excel sheets and visualizing data], sophisticated systems that are interoperable, 
then data science which can help with the more innovative solutions such as AI and machine 
learning.”  
- Agnieszka Rawa, Millennium Challenge Corporation  
“The problem with data is that the potential for misuse is very high. So, anyone dealing with 
data needs to have the capacity and the maturity to handle it. You need to have technical 
capacity otherwise a third -party will steal your nation’s data. You also need the capacity to 
understand that someone can harm you because of the data you hold. And, you need to have the 
capacity to understand how the data can be monetized.”  
- Santosh Misra, Government of Tamil Nadu, India  
“When it comes to the formulation of partnerships or when a design process is being 
undertaken there is always consideration for geographic, gender, racial, and ethnic balance —
which is great. However, there is rarely consideration about whether data rights advocates and 
multilateral organizations are in the room. There needs to be a slightly broader interpretation of 
what it means to have data skills. I would argue that having an understanding of human rights is 
fundamentally a data skill. Having an understanding of governance processes is a data skill if 
you’re ap plying it to how data is governed.”  
- Tom Orrell,  DataReady   
“Building capacity within governments takes time because we’re often going into countries 
where people have not done this before. You have to test their existing legal instruments to see 
if this is allowable. That’s a whole process. You have to develop dat a champions that have the 
political muscle to make this work. It takes a lot. And it requires working with a diverse range of 
partners. To align these actors requires strategy and in- country presence. We really appreciate 57 the technical implementing partner s in the country. They play an important role in engaging with 
the government day -to-day.”  
- Rachel Sibande, DIAL  
Theme 8: The impact of COVID -19  
“COVID has resulted in an increase in political will to get data protection and privacy right. The 
issue has gone from the  fringes  to the mainstream.”   
- Marelize  Gorgens, World Bank   
“Before the rise of technology, Africans had experience in handling their corrupt governments. 
But technology has enhanced the power of corrupt governments who can take advantage of  the 
personal data gathered during the COVID -19 health crisis and use it for surveillance or for 
purposes not related to the pandemic.”   
- Al Kags, Open Institute   
“Some  governments  took a very different approach to COVID, especially in relation to data.  We 
have witnessed governments taking  full control of the data being  produced and publicized.  The 
role of National Statistical Offices as custodians of data during COVID was almost nonexistent. 
COVID proved the level of fragmentation and lack of coordination in data ecosystems at 
country level especially when they are hit with crises.”  
- Stephen Chacha, Tanzania Data Lab  
“Data protection is very important for innovation. When people feel their privacy is not being 
protected, they will not generate data and they will remain offline.  One of the challenges we are 
facing is people not giving the right information when they go for COVID testing –  not even 
giving the right cell number. This indicates a distrust of how their data might be used.”  
- Ramiz Uddin, Access to Information (a2i) of Bangladesh  
“The presence of COVID has brought to the forefront the importance of digital -  including 
having a digital response and knowing the potential risks and barriers of digital -  and the 
importance of providing guidance for  the operating units and bureaus across  USAID on 
navigating this landscape.”  
- Komal Bazaz -Smith, DAI  
“Digital and privacy issues will have to be addressed more quickly than it otherwise would have 
been pre -COVID because organizations and governments reali ze that there are significant 
implications for how they imbue privacy and protection across all the different policies and 
legislation they develop.”   
- Krista Baptista, DAI  58 “COVID -19 has shown us the relevance of administrative data. The inability of gove rnment 
agencies to share administrative data has been a limitation.  Of course,  we want to focus on new 
data sources, but the original big data are  administrative  records,  and we need to take advantage 
of them. There is a need to improve their quality, but there is a bigger need to invest in using 
them for statistical purposes.”   
- Jose Antonio Mejia, Inter -American Development Bank  
“There has been plenty of discussion around infrastructure because COVID showed us that we 
need to go beyond transparency when opening data.  The data we open has to be of good quality 
which means governments need to have good data infrastructure.”   
- Florencia Serale, Inter -American Development Bank  
“Progress was made following the Roundtable of African Data Protection Authorities . For 
example, people were reaching out to each other to realize the items discussed. Still COVID 
created a setback with agencies setting privacy aside. People are using the health crisis as a 
justification for shortcuts.”  
- Joseph  Atick, ID4Africa  