Identification Revolution:  
Can Digital ID Be Harnessed for 
Development?
Alan Gelb and Anna Diofasi MetzCGD Brief October 2017
This brief is a summary 
of the book Identification 
Revolution: Can Digital 
ID Be Harnessed for 
Development?  by Alan 
Gelb and Anna Diofasi 
Metz (Center for Global 
Development, 2018).Summary
Recent advances in the scope and sophistication of identification systems could 
have far-reaching consequences for development. At their best, ID systems can 
advance the Sustainable Development Goals by helping to realize individual 
rights, build state capacity, improve accountability, and expand opportunity. 
But their success is not guaranteed. At their worst, ID systems can exclude 
vulnerable groups, support institutionalized discrimination, and facilitate the 
exploitation of personal data. 
While there is no one-size-fits-all approach, there are common features that ID 
systems should share if they are to support development. Principles that speak 
to inclusion, robust and responsive design, and accountable governance of 
ID systems, and good-practice examples from countries at the forefront of ID 
management, provide a list of areas that all stakeholders should consider as 
ID programs move forward.
Improvements in identification technolo -
gies, the rapid proliferation of digital identi -
fication programs, and the growing number 
of services and transactions that depend 
on accurate identification have been noth -
ing short of revolutionary. People can be 
uniquely identified using their fingerprint or 
iris scan and can prove who they are with 
unprecedented accuracy. Digital ID systems 
are reshaping the relationship between 
citizen and state and transforming the way 
development policies and programs are 
implemented. As the number of people with 
official ID documents grows, so does their 
ability to fully participate in their country’s 
social, economic, and political life. 
Identification is now firmly on the develop -
ment agenda. Over the last decade, the provision of registration and identification 
services has emerged as an important 
policy focus for developing country govern -
ments and their partners; providing “legal 
identity for all” by 2030 is now Target 16.9 
under the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). It is also increasingly seen as in -
strumental to achieving many other devel -
opment goals and targets (figure 1). 
More low- and middle-income countries 
have started “foundational” national ID 
programs since 2000 than ever had them 
before (figure 2). In addition, many new 
“functional” ID programs have been created 
to serve particular purposes—to clean voter 
rolls or to ensure that pensions reach their 
intended beneficiaries, for example. This 
boom in ID programs is driven by a number 
Alan Gelb and Anna Diofasi MetzIdentification  
Revolution
Can Digital i D be Harnesse D  
for Development?
02447699
________  
________contract with each other, open a bank account, 
or register a business entirely in the digital realm. 
Not all of these programs have delivered on their 
promise. Some have struggled to achieve high cov -
erage because enrollment is perceived to provide 
few benefits, or registration requirements are cum -
bersome and costly. Others conducted successful 
initial mass enrollment drives, registering millions 
in a matter of weeks or months, but failed to keep Identification Revolution: Can Digital ID Be Harnessed for Development?
ACCESS TO FINANCE
• Prove ownership over property    
(Goal 1  & Target 1.4)
• Satisfy know-your-customer rules for banking  
(Goal 1 & Target 1.4)
• Unique ID for credit registries    
(Target 8.3 & Target 1.4)
• Reduce remittance costs (Target 10c)
GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWERMENT
• Full participation in economic and social life 
(Goal 5)
• Closing the gender gap in access to finance 
(Target 5a)
ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES
• Registration for school and exams (Goal 4)
• Higher childhood vaccination rates   
(Goal 3 & Target 3.3)
• Unique ID for health insurance (Target 3.8)
• Biometric tracking of TB & HIV/AIDS treatment 
(Target 3.3)
• Civil registration health data: reduce infant and 
child deaths (Target 3.2)
CHILD PROTECTION
• Proof of age: help eliminate child labor   
(Target 8.7)
• Proof of age: help end child marriage   
(Target 5.3)LABOR MARKET OPPORTUNITIES
• Reduce transaction costs in hiring    
(Goal 8 & Target 8.5)
• Facilitate orderly and safe migration   
(Goal 10 & Target 10.7)
SOCIAL PROTECTION : GRANTS AND 
SUBSIDIES
• Improve targeting, timeliness, cost-effectiveness of 
payments (Goal 1 & Target 1.3)
• Unique ID to improve transparency and reduce 
leakages (Target 1.3)
• Facilitate fast and efficient delivery of emergency 
aid (Target 1.5)
• Energy subsidy reform: price subsidies to cash 
payments (Target 12c)
MANAGING PUBLIC PAYROLLS
• Remove ghost workers & generate public savings 
(Goal 16 & Target 16.5)
TAX COLLECTION
• Common identifier can bolster tax collection  
(Target 17.1)
CLEAN ELECTIONS
• Unique ID to clean the voter registry   
(Target 16.7)
of priorities: nation-building, enhancing national 
security, and strengthening government capacity, 
including to deliver transfers and subsidies. 
Technology, in particular biometrics, has been a 
game changer. In some cases, developing coun -
tries have already leapfrogged rich countries in 
their use. New solutions are being developed 
in both rich and poor nations to enable reliable 
identification online (e-ID) and allow residents to  Figure 1. Identification and the Sustainable Development GoalsCGD Brief October 2017
their registries up-to-date, limiting the program’s 
long-term usefulness. There is thus a lot of room 
for strengthening the design and implementation 
of both foundational and functional ID programs 
and ensuring that they are conducive to achieving 
the SDGs.
Different starting points, common 
challenges
Countries are at very different stages in terms of 
the robustness, coverage, and capabilities of their 
ID systems. 
• Early adopters with widely used, high-cover -
age ID systems include Peru, Pakistan, Thai -
land, and Rwanda. India’s Aadhaar program 
has enrolled close to 1.2 billion people in 
eight years and provides cardless digital ID 
with capabilities at least as advanced as any 
system in the world. Through the India Stack, 
it has been leveraged into an open platform 
for digital payments, document management, 
and other new services. 
• At the other end of the spectrum, poor and 
conflict-affected countries like Somalia, Li -
beria, South Sudan, and the Democratic Re -
public of Congo start out with few identity 
management assets. Many of their residents 
have never been formally registered; as a 
result, there is no comprehensive population 
registry to support social programs or verify 
residents’ identities. 
• Countries like Nigeria, Ghana, and the Philip -
pines have multiple disconnected systems for 
voting, healthcare, tax administration, and 
other purposes. Each service provider and 
public entity maintains its own registration pro -
cess and database at significant cost. Often, 
systems fail to follow common standards and 
may not be technically interoperable.
• A fourth group, including Kenya and Zambia, 
has reasonably robust systems whose capa -
bilities could be boosted by new technologies. 
Transitioning from paper-based records to 
more easily manageable digital systems, and improving the identity verification infrastruc -
ture, could, for example, boost the efficiency 
and accountability of service delivery. 
Despite these differences, countries face common 
problems. Many have neglected civil registration, 
the traditional entry point for identification. About 
a quarter of births worldwide are unregistered; in 
the least developed countries, the share is close to 
two-thirds. Until gaps in civil registration are rem -
edied, countries must rely on separate enrollment 
processes for their ID programs. Many countries 
still need to transition from paper-based legacy 
data systems to digital ones and to improve the 
transmission of information between databases—
for example, to ensure that the ID database re -
cords a registered death. Most have not rolled out 
authentication ecosystems to use the capabilities 
of their new systems. 
Innovations in ID systems
There is no “one size fits all” formula for reshaping 
ID systems. However, countries can look to a range 
of technological and institutional innovations, and 
to some leading examples, for guidance. Figure 2. Identification Programs in High-Income 
Countries (HICs) and Others
020406080100120140160180200
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015Cumulative number of countriesNational IDsBirth registration – non-
HICs only
National IDs 
–non-HICs onlyBirth registration
e-IDs/digital IDs
e-IDs/digital IDs
–non-HICs onlyIdentification Revolution: Can Digital ID Be Harnessed for Development?
Innovative technologies
• Multimodal digital biometrics  has be -
come a central tool to help establish new 
unique identity baselines even in large popu -
lations and to authenticate people, although 
more data is needed on performance in the 
field. Duplicate enrollments can be flagged 
to ensure that each person is registered only 
once. Biometric technology allows people to be 
authenticated with high accuracy against their 
claimed identities, whether “offline” against 
data stored on barcodes, QR cards, or smart 
cards, or “online” against a central database, 
as in India’s cardless Aadhaar system. 
• Infants and very young children  
represent a frontier population for identity 
management systems. Biometric enrollment 
is extending to children as young as 5 and 
potentially even younger, increasing the im -
portance of integrating, or at least closely 
coordinating, civil registration and identifica -
tion. Other innovations for uniquely identify -
ing infants include an electronic bracelet or 
necklace with a chip holding the name and 
particulars of the child, as well as a copy of 
the child’s medical record. 
• Mobile units and mobile communica -
tions (used in Pakistan, Peru, Malaysia, and 
other countries) can make ID more accessible 
by reducing registration barriers for remote 
communities.
Innovative institutions and policies 
• “Identity first”: separating identity 
from status and entitlements.  As in 
India’s Aadhaar program, “foundational” 
identification can be disconnected from all en -
titlements, including the determination of na -
tional status, which can be determined later, 
just like eligibility for a subsidy, program, or 
service. Most applications of identification to 
SDG goals and targets do not depend on sta -
tus in any central way; in addition to being in -
clusive, “identity first” can speed up the rollout 
of the ID program so it can be engaged more 
quickly to reform public service delivery. • Providing ID services by an autono -
mous agency with some financial in -
dependence. Several countries use this 
model, including Peru, Pakistan and Rwanda. 
It clarifies the mandate, and greater financial 
independence helps to depoliticize the identi -
fication function, building trust in the system. 
The costs of providing ID services can be 
partly covered by user fees, but charges must 
be regulated to ensure that reliance on fees 
does not impede the provision of identification 
as a social good. 
• Important lessons from leading cases.  
Peru, Estonia, and India offer technological 
and institutional lessons for centralized iden -
tity management. They include performance-
based payments for registration and data 
reporting, standards-based rollout, and using 
digital identification as an open platform for 
further services. The United Kingdom’s GOV.
UK Verify and the use of social networks to 
provide identification are more specula -
tive, but show how digital identification may 
evolve with the growth of digital societies and 
economies. Innovations include flexible iden -
tity assurance standards, multiple competing 
identity providers, privacy-enhancing data 
segregation, and dynamic evidence of active 
identities. 
Acknowledging the risks of ID programs
Exclusion, misuse, and wasteful investments are 
real risks, particularly in the context of developing 
countries. 
• Exclusion.  The formalization of identification 
processes may lead to even greater exclusion 
from social and economic life for some mar -
ginalized populations, including statelessness.
• Misuse.  Some countries may lack the ca -
pacity or willingness to implement effective 
data protection and privacy measures. Only 
around half of developing countries have data 
privacy laws that conform to global standards 
for fair information practices. Even where such 
laws exist, they may not be enforced. CGD Brief October 2017
• Wasteful investments.  Poorly designed ID 
programs and opaque procurement processes 
can lead to fragmented, non-interoperable, 
and overly expensive systems that are ill-suited 
for local needs and capabilities. 
Risks must be recognized and mitigated, but they 
are not a reason for the development community to 
stand aside. There is little prospect of realizing the 
SDGs if countries are not able to strengthen their 
capacity to implement policies and to deliver ser -
vices effectively. Nor will the SDGs be achieved if 
poor and vulnerable people are not able to partici -
pate in political, social, and economic life because 
they lack recognized identity. Multiple factors are 
driving ID programs forward—the task is to ensure 
that they are as development-friendly as possible. 
Building development-focused ID 
systems: 10 principles and some 
practical ideas
Development partners are moving toward a more 
strategic approach. Donors have supported ID 
programs to help implement individual projects 
in line with their mandates—birth registration for 
UNICEF, voter registration for UNDP, refugee reg -
istration for UNHCR. The multilateral development 
banks have supported programs in diverse areas 
such as social protection, financial inclusion, 
and public health. This has encouraged experi -
mentation but also reinforced a bureaucratic ten -
dency toward fragmented and non-interoperable 
programs. 
The situation is changing. Virtually all the major 
players in the area, including UN agencies, mul -
tilateral development banks, major NGOs, and 
foundations, as well as some members of the in -
dustry, have endorsed a set of common principles 
prepared in 2017 in collaboration with the World 
Bank and the Center of Global Development (box 
1). The 10 Principles on Identification for Sus -
tainable Development constitute a start toward a 
shared vision and provide a checklist of areas that 
should be considered as ID programs move for -
ward. They are categorized under three overarch -
ing themes: inclusion, design, and governance.I. Inclusion: Universal Coverage and 
Accessibility 
Identification systems cannot deliver for develop -
ment unless they are inclusive. The importance of 
universal coverage is inherent in the message of 
the SDGs to “leave no one behind” and, specifi -
cally, in SDG target 16.9. 
• Minimize documentary requirements 
and neutralize laws and norms con -
tributing to the exclusion of vulnerable 
groups.  It may be necessary to deploy all-
female registration units—as in Pakistan—and Box 1. Principles on Identification for 
Sustainable Development
Inclusion: Universal Coverage and Accessibility
1. Ensuring universal coverage for individuals from birth 
to death, free from discrimination.
2. Removing barriers to access and usage and disparities 
in the availability of information and technology.
Design: Robust, Secure, Responsive, and 
Sustainable
3. Establishing a robust—unique, secure, and 
accurate—identity.
4. Creating a platform that is interoperable and 
responsive to the needs of various users.
5. Using open standards and ensuring vendor and 
technology neutrality.
6. Protecting user privacy and control through system 
design.
7. Planning for financial and operational sustainability 
without compromising accessibility.
Governance: Building Trust by Protecting Privacy 
and User Rights
8. Safeguarding data privacy, security, and user rights 
through a comprehensive legal and regulatory 
framework.
9. Establishing clear institutional mandates and 
accountability.
10. Enforcing legal and trust frameworks though 
independent oversight and adjudication of grievances.Identification Revolution: Can Digital ID Be Harnessed for Development?
to provide added incentives for women’s reg -
istration, such as Nepal’s tax rebate when 
land is registered to women. 
• Protect people from statelessness.  
States should be expected to ensure that of -
ficials implement their laws and international 
commitments with regards to preventing and 
reducing statelessness, and—while recogniz -
ing state sovereignty in the area of citizen -
ship—encouraged to work jointly toward 
more inclusive policies. It is important to mini -
mize discrimination and access to services 
and programs based on legal status. 
• Access should be prioritized over cost 
recovery.  Identification is a public good and 
plays a crucial role in enabling individuals to 
exercise their rights and participate fully in so -
ciety and the economy. Basic ID, as well as 
the first copy of a birth certificate, should be 
provided free of charge. 
• Link registration to tangible benefits.  
Linking registration—at birth or subsequently 
into an ID system—directly with access to so -
cial transfers or emergency relief can encour -
age broad-based enrollment and use. At the 
same time, registration must not become yet 
another barrier for the poor. 
• Partnerships with civil society can 
help. Service-based payments and coopera -
tive arrangements, including with NGOs, can 
facilitate registration. 
• Biometric exclusion, or difficulties in 
using technology, can also be a bar -
rier. Part of the savings generated through 
the use of technology should be channeled to -
ward supporting people who have difficulties 
in navigating the system. 
II. Design: Robust, Secure, Responsive, 
and Sustainable 
To be robust, systems must ensure that each iden -
tity is unique and enable any credential to be 
verified, and to authenticate a person against his 
or her claimed identity. Robustness increases the usefulness of the system to public and private ser -
vice providers who depend on accurate identifica -
tion; in turn, reliable and easily accessible systems 
will be more widely used. This helps to incentivize 
enrollment and supports the operational and finan -
cial sustainability of the system. 
• Fostering convergence between civil 
registration and national identifica -
tion is a priority.  Integrating civil registra -
tion and the identity management system can 
reduce costs by avoiding duplicate facility net -
works and increase convenience. 
• Lowering the age of enrollment can 
also help to strengthen robust iden -
tity. Early enrollment into ID programs could 
strengthen the entry point into lifetime identity 
management. 
Identification systems can be sound financial invest -
ments for many developing countries. Countries 
can reap fiscal savings in areas such as payroll 
management, subsidy reform, and tax administra -
tion, even as they continue to roll out the system. 
But the system must be fit for purpose and conve -
nient to use for both service providers and end 
users. With many technology options—no cards, 
smartcards, mobiles, simple cards—there is no 
single answer, but all too often, the focus on build -
ing the system and boosting enrollment leaves the 
authentication ecosystem as an afterthought. 
• A well-designed fee system can help 
ensure that the system is financially 
sustainable and responsive to needs, 
but all identification-related service 
charges should be subject to indepen -
dent regulation.  Identification agencies 
are statutory monopolists; without regulation, 
service fees could rise exorbitantly. Perfor -
mance-based subsidies can fund the provision 
of identification services to the poor, or they 
can be cross-subsidized by other charges. 
• The use of common standards makes 
it easier to integrate in the future, 
lowers costs, and prevents vendor 
lock-in. Countries can draw on a range 
of technical standards that together cover CGD Brief October 2017
virtually all aspects of the systems. As with 
investments in infrastructure, development 
partners should require ID systems to conform 
to accepted standards. Beyond national bor -
ders, development partners should support the 
efforts of economic communities like the Eco -
nomic Community of West African States and 
the East African Community to work toward 
common standards, or at least interoperable 
credentials. 
• More countries should publish data on 
the field performance of biometric en -
rollment and authentication systems.  
India has been a pioneer in this area and 
Pakistan, too, is making data available on au -
thentication success rates, but these are more 
the exception than the rule. Performance data 
can provide a basis for standards in other 
countries for registration, uniqueness, and 
authentication. 
One of the biggest risks to sustainability will be 
the political economy of the implementing country. 
This will limit the use of the system even where 
these good practices and principles are applied 
to its design and deployment; as in Pakistan, its 
impact may be limited when it comes to strength -
ening applications that impinge on the privileges 
of elites. 
III. Governance: Building Trust by 
Protecting Privacy and User Rights
The legal and regulatory challenge around ID sys -
tems is increasing as they become more powerful 
and more integrated, and as the locus of activity 
shifts to countries with lower capacity and weaker 
democratic checks and balances. While the num -
ber of developing countries with data privacy laws 
conforming to internationally recognized fair in -
formation principles is increasing, only about half 
have such legislation. Likewise, only about half of 
developing countries have an independent entity, 
such as an ombudsman, charged with represent -
ing the interests of those who use the system and 
ensuring that grievance processes are in place 
and working effectively. Some countries have laws 
on the books but are less well equipped to enforce 
them.Many countries will need sustained assistance to 
strengthen and apply data privacy laws. Data pri -
vacy is, understandably, not always high on the 
agenda in countries where digital databases are 
still modest, but this will change. 
Sustaining trust requires at least a minimum level 
of country capacity to understand and oversee 
the system. ID systems are unlikely to be trusted 
if implemented by vendors as “black boxes” with 
little or no oversight by national authorities. This 
too is an area where development partners can 
be helpful. 
• Especially in situations with inad -
equate legal oversight, the design of 
the system will be the first line of de -
fense. Data collection should be lim -
ited to the essentials. As some countries 
have learned (Rwanda), information that can 
be used to profile or discriminate against in -
dividuals, such as ethnicity or religion, should 
not be collected and certainly not disclosed 
on cards. 
• Another priority is to limit data-shar -
ing, including between applications, 
and to increase people’s control over 
the use of their personal data. In Esto -
nia, the X-Road data exchange layer permits 
the exchange of information only as needed 
by each service provider and program, and 
individuals can see which programs and 
agencies have accessed their records, except 
for law enforcement and security. 
• Having identification managed by an 
autonomous public entity can offer 
advantages.  With a clear and limited 
mandate, such agencies may be more re -
sponsive to user needs; they may also enjoy 
greater trust among the population as a result 
of greater perceived political independence. 
Having representatives of users and stake -
holders—banks, social protection agencies, 
the elections commission, civil society organi -
zations—as well as, perhaps, the office of a 
privacy ombudsman on the board of the iden -
tification agency (Peru, Pakistan) can help to 
ensure that it remains accountable for service. to an independent privacy advocate with 
authority and resources to respond to 
breaches of agreed rules on sharing data, 
and with the power to seek redress and 
penalties, especially against public of -
ficials. Partners should also encourage 
strong grievance-redressal mechanisms 
with periodic reporting.
Development partners can help 
other service agencies adapt to the 
requirements of a common system.  
They will often have a natural tendency to 
defend their own mandates and systems, 
including to preserve control over technol -
ogy procurement, and may resist a com -
mon ID system, citing transitional costs, 
even if it is likely to save resources in the 
longer run. Development partners can help 
by coordinating support to coalitions of 
users and helping to finance the costs of 
transitioning to a common system. 
Partners can also support the moni -
toring of applications to help ensure 
that the new systems are account -
able for results.  Far more—and more 
rigorous—research is needed in this area 
as the frontier moves from creating ID sys -
tems to using them to help deliver programs 
and services.Implications for development 
partners 
As for any other sector, investments in 
identification systems should be subjected 
to cost-benefit analysis, including both the 
socioeconomic and financial perspectives. 
This will ensure a focus both on containing 
costs and on ensuring effective and sustain -
able use of the system to reduce leakage 
and corruption, and to improve the delivery 
of services. 
Development partners can help ensure that 
investments follow internationally agreed 
technical standards and develop costing 
benchmarks to help inform procurement. 
There is not at present a neutral standards-
checking body to help assure the quality 
and effectiveness of ID investments and 
compare them with emerging best practice. 
Such an entity could be a useful follow-up 
to the Principles, involving the international 
financial institutions, UN agencies, and in -
dustry experts. 
“Exclusion assessments” of coun -
tries’ laws and practices and their 
use of identification systems should 
be made before supporting investments; in 
cases where investments in an ID system 
appear likely to entrench discrimination 
against particular groups, development 
partners should decline to offer support. 
Partners should also commit to undertak -
ing a privacy impact assessment as 
part of any major ID investment . 
This may not pinpoint every risk, but can 
help to focus on the technical elements of 
the system as well as its governance and 
the legal regime for data protection. 
Partners need to be prepared to 
offer sustained advisory and finan -
cial support to help strengthen the 
framework for data privacy and 
protection. Capacity support may be 
needed for a number of years, for example 2055 L Street NW  
Fifth Floor  
Washington, DC 20036  
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 
license.Alan Gelb  is a senior 
fellow and director of studies 
at the Center for Global 
Development.
Anna Diofasi Metz 
is a former policy analyst 
at the Center for Global 
Development.She currently 
works with the World Bank's 
Identification for Development 
initiative.
