Article
Land-Use Planning,
Digital T echnologies,
and EnvironmentalConservation in Tanzania
Chris Huggins1
Abstract
Participatory land-use planning (LUP) is often promoted as a solution to variousenvironment-related challenges. In T anzania, planning processes often represent astage in the conversion of village lands to different uses, such as wildlife conservationor large-scale farming. LUP in T anzania is frequently dominated by powerful local,national, or international elites, resulting in loss of rights over village land despite theopposition of many villagers. Contemporary planning involves digital technologies
such as global positioning system units, which enable easier storage and sharing of
geospatial data. Using assemblage theory, and based on key informant interviewsconducted in Arusha and Kilimanjaro Regions of T anzania in 2015, this articleshows that LUP , particularly when it involves digital technologies, is used to notonly to change land uses but also to strengthen linkages between different organiza-tions, reinforce certain narratives of environmental change, and legitimize particularforms of external intervention.
Keywords
land-use planning, transnational assemblages, wildlife conservation, T anzania, digitaltechnologies, environmental management
Local-level land-use planning (LUP) is often promoted as a means of simulta-
neously achieving multiple objectives, such as land dispute resolution, environ-mental conservation, improvements in land tenure security, and identiﬁcation ofareas for commercial agricultural investment. There has been considerableJournal of Environment &
Development
0(0) 1–26
!The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1070496518761994
journals.sagepub.com/home/jed
1School of International Development and Global Studies, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Chris Huggins, Assistant Professor, School of International Development and Global Studies, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Email: chuggins@uottawa.ca
investment in participatory LUP processes in developing countries since the
1980s (Kaswamila & Songorwa, 2009), and there is currently renewed focus
on LUP due to increased foreign direct investment in land (the ‘‘global landgrab’’), impacts of climate change, food security shortfalls in some areas, and theReducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD þ)
process (Carmody & Taylor, 2016; Harnesk & Brogaard, 2017; Hultman,Sulle, Ramig, & Sykora-Bodie, 2012; Kweka, 2010; Massay & Kassile, 2014;Rudel & Meyfroidt, 2014).
Village land-use plans (VLUPs) in Tanzania were originally envisaged as
participatory mechanisms for ‘‘bottom-up’’ planning and community-based
development. However, over time, regulatory and policy frameworks forVLUP have become complex, making it diﬃcult for village councils to producethem without signiﬁcant external ﬁnancial and technical support (Alden Wily,2011). Scholars have demonstrated that this has often led to the VLUP processbeing instrumentalized by external actors and oriented toward objectives that donot necessarily reﬂect the priorities of most villagers (Kweka, 2010; Moyo,Ijumba, & Lund, 2016; Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012). In many cases, VLUPs
have been conducted as a mere step in order to achieve a particular goal: for
example, creating a conservation area or issuing land rights documents.Recently, the widespread availability of aﬀordable digital technologies, suchas handheld Geographic Positioning Systems (GPS) units, GPS-enabled smart-phones, and aﬀordable digital cartography software, has opened up new possi-bilities for LUP. These possibilities include greater citizen participation, moreeﬀective sharing and storage of information, and adaptation of informationproducts for diﬀerent end uses (e.g., adding layers of data onto existing digital
maps). LUPs, which tend to involve many actors from diﬀerent sociopolitical
scales (local, national, regional, and global), potentially become more complexwhen they involve such digital technologies and are networked into variousdatabases. Complex processes can be conceptualized through the notion ofassemblages, derived mainly from the work of Foucault (2008) and Deleuzeand Guattari (2004). This article deploys the assemblages concept to examinethe ways in which ‘‘participatory land-use planning’’ has been used within envir-onmental conservation projects in Tanzania and to demonstrate that use of
digital technologies in the planning process is signiﬁcant not necessarily in
terms of assuring greater local ‘‘participation’’ but in terms of the use of digitalinformation to link diﬀerent elements of the environmental conservationassemblage.
Despite increased interest in VLUP in Tanzania from various actors, pub-
lished case studies of particular LUPs are rare (Travers, 2015). This articleprovides examples from Arusha and Kilimanjaro regions, which have longbeen aﬀected by tensions and disputes over competing perceptions of the envir-
onmental impacts and economic potentials of customary resource-based liveli-
hoods, commercial wildlife conservation activities (linked to international2 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)tourism), and commercial farming (Ihucha, 2012; Mariki, Svarstad, & Benjamin,
2015; Read, 2013). Located in the Northwest of Tanzania, the two regions form
the heart of the ‘‘northern circuit’’ of tourist activities, the focus of most inter-national tourist visits to Tanzania (Igoe & Croucher, 2007; Sachedina, 2008).Kilimanjaro region includes Mount Kilimanjaro, a National Park andUNESCO World Heritage site, and an area of rich biodiversity and environ-mental sensitivity. The region also includes the biodiverse Pare Mountains,where VLUP has been conducted. Arusha region includes major wildlife con-servation areas such as the Ngorongoro Crater and Arusha National Park,
which is adjacent to multiple forms of land use including the Arusha urban
area, large-scale farms and ranches, and subsistence farming and pastoralistareas. The two regions are therefore notable for the signiﬁcance of wildlife,forests, and other natural resources to global and national actors as well as tolocal livelihoods.
Research Methods and Case Study Selection
Through interviews with government oﬃcials and other key stakeholdersin Arusha town (Arusha region) and Moshi town (Kilimanjaro region), theresearcher identiﬁed two projects which used geospatial technologies inVLUP. The ﬁrst was located in Meru District, Arusha region. Interviews wereconducted with villagers and local government oﬃcials in the village, former andcurrent staﬀ of the nongovernmental organization (NGO) involved, and districtplanning personnel. The second was located in Mwanga District, Kilimanjaroregion. This case study was investigated through key informant interviews with
various district personnel and project staﬀ as well as review of the extensive
publications resulting from the project. All ﬁeldwork was conducted in mid-2015 as part of a postdoctoral academic project.
Assemblage Theory
Building on the work of Deleuze and Guattari (2004), Foucault (2008), Li(2007), and Sassen (2006), we can understand assemblages as heterogeneous
and often loose, ﬂuid networks or ensembles of actors, objects, and processes,
which ‘‘can hold together without actually forming a coherent whole’’ (Allen,
2011, p. 154). Assemblage theory tends to emphasize the highly diverse nature ofthe components of assemblages, which have both discursive and material ele-ments. While many ‘‘regional’’ or ‘‘global’’ assemblages might be identiﬁed, thespatial ‘‘reach’’ of assemblages is typically neither stable nor linear, but rathertangled and ‘‘multilinear’’ (Deleuze, 1992, p. 159), involving complex interscalarinteractions. Moreover, changes in the links and articulations within assem-
blages can be noted in the temporal dimension as well as the spatial: assemblages
change over time. The boundaries between one assemblage and another mightHuggins 3also change, with diﬀerent assemblages linking with each other in various ways.
Particularly in the geographical and planning literature utilizing the concept,
there is a strong sense that assemblages have capacities to govern, thoughthese capacities tend to be partial and contested. Assemblages are often asso-ciated with governmental forms of sociopolitical control that are possible when‘‘states of force and regimes of signs ...intertwine their relations’’ (Deleuze &
Guattari, 2004, p. 79) but do not exercise totalizing power: ‘‘adjustment andcompromise are critical to holding assemblages together’’ (Li, 2007, p. 279).Li has put forward a framework for understanding some of the actions involved
in maintaining assemblages, with an emphasis on the ‘‘work’’ involved in keep-
ing networks functional and responding to challenges. She identiﬁes six activitiescommon to assemblages: ‘‘1) forging alignment, 2) rendering technical, 3)authorizing knowledge, 4) managing failure and contradictions, 5) anti-politics,and 6) reassembling’’ (p. 263). This framework informs the discussion of casestudies as follows.
Participatory LUP as a Transnational Assemblage
Like ‘‘community forestry management’’ discussed by Li (2007), participatoryLUP is a broad assemblage that has endured for decades, partly because it canbe deployed and adapted in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent objectives. At the heartof the concept is the involvement of ‘‘local stakeholders,’’ who are usuallyrepresented by elected local planning committees and who generally have arole in approving or rejecting the ﬁnal land-use plan (for details of typicalapproaches, see Bradstock, 2005). These ‘‘local stakeholders’’ are connected
through the planning process and the outcomes (land-use maps, land-use reg-
ulations, and associated sociopolitical processes of categorization) with actors atdiﬀerent scales, particularly state agencies. LUP is often funded by foreignactors such as international NGOs, and ‘‘best practices’’ and other aspects ofpolicy on LUP are shared internationally, giving LUP assemblages a transna-tional nature.
NGOs, inspired by the work of Chambers (1983), in particular, initially pio-
neered the ‘‘mainstreaming’’ of participatory approaches within development
projects and policies, ﬁrst using participatory rural appraisal techniques to
plan, implement, and evaluate projects and programs and later developingbroader conceptual frameworks ‘‘(ostensibly) based on recognizing existingcapacities of people as claims-making agents (e.g. sustainable livelihoodsapproaches and rights-based approaches)’’ (Hickey & Mohan, 2013, p. 3).Many of these methodologies have been adopted by international ﬁnancialinstitutions such as the World Bank, multilateral organizations such as UnitedNations agencies, and government ministries around the globe, which all claim
to use ‘‘participatory’’ approaches. Popular participation in environmental deci-
sion-making is a key element of the Rio Declaration (United Nations4 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)Conference on Environment and Development, 1992) and is justiﬁed both on
ethical and instrumental grounds; that is, it is more eﬀective than external plan-
ning processes (Lestrelin, Bourgoin, Bouahom, & Castella, 2011).
Nevertheless, here are signiﬁcant tensions within the participatory LUP
assemblage, centered on the paradox that a broad variety of ‘‘local stake-holders’’ are located in the discourse as key decision-makers within LUP,while the technical, political, discursive, and ﬁnancial power to ‘‘implement’’(frame, manage, and carry-out) LUP generally rests with external actors andelite local actors. LUPs are not developed in a vacuum, after all, but are justiﬁed
by particular narratives (e.g., of ‘‘economic development’’ or ‘‘conservation’’)
and conducted within webs of power relations. As famously argued by Foucault,power and knowledge are mutually constitutive; processes that make previouslyintangible phenomena ‘‘visible’’ or ‘‘legible’’ (Scott, 1998) are therefore consti-tutive of particular ‘‘regimes of truth.’’ To use Foucauldian terminology, LUPsand the maps associated with them are ‘‘truth telling technologies ...invested in
by both powerful and increasingly marginalized groups in their attempts to useknowledge to further their own agendas’’ (Frewer & Chang, 2014, p. 267). LUP
involves negotiation or contestation over the legitimacy of particular kinds of
land uses that themselves represent relations among individuals, materialresources, and institutions such as laws and markets. Land uses and the cate-gories used to make them ‘‘legible’’ are therefore value-laden sociopolitical phe-nomena, and LUP involves the (re)production of forms of social identity.Certain land uses are privileged, some criminalized, and others simply ignored.Contemporary LUP is mostly conducted within the legal context of an ‘‘imposedliberal rational bureaucratic land tenure system’’ (Frewer & Chang, 2014, p. 268)
and market-based imperatives broadly associated with neoliberalism, which may
not reﬂect local understandings of livelihoods or the environment. VLUP pro-cesses may be intended to increase the extent to which villagers share particularobjectives with state agencies and external actors, for example, around particularforms of economic development or conservation. They may therefore representattempts at ‘‘forging alignments’’ (Li, 2007, p. 263) with local elites. When suchattempts fail, the VLUP process can be used to maintain an appearance of con-
cord and local ‘‘buy-in’’ to such agendas. This is often the case in Tanzania, where
independent evaluations of VLUP often present the processes as mere window-
dressing exercises orchestrated by local, national, and international elites.Moreover, local land-use plans are often positioned, legally and administratively,within broader regional or national planning processes involving multiple actorsand are circumscribed by laws and policies at diﬀerent scales. Like ‘‘communityforestry management,’’ therefore, participatory LUP ‘‘carries within it a will togovern that sits uneasily with an argument that communities are capable of gov-erning themselves’’ (Li, 2007, p. 267).
The central argument of this article is that, rather than acting only as a legal-
administrative means for elite groups to change land uses at the local level,Huggins 5VLUP also plays other roles within assemblages. In this regard, we might diﬀer-
entiate between the core ‘‘technologies’’ or methods of participatory LUP
(including digital technologies) and the conceptual frameworks, advocacyapproaches, institutional networks, and other phenomena that comprise theassemblage more broadly.
Environmental Conservation Assemblages in Tanzania
The dominant assemblage centering on land-based natural resources in
Tanzania, coalescing around nationally and globally resonant discourses, can
be identiﬁed as the wildlife and environmental conservation assemblage (a second,
theland rights for indigenous peoples assemblage, is much smaller and less inﬂu-
ential, though it has recently enjoyed some local successes and internationalrecognition: Goldman Environmental Prize, 2016; Ujamaa CommunityResource Team, 2014). The importance of the ‘‘environmental-conservationcomplex’’ in Tanzania has already been identiﬁed by Brockington (2005), whonoted the symbolic and political dominance of environmental and conservation
concerns. Brockington’s work includes some themes found in the assemblage
literature, such as the ways in which certain ideas allow national-level elites to‘‘exploit international connections for personal proﬁt and their client networks’’(p. 105) and the depoliticizing eﬀects of environmental discourse, which canempower the state to intervene ‘‘without raising thorny questions about whatto do about endemic corruption or state weakness’’ or other governance issues(p. 109). Brockington also documented the use of environmental discourse byless powerful actors attempting to gain inﬂuence with the ‘‘center,’’ and argued
that environmentalism is ‘‘multilayered’’ in Tanzania (p. 115). By framing coali-
tions of actors as parts of an assemblage rather than a ‘‘complex,’’ this articlebuilds on Brockington’s arguments but emphasizes the heterogeneous and trans-national nature of these networks and identiﬁes a set of theoretical tools foranalyzing them (e.g., Dean, 2010; Li, 2007).
The wildlife and environmental conservation assemblage is a contemporary
conﬁguration of kinds of actors and particular narratives that have been aroundfor many decades. Regulation of natural resources was an important part of
colonial state policy in Tanzania. In 1891, the German colonial administration
enacted laws regarding hunting, creating game reserves, and forest reserves,within which settlement, cultivation, burning, and grazing were all forbidden.After World War II, the British colonial regime began to establish moreprotected areas (Neumann, 1998; World Wide Fund, 2014), which involvedevictions and destruction of property. By independence in 1961, three nationalparks and nine game reserves had been established. Protected areas haveexpanded steadily since then, in both numbers and land area. However, poach-
ing threatened elephant, black rhino, and other key species, and in line with
global trends, the government moved away, in part, from the ‘‘fortress6 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)conservation’’ model (Brockington, 2002) toward the community-based conser-
vation model in the 1990s (Haller, Galvin, Meroka, Alka, & Alvarez, 2008;
Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012). While protected areas remained largely based ona principle of exclusion of local people, wildlife sector organizations introduced‘‘buﬀer zone areas and new small participatory projects in an eﬀort to combineboth conservation and development’’ (Haller et al., 2008, p. 119). VLUP is alsopromoted as a solution to loss of village lands to conservation. Under pressurefrom expansion of conservation areas as well as agriculture, pastoralist villagesin Loliondo Division, for example, ‘‘pushed the government for village land use
plans and registration’’ (Read, 2013, p. 45). The 1998 Wildlife Policy led to the
establishment of Wildlife Management Areas (WMAs) on village lands, throughLUP processes. WMAs are dedicated to conservation, and many naturalresource-based livelihood activities, residency, and other land uses are restrictedwithin them. Regulations require ‘‘village councils intending to establish WMAsto recommend suitable areas for this to the village assembly, and to jointly forma community-based organization which will be given wildlife managementresponsibilities and user rights in that area’’ (Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012,
p. 144). While funds ﬂowing to village councils from WMA income can be
signiﬁcant, money ‘‘is spent on public services such as education, health, andwater. Very little (if any) is given directly to households’’ (Mwakaje et al., 2013,p. 53). Moreover, ‘‘there is generally poor governance of the funds received atvillage level’’ (Mwakaje et al., 2013, p. 68).
There are currently 16 national parks and 38 WMAs at diﬀerent stages of
development (Moyo et al., 2016). Tourism, which centers on the wildlife safarimodel, is a major contributor to Tanzania’s economy, and conservation eﬀorts
are funded by major international organizations. Research projects on wildlife,
biodiversity, and related topics are funded by international NGOs (Mwakajeet al., 2013); often these are the most detailed assessments of the state of theenvironment available and are hence central to conservation planning. Other keyactors in Tanzania’s environmental conservation assemblage include the WildlifeDivision and the Tanzania National Parks authority under the Ministry ofNatural Resources and Tourism, wildlife-based tourism investors, and membersof the village and ward-level administrative structures through which ‘‘com-
munity-based tourism’’ is conducted. While conservation activities provide ben-
eﬁts for some actors, they impose costs on others, especially communities withinor adjacent to conservation areas. Impacts such as eviction from protected areas(Brockington, 2002; Neumann, 1998), limitations to land uses within protectedareas, and threats to life and property from wildlife are common (Mariki et al.,2015; Songorwa, 1999). This situation of imbalanced distribution of costs andbeneﬁts has led, in many rural villages in Northern Tanzania, to ‘‘an increasedfeeling of being marginalized and disempowered and with limited possibilities to
inﬂuence the situation through democratic means’’ (Mariki et al., 2015, p. 20).
The costs and beneﬁts of conservation are also highly gendered, with womenHuggins 7often incurring greater costs and fewer beneﬁts (Haller et al., 2008). Tensions are
visible not only among local communities but also in the formal tourism sector,
characterized by protests by Tanzanian staﬀ over low pay (Lyima, 2015) andtensions between locally and foreign-owned tourism companies. While activitiesare undertaken under the banner of ‘‘community based conservation,’’ the rea-lity is that ‘‘between NGOs and among the government, local capacity is verymuch questioned’’ and many local actors are hence marginalized (Haller et al.,2008, p. 136). In this highly conﬂictual environment, ‘‘ideologies, discourses, andnarratives are important as resources to boost bargaining power’’ (Haller et al.,
2008, p. 138), or, to use the language of assemblage theory, to do the ‘‘work’’ of
linking scientiﬁc data, imagery of ‘‘nature’’ and wilderness, concepts of partici-pation, estimates of tourist revenue, and other aspects of the wildlife and envir-
onmental conservation assemblage. VLUPs and the maps resulting from them are
also used in this ‘‘work.’’
VLUP in Tanzania
VLUP in Tanzania is central to the land governance system. The Village LandAct (United Republic of Tanzania, 1999b) and the Land Act (United Republicof Tanzania, 1999a) provide for diﬀerent types of land tenure including villagelands, urban lands, public lands, and protected public lands. As of 2010, therewere approximately 11,000 villages in the country, comprising about 70% of thetotal land area (Isaksson & Sigte, 2010).
Village lands are demarcated and include communal areas as well as areas for
individual use. The Village Land Act no. 5, 1999, gives the Village Council
responsibility for village land, contingent on the approval of their decisions by
the Village Assembly (all inhabitants aged over 18 years). Villages also have theresponsibility to conduct participatory LUP and formulate bylaws for approvalby district authorities. VLUPs can be used as a formal tool to guide state andprivate investments.
In the rural Tanzanian context, VLUP follows speciﬁc government guidelines
(National Land Use Planning Commission [NLUPC], 2011) and involves theelection of up to 14 villagers to a Village Land Use Management Committee;
1
demarcation of village boundaries, after which the village receives a certiﬁcate ofvillage land, and can issue Certiﬁcates of Customary Right of Occupation(a form of land right) to individual inhabitants (Section 7 of the Village LandAct, 1999). VLUP also necessitates assistance of the multisector DistrictParticipatory Land Use Management (PLUM) team (including district specia-lists on forests, ﬁsheries, wildlife, lands, community development, livestock, andagriculture); production of land-use maps, which identify diﬀerent land-usezones in the village; ﬁnalization of land-use bylaws; submission of these and
associated documents to the district authorities for approval; and printing
of a booklet containing all the relevant information (NLUPC, 1998, 2011).8 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)This process is what is referred to in this article as a VLUP: It is not simply a
map but a process, a set of bylaws, enforcement mechanisms, and other aspects.
A VLUP process typically costs 35 to 40 million Tanzanian shillings (Tshs) orUS$16,000 to US$19,000.
2
While the legal framework supports decentralized governance, several poli-
cies, regulations, and laws have recentralized some aspects of land governance.For example, the Land Use Planning Act (United Republic of Tanzania, 2007)lays down procedures that require funding, expertise, and district-level over-sight, making VLUP impossible without the intervention of district authorities
(Alden Wily, 2011). Moreover, the oﬃcial Guidelines for Participatory Village
Land Use Management in Tanzania (NLUPC, 1998), which are 147 pages long,lay out a complex process which requires training and expertise. The emphasison ﬂexibility in the Village Land Act of 1999 has been replaced by strict adher-ence to the lengthy process outlined in the Guidelines (Alden Wily, 2011). In thewords of a member of the NLUPC,
Village Councils and Assemblies have limited control over village land because they
are subject to the advice and directives of the District Councils and the
Commissioner for Lands. In other words, it is much easier for the village landadministration authorities to deal with access, use and customary ownership,but the controlling power is vested in the central government organs. (Stephene,2014, p. 1)
The VLUPs are intended to inform district-level land-use plans, but these are
largely lacking. Institutional constraints include lack of funding for the activities
of village land committees or the ward tribunals where decisions taken by the land
committees can be appealed, as well as insuﬃcient training in mediation.The result is that ‘‘instead of mediating, many VLCs are charging ﬁnes andimposing compensation orders’ and may also be easily corrupted’’ (Stephene,2014, p. 1). In summary, because of lack of funds, insuﬃcient investment incapacity building, and limited political will, few mechanisms are in place at thevillage level to ensure that village land is eﬀectively and transparently managed.
Implementation of the land laws is still ongoing. Every village is legally
required to have a VLUP in place. However, many villages lack VLUP, often
because of inadequate funding or capacity (Hart et al., 2014). District councilstypically have funding to carry out only two to three VLUPs each year (Hartet al., 2014). In 2012, approximately 1,500 VLUPs had reportedly been com-pleted, up from 705 in 2010 (Pedersen & Haule, 2013). It is diﬃcult to accessaccurate, up-to-date information on the number of VLUPs currently; diﬀerentnumbers are supplied by the Ministry of Planning, the NLUPC, and variousdistrict authorities.
3The government sees VLUP as a method for facilitating
investment in the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor, which is a priority
area for large-scale commercial farming, and by 2014, the Ministry of Land hadHuggins 9trained 25 district PLUM teams and completed 391 VLUPs in the 30 districts of
the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor (Tanzania Natural Resource
Forum/IIED, 2014).
VLUP and Natural Resource Management in Tanzania
Rural Tanzania is characterized by natural resource-dependent livelihoods; asdescribed earlier, natural resources are also highly signiﬁcant in terms of thetourism industry, which centers on protected conservation areas. Several studies
have focused on the ways that VLUP processes have been conducted in order to
create WMAs. They have typically found that, as noted earlier, the work andspecialist expertise involved in setting up a WMA ‘‘would be beyond the meansof most villages’’ without external support (Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012, p. 144).‘‘Donor agencies, national and international NGOs, land resources projects andprogrammes, ﬁnancial institutions, private ﬁrms, and media institutions’’ haveall been identiﬁed as ‘‘implementing agencies’’ involved in VLUP in Tanzania(Kami, Kalenzi, Mwita, Flintan, & Liversage, 2016, p. 8).
In some cases, WMAs have been created without the support of villagers
(Sachedina, 2008). One study found that, despite their supposedly community-based nature,
the programme of creating WMAs was directed and managed by the central gov-
ernment—with the backing of external NGOs and donors ...the village assembly’s
involvement in the creation of WMAs is more that of a rubber stamp than agenuine exercise of the villagers’ choices. (Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012, p. 144)
WMAs are formed to create large conservation areas, representing ‘‘new strate-
gies for enlarging and amalgamating a mosaic of contiguous areas into protectedareas without resorting to the overt brutalities of colonial era conservation’’(Ramutsindela & Noe, 2012, p. 141).
In particular, pastoralist interests are often neglected in VLUPs and the
broader LUP processes associated with wildlife conservation interventions bythe state, international NGOs, and some tourism or hunting companies (Brøther
& Solberg, 2007; Kaswamila & Songorwa, 2009; Odgaard, 2006). For example,
the VLUP for Minjingo village, near Tarangire National Park, designated largeareas of the village as a village natural resources management area. Researchersnoted that ‘‘the [management] area on the map also corresponded exactly to thewildlife migration maps at the Tarangire visitor’s centre, funded and designed bythe AWF [African Wildlife Foundation]’’ (Igoe & Croucher, 2007, p. 544). Dueto the establishment of the village natural resources management area, 63families living inside the area were evicted.
VLUP processes tend not to demarcate grazing areas and do not adequately
consider how pasture areas are related to other land uses and public goods10 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)(e.g., environmental services).4As a result, LUPs have in some cases undermined
the resource base of pastoralist livelihoods. This has led to friction between
customary pastoralist leaders and those supporting VLUP. Even local adminis-trators in pastoralist areas are not always in accordance with state-led VLUP;for example, when the Arusha District PLUM team visited some villages in aMaasai-dominated ward to commence VLUP, they were threatened by somelocal people, allegedly on the orders of a village chairman.
5One PLUM team
blamed local councilors, who publicly agree to VLUP, but privately tell theirconstituents that VLUP will be used to grab land.
6
These problems reﬂect longstanding policy biases. The Tanzanian govern-
ment has in the past relocated pastoralist populations from one region toanother, with negative social and socioecological impacts (Mahonge, 2010).The government’s Strategic Plan for the Implementation of Land Laws deﬁnedtranshumant pastoralism as problematic and aimed to facilitate a shift towardsedentary, intensive ranching (HAKIKAZI Catalyst, 2006, cited in Read, 2013).
There are other documented examples, not necessarily concerning pastoral-
ists, of cases where individuals have been expropriated without receiving com-
pensation (Behrman, Billings, & Peterman, 2013, p. 32). As mentioned earlier,
beneﬁts from WMAs, which may include very small ﬁnancial gains, ‘‘game meatquotas and park outreach projects (clinic, schools, etc.)’’ (Haller et al., 2008,p. 120), are often captured by local elites (Sachedina, 2008). Another case illus-trates the tensions around VLUP in villages bordering protected areas. AWF,a well-funded US-based organization, attempted to facilitate VLUP in severalvillages in Engare Nanyuki ward, working with the PLUM team from MeruDistrict Council (Arusha region), to protect a wildlife migration corridor adja-
cent to Arusha National Park. There were several sources of tension during the
exercise. First, there were preexisting disputes between the park authorities andthe villagers over land rights, and the PLUM team was suspected by villageresidents of siding with the parks authority. Second, some villagers allegedlycultivated marijuana inside Arusha National Park and were worried that thePLUM team were there to investigate.
7Third, one village is widely thought to be
located on land claimed by a state-owned cattle ranch,8though the community
has been settled there for a long time. These tensions led to the PLUM team’s
vehicle being blocked by villagers on one occasion to prevent them working.
One of the key issues was the diﬀerence in expectations of the actors involved.On its part, AWF had, as its main objective, the protection of the wildlifecorridor. In the words of one of the individuals involved, ‘‘The AWF werenot exactly focused on the villagers ...They were looking for their own results,
not the results for the village people.’’
9Many of the villagers, on the other hand,
expected some form of support to the development projects identiﬁed during theVLUP process.
10Moreover, they expected compensation if land was set aside
for a wildlife corridor.11As neither the state-owned ranching company nor
AWF were able or willing to guarantee compensation, the village assemblyHuggins 11refused to approve the VLUP.12This indicates the context-speciﬁc nature of the
politics around VLUP. Faced with open resistance from local people, even a
powerful organization such as AWF, working closely with district authorities,was unable to ensure that a VLUP could be completed.
Citing a litany of problems faced by communities in the Tarangire-Manyara
area of northern Tanzania, especially Maasai communities, one study contendsthat, ‘‘unless land use planning is instigated at village levels with more demo-
cratic and transparent methods than generally used to date , this situation will
not get better’’ (Otto, Kamara, & Lissu, 1998, p. 60; italics added). While this
is generally true, the aforementioned case study shows that the main obstacle
was not necessarily how VLUP was done but conﬂicts over outcomes fordiﬀerent stakeholders, within a particular historical context. The particularimpacts of VLUPs depend on how the results of VLUP (maps, bylaws, plan-ning tools, and various aspects of the process) are communicated and deployedwithin the wildlife and environmental conservation assemblage.
Case Studies of VLUP
Most of the academic literature on VLUP to date has focused on VLUP in theestablishment of WMAs. The following two case studies focus on other aspectsof the environmental conservation assemblage in Tanzania, in order to showthat VLUP is not only used as a step in a process of changing control over landbut also is deployed in multiple ways in order to strengthen the material anddiscursive links between diﬀerent parts of the environmental conservationassemblage, particularly at international levels.
VLUP for ‘‘Sustainable Land Management’’ in Kilimanjaro
In 2010, the Kilimanjaro Regional Administrative Secretary’s oﬃce, along withvarious technical experts, launched a $24 million project, cofunded and coma-naged by the Government of Tanzania, Global Environmental Facility, andUnited Nations Development Programme, titled ‘‘Reducing LandDegradation on the Highlands of Kilimanjaro Region.’’ The project was imple-
mented in seven districts. It involved various activities including strengthening
the policy framework and institutional arrangements to support sustainable landmanagement (SLM), ‘‘improved energy eﬃciency’’ through new technologies,tree planting, and an ‘‘energy switch’’ involving a carbon ﬁnance scheme (UnitedNations Development Programme [UNDP], 2010). One of the project objectiveswas to ‘‘strengthen capacity and incentives for SLM through participatory plan-ning processes involving the local institutions and knowledge systems’’ (UNDP,2010, p. 2). This was part of a broader process of facilitating policy and institu-
tional changes to decentralize decision-making over natural resources. Creating12 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)and reinforcing connections between disparate actors, inside and outside of
government, was a central goal.
To understand the project, it is important to consider the broader history of
environmental management in the region. Kijazi (2015a) situates this projectwithin a process of ‘‘reconﬁguration of land access and authority’’ which has‘‘reversed earlier eﬀorts to devolve forest management to local people,’’ (p. 58)and contextualizes the project within a longer history of exclusion of villagersfrom the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro. Furthermore, forest conservation activ-ities in the region are embedded within a discourse that identiﬁes local forest
‘‘degradation’’ as a signiﬁcant contributor to climate change, causing Kijazi to
characterize forests in the area as ‘‘climate forests,’’ thereby signaling the inher-ently political nature of their governance (cf. the ‘‘political forests’’ identiﬁed byPeluso & Vandergeest, 2001). Kijazi (2015b) notes that illegal logging by localelites, probably in collusion with government administrators, is not adequatelyaddressed by conservation strategies. Like Haller et al. (2008), Kijazi is skepticalof the extent to which the ‘‘fortress conservation’’ paradigm has been trulyreplaced with a community-based conservation concept.
VLUP is included in the project partly as a means to test the feasibility of new
environmental assessment tools. The project also emphasizes the use of digitaltechnologies in the VLUP process to produce visual products, which are usedpartly to enhance citizen participation in the project but which, as we see, seemto be directed mostly toward scientiﬁc and policy-making audiences.
The project staﬀ embed their approaches to VLUP within global discourse on
LUP, particularly the importance of local people within the planning process,given the ‘‘inadequacies’’ of the state (Mahonge et al., 2015). Despite an objec-
tive to put in place LUPs in several villages, project staﬀ reported that over the
5-year project lifespan, they had completed only one LUP in a village inMwanga District.
13This village is located in the North Pare mountains, part
of the Eastern Arc Mountain Range, an area of great environmental signiﬁ-cance.
14However, interviews with government personnel revealed that the
LUP had taken place in a village with a boundary conﬂict, without adequateconsultation from the District Lands Oﬃce, and the LUP had hence not beenapproved by the district authorities. This failure to successfully complete any
LUPs is remarkable, and it demonstrates, at least for Mwanga District, the
importance of institutional networks for project success.
15
As mentioned earlier, one of the main project contributions, according to
staﬀ, is the development of decision-making tools for environmental aspectsof LUP, such as tools to assess land degradation, soil health, carbon stock,and hydrological features (Kashaga, Sangeda, Kahimba, Semu, & Mahonge,2014). These tools have been developed on the basis that, ﬁrst, while theTanzanian LUP guidelines (NLUPC, 2011) provide a ‘‘methodology’’ for
LUP, they lack the tools necessary to ensure SLM,
16and second, these new
tools enable involvement of local people in decision-making. Activities includedHuggins 13in the SLM project (such as tree planting, drip irrigation, and promotion of
beekeeping) have been ‘‘mainstreamed’’ within district workplans in the region.
When seen within the context of diﬃculties faced by the project in facilitatingdecentralization of decision-making on natural resource use, the shift toward‘‘designing tools for combating land degradation’’ acts as a depoliticizing mea-sure, ensuring that the project engages less with the politics of decision-makingand more with the biological science of land-use change. Project staﬀ argue that‘‘the lack of tools has limited the usefulness of planning and decision making tocorrect or mitigate the impact of current practices and to deﬁne land use policies
at village level’’ (Sangeda et al., 2014), a position that, while not factually incor-
rect, ignores some of the crucial governance questions regarding decision-making power over trees and other resources in the region. Such an approachcan be understood as a ‘‘rendering technical’’ of inherently political issues(Li, 2007). In addition, the SLM project document argues that VLUPs are‘‘only being done to a very limited extent due to capacity problems’’ (UNDP,2010, p. 26), thereby downplaying the ﬁnancial obstacles to nationwide imple-mentation of VLUP processes as well as local political factors.
Although the ‘‘participatory’’ nature of the SLM project was promoted by
project staﬀ, the selection of tools does not seem to have involved farmers,pastoralists, or their representatives in civil society (Sangeda et al., 2014).Specialists associated with the project selected the four tools based on a litera-ture review. These tools—which reﬂect the way that ‘‘Sustainable LandManagement’’ was framed in this project—also reﬂect the institutional arrange-ments and organizational alliances mentioned in the main project document(UNDP, 2010). The carbon stock assessment tool, for example, was explicitly
written into the project design to articulate with REDD þand other interna-
tional carbon-credit related programs (UNDP, 2010). Indeed, the terminologyof ‘‘carbon stocks’’ seems quite unusual in the Tanzanian village context, whereconcepts such as carbon sequestration are not the subject of day-to-day dis-course. Moreover, trees and bushes provide various valuable beneﬁts to villa-gers, including timber, fuel wood, an environment for beekeeping, some wildfoods, and traditional medicines. The reductionist framing of these resources as‘‘carbon stock’’ suggests that LUPs using such methodologies might be expected
to orient themselves toward particular mechanisms, such as REDD þ.
Geospatial data collection was a major component of the project. GIS data,
satellite imagery, and other data external to the villages were analyzed by spe-cialists, who generated maps showing land-use changes between 1995 and 2014.Village committees trained by project staﬀ developed sketch maps of villageresources and land uses including sources of land degradation. These sketchmaps were then combined with the GIS maps. The geospatial data collectedby the project was given to the Kilimanjaro Regional Commissioner’s oﬃce
for future use within regional activities. Publications by project staﬀ emphasize
the ways in which the project represents a ‘‘paradigm shift from centralized14 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)top-down to collaborative bottom-up planning and decision making on the use
of land’’ (Mahonge et al., 2015, p. 70); however, this conﬂates ‘‘making maps’’
with ‘‘making decisions.’’ Like the focus on ‘‘decision-making tools’’ mentionedearlier, a focus exclusively on the production of maps distracts from the politicsof local governance and is a mechanism for ‘‘rendering technical.’’ The projectdrew from ideas of ‘‘inclusion’’ associated with participatory LUP in order toincrease its own legitimacy.
In this project, the Foucauldian idea of the VLUP as a tool to improve the
‘‘legibility’’ of the socioecological landscape for policy-makers becomes more
relevant (see also Scott, 1998). While VLUP was not completed, detailed land-
use maps were compiled using GIS and ‘‘participatory’’ approaches and made
available to the regional authorities. These focus on environmental changes(with their local framing excluding broader pressures on the environment, imply-ing that local livelihood strategies are primarily responsible for degradation)rather than the development objectives of the villagers involved. There waslittle emphasis on planning for future development infrastructure. The visualdata compiled and transferred to the regional authorities, therefore, do not
necessarily represent the priorities of villagers but rather the priorities of those
involved in designing and implementing the SLM project.
The project also shows that the Tanzanian state is not monolithic and is
aﬀected by institutional competition. In Mwanga district, the SLM projectpersonnel were aﬃliated with the agricultural services rather than the Landsoﬃce. This led to institutional friction. It also seems to have undermined thegeospatial mapping aspects of the project, as it is the lands oﬃce, not theagricultural oﬃce, which has computerized mapping capacity and is hence
needed to prepare maps which can be integrated into district development
plans (if they exist).
Publications by project staﬀ, while describing the project strengths, are silent
about the actual outcomes of VLUP processes, such as the failure to actuallyconclude an approved VLUP. The focus on the capacity-building aspects andfrequent mention of the ways in which the project may have impacts in thefuture (e.g., policy lessons ‘‘beyond the project’s timeframe,’’ Woodﬁne et al.,2016, p. 8) can be seen as examples of ‘‘managing failure’’ (Li, 2007).
In discussing the policy aims of the project—to move toward more ‘‘decen-
tralized’’ decision-making processes—the project personnel argue that the time-frame was too short (Woodﬁne, Vallee, Bunning, Maty, Sinnassamy, 2016).Limited success in this policy objective is not surprising given the political econ-omy of natural resource use in the region. According to Kijazi (2015b), naturalresource management politics is characterized by a struggle between elite cliquesbeneﬁtting from illegal logging and other extractive activities, and other elitecliques beneﬁtting from the ﬁnancial ‘‘park conservation rents’’ (p. 21), with
district and village environmental committees and other elected local institutions
remaining marginalized.Huggins 15One of Kijazi’s critiques of the SLM project is that, in its activities on ‘‘energy
switching,’’ for example, it involves only those organizations aligned with the
government (such as schools) and does not work with local communities‘‘entangled’’ with the diﬃcult politics of resource governance. Seen within thiswider project context, the LUP component serves as a means of facilitatingproject interaction with village inhabitants, making project ﬁndings more cred-ible and legitimate; it can therefore be interpreted as a means of ‘‘authorizingknowledge.’’ Li (2007) writes that the process of ‘‘authorizing knowledge’’involves ‘‘specifying the requisite body of knowledge; conﬁrming enabling
assumptions; containing critiques’’ (p. 265). In this example, we can see that
the use of local knowledge in the production of maps and involvement of villa-gers in the testing of ‘‘decision making tools’’ serve to implicate local commu-nities in the project (therefore precluding the kinds of criticisms made by Kijazi,for example). At the same time, it involved villagers only within limited, pre-scribed activities that did not, for example, include discussions of the broaderaims and objectives of resource management policies and practices in the region.The outcomes of the planning processes, particularly the neat, professional-
looking maps of environmental change, have been published in international
journals (Kashaga et al., 2014; Mahonge et al., 2015; Sangeda et al., 2014)building the credibility of the project and those involved with it within nationaland international scientiﬁc and academic communities and hence drawingtogether elements of the environmental conservation assemblage, despite thefailure of the project to complete any VLUPs.
VLUP Facilitated by Istituto Oikos in Arusha Region
Istituto Oikos is an Italian conservation NGO which also conducts developmentactivities. It has operated for many years in a relatively remote subvillage ofUwiro Village, near Mount Meru. The area is adjacent to Arusha National Parkand has in the past served as a ‘‘wildlife corridor,’’ through which wildlife movefrom the park to other ecologically favorable areas. The Arusha Park authorityhas advocated for surrounding villages to conduct VLUPs.
17Like some other
parts of Tanzania, this area has a complex land tenure history. The Maasai and
Waarusha communities have inhabited the area since at least the colonial period.
Large farms owned by European settlers during the colonial period were lateroccupied by local people. The National Park was established by several govern-ment legal notices, from 1960 onwards, and the park boundaries were expandedfrom 137 ha
2(in 1967) to 328 km2(currently). The park’s authority has planned
to expand it further, but this has not yet happened. There are land disputesbetween villagers and the Arusha National Park authority. There are also pri-vate forestry plantations around the park. Due to the government’s villagization
policy of the 1960s and 1970s, people from outside the village—primarily of the
Wameru ethnic group—were resettled in the area, and during the late 1980s,16 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)they were encouraged to purchase the farms they used to improve their land
tenure security.18There are various land conﬂicts between inhabitants of the
village, which include farmer–herder disputes (with farmers seen as trying toexpand cultivated areas, especially for production of tomatoes on irrigatedplots), disputes over subvillage boundaries, and individual boundary disputeswhich are typically experienced in rural settings (Istituto Oikos, 2011).
Key to OIKOS’ activities in the village is its claim to simultaneously address
both geophysical and socioeconomic dimensions of the development and con-servation ‘‘challenges’’; for example, through supporting income-generating
activities which might mitigate the negative impacts of wildlife on local house-
holds. OIKOS conducted VLUP in order to support wildlife-friendly land-usezoning, though a WMA has not been created in the area. OIKOS originallyplanned to conduct LUPs in ﬁve villages but was only able to complete it in onevillage, due to ‘‘conﬂict between sub villages, ethnic groups and diﬀerent inter-ests expressed by the entities that manage nature reserves, in this case the ArushaNational Park.’’ (Scaramella, Sapienza, Polverini, & Grilli, 2012, p. 32).The NGO unsuccessfully attempted to resolve some of the disputes.
19
The process was expensive because boundary demarcation and other activ-
ities were conducted by district staﬀ, with OIKOS funding. According to formerproject staﬀ, district personnel worked slowly and lacked equipment, which theNGO had to purchase.
20Former NGO staﬀ, who described the information
management systems at the District Council as ‘‘horrible,’’ were unable toﬁnd basic information on the villages (such as maps and legal documents) andhad to do some fundamental boundary mapping which should not have beennecessary.
21
The LUP, and associated bylaws, have a strong conservation emphasis. Since
OIKOS started to operate in the area, several large wildlife species are reportedlymore abundant (Trivellini, 2006). This led to an increase in human–wildlifeconﬂict (Trivellini, 2006). The Kisimiri wildlife corridor, through which ele-phants and other wildlife sometimes pass, is also marked on the VLUP.However, no changes in settlement or cultivation were required by the plan;rather, the former wildlife corridor area is patrolled by volunteer VillageGame Scouts, who enforce national laws on banned practices such as game
poaching and tree cutting for charcoal production. The Village Game Scouts
system is not ﬁnancially self-sustaining, and village leaders often rely on trans-port from OIKOS to visit remote parts of the village for conservation reasons.
22
The subvillage chief in at least one subvillage is permanently employed byOIKOS (Trivellini, 2006).
OIKOS staﬀ acknowledge that the VLUP process, with its emphasis on
administrative boundaries, reinforces a state-centric view of the world, inwhich administrative units (subvillages, villages, wards, etc.) are important
rather than customary systems of resource rights.
23Moreover, the mapping
exercise, with its default structure of ﬁxed ‘‘zones,’’ does not reﬂect the ﬂuidHuggins 17movements of people, animals, and settlements associated with pastoralism and
hunter-gatherer livelihoods, for example. Therefore, while OIKOS has been
careful not to alienate the agro-pastoralist Maasai, who are a major stakeholderin their conservation eﬀorts, the VLUP does represent a certain degree of ‘‘rigi-diﬁcation’’ of a more ﬂexible and negotiated customary land-use system. Thesebiases are largely inherent to the Tanzanian VLUP guidelines. However, OIKOSdocuments also reﬂect Western-biased oversimpliﬁcations of land rights dimen-sions of pastoralist systems, arguing that sedentarization of Maasai householdsmeans that ‘‘they are only recently developing a sense of ownership towards
their land’’ (Istituto Oikos, 2011, p. 12) and ignoring a history of Maasai defend-
ing their customary territorial rights.
Nevertheless, the VLUP has endured, despite a change of village leadership in
December 2014. Part of its success might be attributed to OIKOS’ long-standingﬁnancial and technical support for village and district institutions and the perso-nal-level networking this has facilitated; this contrasts with the SLM project’smuch briefer engagement with the village (and district) in the previous case study.
A great number of maps have been produced through the project, showing
topography, hydrology, geology, land uses, natural resource availability, and
other characteristics. These can be understood as particular means of ‘‘author-izing knowledge’’ (Li, 2007), in this case, establishing the scientiﬁc expertise ofOIKOS and its partners. Project publications are also replete with photographs,many of which reﬂect the beauty and biodiversity that makes NorthernTanzania an attractive tourist destination. The combination of land-use maps,natural resource maps, and photographs in the ﬂagship publication in particular(Istituto Oikos, 2011) suggests that the role of mapping in the project serves not
only to enhance the ‘‘visibility’’ or ‘‘legibility’’ of the project target area in the
sense understood by Foucault, Dean (2010), Scott (1998), and others, but it alsosuggests that visibility is part of a broader project of creating an image of thearea and of the project activities, an exercise in public relations, as much asinternal calculation and planning. OIKOS and its local partner organization,Mkuru Training Camp, beneﬁt from relationships with foreign students, whofrequently conduct scholarly research in the area, using the camp facilities.Such student research provides informational resources to OIKOS and its
local allies and also represents a source of local revenue, strengthening village
support for OIKOS. Students visiting this part of Tanzania typically visit theNational Parks and engage in other tourist activities, thus contributing to cen-tral government revenues and forming a link between the tourism, internationaldevelopment, and academic nodes of the environmental conservation assem-blage. OIKOS staﬀ recognize that their interventions in these diﬀerent domainsinvolve tensions, which they describe as ‘‘contradictions in intervention. We aretalking of planning, but we also have our own strategy for institutional survival:
we are a conservation organization.’’
2418 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)The digital technology-driven aspects of the VLUP were also intended to
strengthen linkages between the project and the district administration and
improve the potential sustainability of the VLUP and related activities byenhancing district-level ‘‘ownership.’’ According to OIKOS documents, theNGO has collected a signiﬁcant amount of geospatial data, comprising ‘‘a geor-eferenced database for Arumeru District’’ (Istituto Oikos, 2011, p. 77). Some ofthese data have been uploaded to the Internet at a dedicated webpage.
25
However, handing the data over to the district in usable form has been a chal-lenge. OIKOS acknowledges that ‘‘only a few district technicians are able to
handle the database,’’ due to the technical skills required (Istituto Oikos, 2011,
p. 82), and that there is a risk of those individuals being transferred from thedistrict, leaving the data unmanaged. Indeed, visiting the district oﬃces about ayear after the information was handed over, OIKOS staﬀ found no trace of it.
26
An external evaluation found that OIKOS had emphasized, in its project design,‘‘the transfer of technical and scientiﬁc skills to local authorities and on issuesrelated to the production of data (computer programs, geographic informationsystems, databases, maps, topography, etc.)’’ while neglecting ‘‘crucial aspects of
mediation and conﬂict resolution, underestimating the political, procedural,
historical, cultural and negotiation aspects typical of the participatory manage-ment’’ (Scaramella et al., 2012, p. 32).
Multiple key informant interviews with government and nongovernmental
personnel suggest that the desire of the Tanzanian state to control VLUP pro-cesses rarely extends to digitization, cataloguing, or actual use of the maps andvisualizations in development planning. NGO staﬀ report that ‘‘districts don’thave much interest in geo-spatial data.’’
27Eﬀorts at coordination by the state
are often largely symbolic. Most districts do not have a land-use plan, and the
government lacks the capacity to manage LUP data, such as a central cadastralsystem which could, for example, link VLUP maps to details of land rightscertiﬁcates issued to inhabitants. Only around 11% of Tanzania’s land is sur-veyed (Dinh & Monga, 2013, cited in Mango, 2015) and the cadastral system is‘‘ineﬃcient, expensive, stagnant and also not commissioned in a transparentmanner’’ (Mango, 2015). As a result, VLUPs are not systematically stored,compared, analyzed, or disseminated among interested parties. Managing
detailed geospatial data is not only problematic for the district authorities.
OIKOS themselves, despite having trained staﬀ and suﬃcient computer equip-ment, have not yet developed a useful interface through which NGO staﬀ canaccess and use the information.
28This reinforces the conclusion that scientiﬁc
data may serve other purposes than those of systematic scientiﬁc observation orcapacity-building, such as building institutional credibility among stakeholders(e.g., donors, the international public, students, and the Tanzanian government)and forging alignments between diﬀerent subgroups of the conservation and
development industries.Huggins 19Conclusions
As processes which often tie together ‘‘participatory’’ activities, visual mapping
technologies, the articulation of ‘‘development’’ goals related to public andprivate infrastructure, and environmental assessment methodologies, VLUPsare well suited to strengthen the links between disparate stakeholders in theenvironmental conservation assemblage in Tanzania. As noted by Dean(2010), states and other actors develop ‘‘ways of visualizing ﬁelds to be gov-erned’’ (p. 41), which create opportunities for assemblages of diverse actors to
intervene in these ﬁelds. The maps and plans produced in VLUP processes are
potentially examples of technologies used to create visual representations of landas a zone for intervention. While the maps and other outputs potentially facil-itate investment (by community-based organizations, state organs, or foreigndevelopment agencies) to respond to development needs prioritized by villageinhabitants, this is not always the outcome, nor is it necessarily the top priorityfor external organizations funding VLUP. The emphasis on mapping and digi-tization in the SLM and OIKOS case studies documented in this article reﬂects a
desire to demonstrate technical expertise and provide tools for assemblages to be
maintained through scientiﬁc and academic networks involving national- andinternational-level specialist, professional actors. Although digital technologiespotentially provide local people opportunities for involvement in and controlover planning processes, they are not in control of how the data are shared,interpreted, adapted, and framed. This is not to say that GPS technologies,digital cartography systems, and other digital tools do not oﬀer material possi-bilities for improving LUP, for actors at diﬀerent levels; they may indeed be
deployed in unexpected and subversive ways by the ‘‘weak’’ in their dealings
with the ‘‘strong’’ in a context of reappropriation of the imagery and language ofenvironmentalism (in the sense identiﬁed by Brockington, 2005). However,the case studies presented here, in the context of a review of broader literatureon LUP in Tanzania, demonstrate that while VLUP processes have been pre-sented as useful examples of ‘‘grassroots’’ consultation and decision-making,they often have greater impact in terms of their roles as instruments for legit-imizing the approaches of powerful organizations, able to translate even proble-
matic or failed VLUP processes into various discursive and material products
(from online databases to journal articles) that use the multidimensional natureof local LUP to enhance the credibility of high-level stakeholders within theenvironmental conservation assemblage.
Authors’ Note
This research was conducted through a Post-Doctoral Fellowship at the Netherlands
Land Academy (LANDac). The author would like to thank Prof Annelies Zoomersand Prof Guus van Westen of the Geosciences Faculty, Utrecht University, and
LANDac coordinator Gemma Betsema. In Tanzania, Saitoti Parmelo provided excellent20 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)interpretation services. The author would also like to thank the District Councils of
Arusha, Meru, and Mwanga Districts for their support to the research as well as all
the villagers, village leaders, NGO staﬀ, and others who shared their knowledge, and
perspectives. The research was done under Research Permit no. 2015-NA- 168-NA-2015-67 from the Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH).
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, author-ship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article: This research was conducted through a Post-
Doctoral Fellowship at the Netherlands Land Academy (LANDac).
Notes
1. The 1998 PLUM guidelines specify a minimum of 6 members, though in practice up
to 14 may be included.
2. Interviews with various district personnel and NGO staff, April to June 2015.3. Interview with international agency personnel, Utrecht, July 9, 2015.
4. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.
5. Interview with district planning staff, Arusha District, May 8, 2015.6. Interview with district planning staff, Arusha District, May 8, 2015.7. Marijuana has been seized in the village by police: see ITV Tanzania report, Jeshi la
polisi mkoa wa Arusha limekamata shehena za Bangi , Aug 15, 2013, retrieved from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼JbrShVuGBms.
8. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015; Interview with
former OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, June 4, 2015.
9. Interviews with former members of Meru District PLUM team, USA River, May 7,
2015.
10. Interviews with former members of Meru District PLUM team, USA River, May 7,
2015.
11. Interviews with former members of Meru District PLUM team, USA River, May 7,
2015.
12. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.
13. Interview with Technical Specialist, UNDP ‘‘SLM’’ project, Moshi town, May 15,
2015.
14. The international NGO Conservation International has declared it one of the world’s
25 ‘‘biodiversity hotspots’’ (von Hellermann, 2016).
15. Only a fraction of the total funding was allocated to VLUP; nevertheless, there was
adequate financing of VLUP activities.
16. Interview with technical specialist, UNDP ‘‘SLM’’ project, Moshi town, May 15,
2015.
17. Interview with former OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, June 4, 2015.
18. Interview with TAWRI staff, Arusha town, June 2015.Huggins 2119. Interview with former OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, June 4, 2015.
20. Interview with former OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, June 4, 2015.
21. Interview with former OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, June 4, 2015.
22. Interview with village chairman, Uwiro village, June 20, 2015.23. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.
24. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.
25. Retrieved from http://luparumeru.blogspot.nl/.26. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.27. Interview with NGO personnel, Arusha town, June 8, 2015.
28. Interview with OIKOS staff-member, Arusha town, May 12, 2015.
Orcid ID
Chris Huggins http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1318-9194
References
Alden Wily, L. (2011). Village land use planning in Kigoma and Mpanda districts,
Tanzania: Is it working for community rights and conservation? 22: Consultancy
Report for the Jane Goodhall Institute.
Allen, J. (2011). Powerful assemblages? Area,43(2), 154–157.
Behrman, J., Billings, L., & Peterman, A. (2013). Evaluation of grassroots community–
Based legal aid activities in Uganda and Tanzania: Strengthening women’s legal know-ledge and land rights (CAPRi Working Paper No. 108). Washington, DC: CGIAR
Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi).
Bradstock, A. (2005). Land reform and participation in South Africa. In A. Milligan,
N. Kenton, & H. Ashley (Eds.), Participatory learning and action (Vol. 52, pp. 45–52).
Nairobi, Kenya: IIED.
Brockington, D. (2005). The politics and ethnography of environmentalisms in Tanzania.
African Affairs ,105(418), 97–116.
Brockington, D. (2002). Fortress conservation: The preservation of the Mkomazi game
reserve, Tanzania . Oxford, England: International African Institute/James Currey.
Brøther, M. E., & Solberg, J.-A. (2007). Legal empowerment—A way out of poverty . Oslo,
Norway: The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Carmody, P., & Taylor, D. (2016). Globalization, land grabbing, and the present-day
colonial state in Uganda: Ecolonization and its impacts. Journal of Environment and
Development ,25(1), 100–126.
Chambers, R. (1983). Rural development: Putting the last first . London, England:
Routledge.
Dean, M. (2010). Governmentality: Power and rule in modern society . London, England:
Sage.
Deleuze, G. (1992). What is a dispositif. In T. J. Armstrong (Ed.), Foucault: Philosopher
(pp. 159–168). New York, NY: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (2004). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia II .
London, England: Bloomsbury Academic.
Dinh, H. T., & Monga, C. (2013). Light manufacturing in Tanzania: A reform agenda for
job creation and prosperity . Washington, DC: World Bank.22 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)Foucault, M. (2008). The birth of biopolitics: Lectures at the College de France, 1978–1979
(G. Burchell, Trans.). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Frewer, T., & Chang, S. (2014). GIS and the ‘Usual Suspects’—[Mis]understanding land
use change in Cambodia. Human Ecology ,42, 267–281.
Goldman Environmental Prize. (2016). Edward Loure: 2016 Goldman prize recipient,
Africa . Retrieved from http://www.goldmanprize.org/recipient/edward-loure/
Haller, T., Galvin, M., Meroka, P., Alka, J., & Alvarez, A. (2008). Who gains from
community conservation? Intended and unintended costs and benefits of participativeapproaches in Peru and Tanzania. The Journal of Environment & Development ,17(2),
118–144.
Harnesk, D., & Brogaard, S. (2017). Social dynamics of renewable energy—How the
European Union’s renewable energy directive triggers land pressure in Tanzania.
The Journal of Environment & Development ,26(2), 156–185.
Hart, A. K., Tumsifu, E., Recha, J., Nguni, W., Malley, Z., Masha, R., & Buck, L.
(2014). Village land use planning: A potential tool for greening landscapes in Mbarali
District, Mbeya . Washington, DC: EcoAgriculture Partners.
Hickey, S., & Mohan, G. (2013). Participation: From tyranny to transformation: Exploring
new approaches to participation in development . London, England: Zed Books. (e-book
edition.).
Hultman, N. E., Sulle, E. B., Ramig, C.W., & Sykora-Bodie, S. (2012). Biofuels invest-
ments in Tanzania: Policy options for sustainable business models. The Journal of
Environment & Development ,21(3), 339–361.
Igoe, J., & Croucher, B. (2007). Conservation, commerce, and communities: The story of
community-based wildlife management areas in Tanzania‘s Northern Tourist Circuit.Conservation and Society ,5(4), 534–561.
Ihucha, A. (2012, May 12). Arumeru, Arusha land invasions threaten commercial farm-
ing. The East African . Retrieved from http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/2558-
1404430-10xvl6u/index.html
Isaksson, R., & Sigte, I. (2010). Allocation of Tanzanian village land to foreign investors .
Umea, Sweden: Umea University.
Istituto Oikos. (2011). The Mount Meru challenge: Integrating conservation and develop-
ment in Northern Tanzania . Milano, Italy: Ancora Libri.
K a m i ,J . ,K a l e n z i ,D . ,M w i t a ,V . ,F l i n t a n ,F . ,&L i v e r s a g e ,H .( 2 0 1 6 ,M a r c h1 4 – 1 8 ) .
Making village land use planning work in rangelands: The experience of the sustain-able rangeland management project, Tanzania . Paper prepared for presentation at
the 2016 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, The World Bank,
Washington DC.
Kashaga, R. L., Sangeda, A. Z., Kahimba, F. C., Semu, E., & Mahonge, C. P. (2014).
Decision making tools to facilitate village land use planning for natural resources man-
agement in Kilimanjaro region . Moshi, Tanzania: Regional Administrative
Secretary—Kilimanjaro Region.
Kaswamila, A., & Songorwa, A. (2009). Participatory land use planning and conservation
in northern Tanzania rangelands. African Journal of Ecology ,47(1), 128–134.
Kijazi, M. (2015a). Climate emergency, carbon capture and coercive conservation on Mt.
Kilimanjaro. In M. Leach, & I. Scoones (Eds.), Carbon conflicts and forest landscapes
in Africa (pp. 58–78). London, England: Routledge.Huggins 23Kijazi, M. (2015b). Resources, rents, representation and resistance: The struggle for just
conservation on Mount Kilimanjaro (RFGI Working Paper No. 30) . Dakar, Senegal:
CODESRIA.
Kweka, O. (2010, July 30). Biofuel investment in Tanzania: Lack of participation,
unawareness and increase poverty in the local communities . Progress Report
Submitted to Research on Poverty Alleviation (REPOA). Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
REPOA.
Li, T. M. (2007). The will to improve: Governmentality, development, and the practice of
politics . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Lestrelin, G., Bourgoin, J., Bouahom, B., & Castella, J. C. (2011). Measuring participa-
tion: Case studies on village land use planning in northern Lao PDR. Applied
Geography ,31, 950–958.
Lyima, F. (2015). TZ tour guides set for 3 week strike. The Citizen (Dar Es Salaam), July
4, 2017. Retrieved from www.thecitizen.co.tz/News/1840340-2908750-xusa23z/index.html
Mahonge, C.(2010). Co-managing complex social-ecological systems in Tanzania: The case
of Lake Jipe Wetland . Wageningen, The Netherlands: Wageningen University Press.
Mahonge, C. P., Kashaga, R. A. L., Sangeda, A. Z., Kahimba, F. C., Semu, E., &
Mkanda, F. X. (2015). Participatory land-use planning: Integrating expert-oriented
and community-based tools for sustainable land management in Kilimanjaro region.
Journal of Environment and Earth Science ,5(7), 65–71.
Mariki, S. B., Svarstad, H., & Benjamin, T. A. (2015). Elephants over the Cliff:
Explaining wildlife killings in Tanzania. Land Use Policy ,44, 19–30.
Mango, J. (2015, April 20–24). An overview of the cadastral system in Tanzania . Paper
presented at The World Cadastre Summit, Istanbul, Turkey.
Massay, G. E., & Kassile, T. (2014). Land-based investments in Tanzania: Legal frame-
work and realities on the ground (Working Paper 56). The Hague, The Netherlands:
Land Deal Politics Initiative.
Moyo, F., Ijumba, J., & Lund, J. F. (2016). Failure by design? Revisiting Tanzania’s
flagship wildlife management area Burunge. Conservation and Society ,14(3), 232–242.
Mwakaje, A. G., Manyasa, E., Wawire, N., Muchai, M., Ongare, D., Mugoya, C.,
Masiga, C. W., & Nikundiwe, A. (2013). Community-based conservation, income
governance, and poverty alleviation in Tanzania: The case of Serengeti ecosystem.
The Journal of Environment & Development ,22(1), 51–73.
National Land Use Planning Commission. (2011). Guidelines for participatory village land
use planning, administration and management in Tanzania (2nd ed.). Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania: Author.
National Land Use Planning Commission. (1998). Guidelines for participatory village land
use management in Tanzania . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Author.
Neumann, R. P. (1998). Imposing wilderness: Struggles over livelihood and nature preser-
vation in Africa . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Odgaard, R. (2006). Land rights and land conflicts in Africa: The Tanzania case .
Copenhagen, Denmark: Danish Institute for International Studies.
Otto, J., Kamara, B., & Lissu, T. A. (1998). Closing corridors: Impact of policy, practices
and privatisation on wildlife movements in the Tarangire-Manyara area: Study for EPIQ
Tanzania . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: USAID.24 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)Pedersen, R. H., & Haule, S. (2013). Women, donors and land administration: The
Tanzania case (DIIS Working Paper 2013:19). Copenhagen, Denmark: Danish
Institute for International Studies.
Peluso, N. L., & Vandergeest, P. (2001). Genealogies of the political forest and cus-
tomary rights in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand. Journal of Asian Studies ,60(3),
761–812.
Ramutsindela, M., & Noe, C. (2012). Scalar thickening: Wildlife management areas and
conservation scales in southeast Tanzania. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography ,
33(2012), 137–151.
Read, M. (2013). Who controls these lands? Mobilizing social justice claims over
land in Tanzania’s third sector (Msc Thesis) . Utrecht, The Netherlands: Utrecht
University.
Rudel, T. K., & Meyfroidt, P. (2014). Organizing anarchy: The food security–biodiver-
sity–climate crisis and the genesis of rural land use planning in the developing world.
Land Use Policy ,36, 239–247.
Sachedina, H. T. (2008). Wildlife is our oil: Conservation, livelihoods and NGOs in the
Tarangire ecosystem, Tanzania (PhD Thesis) . Oxford, England: University of Oxford.
Sangeda, A. Z., Kahimba, F. C., Kashaga, R. A. L., Semu, E., Mahonge, C. P., &
Mkanda, F. X. (2014). Testing of decision making tools for village land use planningand natural resources management in Kilimanjaro Region. Open Journal of Soil
Science ,4, 446–458.
Sassen, S. (2006). Territory, authority, rights: From medieval to global assemblages .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Scaramella, M., Sapienza, R., Polverini, M., & Grilli, E. (2012). Tanzania–NGO financing
Evaluation . Rome: Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Scott, J. (1998). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition
have failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Songorwa, A. N. (1999). Community-based wildlife management (CWM) in Tanzania:
Are the communities interested? World Development ,27, 2061–2079.
Stephene, S. (2014). Institutional constraints to village land management in Tanzania,
Tanzania Land Policy Action Node (Policy Brief #1). Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
Tanzania Land Policy Action Node.
Tanzania Natural Resource Forum/IIED. (2014). Land and investment laws: How can
communities influence investment models and get a better deal? Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania: Author.
Travers, H. (2015). A tale of two villages: An investigation of conservation-driven land
tenure reform in a Cambodian Protection Forest. Land Use Policy ,43, 186–196.
Trivellini, G. (2006). Environmental and socioeconomic analysis for a plan of integrated
development of northern Mount Meru area, Tanzania (Master’s Thesis) . Milan, Italy:
University of Milan-Bicocca.
Ujamaa Community Resource Team. (2014). Securing communal land tenure in northern
Tanzania using certificates of customary rights of occupancy . Retrieved from http://
www.ujamaacrt.org/uploads/1/2/5/7/12575135/ucrt_ccro_brief_2014.pdf
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. (1992). Rio declaration on
environment and development . Rio, Brazil: Author.
United Nations Development Programme. (2010). Reducing land degradation on the high-
lands of Kilimanjaro region (Project document) . Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania: Author.Huggins 25United Republic of Tanzania. (1999a). The Land Act, 1999 . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
Government Printer.
United Republic of Tanzania. (1999b). The Village Land Act, 1999 . Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania: Government Printer.
United Republic of Tanzania. (2007). The Land Use Planning Act, 2007 . Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania: Government Printer.
von Hellermann, P. (2016). Tree symbolism and conservation in the South Pare
Mountains, Tanzania. Conservation and Society ,14, 368–379.
Woodfine, A., Vallee, D., Bunning, S., Maty, B., & Sinnassamy, J.-M. (2016, March
14–18). Informing future investment for scaling up sustainable land management in
Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from the strategic investment programme (SIP) .P a p e r
p r e p a r e df o rp r e s e n t a t i o na tt h e2 0 1 6W o r l dB a n kC o n f e r e n c eo nL a n da n d
Poverty, The World Bank, Washington DC.
World Wide Fund. (2014). Tanzania’s wildlife management areas: A 2012 status report .
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Author.
Author Biography
Chris Huggins , PhD (Geography), has conducted research on agriculture and
natural resource management in East and Central Africa since 1998. He has
published several articles in well-known journals and his book Agricultural
Reform in Rwanda: Authoritarianism, Markets and Zones of Governance was
published by Zed Books in 2017. He is an assistant professor at the School ofInternational Development and Global Studies, University of Ottawa.26 Journal of Environment & Development 0(0)