Leveraging Digital Solutions to Fight COVID-19: 
Lessons from ASEAN CountriesFebruary 3, 2021 No. 41
Fabien Clavier and Francis Ghesquiere
Digital solutions have been the signature of Southeast Asia’s response to COVID-19. Technologies used during the crisis have helped address a wide 
spectrum of problems, supporting public health eﬀorts, public communication, and economic and social policies. This policy brief explores how ASEAN countries have leveraged digital technologies to ﬁght COVID-19 and investigates the roles of governments, local technology ecosystems, and citizens in deploying such solutions. The ﬁndings suggest that the development and use of digital solutions have accelerated collaboration between diﬀerent spheres of governments, technology companies, research entities, and society at large. The COVID-19 crisis has also highlighted the digital divide across the region and the challenges in ensuring technological changes in the ASEAN region as a whole.
Southeast Asia as a Testing Ground for Digital Solutions to the 
Pandemic
The COVID-19 disease was declared a global pandemic by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) on March 11, 2020 and has continued to disrupt the lives of billions of people worldwide ever since. Southeast Asia was one of the ﬁrst regions, outside of China, hit by COVID-19, with Thailand and Singapore recording some of the ﬁrst imported cases during January 2020. 
 Member-countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) are facing common challenges in the current COVID-19 pandemic: their interconnected national economies contracted at record rates due to the various lockdowns and travel restrictions; cases have soared in overcrowded informal settlements and migrant workers dormitories; urban daily-wagers’ revenues have drastically diminished following the economic crisis. 
 Southeast Asia has also been an interesting testing ground for 
innovative policy responses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the innovations that countries and cities in ASEAN resorted to in order to ﬁght the virus, digital solutions have played an important role and have caught the interest of many experts and commentators worldwide. 
 Singapore, for example, was the ﬁrst country in the world to introduce 
a nationwide Bluetooth-based mobile application for contact tracing, called TraceTogether, on March 20, 2020. Many countries in Southeast Asia have emulated Singapore’s experience and developed similar tools and solutions during the COVID-19 crisis.
 One year into the pandemic, that rush toward novel technologies is 
not likely to slow down. Digital solutions will play an active role in the recovery phase of COVID-19 in the ASEAN region and in the gradual reopening of economies and borders. 
 This policy brief aims to shed some light on the potentials and 
limitations of the adoption of digital solutions during multifaceted crises, focusing on the example of Southeast Asia during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is based on a survey of 40 digital solutions implemented in the ASEAN region during the COVID-19 pandemic and 20 interviews of domain experts, public oﬃcials, and technology developers. 
Going Digital in the Face of COVID-19
The ASEAN Region Was Already an Important Adopter of Digital 
Technologies before the COVID-19 Pandemic  
Even before the COVID-19 crisis started, the ASEAN region had been a 
dynamic sandbox for technological innovations, particularly with the rise of many smart city initiatives. In the context of Southeast Asia, smart cities are deﬁned as an ensemble of “technological and digital solutions [that] can be utilised to resolve [urban] issues and to enhance quality and 
accessibility of services, thereby improving our citizens’ lives across the urban-rural continuum, creating new opportunities for them and helping ensure that no one is left behind” (ASEAN 2018). Singapore has been recognized as a global technological hub with its Smart Nation initiative launched in 2014, while fast-moving cities such as Bangkok, Ho Chi Minh City, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, and Manila have accelerated their use of new technologies in various city domains. In its 2018 report on “Smart Cities in Southeast Asia,” the McKinsey Global Institute (2018) estimated that the opportunities to make the built environment smarter in ASEAN countries could be worth up to US$26 billion. In a region that is quickly urbanizing, the push for technology and smart city development has never been more important. 
 Digitalization has also been central to the region’s economic integration eﬀorts. A prime example is the ASEAN Smart Cities Network (ASCN), launched in 2018, at the initiative of Singapore, then ASEAN Chair. ASCN is "envisioned as a collaborative platform [...] to explore potential complementarities, share best practices and develop individualized action plans for smart city development” (ASEAN 2018). 
 Moreover, the region’s experience with another disease—SARS—in 
2003 highlighted the importance of fast responses and contingency plans. In some ASEAN countries, preparations to monitor, trace, and quarantine conﬁrmed virus cases helped to save time in organizing the local responses (Kwok 2020).
 Within this context, many countries in ASEAN have explored a 
digital-based response to COVID-19, turning to Singapore for leadership in the advanced use of technology to support public health eﬀorts. In keeping with its appetite for and aptitude in digital technology, Southeast Asia has aimed to leverage its smart city assets to ﬁght the current pandemic, yet with various levels of success. 
Yet, the Regional Digital Divide Persists 
Digitalization eﬀorts are unevenly distributed in Southeast Asia. Each 
country in the ASEAN region has diﬀerent forms of government, economic systems, levels of technological maturity, and human development indicators, leading to diﬀerent approaches in terms of their digital response to COVID-19. 
 Countries with world-class digital infrastructure were the ﬁrst to 
embark on innovative approaches to COVID-19, primarily to support their public health strategies. Nations with less digital capacities explored solutions at a later stage. 
 Looking at the levels of digital readiness in the region helps to classify 
the digital responses to COVID-19. Digital readiness is directly linked to the level of national development and progress. This is apparent in ﬁgure 1, which combines the Digital Adoption Index—an index developed by the 
Aﬃliations: : Fabien Clavier and Francis Ghesquiere, Urban, Resilience and Land East Asia and Paciﬁc Unit, World Bank.
Acknowledgements: The authors thank Aaditya Mattoo, Tobias Pfutze, Uri Raich and Jonathan Timmis for their useful comments and suggestions. The authors also thank the diﬀerent 
experts that were interviewed during the study of ASEAN's digital response to COVID-19.
Objective and disclaimer: Research & Policy Briefs synthesize existing research and data to shed light on a useful and interesting question for policy debate. Research & Policy Briefs carry the names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank Group, its Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.Research & Policy Briefs
From the World Bank Malaysia Hub
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized2Leveraging Digital Solutions to Fight COVID-19: 
Lessons from ASEAN Countries 
emerged but that have not tapped on them fully, either because they had 
taken other strong measures that prevented the spread of the virus 
(Vietnam) or because of a lack of coordination at the government level 
(Indonesia and Philippines); (4) countries that have relied on traditional 
approaches and where digital penetration and literacy remain low 
(Cambodia, Lao PDR, and Myanmar).  
 Digital readiness is directly reﬂected in the levels of success in introducing and implementing digital solutions during COVID-19.  
Countries with high technological maturity have managed to weave 
digital solutions in their policy responses to COVID-19, while less 
tech-savvy countries have not achieved the same impacts in terms of 
integrating digital solutions.
COVID-19 Technology Solutions in the ASEAN Region: A Study 
in Contrasts 
The Rise of Tailored Solutions to Fight an Unprecedented Crisis 
This policy brief identiﬁed 40 digital solutions being utilized in the region, 
using the following ﬁve criteria:  (1) solutions implemented within the 
ASEAN region (including foreign digital solutions); (2) solutions that are 
primarily addressing COVID-19 virus containment and socioeconomic 
challenges; (3) solutions active in urban centers; (4) solutions used by 
citizens or by central and local governments or both; (5) solutions having 
a digital interface—mobile applications, dashboards, trackers, geographic 
information systems (GIS) (see ﬁgure 2). 
These digital solutions are fulﬁlling seven main functions. 
Digital contact tracing. Digital contact tracing has been present in most of the ASEAN countries, with diﬀerent levels of success. Since the beginning 
of the outbreak, contact tracing has been highlighted by WHO as an 
important dimension to combat the virus, together with testing and 
quarantining measures.World Bank to measure countries’ digital adoption across three 
dimensions of the economy (people, government, and business)—and 
GDP per capita. Based on that combination, this policy brief groups 
Southeast Asian countries into four groups: (1) Singapore, an advanced 
global innovation player, prime mover, and digital pioneer, which has 
quickly developed a digital response to COVID-19, leveraging its Smart Nation assets; (2) digitally advanced countries that have introduced 
technological solutions early in the pandemic to support their public 
health interventions and COVID-19 policies (Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, 
and Thailand); (3) countries where a number of digital solutions have Figure 1. Digital Readiness Levels in ASEAN Countries
Source:  World Bank 2016The higher the level of national development and progress,
the higher the level of digital readinessGDP per capita 2019, US$ (log 10 scale)
Digital Adoption Index, 2016100000
10000
1000
0.0 0.1 0.2Lao PDRIndonesiaBrunei DarussalamSingapore
Malaysia
Thailand
VietnamPhilippines
MyanmarCambodia
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.0 1.0
Figure 2. Country Distribution and Main Functions of Digital Solutions Used in the ASEAN Region during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Source: Authors' construction
Self-reporting of symptoms. Early and rapid case identiﬁcation has been 
central during the COVID-19 pandemic. The use of online symptom 
reporting platforms and mobile applications has emerged as an important 
trend in Southeast Asia. These services can be rapidly deployed and 
provide advice to people showing symptoms, as well as referrals for 
further medical investigation.  
Communication. Informational applications providing transparent data 
about the pandemic situation, locally and globally, are another important 
category of digital solutions developed in the ASEAN region. Soon after 
oﬃcially announcing the pandemic, WHO introduced the term 
“infodemic,” highlighting the risks of information overabundance and 
rapid spread of fake news. Digital solutions and online communication 
channels have been used to make case reporting data accessible and 
transparent.  
Support for policy choices and decision making. Digital tools  such as GIS 
platforms, agent-based modelling, and simulation platforms have been 
mobilized during the pandemic to support the work of public authorities 
in the ASEAN region. A number of these solutions have emerged in the 
region, but mostly in countries with established collaboration programs 
between scientists and policy makers.  
Behavior change. Applications and web platforms have been used in 
ASEAN to inform citizens about the crowd level of certain public areas and 
help them take decisions about potential visits. This application domain 
could be considered to be a niche, but it has seen the emergence of new 
multistakeholders initiatives, leveraging the use of big data analytics.  
Aid distribution. Mobile applications aiming to streamline the distribution 
of aid and ﬁnancial support to the urban poor are not new in the ASEAN 
region, but they have been accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
for example to introduce digital identity systems. This application domain 
might develop further, following the challenges encountered during the 
roll-out of social programs during the pandemic. 
Economic recovery. New online marketplaces and peer-to-peer donation 
platforms to support local businesses and workers of impacted industries 
(such as travel and tourism, food and beverage, and creative industries) 
have been introduced in some Southeast Asian countries. Even if their 
potential to cushion the severe socioeconomic impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic is limited, they might become more important in the future, as 
digitalization of small businesses accelerates in the region.
The Importance of Digital Solutions during the COVID-19 Pandemic is 
Supported by Evidence 
Many experts have highlighted the potential of digital solutions to ﬁght 
virus propagation and mitigate the impacts on the economy.  
 “The emerging consensus is that they have an important role in a 
comprehensive response to outbreaks and pandemics, complementing 
conventional public-health measures, and thereby contribute to reducing the human and economic impact of COVID-19” Budd et al. (2020) note. 
Yet, given that the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, "it is too early to fully 
quantify the added value of digital technologies to the pandemic 
response. While digital technologies oﬀer tools for supporting a pandemic 
response, they are not a silver bullet.” 
 
 In a study published in The Lancet, Whitelaw et al. (2020) highlight 
that “countries that have maintained low COVID-19 per-capita mortality 
rates appear to share strategies that include early surveillance, testing, 
contact tracing and strict quarantine.” In the most successful countries, 
these strategies have been supported by digital technologies, integrated 
with public health policies. Considering the challenges in terms of data 
collection and management, especially for contact tracing, digital 
solutions have proven to be very useful and easy to deploy and scale up.  The WHO (2020) also highlighted the beneﬁts of digital solutions early 
in the pandemic, stating that “digital tools oﬀer opportunities to 
strengthen contact tracing for COVID-19” while insisting that “digital tools 
for contact tracing can only be eﬀective when integrated into an existing 
public health system that includes health services personnel, testing 
services, and manual contact tracing infrastructure”.  
 Finally, an investigation of the use of four technologies during 
COVID-19—Internet of Things (IoT), big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, 
blockchain—by Ting et al. (2020) suggests that they can have a big impact 
on public health strategies, especially IoT and big data for the monitoring, surveillance, detection, and prevention of COVID-19. The study notes that 
“there is also a longer-term goal. The immediate use and successful 
application of digital technology to tackle a major, global public-health 
challenge in 2020 will probably increase the public and governmental 
acceptance of such technologies for other areas of healthcare, including chronic disease in the future.”
Yet, Gaps in the Use of COVID-19 Technologies Persist and New 
Uncertainties about Risks Have Arisen
 
The speed at which governments worldwide have rolled out digital 
solutions has sparked debate among scholars and society at-large. 
Concerns range from the risks of privacy infringements to more 
fundamental questions about the eﬃcacy of such solutions to stop or 
slow the spread of the virus. 
 “In the rush to act quickly,” Kitchin (2020) emphasizes, “there has not been suﬃcient thought and assessment given to the technical feasibility 
of proﬀered solutions, whether they will work in practice, and the extent 
to which they will provide more eﬀective outcomes than traditional 
interventions.”
 
 The use of digital solutions and the collection of highly granular or 
personal data have raised concerns about privacy and ethics, especially in 
the case of contact tracing and digital check-in systems in crowded areas. 
In June 2020, a privacy assessment of six contact tracing applications developed in ASEAN countries found that only one—TraceTogether in 
Singapore—had a good privacy statement and suﬃcient accompanying 
documents, clearly explaining which type of personal data was being 
collected, and how it might be used or disclosed (Shepherdson 2020).
 
 Mass testing programmes, high compliance with adequate isolation 
measures, and low number of cases , as well as solid legislative 
foundations for the deployment of technology, are required to ensure 
that digital solutions such as contact tracing become eﬀective while safeguarding privacy, Kitchin (2020) notes. 
 
In addition, speciﬁc actions are needed to reduce the digital divide among 
some segments of the population, including the elderly, low-income 
households and the diﬀerently-abled. Those who are less digitally-versed 
have not been well included in the initial digital responses (Das and Zhang 
2020).   
 Singapore has provided a response to this latter challenge by 
introducing a “Trace Token” wearable device that can be worn by seniors 
to ensure that they participate in the national contact tracing eﬀorts. So 
far, these inclusion strategies have not been replicated in the region. 
 Finally, in the case of digital contact tracing, many commentators have criticized the fact that a 60 percent coverage target of the population is 
diﬃcult to achieve. Yet, Hinch et al. (2020) have shown that “even with 
lower numbers of app users, we still estimate a reduction in the number of coronavirus cases and deaths.” Fraser emphasizes that “combined with 
other interventions such as community testing and continued shielding of 
vulnerable individuals, digital contact tracing can help prevent 
coronavirus from rapidly re-emerging” (as cited in Big Data Institute, 
Oxford University 2020).”Research & Policy Brief No.41
31. Ensure Government Leadership and Multilevel Coordination in 
 Times of Crisis 
In most ASEAN countries, governments, generally at the central level, 
took the lead in introducing digital solutions, ensuring strong 
coordination with public health investigations and virus containment 
measures. Long-term investments in government institutions and national digitalization programs have helped countries in ASEAN initiate digital responses to the numerous challenges posed by COVID-19 (Soon 2020). 
 
 The countries in the region that have been most successful in curbing the virus are the ones where leadership has been strong over the diﬀerent phases of the crisis, and where learning-driven and “trial-and-error” approaches have been adopted to adjust policies along the way (Abdullah and Kim 2020). 
 
  Given the complexity and unprecedented scale of the pandemic, the COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the need to work across government agencies and ministries in a whole-of-government approach and to support the transformation of digital solutions developed during the crisis phase to ﬁt the needs and the challenges of the recovery phase.
2. Leverage Local Digital Technology Ecosystems
 
In times of crisis, no one can claim a monopoly on how to deal with 
multifaceted and complex challenges. While government action can initiate technological responses, ﬁghting COVID-19 at a digital level means mobilizing a wide range of stakeholders and activating the various 
technology ecosystems and alliances that exist locally.Analyzing the Fragmented Digital Response to COVID-19 in ASEAN 
The ASEAN region has not been exempted from the debates around the 
use of technology during COVID-19. The ultimate impacts of these 
solutions are directly linked to how they were framed and introduced by their promoters. 
 
This policy brief classiﬁes COVID-19 technologies being used in ASEAN 
countries into three categories  (table 1): 
1. The level of integration of digital solutions within government   operations during the COVID-19 pandemic 2. The level of involvement of technology partners (academia,  start-ups, 
 telecommunication companies), in either B2G  (business-to-government)
 or B2C (business-to-citizen) applications 3. The level of participation of citizens (general acceptance of the solution).
 
 The ﬁrst two categories were assessed through interviews with experts and online research. The third was measured by the number of estimated installations in the case of B2C mobile applications (based on 
Apple Store and Google Play estimations), complemented with insights 
from interviews with experts.
 
 This framework aims to provide an initial basis for evaluating the impacts of digital solutions during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially in the context of Southeast Asia. 
Policy Implications  
Four main policy implications follow from this brief’s research and observations.
4Leveraging Digital Solutions to Fight COVID-19: 
Lessons from ASEAN Countries 
Table 1. Classiﬁcation of a Selection of Digital Solutions used by ASEAN Countries and Cities
Source: Authors' construction
Note:  B2C = business to citizen; B2G = business to government.Highly integrated solutions but notwell used by citizens (B2C apps)Highly integrated solutions well used by citizens (B2C apps) orgovernments (B2G solutions)
Insuﬃciently integrated solutions not wellused by citizens (B2C apps)Insuﬃciently integrated solutions but well used by citizens (B2C apps) Indonesia
Jaki/JakCorona (communication)Sapawarga (aid distribution)Thailand
Card2U (communication)Mor Chana (contact tracing)Thai Chana (contact tracing)Vietnam
NCOVI (self-reporting)Brunei Darussalam 
BruHealth (self-reporting)Cambodia
Go.Data (support for decision-making) Indonesia
Pikobar (communication)Siap Tanggap (support for decision-making)Ur-scape (support for decision-making)Malaysia
E-bazaar Melaka (economic recovery)Gerak Malaysia (contact tracing)Kita2Kita (aid distribution)MySejahtera (contact tracing)MyTrace (contact tracing)PGCare (contact tracing)SabahTrace (contact tracing)SeLangkah (contact tracing)Philippines
Smart Infocast (communication)Singapore
COVID-19 WhatsApp GOV.SG (communication)Safe Distance @ Parks (behavior change)Safe Entry (contact tracing)Space Out (behavior change)TraceTogether (contact tracing)Thailand
SydeKick (self-reporting)Vietnam
COMOKIT (support for decision-making)BlueZone (contact tracing)
Indonesia
PeduliLindungi (contact tracing)Myanmar
Saw Saw Shar (self-reporting)Philippines
FASSSTER (support for decision-making)RC143 (self-reporting)Stay Safe Ph (self-reporting)We Trace Cebu (self-reporting)Indonesia
Bagirata (economic recovery)Indonesia Bergerak (communication)LaporCovid19 (communication)Malaysia
Vulnerability Index (support for decision-making)Thailand
5Lab Market (economic recovery)QueQ (behavior change)economic impacts of COVID-19, for example through the setup of online 
marketplaces to support local businesses or  the creation of peer-to-peer digital ﬁnancial platforms, run by local volunteers, to help precarious businesses and workers survive dramatic drops in their revenues and income.
 
 While digital technologies cannot tackle the preexisting inequalities and root causes of the current crisis, it can help ease the burden on the urban poor, while making their conditions and struggles more visible to decision makers. For example, GIS platforms have been used to map and analyse COVID-19 hotspots in vulnerable urban areas (Future Cities Laboratory 2020) or highlight the importance of community resilience in the face of COVID-19 (Leong and Benson 2020). Mobile applications based on digital identity and e-veriﬁcation systems have also been piloted to facilitate aid distribution to the most needy across cities in the ASEAN region. 
Conclusion 
Digital solutions have been the signature of ASEAN countries’ response to COVID-19. The speed at which digital technological solutions have emerged in the region has been exceptional. Digital technologies developed during the COVID-19 pandemic in Southeast Asia have helped address a wide spectrum of problems, from contact tracing and transparent communication to modelling of the spread of the virus, aid distribution, and economic recovery. Even if it is too early to assess the ultimate impacts of these solutions, digital technology has eﬃciently supported contact tracing, communication and transparency eﬀorts in some ASEAN countries, easing the burden on public health authorities.
 
 Digital technology, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, has a lot of potential but some countries have not yet taken full advantage of it, due to various factors. The COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the digital divide in the region and the limited cooperation mechanisms to address those disparities.
 
 As economies reopen across the region, many wonder how ASEAN countries and cities will leverage the gains of digital solutions utilized during the COVID-19 crisis. As many solutions have been trialled in the region, countries and cities have more concretely experienced the potentials and the pitfalls of digital innovation. Nations that will be able to make digital gains stick will likely be more successful in the recovery phase and beyond. In parallel, privacy concerns will remain a high priority and ASEAN citizens will be cautious about trade-oﬀs under the “new normal.” 
 
  Finally, the COVID-19 crisis is pushing for a greater networked urban resilience (Bai et al. 2020) in order to ensure that cities learn from one another and develop coordinated responses to such crises. ASEAN countries and cities, through their use of digital solutions during the pandemic, could better leverage such networks to share best practices, disseminate concrete solutions, and promote inclusive urban development approaches in the recovery stage and beyond.Research & Policy Brief No.41
5References
Abdullah, W. J., and S. Kim. 2020. “Singapore’s Responses to the COVID-19 Outbreak: A Critical Assessment, 
 Comparative Management & Learning Techniques.” American Review of Public Administration 50 
 (6-7): 770–76. 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). 2018. “ASEAN Smart City Network.” Concept Note. 
Bai, X., H. Nagendra, P . Shi, and H. Liu. 2020. “Cities: Build Networks and Share Plans to Emerge Stronger  from COVID-19.” Nature 584 (7822): 517–20.  
Big Data Institute, Oxford University. 2020. “Digital Contact Tracing Can Slow or Even Stop Coronavirus  Transmission and Ease Us Out of Lockdown.” April 16. 
Budd, J., B. S. Miller, E. M. Manning, V. Lampos, M. Zhuang, M. Edelstein, G. Rees, V. C. Emery, M. M.  Stevens, N. Keegan, M. J. Short, D. Pillay, E. Manley, I. J. Cox, D. Heymann, A. M. Johnson, and R. A.  McKendry. 2020. “Digital Technologies in the Public-Health Response to COVID-19.” Nature Medicine 
 26 (8): 1183–92.   
Das, D., and J. J. Zhang. 2020. “Pandemic in a Smart City: Singapore’s COVID-19 Management through  Technology & Society.” Urban Geography.   
Future Cities Laboratory (FCL). 2020. “Mapping Covid-19 in Makassar.” ETHzürich, June 26. 
Hinch, R., W. Probert, A. Nurtay, M. Kendall, C. Wymant, M. Hall, K. Lythgoe, A. Bulas Cruz, L. Zhao, A.  Stewart, L. Ferretti, M. Parker, A. Meroueh, B. Mathias, S. Stevenson, D. Montero, J. Warren, N. K.  Mather, A. Finkelstein, L. Abeler-Dörner, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser. 2020. “Eﬀective Conﬁgurations of a  Digital Contact Tracing App: A Report to NHSX.” Oxford University, April 26. Kitchin, R. 2020. “Civil Liberties or Public Health, or Civil Liberties and Public Health? Using Surveillance  Technologies to Tackle the Spread of COVID-19.” Space and Polity, June 
Kwok, C. S. 2020. “Covid-19 Battle: How Have South-east Asian Nations Fared?” The Straits Times, May 9.  Leong, C., and M. Benson. 2020. “Mapping Vulnerability and Resilience: A Decision Support Tool for  Policymakers.” Urban Policy Series, Issue 4, September. Pulau Pinang: Think City Institute. 
McKinsey Global Institute. 2018. “Smart Cities in Southeast Asia.” Discussion paper for World Cities Summit 2018, 
 in collaboration with the Centre for Liveable Cities, Singapore. Shepherdson, K. 2020. “How Intrusive Are Contact-Tracing Apps in ASEAN?” TechinAsia, June 23.  
Soon, K. P . 2020. “The GovTech Strategy behind Singapore’s Covid Response.” Apolitical, August 13.   
Ting, D. S. W., L. Carin, V. Dzau, and T. Y . Wong. 2020. “Digital Technology and COVID-19.” Nature 26 
 (4):459–61. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0824-5. 
Tunas, D., and F. Clavier. 2020. “3 Emerging Trends as Indonesian Smart Cities Tackle COVID-19.” Blog, UNDP  Global Centre for Technology, Innovation and Sustainable Development.   
Whitelaw, S., M. A Mamas, E. Topal, and H. G. C. Van Spall. 2020. “Applications of Digital Technology in  COVID-19 Pandemic Planning and Response.” Lancet Digital Health 2 (8): e435–e440.  
WHO (World Health Organization). 2020. “Digital tools for COVID-19 contact tracing.” Interim guidance  document, June 2. 
World Bank. 2016. Digital Adoption Index.  Existing “smart governance arrangements” have played a central role 
in driving the digital response to COVID-19 in the ASEAN region. Countries 
and cities with established innovation programs and with a high presence of digital companies, research labs, and start-ups have been able to react more quickly with innovative solutions during the crisis. They have also been able to scale up their digital approaches and solutions more eﬃciently (Tunas and Clavier 2020). 
 
 Governance arrangements in the region have traditionally supported the implementation of smart city initiatives, including ad hoc steering committees at the local level, innovative partnerships with research labs, exploration of new technological approaches, introduction of civic technologies, and experimentation with policy and regulation. Such governance arrangements equip cities with the necessary supports and tools that can be adapted to respond to various future challenges, such as pandemics. 
3. Enable the New Normal by Engaging People from the Very Start
 
As the crisis unfolded, many governments realized that their actions 
would need to be supplemented by behavioral change and a greater sense of awareness among citizens. 
 
 COVID-19 has pushed the need for a “new normal”, which could be deﬁned as a range of adjusted behaviors and social norms to let people coexist with the pandemic. Digital solutions can help enable this “new normal,” but only if citizens understand and accept its underlying principles.
 
 Digital contact tracing provides an interesting illustration because citizen participation appears to be an important success factor. The more people download and use mobile contact tracing applications, the higher the chances to be able to control the pandemic locally (Hinch et al. 2020)—although low levels of uptake can still yield some beneﬁts. But for mobile contact tracing applications to be downloaded and activated, governments need to communicate about their importance and demonstrate their potential in handling the pandemic. Transparent information about data collection and storing mechanisms, the user-friendliness of the application, and end-to-end security and privacy protections, all help enhance the chances that people will install and use mobile contact tracing applications.
4. Address Social Inequalities and Bring Digital Services to the Most 
 Vulnerable
 
COVID-19 has highlighted social inequalities and brought millions of 
informal and migrant workers on the brink.  
 As movement and travel restrictions have spread during the pandemic, local and informal businesses in ASEAN cities have been struggling to stay aﬂoat. Many countries and cities in Southeast Asia heavily depend on tourism. Local hospitality, food and beverage, creative, art, and artisanal industries have been severely curtailed by the various lockdowns. Some countries have turned to digital solutions to cushion the