 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 83  
 
Making Informal Settlements 
‘Visible’ Through Datafication:  
A Case Study of Quarry Road 
West Informal Settlement, 
Durban, South Africa  
 
CATHERINE SUTHERLAND, BAHLE MAZEKA, 
SIBONGILE BUTHELEZI, DUDZILE KHUMALO 
and PATRICK MARTEL  
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustaina ble Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications /di/ 
   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
B1. DATAFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT  ................................ ................................ ...............  4 
B2. A FRAMEWORK TO ASSESS DATA JUSTICE FOR DEVELOPMENT  ................................ ...........  6 
B3. INFORMALITY AND DATAFICATION IN CITIES IN THE SOUTH  ................................ ................  8 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 11 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 15 
D1.  VALUING DIFFERENT FORMS OF DATA IN DIFFERENT CONTEXTS FOR CITY DATAFICATION  ...... 16 
D2.  THE VALUE OF THE DATAFICATION PROCESS  ................................ ................................ . 20 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 29 
E1. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................  31 
E2. FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA  ................................ ................................ ......................  32 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  33 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 36 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 36 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
1 
 Making Informal Settlements ‘Visible’ 
Through Datafication:  
A Case Study of Quarry Road West Informal 
Settlement, Durban, South Africa  
 
Catherine Sutherland, Bahle Mazeka, Sibongile Buthelezi, Duduzile Khumalo and Patrick 
Martel  
School of Built Environment and Development Studies  
University of KwaZulu -Natal, Durban  
 
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Can datafication increase the ‘visibility’ of informal settlements in South Africa, in the 
context of a national and local state that holds both progressive and repressive approaches 
towards informal settlements? This case study explores a datafication process that has been 
in place for five years in an inform al settlement in Durban, which has been established 
through an inclusionary, participatory data col lection and production process.  
 
It examines how and when the data moves in the information value chain, and the 
implications this movement has for achieving  rights -based, instrumental, structural and 
distributive justice. It argues that procedural and rights -based justice can be achieved to a 
certain extent through the construction of an inclusionary datafication process. However, 
instrumental, structural and  distributive justice is dependent on how the interventionist and 
deve lopmental state of South Africa  engages with the data, and whether it takes it up in a 
meaningful way, thus enabling it to lead to fundamental shifts in discourses, approaches 
and practi ces towards informality.  
 
The results reveal that the ‘governance and knowledge platforms’ that are built t hrough the 
datafication process  are more important and powerful at first, than the actual data itself. 
However, informal settlers and other data inte rmediaries, who have learnt how to engage 
data to secure the ‘right of informal settlers to the city’, have begun to use the data in 
interesting ways, acting as champions, and re -shaping citizens’ relations with the state. 
While this does not secure tangib le changes in informal settlements, it begins to shift 
discourses and power relations, which is critical to informal settlement upgrading.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
This case study focuses on the role that urban datafication, including participatory mapping, 
is playing in building social and environmental justice in Quarry Road West informal 
settlement, Durban, South Africa. Quarry Road West informal settlement, which comprises 
approximately 1083 households, is located on the Palmiet River, in the urban core of Dur ban 
(see Figure 1).  Researchers from the School of Built Environment and Development Studies, 
University of KwaZulu -Natal  (UKZN) , Durban , and ‘mapmakers’ from Quarry Road West 
informal settlement have established a five year partnership within the Palmiet Catchment 
Rehabilitation Project (PCRP) as part of an action research project, to improve quality of life 
in the settlement. The PCRP is a pilot project of the uMngeni Ecological Infrastructure 
Partnership (UEIP), which focuses on improving water security in the uMngeni Catchment 
using ecological infrastructu re (Sutherland & Roberts  2014 ). The researchers and 
mapmakers  are co -constructing a range of data and maps at the local scale, producing 
knowledge on the settlement and its governance. This datafication  of the settlement has 
the goal of improving the living environment of residents through informal settlement 
upgrading, supporting social learning, river rehabilitation, climate adaptation, and the 
building of resilience ( Martel & Sutherland  2019; Mazeka e t al 2019; Sim et al 2019; Vogel et 
al 2016; Williams et al 2019).  
 
The university researchers and mapmakers  continually reflect on ‘if, how and why’ this data 
contributes to, and shapes, the well -being, resilience and development of the community 
and whet her it has helped to build state -citizen relations, which have emerged as being 
critical to ‘good’ urban governance in Durban (Martel & Sutherland 2019; Mazeka et al 
2019). Has this long -term, participatory and time -consuming data production process 
suppor ted the transformation of the community and addressed development deficits in any 
way? Has it shaped city decision making with respect to the relocation or upgrading of the 
settlement and service provision within it? And has it contributed to shifting broa der city 
discourses around the ‘rights’ and ‘place’ of informal settlers in the city ? The case study 
therefore reflects on whether ‘data justice for development’ is emerging through the Quarry 
Road West datafication project, and if so , whose interests does  it serve.  It identifies the 
levers of change in the datafication project, which have led to development outcomes. It 
also reflects on the barriers and structural constraints in achieving a higher level of data 
justice. Heeks &  Shekhar’s (201 9) model of da ta justice is used as a framework to assess 
data justice in the Durban case study. This model is expanded to include governance and 
‘critical moments’ as additional elements of data justice, based on evidence from the Quarry 
Road West informal settlement d atafication project.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
3 
  
 
Figure 1: The location of Quarry Road West informal settlement within the urban core of 
Durban (eThekwini Municipality)  (map produced by Eduaction in 2019)  
 
The case study provides a critical reflection on the form and level of data justice achieved 
through the participatory methodologies that have been employed in the settlement to 
date. It explores the way in which the data has been produced and travelled between the 
community, the university and the municipality, in most insta nces through ‘bridges’ or ‘data 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
4 
 intermed iaries’ (Heeks & Shekhar  2019 ), informing community adaptations, as well as 
municipal responses. The case study therefore explores:  
 how the process of co -constructing and producing data is leading to greater social 
and environmental justice (procedural justice);  
 if and how the data has been used to improve quality of life in the informal 
community and if it has shaped municipal decisions and responses to informal 
housing (instrumental justice);  
 the power relations pro duced both by the data production process and the data 
collected, with an emphasis on the role of bridges or data intermediaries (structural 
data justice);  
 to what extent making the settlement more ‘visible’ has shifted discourses about 
informal housing in  the city, particularly in terms of informal settlers’ ‘rights to the 
city’ (rights -based justice);  
 who has benefited and who has lost through the datafication process (distributive 
justice).  
 
Given that relatively few analyses of real -world initiatives of  data justice for development 
have been undertaken (Heeks  & Shekhar  2019), this case study makes a contribution by 
both providing an empirical case of emerging data justice in an African city, and by 
expanding Heeks &  Shekhar’s (2019) model to include two other elements that shape  data 
justice in cities in the S outh, namely governance and ‘critical moments’. It has also 
broadened the understanding of rights -based justice in the model.  
 
 
B. Background  
 
B1. Datafication for Development  
Development depends on data or information for decision  making (Heeks &  Shekhar  2019 ; 
Milan & Treré 2017; UN -Habitat  2017). However, the production of, and control over data 
used for development has predominantly been in the hands of scientists and experts, who 
have provided dat a to the state and non -state actors for decision making through 
adm inistrative rationalism (Dryzek  2012 ). According to Dryzek (2012: 75) “administrative 
rationalism emphasizes the role of the expert rather than the citizen or producer/consumer 
in social pro blem solving, and stresses social relationships of hierarchy rather than equality 
or competition”.  However , data is now making its way in to decision making through 
multiple actors and multiple pathways. This is a result of the democratisation of decision 
making through the shift from government to governance, the development o f the network 
society (Castells 2000; Hajer & Wagenaar  2003), and the growing volume, velocity, variety 
and visibility of data, as a result of the digital technologies of the 21st century (Heeks  2018). 
This is leading to the ‘datafication of development’, which is the growing presence, use and 
impact of data in social processes, leading to opportunities for increased developmental 
impact through new forms of data streams being produced,  shared and translate d at 
different scales (Heeks & Shekhar 2019; Mazeka et al 2019; Spratt & Baker 2015; Taylor & 
Broeders  2015). The production, sharing and use of data is particularly important for the 
urban poor, who to date have been largely excluded from data production processes in Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
5 
 cities in the South, due to their perceived and constructed illegibility, informality and lack of 
power.  
 
In focusing on the power of datafication in supporting development, it is critical to 
differentiate between big data , digita l data and ‘local’ or community -produced data. Taylor 
(2017) argues that datafication tends to focus on digital data or the data people emit 
through the technologies that citizens, the private sector and the state employ to both 
participate in and be accountable to society. However, what happens to development, if the 
data emitt ed by people does not focus on or address the challenges of urban poverty, 
marginalisation, and informality in the city? Large numbers of the urban poor do not emit 
digital d ata on a regular basis. For example, the contribution of informal settlers to state 
coffers through payment for rates and services is often limited or non -existent, as their 
presence in the city is seldom digitally recorded, and they do not pay for service s through 
formal administrative systems, as services in informal settlements are often free or illegally 
obtained. The urban poor are connected to digital systems of data collection through smart 
phone technology and the use of the internet, but this is of ten intermittent due to the cost 
of, and hence their lack of access to, data. As Milan & Treré suggest (2017: 3019), “the 
underprivileged, the silenced, the subaltern, and the “have nots,” whose presence outdoes 
geographical boundaries, often remain in the  blind spot” and hence they remain invisible.  
 
At the same time, datafication has provided institutions and corporations, whose interest it 
is to manage and govern people, with new ‘technologies of rule’ and henc e power (Li  2007). 
This can lead to developm ent when undertaken in a socially transformative manner, but it 
can also produce greater inequality and marginalisation in spaces where human rig hts are 
most fragile (Heeks & Shekhar  2019; Milan & Treré  2017). Taylor &  Broeders (2015) argue 
that big data a nd its processes of informational capitalism serves the interest of the elite or 
those in power, rather than securing socially -just development interventions. This leads to a 
geography of disempowerment as datafication recognises, makes visible and benefit s some, 
while excluding and making others invisible and illegal, as they attempt to claim their ‘right 
to the city’ from the ‘bot tom of the data pyramid’ (Arora 2016; McQuillan  2015). Does 
datafication support individuals and communities with different his tories and geographies 
including diverse racial, class, legal and socio -cultural conditions? Or does it reproduce these 
inequalities?  
 
A point of departure in responding to these questions is to reflect of who is doing the 
collecting of the data, for what purpose and how. The advent of digital technologies has 
increased the production of data on cities, as new forms and streams of data in decision 
making have emerged and are impacting on urban development particularly through the 
discourses and practices of  the ‘smart cities’ ag enda (Heeks  2018 ). Cities are now being 
mapped using remote sensing, sensors that record environmental data , and by tracking 
mobile phone use, which generates new patterns of life in the city (Lokanathan et al 2016; 
Willis  2017). In a ll these cases, technology is producing the data to support decision making 
for development with experts controlling both the production and use of data. Datafication 
therefore has the potential to support development through increased knowledge and 
unders tanding of citizens’ needs and everyday lived worlds; through ensuring efficiency in 
decision  mak ing; and in supporting evidence -based and more transparent development 
(Samarajiva et  al 2015; van Veenstra et al 2014).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
6 
  
However, there is a growing body of l iterature which critically reflects on the datafication of 
the city, arguing that the way in which  data is collected is not fair or equal; that the use of 
data does not always achieve just outcomes and that some benefit more than others from 
this process ( Baud  2016; Milan & Treré 2017; Taylor &  Richter 2015). This has led to the call 
for pro -equity data initiatives (PEDIs), where new forms of data sets and data flows are 
being created to draw the poor and marginalised  into the decision -making processes of t he 
city through open data and community -based mapping ( Chakraborty et al 2015; Heeks & 
Shekhar 2019; Willis  2017 ). This approach is supported by a well -established body of 
knowledge on the value and practices of participatory community -based mapping;  an 
important tool in participatory research which emerged in the 1960s ( Brown &  Kyttä  2014; 
Chambers 2006; Elwood 2006; Mazeka et al  2019; Ra mbaldi et al  2006).  According to 
Rambaldi et al (2006), community -based  maps act as vehicles for (spatial) learning, 
discussion, information exchange, analysis, decision making and advocacy and they facilitate 
communication between insiders (the community) and outsiders (researchers, government 
officials). The mapping process  also has the potential to transform power relations as a 
result of the empowerment that takes place when communities are engaged in the mapping 
of their settlements ( Lydon  2003; Mazeka et al  2019; Picc olella  2013).  
 
Community -based  mapping has been suppor ted through the dissemination of spatial 
information technologies such as global positioning systems (GPS), (open source) geographic 
information s ystems (GIS) and open access to spatial data through th e internet (Chambers  
2006). This has opened up a new ra nge of possibilities for ‘participatory GIS’, through which 
local community members record attributes of their commun ity relevant to them in locally -
scaled maps ( Gaillard et al  2013; Mazeka et al 2019 ). Participatory community -based  data 
collection and map ping produces different forms of data and data streams to those 
produced through digital technologies, as the data collected is ‘locali sed’ and ‘embedded’ 
and is produced through collaborative processes that draw on local knowledge and 
expe rience. This dat a can be digitis ed through the use of GPS and GIS, leading to its 
inclusion in digital data analysis.  
 
This case study explores the datafication of an informal settlement in Durban through 
participatory data practices, produced through a community -universi ty partnership, which is 
attempting to enhance data justice for development. It therefore aims to address the call to 
analyse real -world data production initiatives in the global South , to reflect on how new 
data streams and datafication are influencing an d shaping development at the loca l scale 
(Heeks & Shekhar  2019 ; Sengupta et al 2017;  Spratt & Baker  2015;  Taylor & Broeders  2015). 
Evaluative frameworks are required to determine to what extent data initiatives for the 
urban poor in cities in the South  are leading to greater social justi ce and transformation 
(Heeks & Shekhar  2019). Heeks & Shekhar’s (2019 ) model for data justice for development 
is employed to critically analyse the datafication process which is emerging in Quarry Road 
West informal settleme nt in Durban.  
 
B2. A Framework to Assess Data Justice for Development  
Heeks &  Shekhar (201 9) have developed a model, or applied data justice framework, which 
explores five dimensions of data justice (see Figure 2). In developing their model and 
drawing on the data justice literature, they have highlighted three critical elements of data Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
7 
 justice.  First, it must be critical and must support procedural, instrumental and rights -based  
justice. Second, the way data is produced, flows and is used, determines its transformative 
potential far more than the technology used to produce, process and display i t. Third, the 
socio -political context within which the ‘data assemblage’ is produced, including the 
discourses, institutions, social relations and material resources of that context, will shape 
data -related outcomes (Heeks & Shekhar  2019). The case study presented here reflects the 
importance of these three elements of data justice.  
 
Heeks &  Shekhar’s (201 9) model of the data system for datafication focuses on the different 
forms of justice that emerge out of and support the information value chain, which reflect 
the steps through which data is transformed into development outcomes.  
 
Figure 2: Heeks & Shekhar (201 9) conceptual model of data justice  
 
The five dimensions of data justice as define d by Heeks &  Shekhar (2019: 995) are:  
 “Procedural justice: fairness in the way in which data is handled.  
 Instrumental justice: fairness in the results [or outcomes ] of data being used.  
 Rights -based justice: adhe rence to basic data rights such as representation, privacy, 
access and ownership.  
 Structural justice: the degree to which the interests and power in wider society 
support fair outcomes in other forms of data justice.  
 Distributive justice: an overarching di mension relating to the (in)equality of data -
related outcomes that can be applied to each of the other dimensions of data 
justice .” 
 
The information value chain, which is shaped by and which shapes the five dimensions of 
data justice and the particular soc io-economic and political context within which it is 
produced, comprises of three steps: upstream steps of data capture or collection; mid -
stream steps of data processing and visualisation ; and downstream steps of data use in 
decision  making. This is shown  in Figure 3.  
RIGHTS -BASED  
DATA JUSTICE  
Context  
Institutional 
Control  
Structural 
Relations  
Resource 
Control  
Data  
System  
Practice: Information 
Value Chain  
STRUCTURAL  
DATA JUSTICE  
Utility  
 Results  
Data -
fication  
INSTRUMENTAL  
DATA JUSTICE  
 PROCEDURAL 
DATA JUSTICE  
Epistemic 
Control  
Data 
Rights  
DISTRIBUTIVE  
DATA JUSTICE  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
8 
  
 
Figure 3: The information value chain (Heeks & Shekhar  2019)  
 
This case study will use the information value chain and data justice model – deve loped by 
Heeks (2017)  and applied by Heeks & Shekhar (2019) to four PEDIs in the developing world – 
as an analytical framework to reflect on datafication and data justice in an i nformal 
settlement in Durban, South Africa. It will expand on a number of elements included in the 
model, as a result of the analysis of datafication undertaken in Quarry Road West informal 
settlement. Context is considered critical to data justice analysi s and hence the final part of 
the background section reflects on informality and informal settlements in the global South ; 
particularly  in South Africa.  
 
B3. Informality and Datafication in Cities in the South  
Informality is a way of life both globally and  in Durban, with just over 25% of the global 
population and 27% of Durban residents living in informal sett lements (eThekwini 
Municipality 2017; UN -Habitat  2018). Poverty, the rapid pace of urbanisation, a lack of 
affordable housing, the decompression of existing crowded urban settlements, migration, a 
decrease in urban household size, natural population increase and environmental risk are 
contributing to th e growth in both the number and size of informal settlements ( Braathen et 
al 2016; eThekwini Municipality  2017;  UN-Habitat  2018 ). Formal planning processes, 
financial and social resources and state capacity are not able to keep pace with housing 
demand in South ern cities, leading to significant housing and service backlogs. As a result, 
the urban poor illegally invade land and develop informal settlements, which reflect their 
efforts at securing thei r ‘right to the city’ (Lefebvre  1968). Informal settlers typically  have no 
security of tenure, only somewhat rarely being  granted tenure by the state in progressive 
cities and countries that recognise informal housing as part of urban life (e.g. some locations 
in India, Brazil and South Africa); they lack access to basic infrastructure and services; they 
have poor standards of housing that usually do not comply with planning and building 
regulations; and they live on marginal or environmentally hazardous sites ( Braathen et al 
2016; Davis  2006; UN-Habitat  2018).  
 
National and city governments in the global South  adopt a wide range of responses to 
informal settlements including repressive approaches, where evictions and forced 
relocations are common; ambivalence, where informal settlers inhabit the city with little 
Knowledge  
Learning  
Data  
- Source  
- Capture  
 
Information  
- Process  
- Output  
Decisions  
 Actions  
 Results  
Upstream  
 Midstream  
 Downstream  
 Instrumental  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
9 
 support from the state; to progressive approaches, where informal settlements are 
considered to be part of the solution to housing the urban poor, with national and local 
governments planning and implementing upgrading programmes ( Braathen et al 2016; 
Dupon t 2013; Huchze rmeyer  2011; Satterthwaite  et al 2018; Sutherland et al  2016).  
 
Understanding the discourses that national and city authorities and informal settlers adopt 
towards informal housing is therefore critical in reflecting on their place and future  in the 
city. Knowledge and hence data about informal settlements plays a critical role in framing 
the discourses associated with informal settlements and shapes the way in which they are 
governed ( Huchze rmeyer 2011 ; Jordhus -Lier et al  2016 ). City authorit ies in the global South  
struggle to address the multiple challenges associated with informal settlements, which are 
distributed across the urban landscape, with their different characteristics, which emerge 
from their varied contexts. Human settlement or h ousing departments in local governments 
therefore tend to focus on informal settlements across the city, collecting data on the 
number, location and boundaries of informal settlements. However, they often have limited 
knowledge on their internal configurat ion: their history; age; political organisation and 
social capital; and the number and composition of individual households. This is reflected 
for example, in the significant variation in data on the number and percentage of informal 
househ olds in Kisumu i n Kenya (Kara nja 2010) and in six cities in India, Peru, Brazil and 
South Africa (Dupont et al  2016). For example, in Durban the percentage of informal 
households varies from 12 percent to 31 percent depending on which state authority is  
doing the counting  (Sutherland  2016). Given their scale, informality, dynamic nature and 
complexity, most informal settlements are therefore only ‘known’ or ‘mapped’ at the 
settlement scale by local governments in cities, which renders the ‘human -ness’, 
‘organisation’ and ‘ resilience’ of life in an informal settlement invisible to the state ( Karanja  
2010; Mazeka  et al 2019; Sim et al  2019 ). 
 
In South Africa, city authorities have lacked the political will, capacity and resources to 
collect detailed data on individual househo lds in informal settlements. Some officials argue 
that given that informal settlements are so dynamic, it is not useful to map or collect data 
on settlements at the household scale, as they grow and change at such a rapid rate ( Human 
Settlements Official p ers comm  04/07/2017). South African municipalities record data on 
individual households in informal settlements through informal residents registering their 
informal house with their local government Human Settlements Unit , thereby obtaining a 
housing numb er, which protects their right to be there and which will be used to allocate 
them a formal state -subsidised house, should relocation take place (see Figure 4).  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
10 
  
Figure 4: Housing number in Quarry Road West informal settlement registered with the 
Human Settlements Unit  (Source: C. Sutherland 06/07/2017)  
 
However, this data is not regularly updated which leads to outdated data being held by the 
city on the size and composition of info rmal settlements (Mazeka et al  2019). Durban, as 
part of the implementation of the city’s Resilience Strategy, is currently conducting an 
enumeration exercise in its informal settlements in an attempt to obtain more accurate data 
on its 556 informal settlements and 226, 000 informal hou seholds (eThekwini Municipality  
2017).  
 
eThekwini Municipality has always had a relatively progressive approach to informal 
housing, which is reflected in, for example, its incremental service provision prog ramme, 
where the local state provides basic services, including communal water points, communal 
ablution blocks and electricity, to informal settlements which are not due to be relocated in 
the near future. Efforts around informal settlement upgrading have  recently been 
intensified through the iQhaza Lethu Partnership Project, which is a partnership between 
Project Preparation Trust (PPT), Slum /Shack  Dwellers International and the Human 
Settlements Unit of eThekwini Municipality. This applied partnership pr oject is funded by 
the European Union (2018 to 2020). iQhaza Lethu aims to create a cohesive and 
collaborative effort towards upgrading of informal settlements, drawing on the knowledge 
and expertise of the municipality, NGOs, researchers and communities. Settlements 
selected as pilot studies will become sites of innovation and experimentation in informal 
settlement upgrading ( eThekwini Municipality &  PPT 2018).  
 
Datafication of development can play a role in achieving social and environmental 
transformatio n. However, it can also produce greater inequality and social injustice due to 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
11 
 the power embedded in data processes: collection, production and use of data. Informal 
settlements represent the most unequal, precarious and vulnerable sites of human 
habitatio n or ‘a place to put your head’ ( Quarry Road West Mapmaker pers comm  
14/08/2019), in cities in the South . They are also largely excluded from urban datafication 
processes. For data justice for development to be achieved where it matters the most, 
greater r esearch and empirical testing of the datafication of informal settlements is 
required.  
 
 
C. Methods  
 
Quarry Road West informal settlement is a precarious settlement, as it is located on the 
narrow floodplain of the Palmiet River adjacent to a major freeway  and secondary roads 
(Figure s 5 and 6). The settlement is characterised by its poor living conditions, high levels of 
poverty, its lack of basic services and poor housing, and its vulnerability to multiple 
environmental and social risks, including flooding , poor drainage, illegal electricity, fire, 
disease and crime (Mazeka et al  2019; Williams et al  2019).  
 
 
 
Figure 5: The location of the Palmiet River and Palmiet Catchment in the uMngeni 
Catc hment (map produced by Eduaction  in 2016)  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
12 
 Figure 6: The location of the Quarry Road West informal settlement and its four sub -
sections Mcondo 1, Mcondo 2, maMpondweni and maMsuthu, on the Palmiet Rive r 
(Source: Mazeka et al 2019 ) 
 
Quarry Road West informal settlement is categorised as a ‘deferred relocation’ by  the 
Human Settlements Unit, due th e lack of availability of state -subsidised low cost housing in 
the city. It is located on a high risk site, the narrow floodplain of the Palmiet River, which is 
prone to flooding after storm eve nts (Williams et al  2019). It will therefore be challenging to 
upgrade the settlement in -situ. The settlement is well established, it has been in existence 
for over 32 years and it is not likely that it will be moved in its entirety in the near future, 
due to the large housing backl ogs and slower delivery of formal low cost housing in the city, 
as well as the resistance of  the community to move to state -subsidised housing on the 
periphery of the city. Under the iQhaza Lethu project, the municipality is considering 
innovative approach es to addressing the environmental risk of the site, to determine if in -
situ upgrading is possible, given the broad socio -economic benefits the location of the site 
offers its residents (Mazeka et al 2019; Sim et al  2019).  
 
The datafication project in Quar ry Road West informal settlement forms part of the Palmiet 
Catchment Rehabilitation Project . When the PCRP was established in 2014, the UKZN 
researchers argued, in their initial meetings with the eThekwini Water and Sanitation Unit 
(EWS) from eThekwini Mun icipality, that it was critical to co -produce knowledge on the 
catchment with community -based organisations using participatory approaches, if resilient 
and sustainable water and climate governance was to be built (Vogel et  al 2016). From the 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
13 
 outset of the  project, the UKZN researchers set about building relations and constructing 
knowledge with the community of Quarry Road West informal settlement, to understand 
their relations with the Palmiet River. This knowledge production process is what is critically  
analysed in this case study, to explore the extent to which it has achieved data justice.  
 
This case study was selected for analysis because data has been co -produced between the 
informal settlers and university researchers over a long period of time and hence there is a 
well-established data production process or information value chain. This reveals the 
changing nature of data produced as issues in the settlement change and as researchers and 
community members build their capacity in collecting data in a n informal space. Quarry 
Road West informal settlement is exposed to high environmental risk, is politically and 
socially well organised and it displays high levels of social cohesion and identity, which 
makes it a good case study to e xplore data justice ( Sim et al  2019). Perhaps what is most 
important, is that at the outset of the PCRP, state officials could not enter the settlement 
without high levels of security, due to the conflictual and confrontational relationship 
between the state and the informal s ettlers, as a result of a lack of trust on both sides. By 
2016, a relationship between the state and citizens had been established and by 2018 
informal settlers were conducting river clean -ups in municipal uniforms funded by municipal 
supported co -operativ es (see Figure 7). The relations between citizens and the state had 
shifted as a result of procedural justice which opened up possibilities to build instrumental, 
structural, rights -based  and distributive justice.  
 
 
 
Figure 7: Cleaning up the Palmiet Rive r: informal settlers as municipal workers during a 
week of river rehabi litation (Source: C. Sutherland  28/06/2018)  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
14 
  
The data production process which is analysed in this case study produced the data, maps 
and knowledge  outlined in  Box 1.  
 
Box 1: Data co -produced between university researchers and informal settlers in Quarr y 
Road West informal settlement  
 Baseline data: history and geography of the settlement  
 Engagement in the PCRP and the production of the PCRP Action Pl an (Martel & 
Sutherland  2019; Williams  et al  2018; Williams et al  2019)  
 Community -based  and participa tory GIS mapping (Mazeka et al  2019)  
 Participation in development of Durban’s Resilience Strategy (100RC) (eThekwini 
Municipality  2017)  
 Risk mapping ( community -based , GIS and drone m apping anal ysis) (Mazeka et al  
2019).  
 Development of a climate smart informal settlement handbook  (Sutherland et al 
2019a ) 
 Exploring the ‘narratives of home’ in an informal settlement (Sim et al  2019)  
 Innovative sanitation technologies: Gates Foundation’s ‘Reinvent t he Toilet 
Challenge’  
 
Interviews on the concept of data justice were conducted with four officials from the 
Human Settlements Unit, Environmental Planning and Climate Protection Department 
(EPCPD), Coastal Stormwater and Catchment Management Department in eThekwini 
Municipality  through action research in the PCRP. A focus group was held on 20 March 2019 
with 14 members of the mapmakers team from Quarry Road West informal settlement to 
explore the question of whether the data they have produced has achieved social and 
environment al transformation in the settlement. This was facilitated by Open Data Durban. 
The data and reports that have been produced for the PCRP, listed in Box 1, were critically 
evaluated on an ongoing basis between January 2019 and July 2019. This was undertaken  in 
meetings held in the community and at the university between the mapmakers, university 
researchers and municipal officials as they continued to engage in the work of upgrading the 
settlement and improving water and climate governance within it. The aut hors who have 
written this case study are the researchers involved in the datafication of Quarry Road West 
informal settlement. We therefore acknowledge our positionality in the project and the way 
in which this will have shaped the analysis presented here , as we are embedded 
researchers. The data justice model by Heeks &  Shekhar (2019 ) is used as a framework to 
reflect on the information value chain that is emerging through the project and to critically 
analyse the datafication taking place in Quarry Road West informal settlement. This includes 
a reflection on how the dataf ication process has built state -citizen relations (structural and 
procedural justice), has helped to address challenges in the settlement (instrumental, 
procedural and structural justice)  and how it has supported the upgrading and 
transformation of the settlement to date (instrumental, procedural and rights -based  
justice).  
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
15 
 D. Findings  
 
Mapmakers from Quarry Road West informal settlement have been co -producing data with 
a team of research ers from UKZN since 2014 (see Box 1). However, life in the settlement 
remains precarious, and has become even more challenging after a major flood which 
devastated the settlement on 22 April, 2019. This raises questions about the value of the 
datafication process in achieving development. Data has been collected, processed and 
produced through participatory knowledge production practices, in the upstream and 
midstream activities of the information value chain. Some data has moved downstream in 
the informati on chain, to the spaces of decision  making and implementation, largely 
through the efforts of ‘bridges’ or data intermediaries. Two university researchers, two  
municipal officials and three mapmakers , who have developed their skills in data 
presentation th rough the datafication project, have acted as the main ‘bridges’ in the 
project. These data intermediaries have actively sought opportunities to present, both 
individually and collectively, the data on the settlement in multiple platforms in the city.  
 
This activism, through the way in which the data has been constructed and presented to 
support progressive discourses on informality, has therefore played an important role in 
both moving the data along the information value chain, and in the form the embeddi ng of 
the data in the value chain takes. This includes presenting data in PCRP meetings, in 
international conferences held in the city that had a strong municipal presence (IAIA  2017), 
in stakeholder workshops for the de velopment of Durban’s Resilient  City (2016 -2017), in 
videos produced for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundations Re -Invent the Toilet Challenge 
(2018) for a global toilet fair in China in 2018, in the KwaZulu -Natal Province’s Climate 
Change Summit ( 14/08/2019 ), in municipal forums and meeting s held to address critical 
water, climate and housing issues in the city, and in events to showcase the data produced 
in the settlement, including the Narratives of Home photographic exhibition held in  the 
settlement (21/03/2019 ). The data intermediaries h ave therefore acted as ‘champions’ for 
informal settlement upgrading in the city through the datafication process being undertaken 
in Quarry Road West informal settlement. The role of champions is well recognised  as being 
critical to just transformation an d sustainable development (Roberts  2016).  
 
However, the extent to which the data has resulted in meaningful change in the settlement 
is questioned in a city grappling with informality. Some instrumental outcomes have 
emanated from the co -production of data . However, these outcomes relate more to 
changes in governance, shifts in discourses towards informal settlements and their ‘right to 
the city’, empowerment of the community and having their voices heard, and opportunities 
for engaging with the municipalit y in innovative projects, than tangible outcomes related to 
changes in the built environment of the settlement. In time, these may yield more 
substantive outcomes on the ground, such as the provision of improved services, most 
notably sanitation and stormw ater drainage, the reduction of the risk of the river to the 
community, the upgrading of the settlement, or even the relocation of the settlement in its 
entirety. These substantive outcomes require significant shifts in political will and bold 
governance b y the state. However, the ‘soft’ outcomes are important in creating 
institutional shifts, which can lead to social and environmental transformation. They 
therefore may be just as valuable over the longer term for development, as ‘hard’ outcomes 
reflected i n changes in the built environment. The knowledge that has been built has made Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
16 
 the settlement more ‘visible’ and this visibility has brought other actors and projects to the 
settlement, which has led to change both in the settlement, and in the institution s engaging 
with it (see Figure 10). However, these efforts are also being constrained by the broader 
political struggles around informality that are dominant in the municipality at present, both 
between political parties and within them. In most instances,  the changes in Quarry Road 
West informal settlement represent ‘little victories in the face of big defeats’, as the gains 
are small, and are often overwhelmed by the challenges and politics of living in an informal 
settlement in a city struggling to addre ss and cope with increasing informality. However, 
they bring hope of change in the settlement, and it is this hope that motivates informal 
settlers to persevere in data collection processes (Open Data W orkshop  21/03/2019).  
 
This case study analyses the value of datafication in two ways. It first presents the value of 
the data itself  in supporting social and environmental transformation in the settlement and 
reflects on the structural elements that constrain or enable the move ment of data 
downstream  in the information value chain . Second, it reveals the value of the data 
production process  and the state -citizen -university relations it has built, in leading to change 
through data justice. The first section reflects on the data p roduced, which is multi -modal 
and in most cases is not the digital data of development informatics, but rather qualitative 
data that opens up opportunities for listeni ng and learning (Kennedy et al  2019). The case 
study reveals that qualitative data produc ed at the local scale can play a valuable role, along 
with quantitative and digital data, in making informal settlements more visible through ‘just’ 
datafication. This finding is supported by Kennedy et al ’s (2019) case study on informational 
politics in Hyderabad and Chakraborty et al ’s (2015) and Willis’ (2017) research on 
community -based  mapping.  
 
D1. Valuing Different Forms of Data in Different Contexts for City 
Datafication  
Individuals and communities at the ‘bottom o f the data pyramid’ (Arora  2016) ar e often 
excluded from big data, digital data and the datafication of the city. They do not always emit 
data, nor are they digitally captured or recorded as citizens in the same way as those that 
are connected to the global and national economy;  to the bene fits and services of formal 
city life; and to the dominant political and social networks of a particular society. Informal 
settlers find themselves on the periphery of city datafication, due to their particular 
histories and geographies, their informality,  poverty and inequality, and the way in which 
others who have power, construct their ‘place’ and ‘identity’ in the city.  
 
As the urban poor, they claim their ‘right to the city’ through illegal land invasions. They 
claim land, build their own housing and a ttempt to access basic services. They seek 
representation and hence they organise themselves politically. However, they often remain 
invisible, due to the repressive discourses of informality in the city, which construct informal 
settlements as places to b e removed, relocated or  as places that are ‘not meant to be there’ 
or are ‘not known’ (Councillor 1 pers comm  23/04/20 19). So how do informal settlers begin 
the process of being represented in the data of the city?  
 
An analysis of the data, maps and images  co-produced by the mapmakers and UKZN 
researchers from 2014 to 2019 on Quarry Road West informal settlement, reveals the wide 
range of data that has been collected, processed and more recently transferred into Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
17 
 decision -making spaces through ‘bridges’  or data intermediaries (Heeks & Shekhar  2019 ). 
The data ranges from creative, qualitative data to technical and digital data, collected and 
represented using participatory GIS. The different forms of data have travelled within and 
from the informal settlement outwards, and hence have played a role in ensuring some 
level of data justice in the settlement, albeit in small ways. The types of data collected and 
the purpose of collecting the data was decided upon collaboratively, as the mapmakers and 
the university researchers explored both the relationship between the informal settlers and 
the Palmiet River, and critical issues that emerged in the settlement, as the research 
partnership evolved.  The role of different forms of data (see Table 1) in achieving some lev el 
of data justice and examples of this data (see Figure 8) are presented below. Table 1 
describes the type of data collected and produced and the impact it has had, and it reflects 
on the type and level of data justice achieved.  
 
Table 1: The role of different types of data in achieving data justice  
Type of data  Impact of data  Data justice  
A: Community -based  
maps: maps sketched by 
the community showing 
main sections, features 
and risks  
 
 
 
 Develops a context of the settlement, 
helps data producers to understand the 
organisation of the settlement and its 
main characteristics and risks.  
Many informal settlements in South 
Africa are divided into sections that have 
historical, geographical and political 
meaning, and this is critical to 
understand in any  development process, 
but is often missed in interventions 
planned from ‘outside’ the settlement. 
Supports qualitative open -ended 
listening and dialogue about the 
settlement and its social, economic, 
environmental and political dimensions.  This form of dat a is valuable to data 
producers as it provides a platform 
upon which an understanding of the 
context of the settlement and other 
data is built. It is used in upstream 
activities. It supports procedural 
justice as the community constructs 
and provides the f irst baseline map 
of the settlement, setting the 
boundaries of and framing the 
datafication process at the outset.  
B: Partici patory GIS 
maps and risk maps: 
maps co -produced 
between informal 
settlers and researchers ; 
data collected on each 
household, which is 
included in an attribute 
table. Each household is 
spatially geo -referenced 
as are the risks in the 
settlement  
 
 GIS data and maps provide an accurate 
spatial record of households in the 
settlement at a particular  point in time. 
The settlement is mapped at the 
household scale, which protects 
residents against evictions, as their ‘right 
to the city’, enshrined in the South 
African Constitution and housing 
legislation, is recorded and spatially geo -
referenced on the map. The GIS map 
provides a temporal record, which is 
critical in determining which residents 
have rights to the set tlement after 
natural and human -induced di sasters 
disrupt the settlement.  Procedural, instrumental, structural 
and rights -based  justice is b uilt 
through communities owning and 
producing GIS maps of their 
settlement in partnership with 
university researchers. Community 
members decided which attributes 
were mapped for each household. 
Power relations are challenged as 
informal settlers, rather th an only 
the municipality, hold data on the 
households in the settlement and 
their ‘right to the city’. The GIS 
maps have been used in legally 
challenging evictions, thereby 
protecting ‘mapped’ residents since 
2017.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
18 
 Type of data  Impact of data  Data justice  
C: Data on climate 
adaptation for climat e 
smart informal 
settlement booklet. Data 
on impact of and 
response to natural 
disasters reflected in 
drone maps which are 
being used in the iQhaza 
Lethu project  
 Mixed qualitative and spatially -
referenced data in the form of 
community -based  maps, communit y 
sketches and photographs of climate 
smart informal houses, GIS risk maps of 
environmental and human -induced 
hazards in the settlement, as well as 
drone maps which are being used in the 
construction of a Disaster Risk 
Management Plan for the municipality.  Procedural justice as informal 
settlers define adaptation and 
resilience in the settlement on their 
terms. Data on adaptation 
practices, is evaluated in relation to 
knowledge on adaptation from the 
literature. Potential instrumental 
justice as informal se ttlers are using 
this data to inform and produce a 
Disaster Risk Management Plan for 
the settlement for use by EPCPD 
and the Disas ter Risk Management 
Department.  
 
 
D: Photographic images 
and narratives on the 
meaning of home in an 
informal settlement: 
collected using a range 
of qualitative 
methodologies including 
focus groups, 
photovoice1 and 
interviews  
 Powerful data, which has shifted 
multiple actors’ understanding and 
discourses about informal settlements. 
Data humanises informal settlements 
and their r esidents.  Procedural justice as the narratives 
and visions of home were 
constructed by informal settlers, 
using an established qualitative 
methodology. This ensures that the 
voice of informal settlers is the 
main voice in the data presented. 
Instrumental, rights -based and 
structural justice are being 
enhanced as the narratives of home 
project has played a role in shifting 
repressive state discourses on 
informal settlements through 
presentations made by both 
researchers and informal settlers in 
public forums . 
E: Data collected on 
water and sanitation 
access, practices and use 
by informal settlers in 
partnership with 
university researchers 
for Engineering Field 
Testing of EAWAG 
Waterwall as part of the 
Gates Foundation’s 
‘Reinvent the Toilet 
Challenge’  
 
 Data  is informing an international project 
on the development of innovative 
sanitation technologies and hence has 
local and global impact.  Procedural and instrumental data 
justice, which ensures the voice of 
beneficiaries is heard in the 
development of global technologies 
for innovative sanitation systems 
and is included in the planning and 
service provision strategies of 
eThekwini Water and Sanitation 
Unit.  
                                                      
1 Photovoice is a qualitative methodology developed by Wang and Burris (1997), where participants provide 
narratives of photographic images they have taken to reflect the topic under research (Sim et al 2019).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
19 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: The different types of data produced (the letters A - E refer to the letters in Table 
1 above)  (Source s: A & D: Sim  et al (2019); B: Mazeka et al  (2019); C & E: C. Suthe rland  
17/04/2019)  
 
A 
B C 
D 
E Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
20 
 The multi -modal data collected and processed in Quarry Road West informal settlement 
reflects procedural justice and rights -based justice in terms of how it has been produced, as 
the community has ownership over the data construction process  and over the data itself. 
The mapmakers’ frustration lies in how this  data can move downstream and be used to 
transform their everyday lived worlds, as they argue that they produce the data through 
their own civic duty, but then the data “gets stuck and does not change  our lives” (Open 
Data W orkshop  21/03/2019). The mapmake rs have had to rely largely on ‘bridges’ or data 
intermediaries to move the data downstream in the information value chain. The ‘bridges’ 
are all engaged in the PCRP and so are committed to the datafication process over the 
longer term. Except for one offi cial, they have all been participants in the project for over 
five years. This has created institutional memory and strong partnerships, which have 
supported th e advocacy role of the ‘bridges ’, who have acted collectively to reduce risk and 
improve quality  of life in the settlement. As a result, data developed from the outset of the 
project  continues to be transferred in to various decision -making spaces within the 
municipality, which open up when the politics of the city allows this to happen. Having 
explor ed the different types of data collected and produced, the second part of the results 
of this case study reflects on the value of the data production process, the relations it has 
built and the outcomes it has achieved.  
 
D2. The Value of the Datafication Process  
The value of the datafication process is analysed by reflecting on the outcomes of the 
process, as it has evolved over time. Two phases are identified: the first phase, where the 
datafication process had a limited influence on instrumental, structu ral and distributive 
justice, and the second phase, where the datafication process built on what was achieved in 
the first phase, and began to influence downstream activities, leading to potential 
instrumental, rights -based, struc tural and distributive jus tice.  
 
This became possible when the data began to flow into an innovative upgrading 
programme, iQhaza Lethu, in the municipal department with the most power to transform 
life in Quarry Road West: the Human Settlements Unit. While data had been presented t o 
officials in this Unit in the first phase, it had had little impact as there was resistance to the 
data, with housing officials explaining that they had 556 settlements to deal with in the city, 
and so data at this ‘microscale’ and level of detail was no t helpful to them. They also argued 
that it was unreliable as informal settlements are dynamic and hence this data ‘would 
change all the time’. They argued that the informal settlers were registered with their 
housing numbers on the municipal database, and  this is what they worked from. They also 
stated that Quarry Road West was a deferred relocation and hence they would not invest in 
upgrading efforts in the settlement (Human Settlements Unit Official pers comm  
04/07/2017).  
 
The major flood in the settleme nt in April 2019, also resulted in movement of the data 
downstream  in the information value chain , as the GIS mapping and evidence of ‘life in the 
settlement’ contained in the Narratives of Home Report (Sim et al 2019 ; see also Figure 10) 
became critical t o protecting people’s rights to the settlement. Both iQhaza Lethu and the 
major flood, therefore acted as levers of change. A certain level of procedural justice was 
achieved in both phases, as data was produced by the community, based on their 
identificat ion of data needs and transformed into development results. This was in the form Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
21 
 of both ‘soft’ outcomes, focused on building knowledge, a governance arena, and capacity 
and power to act in the first phase, and downstream activities embedded in municipal, 
research and international projects in the second phase, which are starting to contribute to 
instrumental, structural, rights -based and distributive justice.  
 
Phase 1 of the datafication process  
 
The first phase of the datafication process, which took plac e between 2014 and 2017, 
emerged through the building of a relationship between the mapmakers  and the School of 
Built Environment  and Development Studies ( BEDS ) researchers, with a focus on exploring 
the relationship between the community and the Palmiet R iver2. The datafication process 
was therefore initiated as part of connected state -citizen -university action research 
projects : one part of the UEIP and the other two, national and internationally funded 
research projects located in BEDS, UKZN. The data th at was produced during this phase 
included the community -based  and GIS maps of the settlement ( data types A an d B, see 
Table 1 and Figure 8).  
 
The datafication process had a relatively small sphere of influence. The data was 
predominantly moved downstream into the PCRP, which focuses on building multi -
stakeholder action for improved water and climate governance in the Palmiet Catchment. 
The data was used to shape the Action Plan developed as part of the PCRP. It also played a 
critical role in illuminating t he challenges and risks facing the Quarry Road West informal 
community in the catchment and their desire to participate in decision making affecting 
their ‘right to the city’. It therefore shifted both PCRP municipal and civic science actors’ 
views of info rmality, as a platform was created for community voices to be heard. The data 
also began to travel into more significant epistemic and decision -making spaces, including 
committees and programmes in the municipality, largely through municipal champions. Thi s 
led to ‘soft’ outcomes, such as raising awareness, questioning of dominant repressive 
discourses on informality , and humanising informal settlers (see Figure 9).  
  
                                                      
2 This research formed part of the PCRP and UEI P, a National Research Foundation  (NRF)  and Norwegian 
Research Council SANCOOP research project (CLIMWAYS) and a Water Research Commission project, WRC 
2354.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
22 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participatory data production process  
 Data moves downstream into PCRP through 
participation of mapmakers  and researchers in PCRP  
 Researchers as’ bridges’ and champions move data 
downstream into academic and research forums  
 Data moves downstream and informs Durban’s 
Resilience Strategy as part of global 100 Resilient 
Cities (100RC) programme  
 Municipal officials in Climate P rotection Branch as 
‘bridges’ and champions transfer progressive 
discourses on informal settlements, water and 
climate governance into global, national and local 
governance spaces  
 Municipal influencers who have knowledge of the 
PCRP and the dataficatio n process, and who have 
access to those with positions of political power, 
begin to influence discourses around informality  
 
Figure 9: Phase 1 of the datafication process  
 
  
Palmiet Catchment 
Rehabilitation Project  
Community of Innovation  
Action Plan for water and 
climate governance in the 
Palmiet Catchment  
 
BEDS Researchers  
 
Quarry Road West 
mapmakers  
Data  
International, national and 
local conferences, think 
tanks and programmes, 
including 100RC and UEIP  
Municipal 
Committees and 
programmes 
including 1 00RC  
Data  
 
Trust  
Respect  
Dignity  
Co-production  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
23 
 The initial decision to construct data in, and on, Quarry Road West informal settlement, was 
taken jointly by members of the informal community, led initially by an African National 
Congress (ANC) Branch Committee and  sub-ward committee member, and university 
researchers3. The datafication process therefore started from the bottom up, using the 
political structures present in the settlement. The university researchers’ first meeting with 
the community was organised by EWS as part of the initiation of the PCRP, policed by 
undercover security, given the conflictual relationship betwee n the state and citizens in the 
informal settlement prior to 2015. This conflictual relationship was due to poor service 
delivery, the threat of evictions and the community members’ desire to participate in 
decisions about their future, in the face of an i nterventionist and managerial local stat e 
(Sutherland et al  2018).  
 
The first meeting provided the researchers with an opportunity to explain the focus and 
purpose of the PCRP, namely improved water and climate governance across the 
catchment, by focusing on people’s relationship with the Palmiet River. The focus on the 
river attracted the interest of community members, as they have a close relationship with 
the river, which provides both benefits and risks to the community. Questions about how 
people relat e to the river in the informal settlement did not initially trigger politics. This 
meant that the early processes of engagement were not thwarted by power struggles 
between political actors, including councillors, who wanted to control the process. The 
relations between the community and the river have since emerged as being highly political, 
particularly after the flood in April 2019, which has been part of the learning in the PCRP. 
The researchers met regularly with the informal settlement committee after  the first 
meeting, openly discussing the framing of a research agenda. Trust began to be established 
and discussions held about what the first data gathering exercise in the settlement should 
be. 
 
Exactly why and how this initial trust was established is difficult to determine. The team of 
researchers from UKZN, who have worked in other medium -sized informal settlements 
across the city over the past ten years, attribute the building of relationships to three 
factors.  The willingness and desire of informal settlers to participate in the politics and 
transformation of urban life and to be made ‘visible’ and ‘known’; the openness of a 
participatory research process which has inclusivity and the co -production of knowledge as 
its focus; and the continual ‘going -back’ of researchers to the settlement, to listen and learn. 
Informal settlers state that relationships are built because of the on -going engagement 
between the community and the researchers; because of their desire to engage in and learn 
about knowledge p roduction processes, an opportunity provided by the university; because 
they wish to be ‘made known’ and be recognised in the city; and because they want to make 
a difference to the development trajectory of their settlem ent and their individual lives.  
 
Research projects offer a new space of learning and engagement, which is shaped by the 
politics of the settlement, but which is also not defined and controlled by it. This was 
                                                      
3 In 2014 when the project was initiated, Quarry Road West informal settlement was an ANC -led sett lement in 
an ANC ward, Ward 23. In 2016 after the local government elections, the ward was won by the Democratic 
Alliance (DA) and is now a DA ward (2016 -2021), with the sub -committee in Quarry Road West informal 
settlement being DA led. The ANC still has a strong presence in the community and the representative 
councillor from the ANC, as well as the previous ANC councillor continue to engage with the community.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
24 
 evident in 2016 when the ward within which the settlement is loc ated, changed from  being 
an ANC -led ward to a Democratic Alliance (DA) -led ward, as a result of local government 
elections. This introduced an interesting dynamic, as the mapmakers  supported both 
political parties, as well as others. However, they agreed to work together, r especting their 
political identities, but not allowing them to define and control the datafication process. 
This outcome is extraordinary in the political landscape of South Africa, as it is not common 
for a group of people involved in a process as politic al as datafication, to be able to work 
across different political alliances. The social learning and relationships that had been built 
in the data production process, has created a space of inclusiveness in the community, that 
has enabled the team of mapma kers to work together, cutting across not only political lines, 
but gender and age lines too.  
 
The data produced in Phase 1 remained largely an upstream and midstream activity (see 
Figure 9). Both community members and university researchers argued that th e data had 
become stuck. It was not helping to change the living environment in the settlemen t, as it 
did not move easily in to the spaces of decision  making in eThekwini Municipality, 
particularly the Human Settlements Unit and EWS, where the data potentially could have 
greatest impact. The data was presented and reported in the PCRP, of which EPCPD is a lead 
actor, and in which other municipal departments participate. However, as an environmental 
planning and climate protection department, EPCPD is  more of a facilitating and co -
ordinating agency, rather than an implementing agency of the local state and could 
therefore “not operationalise and invest in the elements on the action plan, this was not 
what EPCPD doe s” (EPCPD Municipal Official pers comm  04/02/ 2019).  
 
The datafication of the settlement provided insight and learning about the settlement, 
which was shared by EPCPD officials in other municipal forums, but it did not lead to 
significant outcomes in terms of service delivery or changes in the built environment. The 
data supported the progressive discourses of the local state, in terms of informal settlement 
upgrad ing, and so it flowed easily in to, and was taken up in spaces where these discourses 
were evident. However, it was ‘blocked’ by the r epressive discourses of some senior 
managers and departments in the municipality, in spaces where informal settlement 
upgrading was presented. However, an innovative city -wide programme located in EPCD, 
Durban’s 100 Resilient Cities journey, provided an op portunity for instrumental, rights -
based and structural justice. Data flowed downstream in 2016 and 2017, as the Quarry Road 
West informal settlers and university researchers used the knowledge gained in the PCRP to 
provide input in to the construction of D urban’s Resilience Strategy, which has a strong focus 
on collaborative informal settlement action in the city ( eThekwini Municipality  2017; 
Sutherland et al  2019 b). 
 
Phase 2 of the datafication process  
 
The second phase of the datafication process started in 2018, and is ongoing ( data collected: 
type s C, D and E, see Table 1 and Figure 8). A s shown in Figure 10, a  major breakthrough in 
the value of the datafication process was achieved when the Human Settlements Unit, in 
partnership with Project Preparation  Trust and Slum /Shack  Dwellers International launched 
the iQhaza Lethu upgrading project, which is funded by the European Union. This opened 
the door for the data collected in the PCRP and Quarry Road West informal settlement to Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
25 
 flow downstream and to star t shaping state policy and discourse within the Human 
Settlements Unit, as the unit began to explore options and practices for informal settlement 
upgrading based on a partnership approach.  
 
However, this was dependent on two important factors: one of the ‘bridges’ or champions 
of the datafication process was placed in iQhaza Lethu in the Human Settlements Unit as an 
official; and a second ‘bridge’ influencing the iQhaza Lethu programme, presented data 
from Quarry Road West informal settlement at initial pl anning meetings. The large amount 
of data that had been collected in the settlement, and hence the knowledge about it, as well 
as the influence of the data intermediaries, resulted in Quarry Road West being selected as 
an iQhaza Lethu pilot project, even t hough it is an unlikely candidate for in -situ upgrading, 
being categorised by the municipality as a deferred relocation. iQhaza Lethu is building up 
knowledge on informal settlement upgrading and will shape policy and practice in the 
future, so the datafic ation of Quarry Road West informal settlement, will shape the 
discourses and practices of informal settlement upgrading in the city, leading to improved 
instrumental, rights -based  and distributive  justice.  
 
The data on the settlement is starting to flow  into other spaces too, as the informal 
settlement has become the site of the implementation of a number of innovative projects in 
the municipality. This includes the Engineering Field Testing (EFT) being undertaken by EWS 
as part of the Bill and Melinda Gate s Foundation’s Re -Invent the Toilet Challenge  (RTTC) and 
the drafting of a Disaster Risk Management Plan, as part of the ‘EPIC A’ project, which is a 
learning partnership between the municipality and the university. The choice of Quarry 
Road West informal settlement as a site for experimentation and social learning, through 
externally funded municipal projects, is attributed to the datafication of the settlement.  
 
The role of ‘bridges’ or data intermediaries, who promote the value of engaging with the 
settl ement, due to the knowledge and capacity that exists within it, as well as the 
governance platform that supports it, is important. This represents a form of instrumental 
justice as the datafication of the settlement has led to the implementation of these d ifferent 
projects within the settlement. These in turn have begun to address development deficits, 
through for example, constructing development options for the upgrading of the 
settlement, and building a playground, as a result of the participation of the  community in 
the EFT. The settlement was also selected as a case study for  a research project funded by 
the National Research Foundation: Narratives of Home and Neighbourhood: Possibilities for 
re-imagining Urban Planning.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
26 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 : Phase 2 of the datafication process  
  Participatory data production process  
 Data moves downstream into a range of municipal and 
international projects. The projects in turn shape everyday 
life in Quarry Road West informal settlement resulting in 
some level of procedural, instrumental and rights -based  
justice  
 Researchers and mapmakers  have formed a research  
partnership that draws in other community members and 
supports research in Quarry Road West informal 
settlement. They act as’ bridges’ and facilitators between 
the settlement and other municipal projects and research 
programmes, which have landed in the s ettlement due to 
the datafication process  
 Data is used to produce research reports, which move 
downstream and begin to shift informal settlement 
discourses in the city   
Quarry Road West informal 
settlement  
 
iQhaza Lethu 
informal 
settlement 
upgrading 
programme: 
Municipality and 
NGOs  
Durban’s 
Resilience 
Strategy:  
Municipality  
 
EFT for Gates 
Foundation’s RTTC: 
Gates Foundation, 
Municipality, 
International 
research institutions 
(innovative 
sanit ation 
technologies)  
Disaster Risk 
Management Plans: 
Municipality and 
EPIC A Programme  
PCRP  
Early flood 
warning system  
 
Mapmakers and BEDS 
research partnership:  
Data  
Climate -smart 
informal 
settlement 
booklet  
Narratives of Home 
Research Project funded 
by the NRF  
Platforms of the 
state, civil society and 
research institutions  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
27 
 The in -depth data produced in this research project, which was made possible due to the 
strong relationships that exist between the mapmakers  and the BEDS researchers as part of 
the datafication process, has had a significant impact in a  number of forums i n the city, as it 
has humanised informal settlers for those that hold more repressive positions related to 
informality.  
 
A second event, the April 2019 flood, has created opportunities for the value of the 
datafication process to emerge. It has also reveal ed how challenging it is for data to result in 
instrumental, structural and distributive justice in a city grappling with rising informality, 
which holds both progressive and repressive discourses towards informal settlements. The 
flood had a dramatic impa ct on the settlement, as both land and informal houses were lost. 
As a result of lack of meaningful disaster response from the state after the flood, informal 
residents began to rebuild houses on all remaining open space in the settlement. This 
prompted a response from the Land Invasions Unit in the municipality, who identified these 
houses as ‘new builds’ and hence activated their process of removing all ‘new builds’ as part 
of the policy of the Human Settlements Unit. They placed red crosses on the doors of all the 
new builds, even though they had housing numbers on them, and warned residents that 
these houses would be taken down by the state. Residents, who were not newcomers after 
the flood, responded by stating that they had lived in the settlement for many years and 
had rebuilt on the open space, as they had lost their land in the flood. Housing officials told 
them they needed to provide evidence of this. The residents then activated the data, to 
claim their rights to the settlement. One resident, who i s also a mapmaker, used the image 
of her household from the Narratives of Home research, to claim her right to the settlement 
(see Figure 11). She placed a copy of the image she took of her original house (before the 
flood washed her home away), as part of  the photovoice methodology in the Narratives of 
Home research, on the door of her ‘new build’, to protect herself from the actions of the 
Land Invasion Unit. This image is contained and referenced in the Narrat ives of Home report 
(Sim et al  2019) and henc e it has led to rights -based  and instrumental justice for herself and 
her family. The GIS maps and database and the drone maps that have been flown of the 
settlement from June 2018 to July 2019 are also being used by community members who 
lived in the sett lement prior to the flood, to protect their right to land in Quarry Road West, 
as the response to the floods and the ‘new builds’ unfolds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
28 
  
Figure 11 : Using data to claim the right to the settlement  (Source: C. Sutherland  
28/07/2019)  
 
Residents of Quarry Road West informal settlement adopted two strategies in the aftermath 
of the floods: the one was to protest and the other was to present a memorandum of 
demands to the Deputy Mayor of the Municipality. This memorandum stated that the 
community wanted to work in partnership with the municipality, drawing on the data and 
knowledge they have of their settlement, partly as a result of the datafication process, to 
plan a future for their community, that addresses the impact of the flood and r educes the 
risk of the river o n the settlement in the future.  
 
Protest action resulted in the Deputy Mayor visiting the settlement. She asked the 
community not to protest and rather to present a memorandum to the city, by delivering it 
to her office. Prote st always achieves an immediate reaction from politicians and senior 
officials, although it seldom leads to longer term action and change. The community, 
through a participatory political process, drafted a memorandum, drawing on the 
datafication process, and submitted this to the Deputy Mayor. To date ( August 2019) there 
has been no response to the memorandum, but this is most likely due to the recent 
replacement of the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor and executive committee of the 
municipality, due to corrupti on charges, which has led to significant political changes at the 
senior level. This political crisis has therefore impacted on the efforts of the Quarry Road 
West informal community to engage with the city. Bigger political struggles therefore play a 
majo r role in how data is taken up in downstream activities.  
 
 
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
29 
 E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
The datafication process in Quarry Road West informal settlement has made the settlement 
more ‘visible’ to the informal settlers who live within it. They state that they have learnt 
more about the place they live in and how it is shaped by its social, econ omic, 
environmental and political context. They have also improved their understanding of the 
mandates and capacity of local government and the limitations that it faces in meeting the 
needs of the urban poor (Open Data Workshop  21/03/2019). The settlement  has also been 
made more ‘visible’ to the BEDS researchers, who are engaged in learning and knowledge 
production processes on how to govern for social and environmental transformation in 
informal settlements in cities in the global South ; and to the state,  which  is tasked with 
managing the ongoing challenge of the growth of informal settlements in Durban, while 
trying to build urban resilience and sustainability. Over time, the datafication process has 
expanded the reach and influence of the settlement in c ity politics and decision making 
around informality, but this reach and influence is yet to have significant impacts on the 
everyday lives of those who live there and on the discourses and politics of informal 
settlement upgrading in the city. It has suppo rted and strengthened a new governance 
arena that has emerged through the PCRP, which includes state, university and civil society 
actors, which may le ad to instrumental and structural justice in the future, as a platform for 
dialogue and change has been b uilt. The platform is perceived as being legitimate and 
having influence by a wide range of actors both within and outside of the state, because it is 
underpinned by multi -modal data and knowledge and this gives it power.  
 
The case study has revealed that it is the coming together of actors, data, and opportunities 
or windows for change, at particular moments in time, in the life and politics of the city, 
which leads to some level of data justice for development. It is also evident that datafication 
has sup ported procedural and rights -based justice due to the epistemic control the 
mapmakers  have had of the data produced within the settlement (see Figure 12). A critical 
question in the datafication process is whether the mapmakers  are accepted by the broader 
community as trustworthy data producers and data intermediaries. While some community 
members have raised issues around how the mapmakers  benefit from the datafication 
process, which in some instances has included small stipends, it has been evident 
throug hout the project that they are trusted in this position in the community. This was 
most clear when they engaged in the highly political process of collecting data on 
households in the settlement for the participatory GIS mapping project. The mapmakers  
mapp ed the settlement in a very short period of time, they were assisted by community 
members who all wanted to be part of the process and they encountered no resistance to 
the process they wer e undertaking (Mazeka  et al  2019). Thus far, they are respected and  
trusted as researchers in th e community (Open Data W orkshop  21/03/2019). However, the 
political struggles over land that have emerged as a result of the flood, with newcomers 
moving  into the settlement, has begun to create tension over the meaning and use  of the 
data.  
 
It is also evident from the case study that trust cannot be taken for granted, that it can be 
broken very quickly, and that the politics in the settlement can change, shifting or breaking 
down relationships between the state, citizens and un iversity researchers. This tension is 
beginning to emerge, as a result of the significant impact of the April floods on the Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
30 
 settlement and the land crisis this has evoked. Trust is essential in ensuring procedural 
justice, as it relates to ethics in data p roduction, respect for different forms of knowledge, 
the ownership and control of knowledge , and the willingness and faith to allow others to act 
as ‘bridges’,  data intermediaries and champions, to move data downstream in the 
information value chain.  
 
Figure 12: A data justice model for Quarry Road West informal settlement (adapted from 
Heeks & Shekhar  2019)  
 
Forms of instrumental and structural justice are beginning to emerge, with these two forms 
of justice being connected. The research has shown that it  is very difficult to obtain ‘hard’ 
outcomes in the settlement without there being significant changes in the structures of the 
city, which result in more progressive discourses, planning for and investment in, informal 
settlements. However, ‘bridges’ or d ata intermediaries have played a positive role here, and 
have ensured that the ‘soft’ outcomes of the datafication process, including the building of a 
governance arena, social learning and opportunities that are created to shift conceptions of 
informality  in the city, have gained traction and made a difference.  
 
Governing for data justice has emerged as being critical to advancing data justice for 
development as this case study has  shown and hence Heek s & Shekhar’s (2019 ) model has 
been expanded to include  governance as a critical element. Perhaps the most critical aspect 
of governing for data justice, is the relations built between the state and citizens, with 
researchers (or NGOs) acting as ‘bridges’ to support the building of these relationships and 
the movement of data downstream between citizens and the state. The impact and role of 
triggers or opportunities for change created by ‘critical moments or events’ such as a flood 
or a major protest, is also recognised as a result of the research undertaken in  Quarry Road 
West informal settlement.  
 
The case study has “gone beyond ‘justice as a set of theoretical principles’ to ‘justice -in-
practice’ ” (Heeks & Renken , 2018: 96). The final section presents the main lessons of the 
project and the recommendations th at emerge from these lessons.  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
31 
 E1. Recommendations  
 Building state -citizen relations is critical in supporting data justice for development . 
 Qualitative and GIS data that is collected and produced at the local scale, can, with 
the support of data intermediar ies and champions, move downstream  into the 
decision -making spaces of the state. This form of data, when collected, produced 
and presented using established and rigorous research processes, is powerful in 
shifting conceptions and discourses on informality.  
 Building trust and ensuring respect for all actors in the knowledge production 
process, and the different forms of knowledge they produce, is critical to data justice 
for development . 
 Datafication, when undertaken in inclusionary spaces that are defined b y all actors in 
the process, can enable people to work across political, gender and age boundaries, 
moving development beyond the ‘gains’ of party politics or a particular group ’s 
interests.  
 Datafication in an informal settlement makes the settlement visib le to the informal 
settlers, to the state and to researchers and NGOs, providing new perspectives on 
how development can unfold and who needs to engage in the development process.  
 Informal settlers are empowered in terms of their ‘rights to the city’ when they hold 
data on the number of households and their characteristics in the settlement.  
 Datafication processes produce data, but often the ‘governance and knowledge 
platforms’ created through the pr ocess of inclusive datafication  are mor e powerful 
than the  data itself  in achieving transformation. These platforms consist of: 
epistemics (what all parties have learned about each other) and social relations (the 
formation of a new social structure).  It is these, rather than the data per se, that 
form the basis for impacts and interventions.  
 The datafication project, rather than the data produced directly in the project, has 
led to some shifts of power in the relations between citizens and the state.  
 Data produced through participatory processes are time consumin g and rely on 
committed relationships to see the process through. This effort and commitment is 
undermined when data does not move downstream in the information value chain. 
Here data becomes ‘stuck’ and actors involved in the process question why they are  
collecting and producing data, if the conditions of their every day lives do not change. 
Only when this data enters the spaces of powerful actors in the state, when the state 
sets the agenda to engage with the data as it serves their interests, does change  
begin to happen and the data becomes meaningful in terms of what it may achieve 
in shifts in policy and practice in informal settlements. The powerful actors in the 
state therefore hold the most power in producing tangible ‘built environment’ 
outcomes fro m datafication processes.  
 Datafication when it is inclusive and builds procedural, rights -based, instrumental, 
structural and distributive justice supports ‘the right to the city’ which is “ the right to 
the city is, therefore, far more than a right of indi vidual access to the resources that 
the city embodies: it is a right to change ourselves by changing the city more after 
our heart’s desire. It is, moreover, a collective rather than an individual right since 
changing the city inevitably depends upon the e xercise of a collective power over the 
processes of urbanization. The freedom to make and remake ourselves and our cities 
is, I want to argue, one of the most precious yet most neglected of our human 
rights” (Harvey  2008 : 1). Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
32 
 E2. Future Research Agenda  
This case study has explored the extent to which a well -established research partnership , 
between researchers within a university and ‘mapmakers’ from an informal settlement in 
Durban , has produced data that has made informal settlements more ‘visible’ to a wide 
range of state and non -state actors  in the city , and achieved some level of social and 
environmental transformation. The instrumental and structural justice outcomes of the data 
process are only just  beginning to emerge. I t is therefore important to  undertake a similar 
reflection , or case study , in three years , to reflect on whether , and  how , life has changed for 
the residents in Quarry Road West informal settlement  as a result of the datafication 
process , drawing on  concepts from a data justice fram ework , which also will have evolved. It 
is also important to determine whether big data or digital data becomes more prominent in 
the settlement over time, and what form the ‘datafication of development’ takes. Will 
informal settlements remain in the more marginalised s pace of community -produced data? 
This data is valuable, as this  case study has shown, but it  is often neglected and no t 
recognised in decision making; it  is time consuming to produce ; and it relies on significant 
effort from the community, data champions and d ata intermediaries.  Or will big data , digital 
data and the new forms of data streams being produced, which support  those connected in 
to the formal systems  of the city, begin to reach in to, or become accessible to informal 
settlements, th ereby  connect ing informal settlers to broader ‘datafication for development’  
processes (Heeks & Shekhar 2019; Spratt & Baker 2015; Taylor & Broeders 2015).  
 
Based on the result s of this case study, it is evident that a future research agenda should 
include a focus on governance. How is data governed or ‘steered’ and who has the power to 
govern its ‘outcomes’? This could include an analysis of the different forms of 
‘governmentali ty’ of data for development.  Future research needs to determine what form 
of governance and institutions pro vide s the best support for  data produced, to ensure it 
moves according to just principles, down the information value chain and impacts on 
decision  making. What sets of rules, norms and social values, in terms of both formal and 
informal institutions, act as levers of change for data justice for development? Should data 
be governed through multi -actor partnerships? What is the role of the state in en suring that 
procedural, instrumental, rights -based, s tructural and distributive  justice is achieved? What 
kind of state can ensure this? As this case study has shown, data becomes stuck, when it 
remains o utside of the critical decision -making and implement ing agencies of the state.  
 
Change  in informal settlements , in terms of state interventions, is a slow process, given the 
regulations , bureaucratic and decision -making processes of the state. However, change, in 
terms of the shocks and stresses faced by i nformal settle ment s and their ability to adapt to 
them , are far more rapid, as informal settlements are dynamic environments that never 
‘stand still’. Data collection and production, when undertaken by informal settlers in 
partnership with universities, is  a relatively quick process when human and financial 
resources are available. Further research needs to be undertaken on levers of change that 
can be activated to move data down the information v alue chain more quickly, and can  
ensure a more responsive, ad aptive and flexible state , that can act on data produced at the 
local scale, and which is ‘smart’ enough to be able to ‘read this data’ and scale it up, and 
apply it to other informal settlements across this city , with a commitment to ‘data justice for 
development’ , while not losing site of the importance of context. A big challenge, but one 
that is required and is essential, to ensure the rights of informal settlers to the city.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
33 
 References  
 
Arora, P. (2016). Bottom of the data pyramid: Big data and the global South. International 
Journal of Communication , 10, 1681 -99. 
Baud, I. (2016). Digitisation and participation in urban governance. In  Local Governance, 
Economic Development and Institutions , G.M. Gomez and P. Knorringa (eds), Palgrave 
Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK, 86 -97. 
Braathen, E., Dupont, V., Jordhus -Lier, D. and Sutherland, C. (2016). Introduction: situating 
the politics o f slums within the ‘urban turn’.  In The Politics of Slums in the G lobal South: 
Urban Informality in Brazil, India, South Africa and Peru,  V. Dupont, D. Jordhus -Lier, C. 
Sutherland, and E. Braathen (eds.), Routledge,  London, UK, 1 -29. 
Brown, G.  and Kyttä, M. (2014). Key issues and research priorities for public p articipati on 
GIS (PPGIS) : A s ynthe sis based on empirical research. Applied Geography, 46(1), 122 -
136.  
Castells, M. (2000). The Information Age Economy, Society, and Culture. Volume 1. The 
Network Society , Blackwell Publishing, Chichester , UK. 
Chakraborty, A., Wilson, B., Sarraf, S. and Jana, A. (2015). Open data for informal 
settlements. Journal of Urban Management , 4(2), 74 -91. 
Cham bers, R. (2006). Participatory mapping and G eograp hic Information Systems: Whose 
map? Who is empowered and who di sempowered? Who gains and who l oses. The 
Electronic Journal on Information Systems in  Developing Countries, 25(2), 1 -11. 
Davis, M. (2006).  Planet of Slums , Verso, London.  
Dryzek, J. (2012). The Politics of the Earth. Environmental Discourses, 3rd Edition , Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.  
Dupont, V. (2013). Which place for the homeless in Delhi? Scrutiny of a mobilisation 
campaign in the 2010 Commonwealth Games context. South Asia Multidisciplinary  
Academic Journal , 8, 2-18. 
Dupont, V., Jordhus -Lier, D., Sut herland, C., and Braathen, E. (eds.)  (2016). The Politics of 
Slums in the G lobal South: Urban informality in Brazil, India, South Africa and Peru , 
Routledge,  London.  
Elwood, S. (2002). GIS use in community planning: A multidimensional analysis of 
empowerment. Environment and Planning  A, 34(5), 905 -922.  
eThekwini Municipality (2017). Durban’s Resilience Strategy , eThekwini Municipality, 
Durban.  
eThekwini Municipality and PPT (2018). The iQhaza Lethu Partnership Project , eThekwini 
Municipality, Durban . 
Gaillard, C., Monteil, C., Perrillat -Collomb, A., Chaudhary, S., Chaudhary, M., Chaudhary, O., 
and Cadag, J. R.D. (2013). Participatory 3 -dimension mapping: A tool for encouraging 
multi -caste collaboration to climate change adaptation and disaster risk r eduction. 
Applied Geography, 45, 158 -166.  
Hajer, M. and Wagenaar, H. (2003). Deliberative  Policy Ana lysis: Understandin g Governance 
in the  Network So ciety , Cambridge  University Press, Cambridge , UK. 
Harvey, D. (2008). The right to the city, New Left Review, II(53), 23 -40. 
Heeks, R. (2017). A Structural Model and Manifesto for Data Justice for International 
Development , GDI Development Infor matics Working Paper no.69,  University of 
Manchester, UK.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
34 
 Heeks, R. (2018). Information and Communicatio n Technology for Development , Routledge, 
Abingdon , UK. 
Heeks, R. and Renken, J. (2018). Data justice for development: What would it mean?  
Information Development , 34(1), 90 -102.  
Heeks, R. and Shekhar, S. (2019). Datafication, development and marginalised u rban  
communities: An applied data justice framework. Information, Communication and  
Society , 22(7), 992 -1011.  
Huchzermeyer, M. (2011). Cities with 'Slums': From Informal Settlement Er adication to a 
Right to the City in Africa , University of Cape Town Press , Cape Town.  
Jordhus -Lier, D. Braathen, E., Dupont, V. and  Sutherland, C. (2016). Knowledge and power in 
upgrading and resettlement initiatives. In The Politics of Slums in the Global South: 
Urban I nformality in Brazil, India, South Africa and Peru,  V. Dup ont, D. Jordhus -Lier, C. 
Sutherland, and E. Braathen (eds.), Routledge,  London, UK, 115 -143.  
Kara nja, I. (2010). An enumeration and mapping of informal settlements in Kisumu, Kenya, 
implemented by their inhabitants.  Environment and Urbanisation, 22(1), 217 -239.  
Kennedy, L., Sood, A., Chakraborty, D. and Chitta, R.M. (2019). Data Justice through the 
Prism of Information Politics and Resource Injustice : A Case  Study from Hyderabad’s  
Urban Frontier, Development Informatics Working Paper no.78,  University of 
Manchester, UK.  
Lefebvre, H. (1968 ). Le Droit à la Ville , Anthropos, Paris.  
Li, T.M. (2007). The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development and the Practice of 
Politics, Duke University Press, Durham.  
Lokanathan, S., Kreindler, G.E., de Silva, N.N., Miyauchi, Y., Dhananjaya, D. and Samarajiva, 
R. (2016). The potential of mobile network big data as a tool in Colombo’s transportation 
and urban planning. Information Technologies and International Developme nt, 12(2), 63 -
73. 
Lydon, M. (2003). Community m appi ng: The recovery (and d iscovery) of our Common 
Ground. Geomatica, 57(2), 131 -43. 
Martel, P. and Sutherland, C. (2019). Governing river rehabilitation for climate adaptation 
and water s ecurity in Durban, South Africa.  In The Geography of Climate Change 
Adaptation in Urban Africa , P.B. Cobbinah and M. Addaney, M. (eds), Palgrave 
MacMillan, Switzerland, 355 -387.  
Mazeka, B., Sutherland, C., Buthelezi, S. and Khumalo, D. (2019). Community -based mapping 
methodo logy for climate change adaptation: A case s tudy  of Quarry Road West informal 
settlement, Durban, South Africa, In The Geography of Climate Change Adaptation in 
Urban Africa , P.B. Cobbinah and M. Addaney (eds) , Palgrave MacMillan, Switzerland, 
57-88. 
McQ uillan, D. (2015). Algorithmic states of e xception. European Journal of Cultural Studies , 
18(4/5), 564 -76. 
Milan, S. and Treré , E. (2019). Big data from the South(s): Beyond data u niversalism . 
Television and New Media , 20(4) 319 -335.  
Piccol ella, A. (2013).  Participatory mapping for adaptation to climate change: The c ase of 
Boe Boe, Solomon Islands. Knowledge Management for  Development Journal , 9(1), 24 -
36. 
Rambaldi, G., Kwaku Kyem, P. A., McCall, M.K., and Weiner, D. (2006).  Participatory spatial 
information  management and communi cation in developing countries. The Electronic 
Journal of  Information Sys tems in Developing Cou ntries , 25(1), 1 -9. Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
35 
 Roberts, D. ( 2016 ). The new climate c alculus: 1.5°C = Paris Agreement , cities, local 
government, science and champions  (PLSC ). Urbanisation , 1(2), 1 -8. 
Samarajiva, R., Lokanathan, S., Madhawa, K., Kreindler, G. and Maldeniya, D. (2015). Big 
data to improve urban planning. Economic and Political Weekly , 50(22), 43 -48. 
Sengupta, R., Heeks, R., Chattapadhyay, S. and Foster, C. (2017). Exploring Big Data for 
Development , GDI Development Informatics Working Paper no.66. University of 
Manchester, UK.  
Satterthwaite, D., Archer, D., Colenbrander, S., Dodman, D.,  Hardoy, D. and Patel, S. (2018 ). 
Responding to Climate Chang e in Cities and in their Informal Settlements and E conomies , 
Paper prepared for the IPCC for the International Scientific Conference on Cities and 
Climate Change in Edmonton, March 2018 , IIED, Sussex.  
Sim, V., McCarthy, A., Buthe lezi, S. and  Khumalo, D. (2 019). Narratives of Home and 
Neighbourhood: Possibilities for Reimagining Urban Planning Exploring an In -Situ 
Upgrade: Quarry Road West Informal Settlement , report produced for Urban Futures 
Centre, Durban University of Technology, Durban.  
Spratt, S. and Baker, J. (2015). Big Data and International Development , IDS, University of 
Sussex, UK.  
Sutherland, C. (2016). Fact Sheet 2.3 South Africa. In The Politics of Slums in the Global 
South: Urban Informality in Brazil, India, South Africa and Peru,  V. Dupont , D. Jordhus -
Lier, C. Sutherland, and E. Braathen (eds.), Routledge,  London, UK, 34 -35. 
Sutherland, C. and Roberts, D. (2014). Why Leadership Matters in Water and Climate 
Governance , Opinion Paper 12, Chance2Sustain, EADI, Bonn.  
Sutherland, C., Braathen, E ., Dupont, V. and Jordhus -Lier, D. (2016). Policies towards 
substandard settlements. In The Politics of Slums in the Global South: Urban informality 
in Brazil, India, South Africa and Peru,  V. Dupont, D. Jordhus -Lier, C. Sutherland, and E. 
Braathen (eds.),  Routledge,  London, UK, 49 -78. 
Sutherland, C., Scott, D., Nel, E. and Nel, A. (2018). Conceptualising ‘the urban’ through the 
lens of Durban, South Africa. Urban Forum, 29(4), 333 -350.  
Sutherland, C., Mazeka, B., Buthelezi, S., Khumalo, D., Martel, P., Rei d, J., Xolo, L., Zondani, 
S.D., Nomlala, T., Xhakaza, S. Khumalo, T., Msibi, G., Sbuthu, Z., Thuthu, N., Hlongwe, S., 
Miya, M., Ndzimande, T., Khuhle, O.D., Nqanula, N., Ntuli, Z., Mgwacu, M., Gwayi, L., 
Zukulu, B., Dube, H., Nzimande, C., Cele, T., Mzandi , N., Khumalo, T., and Nyawuza, B. 
(2019a). Climate Smart Informal Settlements , report prepared for City of Bremen and 
GIZ, School of Built Environment and Development Studies, University of KwaZulu -Natal, 
Durban.  
Sutherland, C., Roberts, D.  and Douwes, J. (2019 b). Constructing resilience at three different 
scales: The 100 Resilient C ities programme, Durban’s resilience journey and e veryday 
resilience in the Palmiet Catchment . Human Geography, 12(1), 33 -49. 
Taylor, L. (2017). What is data jus tice? The case for connecting digital rights and freedoms  
on the global level. Big Data and Society , 4(2), 1 -14. 
Taylor, L. and Broeders, D. (2015). In the name of development. Geoforum , 64, 229 -237.  
Taylor, L. and Richter, C. (2015). Big data and urban go vernance. In Geographies of Urban 
Governance , J. Gupta, K. Pfeffer, H. Verrest and M. R os-Tonen (eds), Springer, Cham, 
Switzerland, 175-191.  
UN-Habitat (2017). New Urban Agenda . UN -Habitat, Nairobi, Kenya.  
UN-Habitat (2018) Pro-Poor Climate Action in Informal Settlements , UN -Habitat, Nairobi , 
Kenya . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
36 
 van Veenstra, A.F., Esmeijer, J., Bakker, T. and Kotterink, B. (2014). Data and the City . TNO, 
Delft.  
Vogel, C., Scott, D., Culwick, C. and Sutherland, C. (2016). Environmental problem solving in 
South Afri ca: Harnessing creative imaginaries to address ‘wicke d’ challenges and 
opportunities.  South African Geographical Journal , 98(3), 515 -530.  
Wang, C. and Burris, M. (1997). Photovoice: concept, methodology, and use for 
participatory needs a ssessment. Health, Education and Behaviour , 24(3),  369-387.  
Williams, D.,  Man ez Costa, M., Sutherland, C., Ce lliers, L. and Scheffran, J. (2019). 
Vulnerability of informal settlements in the context of rapid urbanization and climate 
change . Environment and Urbanisation, 31(1), 157 -176.  
Williams, D.S. , Manez Costa, M., Celliers, L. and S utherland, C. (2018). Informal settlements 
and f looding: Identif ying strengths and weaknesses in local governance for water 
management.  Water, 10, 871.  
Willis, K.  (2017). Whose Right to the  Smart City? Plymouth University, UK.  
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support from  Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . The contribution of the Quarry Road West ‘mapm akers’ in 
the production of this case study is acknowledged and recognised as without them, this 
research would not have been possible. Open Data Durban is also acknowledged for their 
contribution to the research, as are the members of the PCRP.  We would a lso like to thank 
Richard Heeks and James Evans for including us in this project, and for their valuable 
contributions to our paper.  
 
About the Author s 
Catherine Sutherland is an urban geographer and senior lecturer in the School of Built 
Environment and D evelopment Studies at the University of KwaZulu -Natal (UKZN), Durban. 
Her research focuses on environmental governance in cities, with a specific focus on water 
and climate governance and the relations between peri -urban housing, informal settlements 
and t he environment. Her research is locally focused and action based, as result of her 
strong commitment to building participatory governance in cities in the South . 
 
Bahle Mazeka is a PhD candidate in the School of Built Environment and Development 
Studies, U niversity of KwaZulu -Natal. He is an urban geographer who is interested in social 
justice and sustainable human settlements. He is born and raised in Bizana, in typical socio -
economic conditions of rural Eastern Cape, South Africa. He received his junior d egree at  
UKZN where his interest of cities and sustainable development developed. He holds a BSc 
Honours in Geographic Information System (GIS) from the Nelson Mandela University, and a 
Master of Housing from UKZN. He is currently an area manager for the i Qhaza Lethu 
informal settlement upgrading project and hence is employed in the Human Settlements 
Unit, eThekwini Municipality.  
 
Sibongile Buthelezi is a researcher in the School of Built Environment and Development 
Studies at the University of KwaZulu -Nata l. She has extensive experience in conducting 
community -based  research in cities, with a focus on water and climate governance, housing, Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 83  
37 
 the economic development trajectories of the urban periphery and innovative sanitation 
technologies. She has a strong i nterest in participatory environmental governance and is 
engaged in a large number of action research projects in Durban in partnership with 
eThekwini Municipality. She is an expert in methodologies for the co -production of 
knowledge, combining scientific knowledge with local knowledge.  
 
Duduzile Khumalo is a researcher and environmental activist in the School of Built 
Environment and Development Studies at the University of KwaZulu -Natal Durban. She has 
extensive experience in community -based  research in u rban areas, with a focus on water 
and climate governance and housing. She is currently working on research related to the 
nexus between food, environment and health. She has a strong interest in integrating local 
knowledge and experience  into policy making  and so strongly supports the practice of the 
co-production of knowledge. She is engaged in a number of action based research projects 
with eThekwini Municipality.  
 
Patrick Martel is a PhD Candidate in the School of Built Environment and Development 
Studie s at the University of KwaZulu -Natal, South Africa. Patrick works at the interface of 
the social and natural sciences, and is interested in governance processes. Initially trained as 
a geographer, his PhD thesis topic is titled “A temporal analysis of chan ging hydrosocial 
relationships in Durban, South Africa”. Patrick is funded by the Water Research Commission 
of South Africa (WRC 2354). He is part of a research team at UKZN that is actively involved in 
a range of water and climate change -related action re search projects in eThekwini 
Municipality.  
 
 
 
 