PSYCHOLOGY Copyright © 2019
The Authors, some
rights reserved;exclusive licenseeAmerican Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim tooriginal U.S. GovernmentWorks. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons AttributionNonCommercialLicense 4.0 (CC BY-NC).Motivating the adoption of new community-minded
behaviors: An empirical test in Nigeria
Graeme Blair1*†, Rebecca Littman2*†, Elizabeth Levy Paluck3,4*†
Social scientists have long sought to explain why people donate resources for the good of a community. Less
attention has been paid to the difficult task of motivating the first adopters of these important behaviors. In a field
experiment in Nigeria, we tested two cam paigns that encouraged people to try reporting corruption by text message.
Psychological theories about how to shift perceived norms and how to reduce barriers to action drove the design of
each campaign. The first, a film featuring actors reportin g corruption, and the second, a mass text message reducing
the effort required to report, caused a total of 1181 people in 106 communities to text, including 241 people who sent
concrete corruption reports. Psychological theories of social norms and behavior change can illuminate the early
stages of the evolution of cooperat ion and collective action, when ad option is still relatively rare.
INTRODUCTION
Why do people donate time, money, or other resources to their com-
munities? Scientists view this question about community-minded be-
havior as part of a broader question about why humans cooperate,
which sets apart large-scale human behavior from the behavior of other
species ( 1). Research has uncovered several factors that drive and con-
strain community-minded behavior, including expectations of paybacks
(2) and of punishments for free riders ( 3), internalized decision-making
tendencies that favor cooperation over selfishness ( 4), and perceived
social norms ( 5). A rich tradition of research on the evolution of col-
lective action for public goods provis ion was inspired by the pioneering
work of Ostrom ( 6), but few studies in this tradition focus on how
community-minded behaviors are initially adopted. Community-
minded behaviors that are rare (because they are novel or, for whatever
reason, are not widely adopted) may ca rry special costs and risks. These
costs and risks accrue from the fact that people have difficulty choosing
and acting on alternatives to the status quo ( 7,8), people ’s contributions
may not be matched by other community members without coordinatedpunishment of free riders ( 3,9), and people may perceive social, legal, or
safety risks associated with being on e of few to participate. Understanding
why people would sacrifice resources for their community, particularly
when it is not socially recognized as a common or desirable behavior,is important for understanding the ful l evolution of a collective action
strategy ( 6,10).
Learning how community-minded contributions are adopted and
become normative is also pragmatically important because voluntary
community contributions are often encouraged in contexts where gov-
ernment or private sector initiatives are infeasible or unsuccessful. Forexample, reporting social or political problems via text message is a re-cently invented solution used by a growing number of political activists,
civil society organizations, and technology experts ( 11). Initiatives in
countries like Kenya, Haiti, and India have asked people to contributeinformation about local violence, natural disasters, or corruption to helpother citizens navigate crises and to identify areas in need ( 12,13).
Studies of technology adoption show that once a certain threshold ofnew users is achieved, bandwagon effects, herding, and information
cascades can spur new behaviors to become widespread in a society
(14,15). However, the success of these initiatives depends, as a first
step, on persuading an initial group of people to try a behavior that isoutside of the status quo.
The current study addresses this first step, of how to persuade an
initial group of people to try a new form of community-minded action.We identify two major barriers to adopting new actions: the perception
that no one else will join (a problem of social norms) and minor logis-
tical or technical barriers (a problem of personal and structural ca-pacity). Psychological theories of social norms and behavior change
offer ideas for addressing each barrier —specifically, mechanisms for
influencing individuals ’perceptions of social norms, and small inter-
ventions for increasing individuals ’personal capacity, given structural
and cognitive constraints.
Psychological theory defines a perception of a social norm as an
individual ’s perception of how widespread or desirable a behavior is or
is becoming within the community ( 16,17). Research suggests that
norm perception is a strong motivator of human behavior ( 18). For mo-
tivating rare behaviors, percepti ons of a norm can be influenced even
before changing the actual rate of the behavior in a community ( 19).
Studies suggest that this is possible in part because people overgeneralize
from the public behavior of role models to their perception of the overallcommunity norm ( 20,21). Role models who influence norm percep-
tions can be people in one ’s community who are high status ( 22,23),
who receive lots of attention ( 20), and, in some cases, who break with
tradition ( 24). However, people can even use fictional characters as role
models, such as characters in a soap opera ( 25). Thus, one mechanism
for changing norm perceptions is to highlight the behavior of role
models, real or fictional ( 19).
Psychological theory on behavior c hange also highlights the impor-
tance of removing minor but psychologically important barriers to a
behavior, using a “nudge ”(26). A nudge —such as a reminder ( 27)o r
a new default ( 28)—helps a person to accomplish a behavior toward
which he or she is positively inclined by removing barriers to the be-
havior. While this insight may seem in tuitive, behavioral research has
demonstrated that what may seem lik e a materially insignificant cost,
such as memorizing a number or filling out a form, can actually be a
psychologically large barrier given constraints on individual cognitive or1Department of Political Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.2Sloan School
of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,USA.3Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.4Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton Uni-
versity, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: graeme.blair@ucla.edu (G.B.); rlittman@mit.edu (R.L.);
epaluck@princeton.edu (E.L.P.)†These authors contributed equally to this work.SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 1o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
motivational capacity ( 26). A wealth of studies show that using nudges
to remove minor barriers significantly increases rates of consequential
behaviors like showing up to a court date ( 29), successfully enrolling in
college ( 30), and voting ( 31).
Thus far, psychological theorie sa b o u tn o r m sa n db e h a v i o rc h a n g e
have been successfully applied in Western democracies to improve lowrates of community-minded behaviors. Using a large-scale field ex-
periment, we evaluate these two psych ological theories in a non-Western
context where activists sought to enc ourage the rare behavior of corrup-
tion reporting. In Nigeria, reporting corruption to nongovernmentalagencies is part of an envisioned citizen-driven campaign to reduce
the country ’s endemic corruption ( 32). Activist groups hope that large
numbers of people will report their experiences with corruption,which would be used to write advocacy reports testifying to the wide-
spread nature and negative effects of corruption on the population.
However, citizen corruption reporting is extremely uncommon inNigeria. Previous efforts to encourage reporting have been uniformly
unsuccessful, regardless of the recipient of the reporting and regard-
less of the technology used. Nationwide campaigns via phone, textmessage, and the internet have elicited no more than 140 reportsper year, out of a population of 174 million ( 33,34).
The failure of previous corruption- reporting campaigns in Nigeria
cannot be attributed to a lack of conce rn about the issue, since Nigerians
consistently name corruption as one of the top problems facing their
country ( 35). Our pilot research in Nigeria, including a survey of 345
randomly sampled individuals in the four states where our study tookplace, indicated that just under 80% of citizens believe the police, civil
servants, and their state government s were corrupt. Eighty-three per-
cent reported being angry they had t o pay bribes, and 60% reported be-
ing very angry. Our research also suggested the importance of the two
barriers to reporting. With respect to perceived norms of reporting, re-
spondents indicated that corruption reporting is rare; with respect tologistical barriers, they reported that there are no means to report. Re-lated to both assertions, 30% of pilot respondents said that they felt re-
porting corruption was useless, an d 50% said reporting was dangerous.
In the present experiment, we tested a norms intervention, which
aimed to address individuals ’perception that corruption reporting is
rare, and a nudge intervention, which aimed to minimize the perceived
logistical barriers to corruption reporting. We first worked with aNigerian anticorruption group to establish a toll-free text messaging
platform. We then launched two campaigns that raised awareness of
the platform and that attempted to (i) shift perceptions of the normsof corruption reporting and (ii) reduce barriers to reporting using a
nudge. We tracked corruption reports texted into the platform from
each community for 160 days. We also fielded a survey in each com-munity several days after both campaigns were implemented.
The first campaign was a 2-hour Nigerian ( “Nollywood ”)f e a t u r e
film produced for this project with well-known actors. It was filmed
in the Niger Delta region where the study took place. The film ’sd r a m a t -
ic storyline incorporated corruption as part of the characters ’everyday
lives. The film campaign was rolled out in a between-community de-
sign. The design entailed that half of the study communities receiveda treatment version of the film and half received a placebo version.
The packaging of the two versions was identical except that different
phone numbers for texting reports w ere included on the covers in small
letters. The treatment version included scenes in which the actors re-ported corruption using our texting platform as part of the overall cor-
ruption storyline (Fig. 1, A and B). These scenes showing role models
reporting corruption were designed to shift viewers ’perceptions ofcorruption-reporting norms. Specifically, the role models ’behavior
was used to increase audience perception that other Nigerians report
and approve of corruption reporting. The role models in the filmwere fictional but also high-status actors filmed in the audience ’sl o c a l
Nigerian context. A placebo version of the film cut these corruption-
reporting scenes, which were not central to the film ’s resolution.
Both the treatment and placebo ve rsions of the film advertised the
corruption-reporting platform at t he beginning, middle, and end of the
f i l mw i t hab a n n e ra c r o s st h es c r e e n and on the film packaging. Thus, all
film viewers had the information needed to use the corruption-reportingplatform. Because we randomized which version of the film was dis-
tributed in each community, we are able to estimate the causal effect of
the role models in the treatment film compared with the placebo oncorruption-reporting and perceived norms.
The second campaign was a mass text message sent to all customers
of Nigeria ’s largest mobile phone provider in each study community,
after the community received either the treatment or placebo film.
The mass text was sent to people in each community on a randomly
assigned date a few weeks following the film distribution using a steppedwedge design. By virtue of this randomization, we are able to estimatethe causal effect of the message by co mparing response rates before and
after the randomly assigned date of the nudge. The message alerted in-
dividuals to the corruption-reporting platform and explained the ease ofreporting (Fig. 2A). In this way, the message was designed to reduce
barriers to reporting by clearly explaining the reporting campaign,
allowing recipients to simply hit “reply ”to report, and emphasizing that
correspondence with the corruption p latform was free (an unusual fea-
ture; see Methods and Materials for more details on each campaign).
Thus, the film campaign and the text message campaign both
attempted to encourage individual s to adopt corruption reporting via
text, either by promoting the perception that corruption reporting
was becoming more normative, i.e., widespread and accepted (via rolemodels in the film), or by reducing barriers to reporting (via a text-basedreminder with simple and encouraging instructions). Neither campaign
promised investigative action in r esponse to a report, and any person
w h oi n q u i r e dv i at e x tm e s s a g ew a st o l dt h a tr e p o r t sw o u l db eu s e db yaNigerian activist organization. Bot h campaigns made salient the issue of
corruption, although daily life already highlights this issue to the ma-
jority of Nigerians. Our film intervention controls for salience of thecorruption-reporting platform: We compare corruption reports and
norms among people who watched either the treatment or the placebo
film, both of which provided info rmation about the corruption-
reporting campaign hotline. Within this film experiment, we assess
whether corruption reporting is further boosted by a nudge from a
text message sent on a randomly assigned day to both communitiesthat received the treatment film or the placebo film.
RESULTS
Over the course of our 7-month study in 106 communities across the
Niger Delta region in southeastern Nigeria (see figs. S1 and S2), the
corruption-reporting platform received 3316 messages from 1685unique senders. In total, 1181 unique senders texted in messages dis-
cussing corruption or the study ’s campaigns, including 241 unique
individuals who sent a concrete corruption report that made explicitmention of a corrupt act, person, or ins titution (Fig. 3). As a benchmark,
our 7-month study in 106 small southern Nigerian communities (for
example, in urban neighborhoods as small as a quarter square mile)
produced 1.7 times as many concrete corruption reports as 1 year ofSCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 2o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
the previous nationwide corrupt ion-reporting campaign. People
most commonly reported bribes and embezzlement perpetrated bypoliticians, law enforcement, and those in the education sector. Of
the corruption-related messages, 86% arrived within the first 30 days
after the campaigns began.
What caused people to report? A total of 31,800 copies of the treat-
ment and placebo films were distributed to the 106 randomly sampled
communities in a random order. A randomly assigned half of com-munities received the treatment film, and the other half the placebo
version. Figure 1 (C and D) shows that we received messages from
communities where we distributed the treatment version of the film, butthe average effect is close to zero from the placebo communities. Weestimate that in the 15- to 34-day period between the start of film
distribution and the laun ch of the mass text message, the treatment film
caused an increase of 0.007 corrupt ion reports per day in each commu-
nity compared with the placebo film [confidence interval (CI), 0 to 0.013].
In each community, the mass text message was sent on a randomly
assigned day 10 to 20 days after film distribution. On the day the
mass text message arrived, we obse rved an estimated increase of
5.053 corruption-related messages in each community (CI, 4.06 to6.047), including an increase of 0. 91 concrete corruption reports (CI,
0.597 to 1.224; Fig. 2, B and C). Afterward, we observed a steep decay
such that 3 days later, the effect of the campaign was 0.208 corruption-
related messages per day in each community (CI, 0.038 to 0.378). The
Any engagement messages
0.01.02.03.04
0 4 8 1 21 62 02 4Mean number of any engagement messages
per community per day
Days since start of film distribution
Treatment Placebo
0.01.02.03.04
0 4 8 12 16 20 24
Days since start of film distributionMean number of corruption reports
per community per dayCorruption reports
Treatment PlaceboA
BC
D
Fig. 1. Social norms campaign film scene and results. (AandB) Scenes from the treatment version of the Nollywood film, depicting characters texting in corruption
reports. (Photo credit: Graeme Blair, University of California, Los Angeles; Rebecca Littman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Elizabeth L evy Paluck, Princeton
University). ( CandD) Time series plotting the average daily number of text messages that engaged with the campaign and that reported a concrete corruption event,
respectively, from communities where we delivered the treatment versus placebo version of the film. Locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOES S) lines are overlaid.SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 3o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
effects of the mass text message were not different in the placebo versus
treatment film communities (difference, −0.009; CI, −0.03 to 0.012).
To test whether the treatment version of the film shifted viewers ’
perceptions of social norms, we surveyed 1399 randomly sampled film
viewers from our study population (see the Supplementary Materials).We found that watching the film ’s characters text about corruption
shifted the viewers ’perceptions of norms in their community, specif-
ically that corruption, and anger about corruption, was widespread(corruption = 0.083 and CI, 0.025 to 0.142; anger = 0.116 and CI,
0.035 to 0.197; fig. S4). Respondents who watched the treatment film
also believed that their community viewed corruption reporting asdangerous to a significantly greater extent than the placebo film au-dience (0.097; CI, 0.016 to 0.178). But contrary to our prediction that
viewers would overgeneralize the behavior of the characters in the
film to others in their community, the treatment film did not in-crease perceptions of how widespread corruption reporting was or
was becoming in their community, compared with viewers in placebo
communities ( −0.003; CI, −0.052 to 0.046). One reason may be that
the text reporting was not a visible behavior in their community: Only
18% of all respondents knew someone who planned to text a corruption
report, and only 5% knew someone who actually had texted a corrup-tion report.
DISCUSSION
Two campaigns in 106 communities, involving 17 additional minutes in
a Nollywood film and one unsolicited mass text message, prompted
241 corruption reports and hundreds more text messages signaling in-terest in addressing corruption. The influence of each campaign oper-
ated independently: Communities receiving the treatment film were
just as responsive to the mass text campaign as those that receivedthe placebo film. While it is impossible to report a precise response rate
given that we do not know how many people actually read the mass text
or watched the film, we estimate a range from 0.002 (approximately 1 of605 people sending a message) to 0. 007 (approximately 1 of 145 people
sending a message). The rate of 0.002 was calculated assuming that all683,000 recipients received the mass text message and all 31,800 films
were viewed; the rate of 0.007 was calculated assuming approximately
one-quarter of the text messages were received on the basis of a phoneaudit that we conducted (see the Supplementary Materials) and that
one-half of the films were viewed. Our campaigns elicited a much higher
response rate than previous corruptio n-reporting campaigns in Nigeria,
which received fewer than 140 messa ges from the entire country over
the course of 1 year ( 33,34). The response rate in our study is also sub-
stantially higher than that of a radio ad campaign in Uganda encouraging
citizens to send messages to their Me mber of Parliament [estimated re-
sponse rate = 0.0002 o ver a 6-month period ( 36)]. Last, while our effects
are statistically and substantively significant, they are smaller than
the effects found in recent studies us ing a text or film campaign to target
highly motivated citizens or behaviors that are driven by more im-
mediate self-interest ( 37,38).
The film campaign likely influenced corruption reporting through
a mechanism other than shifting perceived norms about the commonality
or desirability of reporting itself. Instead, the campaign may have caused
reporting through the observed shift in perceived norms regarding thetypicality of corruption and community members ’feelings of anger
about corruption. Previous work has shown the power of mobilizing
collective emotions like anger to increase collective action ( 39). This
mechanism may have encouraged more corruption reporting, despitethe concurrent impression promoted by the treatment film that com-
munity members view corruption reporting as dangerous.
Encouraging people to try a community-minded action for the first
time is a task separate from encouraging a long-term pattern of this be-
havior ( 6,10). Our data cannot shed light on whether repeated mass text
messages and greater media saturation of role models from popularculture would sustain the first month ’s rate of corruption reporting. Po-
tentially, repeating the text messages and inserting more role models
into mass media could successfully shift actual rates of corruption
012345
012345678Mean number of engaged messages
per community per dayAny engagement messages
Days since text blast
Treatment Placebo012345
012345678Days since text blastMean number of corruption reports
per community per dayCorruption reports
Treatment PlaceboAB C
Fig. 2. Nudge campaign text and results. (A) Mass text nudge sent to phones. (Photo credit: Graeme Blair, University of California, Los Angeles; Rebecca Littman,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Elizabeth Levy Paluck, Princeton University). ( BandC) Time series plotting the average daily number of text messages that
engaged with the campaign and that reported a concrete corruption event, respectively, from communities that received the text on a randomly assigne dd a y
following the film distribution. LOESS lines are overlaid.SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 4o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
reporting, in addition to perceived norms of corruption reporting. Inter-
ventions building on the present work could also advertise the existence
of early adopters and early increases in corruption reporting. To under-
stand how this new form of community-minded behavior might be-
come an established convention, it would also be relevant to test
whether publication of the received corruption reports would succeedin reducing actual levels of corruption, as a community-level payoff.
These and other inquiries can contrib ute to understanding the adoption
of rare community-minded behaviors and the evolution of cooperationand collective action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Identification of study population
We estimated the coverage area of al l mobile phone towers in four states
of the Niger Delta (Akwa Ibom, Bayel s a ,D e l t a ,a n dR i v e r s )u s i n gt h e i r
geographic coordinates. We then conducted a restricted random
sampling of towers, such that communities were sufficiently separated
from each other to avoid spillover of the mass text message and theNollywood film. To do this, we simulated many samples of 215 com-
munities meeting the distance restri ctions and randomly selected one of
those samples. Following a technical error with our mass text messaging
service, we conducted the study on the unaffected subset of 106 com-
munities within that representative sample (see the Supplementary
Materials for further details). We also conducted a pilot study of our
baseline survey that helped us to estimate rates of mobile phone usage,media consumption, corruptio n, and corruption reporting.
Baseline survey
We conducted a baseline survey in all 106 communities to gather data
used to block communities for treatment assignment (see table S5). The
survey was portrayed to participants as an independent survey fromPrinceton University. The sample fo r our baseline survey in each com-
munity was a randomly selected group of self-identified Nollywood film
watchers (those who would likely purchase the Nollywood treat-ment film). In 88% of all communities, we interviewed between12 and 20 people in the community; be cause of rigorous quality checks,
11 communities retained fewer than 12 participants (a minimum of 8).
The number of surveys completed was balanced across treatmentconditions (average = 15 completed surveys under the placebo condi-
tion and 16 under the treatment condition). The survey measured a
range of norms about corruption and corruption reporting. Surveyors
also confirmed that the 106 communities had a video CD film seller
(one of our treatment delivery methods) and reception from our mobile
phone company partner.
Treatment campaigns
We developed two campaigns: a featu re-length film with treatment and
placebo versions, and a mass text message. The film was produced in
collaboration with iROKO Partners, the leading distributor of films
from the Nigerian film industry, known as Nollywood. Nollywood is
the third largest film industry in t he world, following Hollywood and
Bollywood. The film produced for this project, titled Water of Gold ,r u n s
approximately 2 hours and stars wel l-known Nollywood actors. It tells
the story of a poor fisherman named Natufe living in the Niger Deltaand of his rags-to-riches brother, Priye. The two are close until Priye
leaves their village, eventually returning many years later as a rich busi-
nessman. Against his brother ’s protests, Priye enters politics and begins
to work with corrupt local politicians. The film depicts corruptionharming Natufe and his neighbors ’livelihoods, including bad medical
care, police harassment, and oil comp anies disrespecting environmental
concerns. Natufe becomes outspoken against the corrupt system inwhich they live.
In the treatment version of the film, Natufe and a local activist set up a
toll-free “short-code ”telephone number, and in additional scenes totaling
17 min, they encourage community members to use the short code to
report on corruption by text message. They explain that their activist
group will use the text messages to write a public report. Subsequenttreatment scenes separately depict men and women of varying social
classes reporting corruption to the short code. These treatment
scenes do not appear in the placebo fi lm, which is otherwise identical.
In both versions of the film, an information banner echoing the content01020304050
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
2014Number of any engagement messages received per dayFilm distribution start dates
Mass text dates
Fig. 3. Total number of text messages received per day from January 2014 to August 2014. The number of messages received per day is reported for Any Engagement
messages that mentioned corruption or the two media campaigns, including Corruption Report messages that made explicit mention of a corrupt act, person, or institution.SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 5o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
of the mass text message appears on the screen four times: “See cor-
ruption? Let us hear from you! SMS 50500 to report corruption to
Integrity Nigeria. Tell us your story. Text for FREE. Your numberkept secret. ”
The mass text message treatment (see Fig. 2A) was received by all
subscribers to the major mobile phone company within the treatedphone tower ’s coverage area. A pilot survey that we conducted before
the experiment revealed that 87% of people in the Niger Delta region
with phones subscribed to that phon e company (88% of all respondents
reported owning a phone).
Treatment assignment
After we blocked communities into pairs using covariates measured inthe baseline survey and characteristics of the community such as the
number of mobile phone subscribers, we randomly assigned com-
munities within each pair to receive either the treatment or the placebofilm ( n= 53 communities in each group). Next, we randomized the
o r d e ri nw h i c hf i l m sw e r ed i s t r i b u t ed in communities. The order was
randomized first among the pairs of communities and then between thetreatment and placebo communities within each pair. Last, we ran-domized the timing of the mass text message for each blocked pair of
communities, such that it was sent on a randomly assigned day within
14 to 20 days following the last day that films were distributed in a givencommunity. (The actual time interval ranged from 10 to 20 days be-
cause of an administrative error in six communities.) This range was
selected to give people in each community a chance to watch the filmbefore receiving the mass text message.
Film distribution
Films were distributed in each community after the baseline survey,
from 13 January 2014 to 9 March 2014. They were distributed by mem-
bers of a Nigerian research firm who were trained on distributionprotocols by the research team and were not part of the baseline surveyenumeration team. Film distributors visited the main film seller in each
community and introduced themselves as representatives of our film
production partner. The distributor s explained that they were promot-
ing a new, unreleased film. As part of the promotion, they were there to
give out two free copies of Water of Gold to customers who bought any
Nigerian film from the film seller (one copy for the customer and onefor the customer to give to a friend). In return for entry in a lottery for a
Blackberry phone, customers who re ceived the films were asked to pro-
vide their name and contact numbe r, as well as the names and numbers
of two friends with whom they usuall y watch Nigerian films. (The lot-
tery was conducted and the phone deli vered after the conclusion of the
study.) These names and numbers were later used to randomly samplepeople to participate in the endline survey. To augment the number offilms given out in such a short time, film distributors gave out an addi-
tional 100 free films to arbitrary pe ople aged 18 and over in return for
contact details. The distribution of 300 films in each community typi-cally lasted from 3 to 5 days. All films were distributed by a member
of our trained film distribution te am who sat in the shop all day, not by
the shop ’s film seller. Across the 106 communities in the sample, we
distributed 31,800 films.
Mass text message
The mass text message was sent to all subscribers of the largest mobilephone provider in our study communities, as well as to the film buyers
and their friends, whose numbers were collected by the film distribution
team. Text messages were sent to 6 83,000 people across the 106 com-munities from 3 February 2014 to 29 March 2014. While we knew the
exact number of phone numbers tar geted by the mass text message, we
could not confirm the number of people who actually received themessage. Certainly not all people on the list received the message, as a
result of insufficient credit purchase d for their phone, incorrect profile
settings, an invalidly recorded numb er, no operator coverage, and other
possible causes. During an audit o f randomly selected 1000 mass text
message recipients (544 of whom answered our phone call), 23% con-
firmed receiving the message, with no difference between phonenumbers assigned to the treatment or placebo film ( p=0 . 9 ) .
Endline survey
Approximately 10 days after the mas s text message was sent to a given
community, the endlin e survey was conducted, from 18 February 2014
to 11 May 2014. Before arriving in ea ch community, surveyors called
participants who received a copy of Water of Gold . We collected the
phone numbers of friends to add them to the list of mass text message
recipients, but only interviewed fil m buyers in the endline survey (with
the exception of one community, where we were unable to contact asufficient number of film buyers and so interviewed customers andothers who had received and watched the film). Surveyors made three
attempts to contact each film buyer on the list before moving on to the
next person. When surveyors made contact over the phone, theyscreened the respondent to confirm that they were 18 years of age,
which was required for survey participation, and to see whether they
had actually watched the film (determined by asking for a cursory de-scription of the plot). Only those who had watched Water of Gold were
included in the endline survey. In 91% of all communities, we inter-
viewed between 12 and 20 people in the community; because of rigorous
quality checks, eight communities retained fewer than 12 participants (a
minimum of 7). The number of surveys completed is balanced across
treatment and placebo (average = 14 completed surveys each). The end-line survey repeated all of the questions contained in the baseline.
Coding incoming messages
After eliminating incomplete or nonsense texts received by the plat-form, we coded all remaining messa ges. Five members of the research
team independently coded a rando m sample of 200 messages and then
discussed and agreed on their differe nt interpretations of the coding def-
initions. One coder then coded all m essages using the consensus inter-
pretations, and a second coder coded a random subset of 200 messages,
achieving a rate of agreement of 90.5% (Fleiss ’k= 0.81). Messages re-
ceived between 13 January 2014 an d 12 August 2014 were coded and
included in the analysis. We report the two main codes of interest in this
paper: (i) Any Engagement (texts in which the sender mentioned cor-
ruption or the two media campaigns) and (ii) Corruption Report (a sub-
set of Any Engagement messages in which the sender made explicit
mention of a corrupt act, person, or institution). A list of the coding
definitions with example messages is presented in table S1. While it isimpossible to verify the veracity of the reports or to determine the mo-
tivations of the sender, we note that most of the messages featured com-
mentary about corruption as a societ al problem rather than reports on
the malfeasance of specific people. T herefore, the vast majority of mes-
sages do not appear to be motivated by a desire for personal vengeance
or gain, but rather by a desire to engage with a societal problem.
Analysis
We predicted the number of corruption messages per day in each com-
munity (separately for messages with any engagement and corruptionSCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 6o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
report) received from unique sender s using the following randomly as-
signed independent variables: treat ment versus placebo film, which was
randomly assigned at the geographic level; and day of mass text messagereception, which was assigned at the geographic level on a randomly
chosen day following film distribution. For the corruption messages,
we were able to determine each unique sender ’s treatment status based
on their geographical location, according to the phone company. In all
analyses, we interact the film and m ass text treatments and used fixed
effects for the community matched pair, and we report cluster-robustSEs at the level of the community.
Y
it¼treat film itþmass text itþtreat film it/C2mass text itþpairi
We predict endline survey respon ses about social norms of corrup-
tion and corruption reporting in each community using the randomly
assigned treatment versus placebo film variable. These regressions alsocontrol for community matched-pair fixed effects and calculate cluster-
robust SEs at the level of community.
Y
it¼treat film itþpairi
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/3/eaau5175/DC1Supplementary Text
Fig. S1. Illustrative map of 106 sampled communities and mobile phone towers.
Fig. S2. Illustrative map of sampled communities in an urban area, Port Harcourt.Fig. S3. Ex ante predictions for rates of corruption reporting per treatment condition.Fig. S4. Difference in perceptions of social norms regarding corruption and corruptionreporting.Fig. S5. Difference in perceptions of social norms regarding corruption and corruptionreporting, for police and bureaucrat corruption and government corruption.
Table S1. Summary of text messages received in response to the two study campaigns.
Table S2. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text.Table S3. Changes in social norms outcomes as a result of the treatment film.Table S4. Summary statistics for items in social norms outcome indices.Table S5. Full text of survey questions and response scales used in the design and analysis.Table S6. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text, averaged
over the period before the mass text and the period after.
Table S7. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text, droppingcommunities with no film watchers.Table S8. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text, droppingcommunities that received the mass text early.Table S9. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text, using
assigned mass text send date.
Table S10. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass text,controlling for week of film distribution.Table S11. Corruption messages sent as a result of the treatment film and mass textinteraction, with distribution duration control.Table S12. Messages related to corruption that are not detailed corruption reports sent as aresult of the treatment film and mass text.
Table S13. Changes in social norms outcomes as a result of the treatment film, controlling for
individual-level covariates.Table S14. Changes in social norms outcomes as a result of the treatment film, controlling forweek of film distribution start.Table S15. Changes in social norms outcomes as a result of the treatment film, controlling forthe duration of film distribution.
Table S16. Changes in social norms outcomes as a result of the treatment film, with
enumerator fixed effects.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. R. Boyd, P. J. Richerson, Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation (or anything
else) in sizable groups. Ethol. Sociobiol. 13, 171 –195 (1992).
2. M. A. Nowak, K. Sigmund, Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature 437, 1291 –1298 (2005).
3. R. Boyd, H. Gintis, S. Bowles, Coordinated punishment of defectors sustains cooperation
and can proliferate when rare. Science 328, 617 –620 (2010).4. A. Bear, D. G. Rand, Intuition, deliberation, and the evolution of cooperation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 936 –941 (2016).
5. H. Allcott, Social norms and energy conservation. J. Public Econ. 95, 1082 –1095 (2011).
6. E. Ostrom, Collective action and the evolution of social norms. J. Econ. Perspect. 14,
137–158 (2000).
7. S. Eidelman, C. S. Crandall, Bias in favor of the status quo. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass
6, 270 –281 (2012).
8. D. Kahneman, J. L. Knetsch, R. H. Thaler, Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aversion,
and status quo bias. J. Econ. Perspect. 5, 193 –206 (1991).
9. E. Fehr, S. Gächter, Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415, 137 –140 (2002).
10. R. Axelrod, W. D. Hamilton, The evolution of cooperation. Science 211, 1390 –1396
(1981).
11. D. Ryvkin, D. Serra, J. Tremewan, I paid a bribe: An experiment on information sharing
and extortionary corruption. Eur. Econ. Rev. 94,1–22 (2017).
12. R. I. Rotberg, J. C. Aker, Mobile phones: Uplifting weak and failed states. Wash. Q. 36,
111–125 (2013).
13. M. Zook, M. Graham, T. Shelton, S. Gorman, Volunteered geographic information and
crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the haitian earthquake. World Med.
Health Policy 2,7–33 (2010).
14. T. C. Schelling, Dynamic models of segregation. J. Math. Sociol. 1, 143 –186 (1971).
15. A. V. Banerjee, A simple model of herd behavior. Q. J. Econ. 107, 797 –817 (1992).
16. R. B. Cialdini, M. R. Trost, in The Handbook of Social Psychology , D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske,
G. Lindzey, Eds. (McGraw-Hill, ed. 4, 1998), vol. 1 –2, pp. 151 –192.
17. M. Sherif, The Psychology of Social Norms (Harper, 1936).
18. D. T. Miller, D. A. Prentice, in Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Principles , E. T. Higgins,
A. Kruglanski, Eds. (Guilford Press, 1996), pp. 799 –829.
19. M. E. Tankard, E. L. Paluck, Norm perception as a vehicle for social change. Soc. Issues
Policy Rev. 10, 181 –211 (2016).
20. E. L. Paluck, H. Shepherd, P. M. Aronow, Changing climates of conflict: A social network
experiment in 56 schools. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 566 –571 (2016).
21. E. La Ferrara, Mass media and social change: Can we use television to fight poverty?
J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 14, 791 –827 (2016).
22. A. Banerjee, A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, M. O. Jackson, The diffusion of microfinance.
Science 341, 1236498 (2013).
23. M. A. Hogg, Influence and leadership, in Handbook of Social Psychology , S. T. Fiske,
D. T. Gilbert, G. Lindzey, Eds., (John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, NJ, US, 2010),pp. 1166 –1207.
24. J. E. Dannals, D. T. Miller, Social norm perception in groups with outliers.
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 146, 1342 –1359 (2017).
25. E. L. Paluck, D. P. Green, Deference, dissent, and dispute resolution: An experimental
intervention using mass media to change norms and behavior in Rwanda. Am. Polit.
Sci. Rev. 103, 622 –644 (2009).
26. R. H. Thaler, C. R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
Happiness (Yale Univ. Press, 2008).
27. S. Bhargava, D. Manoli, Psychological frictions and the incomplete take-up of social
benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 3489 –3529
(2015).
28. G. B. Chapman, M. Li, H. Colby, H. Yoon, Opting in vs opting out of influenza vaccination.
Jama 304,4 3–44 (2010).
29. B. Cooke, B. Z. Diop, A. Fishbane, J. Hayes, A. Ouss, A. Shah, Using Behavioral Science to
Improve Criminal Justice Outcomes (University of Chicago Crime Lab Report, 2018).
30. B. L. Castleman, L. C. Page, Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and peer
mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates?J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 115, 144 –160 (2015).
31. N. Malhotra, M. R. Michelson, T. Rogers, A. A. Valenzuela, Text messages as mobilization
tools: The conditional effect of habitual voting and election salience. Am. Politics Res. 39,
664–681 (2011).
32. D. J. Smith, A Culture of Corruption: Everyday Deception and Popular Discontent in Nigeria
(Princeton Univ. Press, 2010).
33. I. Nigeria, egunjedotinfo: Name & praise or name & shame …just tell your story!,
[accessed 1 September 2016].
34. BribeNigeria.com, Bribenigeria.com: Fighting corruption in nigeria, [accessed
1 September 2016].
35. NOIPolls, Democracy day poll, [accessed 6 September 2016].36. G. Grossman, M. Humphreys, G. Sacramone-Lutz, Information Technology and Political
Engagement: Mixed Evidence from Uganda (Mimeo, 2016).
37. G. Grossman, M. Humphreys, G. Sacramone-Lutz, “I wld like u WMP to extend electricity
2 our village ”: On Information technology and interest articulation. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
108, 688 –705 (2014).
38. A. Banerjee, E. Duflo, S. Barnhardt, Movies, margins, and marketing: Encouraging the
adoption of iron-fortified salt, in Insights in the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago
Press, 2015), pp. 285 –306.SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 7o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
39. M. van Zomeren, R. Spears, A. H. Fischer, C. W. Leach, Put your money where your mouth
is! explaining collective action tendencies through group-based anger and group
efficacy. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 87, 649 –664 (2004).
Acknowledgments: We thank R. Gomila for the extraordinary research assistance. We are also
very grateful to A. Bland, M. Clark-Barol, A. Coppock, S. Cuerda, J. Drost-Lopez, A. Edgell,M. Gleave, J. Okeke, and M. Offer-Westort for additional research assistance. We thank ourpartners in the interventions and data collection, especially Integrity Nigeria; iROKO TV;
Magic Movies; a major mobile phone firm in Nigeria that wishes to remain anonymous;
TNS RMS Nigeria, and especially M. Fagbemi and C. Egbulefu; MK&I, and especially Y. Aderojuand A. Seosan; Funmobile, and especially A. Adetule; and Social Action. We also thankK. Egbon and K. Henshaw for assistance in developing the interventions, and C. Okpowhorand C. Uche for help in developing and translating our measurement. We are grateful for theuseful comments from audiences at Yale, Harvard, Evidence in Governance and Politics
(EGAP), the Contemporary African Political Economy Research Seminar (CAPERS), the
Paluck laboratory, the UCLA Improving Designs in the Social Sciences workshop, and theAmerican Political Science Association Annual Meeting. Funding: Funding from an
anonymous private donor and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research to E.L.P. isgratefully acknowledged. Ethics statement: This study was approved by the Princeton
University Institutional Review Board (protocol no. 5813). The authors complied with all
relevant ethical regulations. Author contributions: G.B., R.L., and E.L.P. designed the study,
oversaw data collection, analyzed the data, and drafted the manuscript. All authorscontributed equally. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study and all codes areavailable in the OSF repository at http://dx.doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/9A7H5.
The experimental design was preregistered at http://egap.org/registration/629.
Submitted 19 June 2018
Accepted 28 January 2019Published 13 March 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aau5175
Citation: G. Blair, R. Littman, E. L. Paluck, Motivating the adoption of new community-minded
behaviors: An empirical test in Nigeria. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau5175 (2019).SCIENCE ADVANCES |RESEARCH ARTICLE
Blair et al .,Sci. Adv. 2019; 5: eaau5175 13 March 2019 8o f8
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances  (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances  is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).Motivating the adoption of new community-minded behaviors: An empirical test in
Nigeria
Graeme BlairRebecca LittmanElizabeth Levy Paluck
Sci. Adv., 5 (3), eaau5175. • DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau5175
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aau5175
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on December 05, 2022
