JANUARY 2021  
Keeping  Children Engaged in Distance 
Learning in the Philippines: Key 
Findings from the RECOVR Survey  
RECOVR Policy Analysis Series  
Introduction  
To support government partners’ initiatives in response to the COVID -19 pandemic, IPA launched the 
Research for Effective COVID -19 Responses (RECOVR) Survey, a rapid response panel survey it has 
conducted in nine countries including the Philippines. The RE COVR survey aims to directly inform key 
government partners on the health, economic, educational, and social ramifications of the pandemic.  
 
This brief summarizes and presents key education results from the RECOVR Philippines Survey to 
provide decision -makers of the Department of Education (DepEd) with rigorous evidence in support of 
the implementation of the Basic Education Learning Continuity Plan (BE -LCP) and policy 
recommendations based on the results. Key policy questions to consider are: 1) how can policymakers  
ensure  that children do not fall behind in their education, and 2) how can policymakers  help students 
be engaged in distance learning?  
The Research   
IPA Philippines conducted the RECOVR survey from 18 June to 1 July. The sample consisted of 1,389 
respondents reached through Random Digit Dialing  (RDD)  of a nationally representative sample of 
phone numbers in the TNT network. As such, the survey is not nationally representative , but rather is 
representative of numbers in the network . Compared to 2015 Census averages, respondents in  the 
survey are younger (32 y ears old  Vs. 52 years old .), more female (70  percent  vs. 49  percent ), more 
urban (from the National Capital Region; 19  percent  vs. 13  percent ), and more educated (52  percent  vs. 
25 percent  completed secondary school). Respondents came from comparable average household 
sizes (4.8  persons  vs. 4.6  persons ). 
Findings  
Respondents were most concerned about children falling behind in their edu cation and children 
getting sick : When asked about their main concerns about school -age children  (those in Grade 12 or 
below)  at home, respondents said that they were mostly worried about children falling behind in their 
education (34 percent) and children getting sick (33 percent). Poorer and wealthier respondents were 
similarly likely to report these concerns.  
 JANUARY 2021  
 
Concerns abou t school -age children  
 
Concerns about school -age children : The problem of children falling behind education is not new. Prior 
to the pandemic, vulnerable children were already at risk of falling further behind learning. With new 
modes of education delivery , the challenge now is how to ensure learners are participating and 
engaged in distance learning for a prolonged period. A key policy implication to consider is setting up 
support structures for parents and caregivers to help them manage children’s learnin g at home and 
ensure that engagement in distance learning is sustained.  
 
Existing evidence shows that direct communications with parents via SMS or other channels help 
increase and sustain parental involvement at home and at school, resulting in learning gains.1 These 
interventions include informing parents of their children’s learning levels,2 progress,3 and teacher 
attendance4. Furthermore, personalized messages may be more effective in strengthening parental 
engagement than generic messages.5  
 
Sixty pe rcent of respondents indicated that children in their household had already enrolled in 
school : The majority (60 percent) of respondents reported that they had enrolled their children in basic 
education, while another 20 percent indicated that they definit ely or most likely would enroll their 
children. The results reflect DepEd’s target enrollment of 80 percent based on last year’s enrollment 
figures. Our survey was conducted within the period of enrollment in basic education (1 June to 15 July).  
 
Among th ose who said they would not enroll their children in school, 88 percent cited concerns over 
school safety. DepEd has stated that there will be no face -to-face classes this year to protect student’s 
health and safety.  
 
 
Likelihood of parents to enroll children  in school  
JANUARY 2021  
 
 
Online and modular learning were the preferred distance learning modalities: When we asked about 
respondents’ preferred mode of distance learning, online learning (34 percent) and homeschooling 
using offline school modules (30 percent)  emerged as respondents’ top choices. We found that 
wealthier respondents were more likely to cite online learning as their preference. This is slightly 
different from the results of DepEd’s Learner Enrollment and Survey Form , where modular learning 
emerged as parents’ preferred distance learning modality, followed by blended and online learning.  
 
Past studies evaluating the impacts of online educational platforms have shown improvements in 
learning outcomes in high -income countries such as the United States6, Taiwan7, and Saudi Arabia8, 
where there are fewer barriers in accessing technology. If learners do not have the tools to engage in 
online learning, they will be at risk of falling further behind in their education.  
 
In cases where online learning and other educational media are not accessible to the learners, low 
technology interventions such as providing printed learning materials and text messaging can support 
home lear ning. A recent study found that providing books and training parents in dialogic reading 
resulted in positive outcomes for early children’s literacy skills.9 Another study found that sending 
weekly text messages containing basic math problems increased bas ic numeracy skills among children 
in grades 3 to 5.10 
 
 
Preferred Distance Modalities  
 
Lack of access to internet, devices, and learning materials were cited as major barriers to distance 
learning:  While respondents preferred online learning, they cited lack of access to the internet (76 
percent), devices (75 percent), and learning materials (71 percent) as major challenges to distance 
learning. Poorer respondents were more likely to cite these concerns. Recent findings from the 2019 
National ICT Househol d Survey11 show that only 18 percent of households across the country have their 
own internet connection, and only 24 percent have computers. Given that schools are authorized to 
choose from among the distance learning options, DepEd should ensure that the  chosen modalities are 
accessible to the learners. To address accessibility challenges especially in areas with weak or no 
internet connection, one possible mode of remote instruction is using low technology solutions such as 
sending text messages and call ing parents. In Botswana, sending messages with basic math “problems 
of the week” and supplementing them with phone calls from instructors as additional learning support 
showed improvements in learning and increased parental engagement.12 
 
JANUARY 2021  
 
Challenges to distance learning  
 
Most respondents indicated that DepEd could help with internet access and virtual classes to support 
children:  When asked what DepEd could do to support children if schools could not be opened in 
August as planned, respondents mostly cit ed providing internet access (31 percent) and encouraging 
schools to conduct virtual classes (31 percent). This is consistent with our findings that respondents 
prefer online learning for the children at home.  
 
 
What can the Department of Education  do to support children?  
 
Given that respondents were most worried about children falling behind education, they may have 
perceived online classes as an effective distance learning method since it involves real -time interaction 
between teacher and student as opposed to other modalities. Respondents, especially those who are 
parents, would naturally prefer the best option available for the education of their children.  
 
The risk of having students in the same class or grade level groupings with differing lea rning levels. 
Targeted instruction —grouping children according to learning level and teaching to that level —may 
help address this problem. Rigorous research has shown that targeted instruction improved learning in 
Ghana, Kenya, India, and elsewhere.13 Impr ovements in learning outcomes were more pronounced 
when targeted instruction focuses on foundational literacy and numeracy.  
 
Households with school -age children experienced difficulties in accessing food and paying for food, 
healthcare, and other expenses:  Respondents with school -age children were more likely than those 
without to say they had difficulty buying the amount of food they usually buy because household 
JANUARY 2021  
income had dropped.  Respondents with and without school -age children were similarly likely to say 
they had to limit portion sizes at mealtimes, reduce the number of meals eaten in a day, or reduce the 
kinds of food eaten in a day more than once in the past week.  
 
 
Respondents cite difficulties in buying usual amount of food due to…  
 
 
Aspects of reduced food consumption  
 
Respondents with school -age children were more likely to say they borrowed money they were not 
certain they could pay back on time, skipped making a required payment on a loan, or bought fewer 
inputs than planned to pay for food, healthcare, or other expenses since February 2020.   
 
 
Measures taken by households to pay for food, healthcare, and other expenses  
JANUARY 2021  
 
We found that households with children in basic education tended to experience more difficulties in 
terms of accessing food  and paying for expenses. Government partners should find ways to provide 
adequate support to address other financial constraints experienced by families with school -age 
children. To help ease the burden of these families with school -age children, continui ng school feeding 
programs this school year may help improve children’s health and nutritional status.  
Conclusion and Recommendations  
Based on lessons from other contexts and times of crisis, the following recommendations can be 
incorporated into policies to support the vulnerable groups outlined by this brief.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Summary of Policy Recommendations   x Set up support structures for parents and caregivers and help them manage children’s learning at home and ensure that engagement in distance learning is sustained. Consider SMS interventions and reminders to keep parents engaged. x In cases where online learning and other educational media are not accessible to the learners, promote low technology interventions such as providing printed learning materials and text messaging to support home learning.  x Promote targeted instruction—grouping children according to learning level and teaching to that level—to help address learning losses. Rigorous research has shown that targeted instruction improved learning in Ghana, Kenya, India, and elsewhere.123 Improvements in learning outcomes were more pronounced when targeted instruction focuses on foundational literacy and numeracy. x Find ways to provide adequate support to address other financial constraints experienced by families with school-age children. To help ease the burden of these families with school-age children, continuing school feeding programs this school year can help improve children’s health and nutritional status. JANUARY 2021  
Notes and References  
1. York, Benjamin N., Susanna Loeb, and Christopher Doss. 2018. "One Step at a Time: The Effects of an Early 
Literacy Text Messaging Program for Parents of Preschoolers" Journal of Human Resources 54, no. 3: 537 -
566.  https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/One%20Step%20At%20A%20Time%203_1_17_0.pdf  
 
2. Berlinski, Samuel, Matias Busso, Taryn Dinkelman, and Claudia Martinez A. 2016. "Reducing Parent -Scho ol 
Information Gaps and Improving Education Outcomes: Evidence from High Frequency Text Messaging in 
Chile"  https://lacea -lames2017.exordo.com/files/papers/550/final_draft/BBDM_February_2017.pdf  
 
3. Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das and Asim Ijaz Khwaja. 2017. Report C ards: The Impact of Providing School and 
Child Test Scores on Educational Markets. American Economic Review 107, no. 6: 1535 -1563.  
https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/aer.2 0140774  
 
4. Aker, Jenny C. and Christopher Ksoll. 2018. "Call me Educated: Evidence from a Mobile Phone Experiment in 
Niger"  https://sites.tufts.edu/jennyaker/files/2010/02/Call -Me-Educated_20sept2018.pdf  
 
5. Doss, Christopher, Erin M. Fahle, Susanna Loeb, and Benjamin N. York. 2018. "More than Just a Nudge: 
Supporting Parenting through Differentiated and Personalized Text -Message s.” NBER Working Paper No. 
24450. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w24450.pdf  
 
6. Heppen, Jessica B., Kirk Walters, Margaret Clements, Ann -Marie Faria, Cheryl Tobey, Nicholas Sorensen, and 
Katherine Culp. 2011. "Access to Alge bra I: The Effects of Online Mathematics for Grade 8 Students. NCEE 
2012 -4021." National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.  
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED527394 .pdf 
 
7. Sun, Koun -tem, Yuan -cheng Lin, and Chia -jui Yu. 2008. "A study on learning effect among different learning 
styles in a Web -based lab of science for elementary school students." Computers & Education 50, no. 4: 
1411 -1422.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.01.003  
 
8. Aljaser, Afaf M. 2019. "The Effectiveness of E -Learning Environment in Developing Academic Achievement 
and the Attitude to Learn English among Primary Students." Turkish Onl ine Journal of Distance Education 
20, no. 2: 176 -194. https://doi.org/10.17718/tojde.557862  
 
9. Innovations for Poverty Action. 2020. “Using Storybooks to Promote Early Literacy in Kenya.” 
https://www.poverty -action.org/study/using -storybooks -promote -early -literacy -kenya  
 
10. Angrist, Noam, Peter Bergman, Caton Brewster, and Moitshepi Matsheng. 2020. “Stemming Learning Loss 
During the Pandemic: A Rapid Randomized Trial of a Low -Tech Intervention in Botswana,” CSAE Working 
Paper WPS/202013. https://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/materials/papers/csae -wps-2020 -13.pdf  
 
11. Department of Information and Communications Technology. 2019. “National ICT Household Survey 2019.” 
https://dict.gov.ph/ictstatistics/nicths2019/  
 
12. Angrist, Noam, Peter Bergman, Caton Brewster, and Moitshepi Matsheng. 202 0. “Stemming Learning Loss 
During the Pandemic: A Rapid Randomized Trial of a Low -Tech Intervention in Botswana,” CSAE Working 
Paper WPS/202013. https://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/ma terials/papers/csae -wps-2020 -13.pdf  
 
13. J-PAL. 2019. Tailoring instruction to students' learning levels to increase learning. 
https://www.povertyactionlab.org/policy -insight/tailoring -instruction -students -learning -levels -increase -
learning
 
____________  
Innovations for Poverty Action (IP A) is a research and policy non profit that discovers and promotes effective solutions to global poverty 
problems. IPA designs, rigorously evaluates, and refines these solutions and their applications together with resear chers and local decision -
makers, ensuring that evidence is used to improve the lives of the world’s poor. Our well -established partnerships in the countries where we 
work, and a strong understanding of local contexts, enable us to conduct high -quality rese arch.  