One-stop-shops — where citizens 
could register for several authorities 
at the same visit and receive 
information — were the most 
successful policy in registration 
campaigns. They increased 
the number of taxpayers by 
approximately 70%
Simplified tax return form of 
presumptive tax doubled the number 
of tax filers after 2015
Enforcement services and provision 
of information in one-stop shops and 
lowering the compliance costs are 
the most feasible mechanisms for 
increasing the numbers of tax filers
Both interventions led to 
presumptive tax revenue gains as 
after the interventions more small 
businesses filed taxes
The taxpayer register expansion 
project (TREP) was highly cost-
effectiveHow could countries in the Global South develop their tax systems 
further and improve compliance? This analysis shows how two tax 
administration interventions impacted the number of small business 
taxpayers and presumptive tax revenues in Uganda. 
Developing countries have been able to increase their tax revenue in the 
last decades, but overall revenues have often remained too low to sustain 
provision of crucially important public goods. Small businesses are an 
important part of the economy and an appealing target group for tax 
authorities in many of these countries. However, as operate mostly in the 
informal sector they are hard to catch into the tax net.
In Uganda, the informal sector covers half of the economy and only a 
small fraction of employees work on the formal sector. Broadening the tax 
base by formalizing small businesses is one important step for enhancing 
the domestic resource mobilization in the country.
Many low-income countries have a dedicated tax regime for small 
businesses, usually referred as a presumptive tax, in which tax is based on 
businesses’ sales instead of profits. In Uganda, a presumptive tax regime is 
designed for small businesses who cannot keep comprehensive records of 
their sales and hence tax liability is calculated from estimated sales.
Two interventions to improve tax administration and 
compliance of small businesses
The Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) with local governments and the 
Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) initiated a taxpayer register 
expansion project (TREP) in 2013 to improve tax compliance by formalizing 
and educating businesses. Two years later in 2015, the URA introduced a 
new electronic system, e-filing, for presumptive tax which simplified tax 
filing of small businesses.
Using administrative data from the Uganda Revenue Authority this 
analysis compares the number of taxpayers in different geographical 
areas and industries to uncover the impact of these interventions, 
whose introduction varied across regions and time. The data covers both 
presumptive taxpayers and comparable small corporate income tax (CIT) 
payers.FINDINGSSimplifying the tax filing of small 
businesses in Uganda  
– does it make a difference?research brief
2/21
Image: Antoine Pluss / Unsplash
More businesses file tax returns
The results show that both interventions increased the 
number of small businesses filing their taxes. The analysis 
indicates that the type of the intervention matters in the 
taxpayer registration campaign. The number of tax filers 
increased approximately by 70% when one-stop shops — 
where citizens could register for several authorities at the 
same visit — were established, but less than 50% in the 
first years when TREP mainly included door-to-door visits 
to businesses.
The new e-filing form had a large impact on tax 
compliance and it almost doubled the number of 
presumptive taxpayers after its introduction (see figure 
1). In addition, the results indicate that the TREP and the 
new e-filing system complemented each other. This result 
is associated with one-stop shops because they not only 
increased enforcement but also educated taxpayers to 
comply tax obligations which lowers their compliance 
costs.
Who are these new tax filers? The descriptive analysis 
shows that most of the presumptive taxpayers file their 
tax returns only in one year and not in the next year. 
Furthermore, most of the new presumptive taxpayers file 
the lowest possible taxable amount of sales.
Overall, the two interventions enhanced tax compliance, 
but only for smallest businesses and they did not manage 
to keep small businesses on board for several years. The 
reason for this might be the low enforcement capacity 
of tax officials. In general, enforcement operations in 
low-income countries with limited administrative capacity 
focus on large firms from which most of the tax revenues 
arise.
Interventions led to revenue gains
This analysis further investigates if the two interventions 
affected presumptive tax revenues. Both interventions 
approximately doubled presumptive tax collection. 
Similarly, as for the number of taxpayers, the 
establishment of one-stop shops was a crucial initiative 
to raise more revenue from small businesses. Overall, 
presumptive tax revenue increased from 0.01% of gross 
tax revenues in the financial year 2015–16 to 0.04% in 
2016–17. These numbers show that presumptive tax is 
still a minor source for tax revenues in Uganda, but there 
is potential for the share to grow.Finally, the study shows that tax revenue gains from TREP 
outweighed URA’s budgeted costs for TREP which suggests 
that the taxpayer registration campaign was a cost-
effective intervention. The cost-effectiveness of the new 
e-filing system was not possible to study because of the 
lack of information.
Small businesses should have easier access 
to services
These results indicate that easier access to government 
services —such as tax registration, filing and paying — 
should be facilitated. In particular, one-stop shops help 
citizens to register for taxes and they can be provided cost-
effectively. Taxpayer registration services should include 
tax education as a lack of information can hinder tax filing.
The physical access is not the only solution. Digital services 
can also play an important role. Findings of this analysis 
point out that the electronic tax forms for small businesses 
should be simpler than for larger firms, to lower the 
compliance costs of small enterprises.
One-stop shops are a good way to 
improve tax compliance as they help 
citizens to register for taxes, and they can 
be provided cost-effectively
Taxpayer registration services should 
include tax education as a lack of 
information can hinder tax filing
The electronic tax forms for small 
businesses should be made simpler than 
for larger firms, to lower compliance 
costs of small enterprisesIMPLICATIONS
This Research Brief is based on the 
WIDER Working Paper 17/2021 Do tax 
administrative interventions targeted 
at small businesses improve tax 
compliance and revenue collection? 
Evidence from Ugandan administrative 
tax data  by Maria Jouste, Milly I. 
Nalukwago and Ronald Waiswa.
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000Number of taxpayers
2012/13 2014/15 2016/17
CIT PresumptiveFigure 1 
Number of taxpayers from presumptive tax and comparable small 
corporate income tax (CIT) returns data in the analysis of the new 
e-filing system
Note: figure includes presumptive taxpayers with turnover less than UGX50 million, and CIT payers with 
turnover between UGX150 million and UGX400 million. The dashed line indicates July 2015, when the new 
e-filing form came into force. The figure is descriptive and not intended to be used to analyse the significance 
of pre-reform time trends.
Source: authors’ calculations based on URA administrative tax returns data