 
 
UKRAINE  
e-Government  Assessment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June  2018  
Governance Global Practice   
Europe and Central Asia Region  
The World Bank  
 
 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorizedi ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The report is prepared by a World Bank team based on the findings and research carried out between 
Marc h and June 2018. Davit Melikyan (Senior Public Sector Specialist), Carolina Rendon (Senior 
Public Sector Specialist) and Constantin Rusu (Public Sector Specialist) are the main authors of the 
report  and represent Governance Global Practice (GP) . The team a lso included  Iryna Shcherbyna 
(Public Sector Specialist), Daria Gulei (Program Assistant) and Anastasia Soltis (Team Assistant) who 
provided valuable professional contributions and  organizational  support throughout the assessment.  
The assessment was peer r eviewed  by Cem Dener (Lead Governance Specialist, Governance GP) , 
Knut Leipold (Lead Procurement Specialist, Governance GP)  and Juan Navas -Sabater  (Lead ICT 
Policy Specialist , Transport & Digital Development  GP). The oversight of this task was performed by  
Daniel Boyce, Practice Manager.  
The team would like to acknowledge extensive cooperation and assistance received in Ukraine from 
the staff of State e -Government Agency and Reforms Delivery Unit. The team is also grateful to 
involved ministries, services and agencies and their subordinated entities, as well as to the development 
partners and civil society representatives for sharing their views and information.  
 
 ii ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  
AI  Artificial intelligence  
API  Application programming interfac e 
BPR  Business process reengineering  
CDO   Chief data officer  
CEGU   Central Electronic Government Unit  
CERT   Computer emergency response teams  
CoM  Cabinet of Ministers  
CSA   Civil Service Agency  
CSIRT   Computer security incident response teams  
DGT   Digital  government toolkit  
ECA   Europe and Central Asia  
eGGO   Electronic Government  Governance Outline  (assessment framework)  
EIU  Economic Intelligence Unit  
EU  European Union  
GIR  Government Information Resources SOE (under S EGA) 
HRM   Human resource management  
HRMIS   Human resource management information system  
I.I.I.  Inclusive Internet Index  
IAD  Income and assets disclosure  
ICT  Information and communication technology  
IoT  Internet of things  
ISO  International Organization for Standards  
IT  Information techn ology  
ITU  International Telecommunication Union  
KIIS  Kiev International Institute of Sociology  
KPI  Key performance indicators  
LPPR   Leading policy planning role  
M&E   Monitoring and evaluation  
MoEDT  Ministry of Economic Development and Trade  
MoJ  Minist ry of Justice  
MoEnv   Ministry of Environment  
NAIS   National Information Systems (SOE)  
NCCS   National Confidential Communication System  
OECD   Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  
OGP   Open Government Partnership  
OSS  One stop shop  
PFM   Public financial management  
PM  Prime minister  
PPP  Public -private partnership  
SEGA  State Electronic Government Agency  
SFS  State Fiscal Service  
SIDA   Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency  
SNAP   Local service centers (abbreviation in Ukrainian  language)  
SOE  State owned enterprise  
SSSCIP   State Service of Special Communications and Information Protection of Ukraine  
SWOT   Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats  
TAPAS   Transparency and Accountability in Public Administration and Services  
UK  United Kingdom  
UN  United Nations  
UNDP   United Nations Development Program  
USAID   United States Agency for International Development  
USS  Ukrainian Special Systems  
WB  World Bank  
WDR   World Development Report   iii DEFINITION OF MAIN TERMS  
Benchmark  A comp arator derived from good practices, against which a specific aspect of the e -
governance system is assessed  
Dimension  A specific aspect (sub -area) of the e -governance system  
Area A distinct part of the e-governance system that pools together  several  specific 
dimensions that are thematically  interrelated  
Current “ Status ” A description of the “de facto” status of e-governance compared to a Benchmark  
Progress  An assessment  of the current status of e-governance  against the Benchmark (red, 
amber and green)   
Foresight  An assessment  of the planned development vision  against the Benchmark (red, 
amber and green)  
Trend  Is the dynamic characteristics of the e -governance reform implementation 
(stagnation, advancement , achievement )   
“Overall” Category  Reforme r category based on the percentile average score for all  dimension s, and 
changing  between  Beginner , Follower, Performer, Frontier   
-Beginner  Reformer category with overall score of 25% and less  
-Follower  Reformer cat egory with overall score above  25% that does not exceed 50% 
-Performer  Reformer category with overall score above  50% that does not exceed  75% 
-Frontier  Reformer category with overall score above  75%  
 iv  
Table of Contents  
Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 5 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..7 
The Overview of e -Government Reforms in Ukraine ................................ ................................ ........................... 7 
About  the methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 8 
Electronic Government’s Governance Outline (eGGO)  ................................ ................................ ........................  11 
Area 1. Policy, Planning and Implementation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 11 
DIMENSION 1. POLICYMAKING  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  11 
DIMENSION 2. IMPLEMENTATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  14 
DIMENSION 3. ICT  PROCUREMENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  21 
DIMENSION 4. STRATEGIC AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  ................................ ................................ ...... 25 
Area 2. Public Services ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  30 
DIMENSION 5. PLATFORMS AND SERVICES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 30 
DIMENSION 6. REGISTRIES AND INTEROPERABILITY  ................................ ................................ ....................  36 
DIMENSION  7. ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 40 
DIMENSION 8. CUSTOMER RELATION s ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  45 
DIMENSION 9. DELIVERY MODES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  47 
DIMENSION 10. e-IDENTIFICATION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  49 
Area 3. Data and Analyt ics ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 51 
DIMENSION 11. SMART ANALYTICS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  51 
DIMENSION 12. INFORMATION FOR MANAGEMENT  ................................ ................................ ......................  54 
Area 4. Infrastructure and Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  56 
DIMENSION 13. DATA CENTERS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  56 
DIMENSION 14. ACCESS TO ICT  RESOURCES  ................................ ................................ ................................  58 
DIMENSION 15. BUSINESS CONTINUITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  59 
DIMENSION 16. CYBER SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ....................  60 
Area 5. Control Mechanisms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  64 
DIMENSION 17. MONITORING AND CONTROL  ................................ ................................ ...............................  64 
DIMENSION 18. CROSS CHECKS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  66 
Overall Snapshot of the Assessment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  67 
Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 72 
Annex 1: eGGO Assessment Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  73 
Annex 2: List of Reco mmendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  74 
 
 
  
 v Executive Summary  
Electronic Government  (e-government ) is among the main bases  for improving public 
administration and service delivery in Ukraine . To effectively support  enhanced development 
outcomes , it requires a s ystemic  and coordinated  approach and parallel advancement of various 
components of digit alization.  The purpose of th is assessment is to identify issues and opportunities 
to consolidate, enhance and accelerate the electronic government  reform in Ukraine. It  informs and 
serves as a foundation for the prioritization and development of future areas of engagement of the 
broader e-government reform.  
Efforts to advance the implementation of e -government activities have not been properly 
sequenced and have been unc oordinated.   Policy instruments, such as Ukraine’s Strategy for Public 
Administration Reform (2016 -2020) prioritize the need to improve the quality of and accessibility to 
administrative services. To achieve this objective, the government  plans on investin g in digital 
technologies, the implementation of administrative service centers as well as the decentralization of 
basic administrative services. But an initial review of the status of reforms reveals that there is 
fragmentation in the implementation of e -governance reform efforts at the central government level.  
The main initiatives included in the e -government agenda seem to be organized around: (A) regulatory 
and institutional framework, (B) interoperability and registries, (C) electronic services, (D) o pen data 
and transparency, and (E) capacity, digital literacy and communication. One of Ukraine’s key 
initiatives in advancing the e -government reforms is related to the ongoing implementation of the 
interoperability platform "Trembita" (based on the Eston ian X -road).  
To assess governance e -transformation  this report introduces a comprehensive methodology  – 
Electronic Government’s Governance Outline ( hereafter Assessment ) – that was developed by 
the team and  is used for the first time . Conceptually it is b ased on three major pillars – the twelve 
principles of the  OECD Digital Government Toolkit, the World Development Report 2016  (WDR 
2016)  on Digital Dividends, and the priorities of institutional governance reforms  from operational 
learning . 
This assessment  reflect s the progress and status against  various  benchmarks of e-government , 
grouped in 18 dimensions and spread among 5 areas.  Progress is assessed based on actual status, 
while the foresight evaluates the ongoing directions  and plans formalized through normative acts and 
strategic plans.  
The Ukraine assessment is a first attempt at bring ing together the technical perspect ive of 
digitalization with the treatment of the agency problem underlaying the essence of governance.  
Pro-poor policies, in -line with  the World Bank Group’s  Twin Goals and the perspective of WDR 2016 
are also incorporated into the report, in particular, through such entry points as delivery mode  and 
connectivity . 
Recognizing the challenges and complexity of reform s in this area , the repo rt outlines key 
priorities  for future focus by policymakers and implementers in setting up specific strategies for 6 addressing weaknesses and advancing  reform s. The assessment, which was performed  through desk 
review of policy and regulatory framework,  interviews and structured survey s of key stakeholders,  
reveals a pattern of disproportional development of the system. In some  areas , Ukraine performed well 
(cyber security  arrangements , access to ICT resources , access and connectivity, strategic and 
regulator y framework ), while  other  areas  appear  to be at the inception  phase or  lacking clear foresight.  
Datacenters, data analytics,  business continuity,  ICT procurement, citizen identification, separation of 
stakeholder roles , and shared platforms a nd services ar e among the key functions exposed to 
vulnerabilities of e-government in Ukraine.  Ukraine  needs to  initiate  a number of important steps to 
address these vulnerabilities, inter alia, including commencing  a process of public sector data centers 
consolidation , creating a unit or body in charge of data management in the public sector  as an important 
step toward evidence based policymaking, implement ing a data recovery center , establish ing a unit in 
charge of ICT procurement policy at the central government level , filling in of the unified demographic 
register , making c lear delineation of e-government policy making and implementation  roles, as well 
as adopting an approach to  implementation of  shared services and platforms . 
The report discusse s three foresight scen arios as alternative s to the “status quo”. The scenarios 
reflect different approaches to  addressing identified  vulnerabilities of e-government  in Ukraine . It 
observes that  pursui ng a scenario that addresse s the top five vulnerabilities – lack of attention to the 
“information for management ”, challenges for centralization and virtualization of  “data centers ”, lack 
of “smart analytics ”, weak “ business continuity ” arrangements , and missing arrangements for “ ICT 
procurement ” - would warrant upgrading the status  to the next level of development .  
Implementing many of the good practices will be a challenge in the short -term.  Next steps should 
ideally focus on reforms  that prioritize  consolidation of datacenters . Implementing a c entralized policy 
for ICT procuremen t requires strong political will and high -level support. The first manifestation of 
such political support could be clear definition of the stakeholder roles and, most importantly, 
separation of implementation from policymaking.  
  7 Introduction  
 
The Overvie w of e-Government Reforms  in Ukraine   
In its quest to meet c itizen  and business  demand s for qualitative  and accessible  public 
services , the Government of Ukraine (GoU) has expressed interest in investing in information 
and communication technologies (ICTs)  and using e -government tools to improve the 
provision of public services.  Given the increasing role of digital technologies in almost all areas 
of public administration – from citizen engagement in policy formulation to public service 
delivery, Ukraine’s e-government reform efforts have been placed at the core of its public 
administration reform agenda.  
Several motivations appear to have driven the implementation of e -government activities so 
far. Although efforts and initiatives have responded more to in dividual decisions than institutional 
planning, among t he top -down motivational sources are the processes of integration with the EU, 
a more citizen -centric approach  to administrative reforms , and efforts to increase transparency and 
accountability. Bottom -up motivations  include increasing voice , awareness  and participation , led 
mostly by civil society and NGOs .  
Efforts to advance the implementation of e -government activities have not been properly 
sequenced and have been  uncoordinated .  Policy instruments , such as Ukraine’s Strategy for 
Public Administration Reform (2016 -2020) prioritize the need to improve the quality of and 
accessibility to administrative services. To achieve this objective , the GoU plans on investing in 
digital technologies, the impleme ntation of administrative service centers as well as the 
decentralization of basic administrative services. But a n initial review of the status of reforms 
reveals that there is fragmentation in the implementation of e -governance reform efforts at the 
centr al government level.  
Despite the challenges, progress has been made.  Since the mid -2017  Ukraine has adopted two 
new strategies that further spell out the national priorities in e-government: (i) Concept Note for 
E-government Development in Ukraine (Septemb er 2017) ; and (ii) Concept Note on the 
Development of Digital Economy and Society in Ukraine for 2018 -2020 (January 2018). Different 
sector ministries, such as health, education, and labor, have embarked upon reforms to incorporate 
the use of ICT technolog ies into their core front and back office services.  The UN e -Government 
Development Index, 2016, ranked Ukraine 62nd out of 193 countries, an improvement of 25 places 
over its 2014 placement, with significant gains in e -government and e -participation.  
Limited d onor coordination  appears to have added complexity to the GoU’s reform efforts . 
Requests for collaboration and donor support have  been sporadic  and uncoordinated, increas ing 
fragmentation and complexity in implementation.  A full e -government assessm ent has not been 
completed since 2002, but a mong the most relevant activities , there was an Open Data Readiness 
Assessment  (ODRA)  by the UNDP in 2016 . Furthermore, an  e-government assessment focused 
on policy and institutional  aspects is currently being co nducted by EU consultants . With support 
of several projects financed by development partners such as the EU, SIDA, Swiss, USAID , and 
UK, among others, the GoU is pursuing the digit alization of one hundred key public administrative 8 services (out of a total of 1,200 mapped) by the end of 2018. Lastly, activities at the local level are 
being led mostly by civil society organizations and donors in an uncoordinated manner (although 
in some cases these partnerships with local public authorities have produced e -solutions that were 
later adopted by the central government, such as the mobile application for garbage collection  
management , currently hosted on the Ministry of Environment ’s official web -page ).    
Despite weak institutional capacity and resource constrain ts, reform efforts at the central 
level continue to be quite ambitious . The main initiatives included in the e -government agenda 
seem to be organized around: (A) regulatory and institutional framework, (B) interoperability and 
registries, (C) electronic se rvices, (D) open data and transparency, and (E) capacity, digital literacy 
and communication. One of Ukraine’s key initiatives in advancing the e -government reforms is 
related to the ongoing implementation of the interoperability platform "Trembita" (based on the 
Estonian X -road). Due to the challenges related with finalizing key registries, in particular a 
reliable demographic registry (currently covering about 20% of population)  which is sought as the 
basis for unique identification number s for citizens, the full implementation of an interoperability 
platform to connect the registries may take an additional three years. The National Interoperability 
Development Roadmap envisages implementation steps till end 2020.   
About  the methodology  
This assessment  reflects an effort  to uncover the status of key foundations for digit alization 
and the pre-conditions for the introduction of electronic service delivery  from governance 
and institutions  entry point s. It analyzes the current development of several institutio nal, 
infrastructure and regulatory pre-conditions  in Ukraine  and how they have impacted  reform efforts 
conducted by the Government . The aim of the Electronic Government ’s Governance Outline 
(eGGO ) assessment is to help inform and tailor future reform effor ts in the use of ICTs and e -
government tools for such things as the digitalization of government registers and databases; 
improved information flow s between agencies; implementation of shared and sectorial e -services; 
data centers consolidation and user -friendly interface s with citizens, businesses and local 
governments, among others .  
The present analysis follows the 2016 World Development Report (WDR 2016) on Digital 
Dividends recommendations on the importance of “analog foundations” to achieve the true 
benefits from d igitalization . Likewise, Government play s important roles  in ensur ing such pre-
conditions and to avoid exclusion and the deepening of the digital divide , using  digital technologies 
to reinforce institutions, improv ing monitoring of service de livery, strengthen ing social norms and 
promot ing civic behavior (like voluntary tax compliance or energy conservation through peer 
comparisons). The WDR 2016 also cautions on principal -agent information asymmetries to 
explain why systems can fail to combat  rent seeking. It argues that without political commitment 
and leadership the digit alization may further contribute to exclusion and control without producing 
positive development impact.  
The present assessment has been conducted using the eGGO methodolog ical framework , 
specifically developed for this exercise . The methodology benefits from existing tools and 9 approaches to the maturity benchmarks – for instance OECD digital government toolkit and EU 
e-government benchmark – organizing them around the gover nance and economic development 
priorities in the developing country context (as defined in the WDR 2016).   
Figure 1 – Conceptual bases of eGGO assessment  
 
The key features of the methodolog y are reflected below:  
• Assess ment of progress and foresight of e-government reform against a pool of benchmarks, 
compiled from various OECD and EU good practices, tools and the World Bank experience in 
ECA countries, grouped in 18 dimensions spread among 5 areas. The progress is assessed 
based on actual status, while the  foresight evaluates the ongoing activities and plans formalized 
through normative acts and strategic plans. This approach allows assess ing both the current 
status and the direction of any reform, thus providing more information for policy level 
discussion s. 
• The assessment uses the traffic light or RAG (red -amber -green) rating system (red=0 or void, 
amber=50% or partial, green=100% or full) .  This is  popular in project management and has 
been previously deployed in the similar World Bank assessments to classify against spe cific 
benchmarks, and aggregate  these at the level of dimensions and areas over a 0-100 range or 
percentile measure  (where 100% resembles the perceived best practice .)  
• Having both the progress and foresight measurements also allows the reporting of trends – 
upward sign (↑) if foresight is improvement over the progress ; warning sign (!) if the foresight 
does not target further improvements ; and finish sign ( checkered flag) if the progress warrants 
getting full credit for the specific benchmark.  
• Depending on the percentile score for each dimension the framework proposes four possible 
reformer statuses – “beginner” (score≤25), “follower” (25<score≤50), “performer” 
(50<score≤75) and “frontier” (score>75). While the overall score at the country level is not 
reported, it may be used to determine the overall status of the reform.  Governance and 
Institutions
WDR 2016 
lessonsDigitalization 
benchmarks and 
trends 
(OECD
& EU)10 The task team used the “eGGO  framework  questionnaire”  to interview  selected  key 
stakeholders on various aspects of electronic government, which were  organized around the 
assessment  areas  and dimensions  listed below : 
1. Policy, Planning and Implementation - Policymaking; Implementation; ICT procurement; 
Strategic and regulatory framework ; 
2. Digital  services - Platforms and services; Registries and interoperability; Access and 
connectivity; Customer relations; De livery modes; Identification;  
3. Data and analytics - Smart analytics; Information for management;  
4. Infrastructure and security - Data centers; Access to ICT resources ; Business continuity; Cyber 
security  arrangements ; 
5. Control mechanisms - Monitoring and contr ol; Cross check s. 
The e GGO  assessment  focuses on the institutional contexts and capacities of relevant 
institutions to design and deliver government to citizen and government to business services 
effectively.  
The next section of this report reflects the f indings of eGGO  assessment by areas, dimensions and 
benchmarks.  11 Electronic Government ’s Governance  Outline  (eGGO)  
Area 1. Policy, Planning and Implementation  
DIMENSION 1. POLICYMAKING  
 
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (hereinafter referred to as “CoM” ) plays the le ading role 
in e-Governm ent policy setting  by approving various concept notes, strategies and action plans in the 
field of e -Government . For example, the CoM decided on e -Government as one of main priorities in 
its mid -term priority action pla n (till 2020), as well as recently approved a number of  important  
strategic documents such as e-Government Development Concept Note (2017) and Concept Note of 
e-Services Development (2018) and their implementation plans. Recently approved documents are 
clearly showing that implementation of the e-Government  agenda is a top CoM ’ reform  priority and 
needed policy and strategic framework actions are being  approved.  
Another theoretically important body in the field of policy development is the Intersectoral 
Council on e -Governance Developme nt (hereinafter referred to as “Council ”). The CoM 
established the Council back in 2009, but recently revisited its role and functions (2017)1. According 
to its regulation, t he Council is headed by the Prime Minister and inclu des 44 members - 
                                                           
1 CoM Decision No. 4 from the January 14th , 2009 (with last amendments from May 24th, 2017).  
12 representatives of various ministers, services and agencies, as well as academia, business and civil 
society organizations.  
The Council is a consultative and advisory body of the CoM , established with the purpose to 
coordinate the activiti es on development, implementation and monitoring of implementation  of 
programs and projects (tasks) in the field of e -Government development.  Organizational support 
and the secretariat work of the Council is carried out by the State Agency for e -Governance .  
The main tasks of the Council are:  
• preparing proposals for the formulation and implementation of state policy in the field of e -
government development and integration of Ukraine into the global information space;  
• assistance in ensuring coordination of a ctivities of executive authorities and local self -
government bodies while conducting work in the areas of e -government, computerization , the 
formation and use of national electronic information resources and the development of the 
information society;  
• preparing proposals and recommendations on the targeted and effective use of public finances 
and other financial assistance , implementation of sectoral, regional and informational programs  
and informatization of executive authorities and local self -government bodies.  
According to its regulation t he Council shall meet on a need bas is, but not less than twice per 
year.  In addition, the e -Government Development Concept Note states that an effective operation of 
the Council should be ensured in order to r aise manag ement efficiency in the field of e -Government .  
Moreover , the Council should play a key role in fostering the coordination of the authorities’ activities 
in the process of implementation of the provisions of the Concept Note – the main strategic document 
in the field of e -Government development. However, it appears that the Council has not met in recent  
years underlining  its irrelevancy .  
As result , the State e -Governmen t Agency  (hereinafter referred to as “SE GA”) is de facto 
coordin ating b oth e-Government policy making and policy implementation . The SE GA 
participates in policy development related to following main themes: development of electronic 
services; automation of internal processes of the public authorities and implementation of the 
documents manage ment system; improving IT registries and implementation of the interoperability 
platform, as well as making  government data  public . 
There are other players involved in policy making somewhat connected to the implementation 
of the e -Government agenda.  For e xample, the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade 
(hereinafter referred to as “MoEDT”) oversees  policy in the field of administrative services and the 
State Service of Special Communications and Information Protection (hereinafter referred to as 
“SSSC IP”) does the same in the field of cyber security.  
The absence of clear leadership and lack of coordination of policy making is complicating  the 
implementation of the "whole -of-government" e -transformation  as the entire e -Governance 
reform effort is spora dic and uncoordinated both horizontally and verticall y. From a governance 
prospective there  should be a clear delineation  of policy making fro m the policy implementation. But 
SEGA seeks to lead both policy making and imple mentation , splitting its  capacity , raising conflict of  
interest issue s, and underminin g SEGA’s ability to fully focus  on its policy implementation  role.  13 The p olicy making process includes conducting  public consultations as one of the main 
requirements for the assurance of transparency in decision making.  Authorities which are  
developing a legislative act must organize its public discussion which includes both publishing 
documents on the authority’s web -site and face to face meetings with civil society2. The core policy 
papers  related to e -government reforms,  such e -Government  Development and e -Services 
Development Concepts , followed the appropriate  process of public discuss ion before the ir approval3.  
The policy making process takes in to consideration emerging modern technologies and is 
considering their application in the specific areas . For example , the Roadmap of the National 
Interoperability Development includes an action with the aim to improve transparency and 
accountability of the data processing in public registries through the imple mentation of the pilot 
projects using blockchain technology.  A broader plan for adopting blockchain technology in public 
sector through 2020 is in the pipeline.  SEGA and MoEDT are members of the Innovation Council 
where the development and application of s uch innovative and modern technologies are frequently 
discussed.  
Overall,  as summarized in the table above, the policymaking framework is still emerging, with 
an eGGO status of a “follower”.  The trends are mostly directed upwards, but may not materialize 
without commitment to revise the mandates, delineate roles and responsibilities, and change the 
relevant regulatory framework.   
Recommendations:   
• The p olicymaking function should be streamlined and consolidated.  
• The Intersectoral Council on e -Government should be strengthen ed. Decreasing the number 
of Council members  should be considered , while retaining sufficient  representation  and 
incisiveness . This recommendation  stems  from the high number of members that might make 
the functioning and decision making  of the Council difficult . 
• Given that any policy is ultimately approved by the C oM, Council’s management and 
membership  could be set up at a more technical level  to make the scheduling and sessions 
more agile , technical , and productive .  
• Clear delineation o f policy making versus implementation is needed . 
• Clear delineation of mandates and the policy /decision -making roles is warranted amongst th e 
key actors in the e -Government  agenda . 
• Strong political support to advance this agenda that has been declared a nat ional priority. The 
Head of SEGA  should be given the status of A dvisor to the PM on e-government reform . 
• Public outreach to communicate about plans and achievements of e -Government  reform is 
needed.  
                                                           
2 CoM’s Decision No. 996 from March 3, 2011 on the Regulation of Public Consultations on the Development and 
Implementation of the State Policy.  
3 SeGA published the Concept of E -Governance Development Str ategy 2020 and the Concept of e -Services on its website 
and organized face -to-face public debates in its office in January 2017. During March -April 2017, SeGA provided regional 
level public discussions (https://www.e.gov.ua/content/gromadske -obgovorennya -komponentu -elektronne -uryaduvannya).  14 DIMENSION 2. IMPLEMENTATION  
 
As mentioned under  the previous  dimension , one of the key players in the field of e -Government 
implementation is the State e -Government Agency (https://www.e.gov.ua/).  The SEGA  was set 
up by the CoM4 in 2014 as a dedicated central public administrative body to lead the implementati on 
of state policy in the fields of informatization, e -governance, the formation and use of national 
electronic information resources, the development of information resources in  society. In addition,  
SEGA  is entitled to make proposals to the C oM to ensure  the development of a state policy in this area.  
As mentioned in the e -Government Development Concept Note, SEGA  should carry out the   
coordination and control of implementation  of the provisions of the Concept – the main policy 
document in the field of e -Government. In addition, the SEGA  is responsible for the introduction of 
                                                           
4 CoM Decision no. 492 from October 1, 2014.  
15 the project approach to the implementation of e-government, as well as standards of information 
systems management . 
According to its regulation, SEGA  should  perform the following act ivities:  
• suggest improvement s to legislation;  
• conduct various studies;  
• perform monitoring and evaluations;  
• coordinate sectorial and regional programs and projects;   
• provide methodological, legal, informational and organization support to various actors 
involved;  
• perform state registration of information resources from the public sector and issue 
corresponding certificates of registration;  
• assure functioning of the CoM’s single web portal;  
• monitor the content of the public sector websites;  
• assure integra tion of information systems (hereinafter referred to as “IS”) in the single web 
portal of public sector bodies and assure provision of information and services through the IS 
“e-Government”;  
• coordinate the work on creation, maintenance and operation of th e National Register of 
Information Recourses ;  
• establish  data formats of electronic documents, methodology of determining who should paid 
from the budget programs, methodology for indicators development;  
• submit proposals on: policy goals and tasks and way s of implementation; coordination of the 
activities of state bodies; establishment of standards, norms, rules, orders, classifiers; rules for 
web portal and web pages content;  
• development and implementation of interoperability IS;  
• approval (together with MoEDT) of the procedure and requirements for integration of services 
to the State Administrative Services Portal  
• development and implementation of Open Data Portal;  
• development and implementation of the IS “Single window for e -reporting”;  
• development of A dministrative Services Portal;  
• implementation of national system of indicators for the development of Information Society;  
• implementation of digital signature;  
• participate in the protection of state information resources;  
• participates in capacity building ;  
• organizes public awareness and promotion campaigns;  
• participates in international collaboration.   
The above mandate , that looks quite broad,  covers functions related to both policymaking and 
implementation . Perhaps , those related to policymaking could  be reassigned to the e-Government  
Council proposed as part of the recommendations on the previous dimension, unless the political 
decision is for SEGA  to concentrate on the policy formulation, which sh ould trigger  alternative 
arrangements on part of the i mplementation.  16 The decisions and orders of SEGA  are mandatory for execution  by the central executive 
authorities, their territorial bodies, regional and local state administrations  and authorities, local 
self-government bodies, enterprises, institutions, o rganizations irrespective of the form of 
ownership , and citizens . According to its regulation, SEGA  is headed by a Director who is appointed 
and dismissed by the C oM on the proposal of the Commission on the Issues of the Senior Civil Service 
that selects t he candidates based on the results of the competition in accordance with the law on c ivil 
service. The Director has two deputies that are selected on a competitive basis  and similarly are 
appointed by the CoM based on  proposals of the Commission.   
To discu ss and/or agree on specific aspects of e -Government implementation SEGA  can 
establish  thematic c ouncil s. Council decisions can be implemented by issuing an order. Other 
permanent or temporary consultative, advisory and other subsidiary bodies may be formed  for 
consideration of recommendations and conducting professional consultations on the key issues of 
SEGA ’s activity. The Director  of SEGA is deciding on the establishment or liquidation , as well as 
composition of such bodies.  
The maximum number of civil servants and employees of the Agency shall be approved by the 
CoM and currently SEGA  has 75 staff position out of which 54 are filled.  The staff structure is 
approved by the Director , in agreement with  the Minister of the C oM. The staffing  and SEGA  budget 
are approved  by the Director in agreement with the Ministry of Finance.  
As reported by SEGA  during the interview, its capacity has been sufficient  to handle the current 
scope of work , but the perception of the WB Team is that som e functions are clearly la gging . For 
example, there has been little done regarding the  adoption of BPR methodology , delays in implantation 
of the interoperability system  and coordination  of the e -government agenda at the subnational level  is 
lagging . SEGA  capacity could improve aft er it fills its current vacancies and achieves a  narrower 
functional scope.  SEGA  should revisit its overly broad mandate and functions to become more focused 
and efficient in implementing e -Government reform. SEGA  should undergo a functional analysis to 
determine  what is critical and realistically can be performed on its own and what should be t ransferred, 
delegated or outsourced.  
SEGA  is missing an institutional development strategy and indicators for monitoring of its own 
performance.  In addition, its fu nding model is not defined to allow incentives based on results of e -
Government implementation and to assure financial sustainability and institutional development.  
SEGA is the founder of the State Enterprise “Government Information Resources”  
(hereinaft er referred to as “ GIR”), which is technically  maintaining and operating several  e-
Government related portals and platforms such as O pen Data Portal  and interoperability platform 
“Trembita ”, Electronic Documents Management System (EDMS) and some front offi ce information 
systems for SNAP s.  
SEGA  benefits fr om substantial donor  support for many key e -Government  initiatives ,  
such as implementation of the interoperability platform, improving of the state registries, 
administrative services digit alization, fron t office digit alization for local service centers 
(hereinafter referred to as “ SNAP ”s as per their Ukrainian abbreviation) , Open Data, 
implementation of the e-tools for participatory governance  and capacity building.  Below are 17 presented main donor project s with their areas of support .  More details on donors’ assistance are 
included throughout the report under specific thematic areas :  
• Technical assistance project “Transparency and Accountability in Public 
Administration and Services” (hereinafter referred  to as “TAPAS”) co -funded by 
USAID and UKAid.  A 19 million USD project for 5 years (2016 – 2021) that is covering the 
areas of e -procurement, open government data , e-services  and capacity building . 
• Technical assistance project “e -Government for Ukraine” (h ereinafter referred to as 
“EGOV4UKRINE”) co -funded by the Estonian Development Cooperation and Sweden  
with its “You Lead” sub-project (hereinafter referred to as “U-LEAD ”) implemented by the e -
Governance Academy of Estonia is focusing on: rollout of the in teroperability platform 
“Trembita”; development of a front -office IS for the SNAPs ; capacity building in the field of 
e-Government for the central and local authorities.    
• EU Delegation  plann ed an  assess ment of  the e -Government in Ukraine with support of 
experts from the E -Governance Academy of Estonia.  The assessment focus es on policy 
framework and institutional aspects, potential assistance in improvement of the policy 
documents and action plans as well as reinforcement of the SEGA . Based on the assessmen t 
report the EU Delegation is planning to provide recommendations and future support in 
implementation. The work start ed in April  2018 and will be finalized durin g the summer. Per 
EU’s vision the e-Government in Ukraine should be  treated as an integral par t of a broader 
Public Administration Reform. EU Delegation is conducting the Public Administration 
Reform (PAR) SIGMA assessment to be released in June 2018 that will  also include e -
Government aspects. The SIGMA assessment report will be also used for defi ning further steps 
of the e -Gove rnment implementation and EU potential support in the area.  
• More narrowly focused donor financed digit alization projects are primarily 
implemented with responsible public entities, who in turn collaborate with SEGA . 
Example s from the WB active portfolio include Human Resource Management System 
(HRMIS) for civil service, e -Heath System, etc. 
The e -Government Development Concept Note sets up priorities for the e -Government 
implementation in key sectors.  According to the Concep t, effective management in any sector 
currently is impossible without wide application of modern e -government tools. These tools should 
include automation of processing of the big volumes of data, information and analytical support of 
decision making, opti mization and automation of business processes and introduction of e -tools for 
interaction. In addition, the Concept encourages the use of modern technologies for the e -Government 
such as geo -information technologies, internet of things, big data processing  and blockchain.  
The priority activities for sectorial e -Government implementation are the following:  
• In healthcare: creation of basic registers including professionals, medicines and intuitions; 
introduction of e -medical records and e -prescription IS; i ntroduction of the un ified open 
standards for health care IS;  development of integrated healthcare IS and telemedicine;  
• In environment and natural resources: online environment monitoring; electronic integrated 
environment permission; IS on water balance;  18 • In education and science: encouraging the development of design infrastructure and secure 
application  in the sector; development of the training IS and automation of  the main processes 
of work of educational establishments, including e -grade book, e -text b ook, distance learning;  
• In social protection: unified social state register with integration of the existing disintegrated 
data bases;  introduction of the e -sick leave;  introduction of automated data verification;  
introduction of electronic employment agre ements;  
• In financial and fiscal policy : development of e -office of a taxpayer;  development of "one -
stop-shop" customs automated system; automated processes for budgets planning and approval 
at various levels ; e-excise stamps;  
• In human rights and freedoms p rotection : integrated IS for the Ministry of Internal Affairs;  
implementation of the “112” integrated emergency system; development of single 
demographic register;  
• In transport and infrastructure: introduction of the e -ticket;  
• In regional development and reform of local self -governance and territorial organization of 
authorities: city planning cadaster; introduction of sample information and analytical systems 
for the local communities;  
• In elections: development and implementation of the e -election IS;  
• In archiving: development of the archiving IS; implementation of the e -archive services.    
Public authorities are currently facing multiple problems related to the implementation of e -
Government agenda , such as :  
• lack of capacity and qualified staff in the f ield of IT management to assure decent 
implementation , management and maintenance of the IT solutions;   
• low level of salaries and high turnover in the public sector that makes  it difficult to retain 
qualified staff;   
• lack or insufficiency  of the IT infrast ructures to assure optimal level of performance and 
security ;  
• lack of IT projects management capacity to professionally conduct IT procurements ;  
• capacity constraints for evaluat ion of the  purchased systems , proper acceptance of deliverables 
and assurance  of sustainability.  
The Ministry of Infrastructure and its Digital Department  can serve as a  relevant example of 
these problems . The head of the Digital Department serves as Chief Information Officer (CIO) of the 
sector  but is the only person that currentl y works in the Department . The Department has 10 staff 
positions , all unfilled . The Digital Department is responsible for budgeting of related activities, 
conducti ng e-Government related feasibility studies and monitor ing the implementation of specific e -
Government sectorial projects. The allocated 10 staff positions, however are not dedicated exclusively 
to e-Government implementation. For example, 3 positions will work on Postal Services, including 
market regulation; another 3 positions will be dedicated to Railways and assure development and 
maintenance of the technical side of its activity (hard and soft) and only the remaining 3 positions will 
work on integration of the systems and development of the sectorial e -services that are pure e -19 government relat ed tasks. One service to be implemented by the Ministry of Infrastructure , in 
collaboration with the CoM and Agency of Transporters  and with the support of TAPAS project , is to 
connect different registries with geo -positioning information systems. There ar e also discussions on 
using railway pillars and wires f or support to extension of the internet access .  
The State Enterprise “Government Information Resources ” is an example of the impact of staff 
turnover . Although this  quasi state enterpris e has entrepre neurship  possibilities and elements for 
attracting high qualified staff , it is still financed mainly by the state. The competitiveness of pay is not 
high, which results in an annual turnover of  about 50%. Retention of qualified staff is a problem. After 
gaining professional experience at GIR, staff members easily find job s in the private sector with 3 -4 
times higher pay. The average pay in a state enterprise is close  to US$500 a month (US$1000 for IT, 
US$700 for support staff, and US$500 for front office wo rk). In public institutions where salaries are 
lower, the retention of staff is even more challenging.    
Government agencies are operating in silos rather than collaborating, withholding data rather 
than sharing it, building redundant systems rather than l everaging shared applications and 
infrastructure.  Currently, most administrative bodies maintain their own ICT staff and suboptimal 
technology infrastructure in a siloed manner that lead to duplication of functions and inefficiencies. 
Regional and local go vernments suffer from a shortage of ICT capacity and national agencies do not 
have sufficient resources to support them.  
Another list of problems related to implementation that needs to be addressed is reflected in the 
e-Government Development Concept Note :  
• insufficient level of integrated coordination, control and interaction of the customers;  
• economic crisis, which leads to decreased amount of funding in the sphere of e -government 
development;  
• low quality, effectiveness and efficiency of projects and tas ks implementation;  
• low quality of management of design, implementation, maintenance and development of the 
information and communication systems (data bases, registers etc.) and resources (data 
processing centers, telecommunication networks etc.) of the a uthorities;  
• insufficient level of readiness of the civil servants and local self -governance bodies staff, 
individuals and legal entities for implementation and use of e -government tools.  
Additional implementation challenges  identified by the WB Team indicate that there is no clear 
definition and delineation of the roles related to the IS implementation  and life -cycle (IS design 
and development, testing, placement in production, technical operation and maintenance, 
service delivery, quality assurance, moni toring and evaluation) . In addition, the  business model 
and financial sustainability of implemented solutions are usually addressed on an ad-hoc basis and lack  
a unified approach; and financial management arrangements are not properly defined . SEGA  has the  
mandate and is working on coordination across the sectors and regions, however rules are not 
consistently followed by the stakeholders.  
Overall, the implementation capacity needs to improve. As can be observed in the table above, t he 
current eGGO status of a “follower” may be upgraded in the future subject to achievement of the set 20 strategic targets. Yet, there is no clear plan on delineation of implementation from policymaking, which 
is the most critical step , as well as narrowing SEGA ’s scope of work . 
Recommendations:  
• Implementation should be guided by following principles stated in the EU e -Government 
Action Plan: Digital by default, Cross -border by default, Once only principle on EU level, 
Interoperability by default, Openness and transparency, Inclus iveness and accessibility, 
Trustworthiness and Security .  
• IT project and programs design and management capacity of the public sector should be 
consolidated. Quality assurance of the provided IT solutions  should be improved .  
• Development of all systems sho uld follow the same rules, practices and procedures to assure 
acceptable quality, documentation and sustainability plans.  
• Deployment of the shared services should be embraced by the key guiding principles of the e -
government implementation.  
• The e -Governme nt reform should help systematize projects and programs management related 
to IT development, implementation and maintenance from the ministries, subordinated  
agencies , regional and local authorities to a qualified central unit or net of units. Public 
authorities should deal only with strategic planning of the use of modern technologies and 
digitalization (sectorial e -transformation), as well as  participation at the concept development 
phase for the IT projects and solutions and use of the implemented solut ions. 
• SEGA  should consider narrowing its scope of activities and responsibilities to become more 
focused. It should be decided what can be done in -house and what can be delegated or 
outsourced .  
• e-Government transformation agents (persons or units) should be strategically established in  
public sector entities to ensure proper implementation of activities under the e -government 
development plan. The person responsible for sectorial e -transformation should not have a 
rank lower than deputy minister  (state sec retary) . It must be understood such persons or units  
are in charge of advising on e -Government policy implementation and should  not be place d in 
operative units such as  IT department s (or units in charge of  maintenance of the IT hardware 
in ministries or a gencies ). They need to be change agents in the sector and work tightly with 
SEGA .  
• Clear delineation of institutional mandates related to the IT cycle ( design and development, 
testing, placement in production, technical operation and maintenance, service d elivery, 
quality assurance, monitoring and evaluation) is needed.   
• Reform Delivery Unit under PM can monitor and evaluate the progress of reform 
implementation through a Scorecard based on KPI and foster reforms implementation.   
• Business model and financ ial sustainability plans for implemented solutions should be 
developed, approved and followed.  
 21 DIMENSION 3. ICT  PROCUREMENT  
 
Procur ement of digital technologies is included as one of the twelve principles of OECD Digital 
Government Toolkit5 (DGT) . Procur ement of modern digital technologies requires more agile ways 
of procurement and deployment, new forms of public private partnerships ( PPPs ) and service contracts 
with the private sector.  Given the large scale and extended implementation period , the procur ement of 
ICT systems is associated with high risk of failure.  
Besides being transparent, procurement of ICT systems need s to be agile.  Due to its complexity  
the procurement of ICT system should be covered by special guidelines available to public entities.  
DGT highlights that to select the appropriate mix of ICT solutions, governments should have a good 
knowledge of their existing assets, including a skills inventory, ICT inventory and age of existing assets 
                                                           
5 OECD Digital Government Toolkit: http://www.oecd.org/governance/digital -government/toolkit/  
22 to determine where they are in their life cycle, a public services catalogue, current contracts, inter -
agency agreements and a list of public sector registries. These tools can guide future investments and 
help prioritiz e strategic decisions on resource allocations.  Addressing these questions require s sound 
coordination mechanisms and implementation arrangements. In an  intermediate or advanced system 
these functions are carried out by a designated unit in charge of ICT procurement policy at the central 
government.  The complexity of ICT systems also introd uces additional requirements for mainte nance 
provisions.   
In summary, the relevant DGT principle (#11) underlines the importance of reviewing 
procurement  rules and creating an ICT -acquisition environment and strategy that supports the digital 
transformatio n of the public sector.  
 
Intelligent ICT 
procurement:  
 
 Increases efficiency  
 Supports innovation 
and sharing  
 Helps achieving the 
national digital 
government strategy   
Capability is needed to:  
 
 Identify common 
needs across the public 
sector  
 Changes in 
procur ement and 
contracting rules  
 Set clear frameworks 
and responsibilities   
Public procurement 
should be adapted to new 
trends in technology and 
ICT deployment 
methods, namely:  
 
 Cloud computing  
 New forms of PPPs  
 Open source software  
 Service contracts with 
the p rivate sector  
  
Failure to address these 
issues accurately exposes 
governments to:  
 
 Efficiency 
shortcomings  
 Untapped 
opportunities for 
public sector 
innovation  
 Financial risks through 
project failure  
Source:  http://www.oecd.org/governance/digital -governme nt/toolkit/principle11/  
According to the 2014 OECD Survey on Digital Government Performance , 36% of member 
countries did not have a specific strategy for ICT procurement, and 50% did not have central repository 
of existing ICT contracts in government.  
The Ukrainian procurement system does not have separate procurement procedures or 
arrangements for ICT systems.  Most of the recent advances in public procurement reforms are 
associated with introduction of ProZorro system for electronic procurement.  ProZorro w as primarily 
introduced to enhance transparency in Public Procurement in Ukraine.  It was developed in 2014.  
Before becoming operational, the system was piloted between February 2015 and April 2016. 
Currently, the ProZorro covers the entire country.   
The Pr oZorro system provides transparency for certain stages of general public procurement, 
but it appears that the whole process is not digit alized and integrated with other systems.  Nor are 
all procurement methods covered by ProZorro , as revealed in the “Asses sment of Ukraine Electronic 
Procurement System” by the  World Bank in 2017  (hereafter Assessment of ProZorro) . More 
importantly , there are no specific methods and documents for ICT procurement comparable with the 
Bank’s bidding documents for supply and inst allation of ICT systems . The National Program for 
Informatization, coordinated with SEGA , is the main instrument  for keeping the track of procurement 
planning . There is no information about the robustness of this process.  23 There are no specific ICT procurem ent standards or  guidelines available to public entities . In 
some cases, the gap is partially covered by  the provisions in outdated GOST standards, which are 
derived from general budgeting and public procurement legislation.   
The Law on the National Progra m of Informatization provides the regulatory framework  for 
coordinating the ICT procurement . Coordination with SEGA  and SSSCIP  respectively on ICT and 
cybersecurity is a formal requirement, but is not reliably enforced . There is no centralized and 
speciali zed ICT procurement policy unit in place.  Despite requirements for coordination with SEGA , 
ICT procurements at subnational level lack coordination.  
There is also no dedicated centralized repository for ICT contracts . There have been certain 
surveys for ex isting systems in context of "Trembita" and/or the MOF fund for intellectual property, 
but there is no robust inventory with the real -time age information.  While the ProZorro systems 
contains the details about awarded contracts there is also no database fo r historical supplier 
performance.  Introducing  relevant  accounting standards  could help  to keep  better  track of expenditures 
on ICT assets and services . 
There are  provisions in the Budget Code, Law on Public Procurement and National Program of 
Informatizat ion that support budgeting the maintenance of ICT systems . According to the Article 
9 of the Law on National Program of Informatization, the Cabinet of Ministers annually, together with 
the draft Law on the State Budget of Ukraine for the next year, submit s to the Verkhovna Rada of 
Ukraine: a report on the state of informatization in Ukraine; the tasks of the National Informatization 
Program for the next three years; and a program of informatization tasks for the next budget year with 
the definition of fund ing sources. As part of the mandatory review of ICT procurement packages  
SEGA  pays attention to the total cost of ownership in the context of procurement of the systems.   
Plans about introducing the ICT specific good practices did not come out during the i nterviews 
and the desk review of national strategies.  Based on the Assessment of ProZorro , the Bank 
recommended that the MoETD needs to create a guide book on public procurement . There has been 
no specific discussion  about the guidelines for ICT procuremen t in the Assessment of ProZorro, or  the 
2016 Strategy for Public Procurement Reform (Roadmap) approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.  The 
Bank recommendations also included  introduction of  black and white lists for economic operators6 
(suppliers)  and central  pool of ICT procurement and contract management expertise .  
As shown in the table above, ICT procurement is at inception, which corresponds to eGGO 
status of a “beginner” . While there is a foresight for coordination and transparency of all 
procurement, th e core procurement nuances that are specific to ICT are missing  from the strategic 
documents.  
 
 
                                                           
6 This information could also justify the cases of  use of direct contracting, for instance  if the government has committed to 
specific brands and signed special framework contracts with vendors for this purpose.  24 Recommendations:  
• Develop a central data base on all existing assets in the public sector including their age , as a 
next step to earlier initial stocktaking exer cises. Develop a strategy for ICT procurement based 
on the inventory of existing assets.  
• Establish a central repository for all ICT tenders, contracts and payments across the public 
sector at the central levels. ProZorro should provide a good foundation fo r it. Expand the 
central open repository to include ICT tenders, contracts and payments at the subnational 
level.  
• Establish a unit in charge of ICT procurement policy at the central government level , and 
establish co -operation and collaboration with subnat ional levels of government to avoid 
duplicities and improve value for money of ICT investments . The unit, inter alia, will be 
responsible for putting in place the arrangements for framework agreements for aggregated 
ICT demand.  
• Adapt ICT procurement policy  to more agile and iterative delivery methods and  facilitating 
access to small specialized  firms to compete for contracts in their area of  expertise . 
• Develop an ICT procurement strategy applicable across the public sector.  
• Develop a n open database of previ ous supplier performance for ICT projects . The Assessment 
of ProZorro  made a relevant general  recommendation to establish  a black and white list of 
suppliers.  
• Although in contrast to the general trends and the logic of reduced transaction cost in the 
procu rement sector , in-line with OECD recommendation  over longer term  there could be 
significant benefits from breaking down large projects to smaller,  more manageable sizes as 
appropriate.  One immediate result would be reduction of the risk of failure for smal ler and 
simpler tasks. The smaller  sized  projects will also allow small er bidders  to compet e and bring 
quite interesting and specialized  expertise  that some small start -ups or companies may offer.  
• A more coordinated and unified investment in public sector IT needs to be implemented. At the 
local public authorities should coordinate their investments in IT with the central level.  25 DIMENSION 4. STRATEGIC AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  
 
 
The main policy document in the field of e -Government  is the Concept Note on t he e -
Government Development in Ukraine  (hereinafter referred to as “ e-Government Concept ”.  The 
Concept Note was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers in September 20177. The Concept  shall guide 
central, regional and local level public authorities and subor dinated entities during impl ementation of 
the e-Government. The document is quite comprehensive and covers  the following topics:  
• The problem which should be addressed;  
• The goal and timeline  of the implementation;  
• Ways and methods of solving the problem;  
• Modernization of the public services and development of interaction between the authorities, 
citizens and business with the support of information and communication technologies;  
• Development of electronic services;  
• Open data development;  
• Development of ele ctronic tolls for citizens involvement;  
• Development of electronic identification and trust services;  
                                                           
7 COM Decision no 649 -P from September 20, 2017.  
26 • Modernization of public administration with the support of ICT;  
• Development of electronic interaction (interoperability);  
• Development of the e -document  flow;  
• E-Government in the key sectors and support of the priority reforms;  
• Management of the e -government development;  
• Formation of basic ICT e -government infrastructure;  
• Raising the efficiency of management of the e -government development.  
According to  the Concept, the e -Government  reform  was set by the CoM as one of main 
priorities of the Public Administration Reform as well as implementation of the e -Government 
is one of the Ukraine’s commitments under the EU Association Agreement.  Implementation of 
the e-Government is treated as a main precondition to the effective development of the digital economy 
and digital market in Ukraine and its further integration into the EU Digital Single Market Strategy.   
The goal of the e -Government Concept is to define t he directions, mechanisms and period for 
the development of an effective e -government system in the Ukraine for meeting the interests and 
satisfying the needs of individuals and legal entities, improvement of public administration, increasing 
the competiti veness and fostering social and economic development of the country. The 
implementation is envisaged for the period until 2020.  
In line with the EU e -Government Action Plan, t he Concept sets out the following internationally 
recognized principles for the implementation of e -Government:  
• Digital by default  
• Once only  
• Compatibility b y default  
• Accessibility and citizens involvement  
• Openness and transparency  
• Trust and security  
The implementation implies undertaking of integrated measures covering three mai n areas : 
public services modernization and development of interaction between the authorities, citizens and 
business with the support of ICT ; modernization of public administration with the support of ICT;  
management of  the e-government development.  
Anothe r important policy document in the field of e -Government is the e -Services Concept Note 
(hereinafter referred to as “e -Services Concept”). The e -Services Concept was approved by the 
CoM in November 20168. The Concept recognizes that Ukraine is lagging  the global pace of the 
development of electronic services and there is a need to develop a single coordinated state policy in 
this area.  
The e -Services Concept seeks  to solve key issues in the field of e -services delivery. The purpose of 
the Concept is to dev elop an efficient electronic services system in Ukraine to meet the interests of 
                                                           
8 COM Decision no. 918 -p from November 19, 2016.  27 individuals and legal entities through the development and maintenance of accessible and transparent, 
safe and non -commercial, least costly, fast and convenient electronic ser vices.  
In addition, the e -Services Concept sets out main principles that should guide the development 
of the e -services in Ukraine:  
• consumer orientation;  
• accessibility;  
• security and protection of personal data;  
• de-bureaucratization and administrative sim plification;  
• transparency;  
• preservation of electronic information (subjects of treatment should be able to receive 
information on the actions of the entities providing administrative services related to the receipt 
of their personal data);  
• openness and reu se (the ability of the actors to provide administrative services to interact to 
provide high -quality and efficient electronic services, using data and technical solutions of each 
other);  
• technological neutrality;  
• efficiency and effectiveness.  
Implementatio n of the Concept is foreseen for the period up to 2020 . The Concept approve d a list 
of 45 priority services to be digit alized by 2020. More details related to the planned 3 stages and actual 
status of implementation are provided in the following chapter th at focuses on services.  
An important policy document is the Roadmap of National Interoperability Development (2017 -
2020) (hereinafter referred to as “ Interoperability Roadmap ”). The Interoperability roadmap 
defines the main steps to be taken by various pu blic authorities in coordination with  SEGA  to 
implement an  interoperability platform. According to the Roadmap, by the end of 2017 the central 
elements of the interoperability platform were expected to be deployed followed by integration of 
registers. The integration of registries into the interoperability platform was supposed to happen in 3 
stages. By the end of 2017, top -priority electronic registries of the 15 central bodies were expected to 
be integrated and by the end of 2 -nd quarter of 2018, registri es of another 30 (2nd line) central executive 
bodies. More details about the Interoperability Roadmap and status of implementation is provided 
below in a nother  chapter.  
As described above, Ukraine has a strong policy framework for implementing e -governmen t, e-
services and interoperability system.  These policy documents supported by several other laws and 
regulations, create the foundation of policy, legal and regulatory environment for e -Government 
implementation.  
In terms of legislative and regulatory fr amework , there is a modern and dynamic legislation in place 
defining and regulating such basic e -Government related notions such as Digital Signature and 
Electronic Document. This Laws regulate the activity of the users in the respect with electronic 
docum ents and their exchange between various authorities. Based on the Law on Electronic 
Documents the SEGA  is currently implementing the public -sector  Documents Management System.  28 An important law connected to the area of public services modernization is the Law on 
Administrative Services.9 The information about each administrative service can be received free of 
charge from the Register of Administrative Services, located on the Government portal. According to 
the Art. 16 of th at law, the Register of Administ rative Services is formed and maintained by the 
Ministry of Economic Development and Trade. The procedure for keeping the Register is regulated 
by the Cabinet of Ministers. The Register aims to include a proper accounting of administrative 
services and pro vide an open and free access to information about administrative services.  
Cyber security is also regulated by the Law on Administrative Services .10 The Law  defines the 
legal and organizational foundations for ensuring the protection of private and national  interests of 
Ukraine in cyberspace, the main goals, directions and principles of state policy in the field of 
cybersecurity, the powers of state bodies, enterprises, institutions, organizations, persons and citizens 
in this area, and the main principles o f coordination of their work on the provision of cyber security.  
The area of Open Government Data is regulated by the Law on Information Access , as well a s 
the Regulation on data sets that should be published in the open data format .11 The Regulation  
define s the requirements for the format and structure of the data sets to be made public in the form of 
open data, the frequency of updates, and the procedure for their publication, as well as the list of such 
sets of data. According to the Regulation , creation and provision of the operation of the Unified State 
Portal for Open Data is carried out by the S EGA , which is its holder. The Administrator of the Unified 
State Web -Portal for Open Data is the State Enterprise “Government Information Resources” . The 
regula tion establish ed that data sets should be published in  open -readable formats for reuse  such as : 
CSV, XML, JSON, RDFa, HTML, Microdata, or other similar formats.  
An important law in preparation with TAPAS Project assistance is the Law on State Electronic 
Registries.  The Law is aiming at the unification of criteria and requirements for all the state registries. 
The law will define the legal framework for the creation and maintena nce of electronic registries. The 
draft is supporting the implementation of the E U standards for data exchange and interoperability, 
including cross border data exchange with EU member -countries. A semantic catalog will be 
implemented to allow connection to EU single digital gateway and digital market. The data exchange 
will be based o n the “once -only” principle and unique identification number, to exclude duplication of 
personal data in all state registers.  The IT committee in the Parliament is supporting the draft that was 
recently publicly consulted and is expected to be sent for  approval by  the Parliament.  
In addition to the policy and legal acts, there are many  CoM’s decision s and regulation s, earlier 
mentioned in the report, to support the e -Government  implementation at the sub -legislative level , such 
as the Regulation on Intersec toral Council of e -Government Development and the  Regulation on State 
e-Government Agency.  
While laws and regulations mentioned above do not provide a comprehensive list , they provide 
insight into the general legal and regulatory framework.  It is also imp ortant to emphasize that in 
Ukraine there a strong policy and legal framework to implement the e -Government reform and that it 
                                                           
9 The Law no. 5203 -VI from September 16, 2012.  
10 The Law no. 3163 -VIII from October 5, 2017.  
11 CoM decision no. 835 from October 21, 2015.  29 provides a clear mandate for the SEGA  to lead the  implementation of such a reform. T his framework 
continues to evolve as new legi slation and go vernment decisions are passed.  
At the same time, the e -Government Concept recogniz ed that the regulatory framework is 
imperfect and the following actions are need ed:  
• analysis and systematization of the regulatory framework on e -government  and ICT regarding 
their effectiveness and focus on e -Government  goals and strategic objectives;  
• updating and development of the new regulatory documents regarding e -government,  ICT, 
information -oriented society and e -services etc.;  
• reliable protection of th e data and right to privacy of an individual, with the aim of 
strengthening public  confidence in the on-line environment;  
• harmonization and introduction of the international standards in the sphere of information 
technologies;  
• defining unified rules and re quirements for the  creation, introduction and functioning of the 
state electronic information resources and introduction of the national register of electronic 
information resources .  
In addition, the WB’s Team would like to mention the following issues re lated to the strategic 
and legal framework: there is no clear delineation of mandates and responsibilit ies related to policy 
making and implementation of the various players involved; high -level of decentralization require s a 
more explicit regulation of th e e-Government implementation at the regional and local level; standards 
based on international best practices are implemented in limited areas such as open data and 
information security, but in some areas such as IS development  and interoperability  are still missing 
or under development;  there is no methodological framework in place to support such processes as re -
engineering and digitation of services, protection of data , etc.; the Law on Personal Data Protection is 
in place, but there are some challenges  related to implementation.  
Overall performance on this dimension , as reflected in the table below , is significant and secures 
an eGGO status of a “performer”. Nevertheless,  special attention should be paid to improvement of 
the foresight , implementation o f standards  and benchmark regulation as well as provision of 
methodological support . 
Recommendations:  
• Revise the legal framework to provide a clearer definition and delineation of mandates and 
responsibilities related to policy making and implementation o f the various players involved .  
• A more detailed regulatory framework on e -Government implementation at the regional and 
local level is needed due to the high-level of decentralization.  
• Establish the interoperability framework in line with the European In teroperability 
Framework, as well as a whole -of-government Enterprise Architecture as the overarching 
operational document.  
• Explore the option of standardizing by adopting international best practice or benchmark 
regulations, for example on the quality of public services, management of registries, etc.  30 • Methodological support documents in such areas as re -engineering and digit alization of 
services, registry cleansing, data protection , etc. needs to be developed and provided . 
• A better implementation mechanis m for the Law on Personal Data Protection should be define 
and implemented.  
 
Area 2. Public  Services  
DIMENSION 5. PLATFORMS AND SERVICES  
 
31 The main policy document in the area of e -services is the Concept Note on e -Services 
Development. By approving this  document, CoM places the public services modernization in the 
center of e -Government reform and aims at development of a unified coordinated policy in this area. 
The purpose of the Concept is the implementation of the efficient user oriented e -services sy stem 
through the development and maintenance of accessible and transparent, safe and non -commercial, 
least costly, fast and convenient electronic services.  
The Concept seeks  to solve the following key problems : 
• failure of the regulatory framework governin g the provision of e -services;  
• lack of uniform requirements for e -services implementation;  
• the unsettled issue of electronic identification and authentication of business entities when 
providing e -services;  
• the lack of an interoperability system that will assure interagency electronic interaction  
• complexity and overlapping of the procedures for the provision of administrative services;  
• uncertainty of the format of the electronic document, according to which the applicant must 
submit documents for the receip t of administrative services;  
• the lack of a single information and telecommunication infrastructure, providing electronic 
services;  
• lack of confidence in the electronic interaction of entities providing administrative services and 
users;  
• low level of readi ness of civil servants, officials of local self -government bodies, individuals 
and legal entities for the introduction of electronic services.  
Services digit alization is based on the following internationally recognized basic principles:  
• consumer orientati on; 
• accessibility;  
• security and protection of personal data;  
• de-bureaucratization and administrative simplification;  
• transparency;  
• preservation of electronic information (subjects of treatment should be able to receive 
information on the actions of the ent ities providing administrative services related to the receipt 
of their personal data);  
• openness and reuse (the ability of the actors to provide administrative services to interact to 
provide high -quality and efficient electronic services, using data and t echnical solutions of each 
other);  
• technological neutrality;  
• efficiency and effectiveness.  
Implementation of the Concept is foreseen for the period up to 2020 and is based on a phased 
approach consisting of three main stages.  In the first stage (2016 -2017)  the reform focused on  
priority services, includ ing their re-engineering , digit alization and piloting ; development of the single 
Services Portal; as well as regulation of the use of digital signature and electronic identification.  At 32 the second stage (201 8-2019 years) that is currently on -going the reforms should focus on optimization 
of the procedures for the provision of administrative services;  introduction of priority services in 
electronic form;  as well as wide involvement of individuals and legal ent ities in the use of electronic 
services.  The third stage (2020) provides for the provision of e -services in all areas of public life, the 
provision of integrated electronic services, and the introduction of cross -border electronic services.  
According to th e Concept a precondition for digit alization of administrative services is re -
engineering (optimization) of procedures for the provision of administrative services. The re -
engineering is aiming at: reduction of the number of documents required when applying  for a service; 
reduction of the number and simplification of the stages/steps to be taken during provision of services;  
the introduction of electronic forms of interaction between the providers and users;  identification of 
certain stages (procedures) that  can be automated  and reduction of the internal processing time for the 
certain stages during services provision.  However, a clear step -by-step methodological guideline  for 
the re -engineering is missing. Currently  the re -engineering is done on an ad-hoc ba sis, mainly with 
donor’s support, or by own agency efforts  in the format  of a “brain -storming” . A task force that would 
provide a more systemic and comprehensive approach to such a complex issue as re -engineering of 
services is missing.   
MoEDT  is responsi ble for setting up polices in the field of administrative services and their 
provision.  According to the Ministry currently there are 1200 administrative services in Ukraine. The 
services are provided by a net of service centers set up at the local level. There are around 700 service 
centers that provide local services and central administrative services as well as some online services. 
The government of Ukraine plans to create an additional 600 service centers and to implement the 
concept of one -stop-shop centers for service delivery both local and central as well as offline and 
online. More information on service delivery model is provided in the specific dimension below.  
The SEGA  is coordinating the process of services digit alization.  The e -Services Conce pt defines a 
list of 45 priority services to be digit alized in the first run. Currently there are around 50 public services  
(land and environment -10, citizenship and migration -5, business registration and activities -8, 
construction and real estate -14, soc ial assistance -9) that can be accessed on -line from the web page of 
the CoM: (https://www.kmu.gov.ua/ua). For modernization of a service, the SEGA , in collaboration 
with the relevant ministry or agency , is developing the concept of the service which needs to be backed 
up by a Ministerial decision or regulation. Services that are to be reformed with the support of donors 
are regulated by a M emorandum of Understanding (M oU) with the donor. Digit alized services are at 
a different level of maturity. For some , individuals  can only submit the application on -line while others 
are fully transactional. For example, the on -line certificate on criminal record is one of the services 
digitalized and used as a pilot, but only the application for the certificate can be submitted on-line. 
Back processing, payment and issuance of the certificate are done in the traditional way - manually.  
The process of sectorial services digit alization is benefiting from donors’ support.  The TAPAS 
project in collaboration with SEGA  and some  ministries did implement 12 online services. For 
example, on -line application for the allowances for the new born was implemented for the  Ministry of 
Social Protection  (over 10,000 on -line applications) . Another important achievement is the 
implementation  of the on -line business registration  (more than 5,000 entrepreneurs registered online) . 
According to project representatives , the technical part of digit alizing a service is the easiest one. The 33 most difficult it is to synchronize ministries and to develo p a proper legal framework for the service to 
be modernized.  
According to the Government of Ukraine's Mid -Term Pr iority Action Plan which was ad opted 
by the Cabinet of Ministries' Order no. 275 of April 3, 2017, 100 public services are to be 
digitalized by the end of 2018.   Prioritization of the services to be digit alized is done based on the EU 
recommendations for prioritization of the online series (EU 20 services). The final list of services to 
be digit alized has not yet been defined . There are differen t approaches to determine  which services are 
subject to digit alization. Some services are prioritized in policy documents and SEGA  is helping 
ministries to address them. In other cases, a bottom -up approach is used when a ministry approach es 
SEGA  with a request to help with the digitalization of a specific service. There are other cases when 
the digit alization of services it is done by an entity itself (i.e. Tax Service).  
The coordination role of MoEDT and SEGA in the area of administrative services 
modern ization are somewhat overlapping due to poorly assigned mandates and competences.  
Apparently , SEGA  and MoEDT have different understanding s of coverage boundaries  created by the 
lack of clear definition of the terminology used. SEGA  is focusing mostly on th e services planned for 
digitalization that include both central “administrative services”, as well as “sector specific” services, 
whilst MoEDT is responsible for the administrative services through the lens of traditional offline 
delivery  with some element s of on -line delivery . This creates a lack of clear leadership and 
responsibility for the coordination and advancing on the overall public services modernization reform. 
In addition, there is no clear methodology on prioritizing the services for digit alization and it is not 
obvious  how the Government is going to modernize all 1200 existing services.  
The MoEDT , with the support of U -Lead project , has been conducting services inventory 
surveys.  The initial extensive list  of around 3000 services  is reported t o be optimized to 1200  through 
the consolidation and clustering of services. Initially , the list was sorted by service providers, but later 
MoEDT  decided to move to a listing based on the names of services. These are more demanded and 
better described. As result, MoEDT created a register of services based on the screening of existing 
legislation. However, a robust horizontal review and regulatory guillotine aiming at exclusion of the 
outdated services and elimination of duplications is missing. While digit alization may indeed reduce 
the administrative burden, its impact will be limited without proper filtering and guillotin ing of 
services.  Recently M oEDT tasked a team of five persons to prepare the revised full list of services by 
end 2018.  
The e -Services C oncept and its Implementation Action Plan12 refer to the Unified 
Administrative Services Portal that should incorporate the information about all existing 
services  and serve as a single -entry  point for provision of on -line services.  In addition, the e-
Gover nment Concept Note mandates the “implementation of the "one-stop-shop" principle through 
ensuring development and functioning of the Unified State Administrative Services Portal, as a single 
point of access of individuals and legal entities to the electron ic services ”. However, on -line services 
as well as information about off -line services can be found on various  sources usually containing 
different information and steps for service provision. For example, o nline public services are provided 
                                                           
12 Approved by the Cabinet of Minister’s decision no. 394 -p from June 14th, 2017.  34 through the  CoM official web page (https://www.kmu.gov.ua/ua ), compartment “Services”, were 
citizens and business can access online services as well as find information about the offline 
administrative services ; and an Online st ate services portal “IGov” (https://igov.org.ua/ ) where only 
online services G2C and G2B are provided  (a portal developed on a volunteer base) . The information 
about sectorial services can be found as well on the web -pages of specific ministries or agencies.   
Currently SEGA  is considering several experiences (UK, Estonia, Israel, etc.) in collecting all 
services on a single portal.  Narrow technical services are closely linked to their back office and are 
considered hard  to move to a centralized portal. SEGA’s preference is to have multiple entry points 
(portals or web -pages) but compliant to a unified design code. Several countries expanded the design 
code to cover such services, so that for the user it appears as a sing le system. SEGA is currently 
discussing this option with MoEDT and is trying  to finalize development of the design code and 
introduce it for the pilot ministries. The design code and templates also need to be citize n friendly.  
There is some proactivity in deployment of modern technologies.  There are attempts to use 
blockchain when issuing the land titles based on cadaster records and during the auctions of property 
confiscated by bailiffs.  
Despite implicit understanding, the common aspects of digit alization  (Government IT enterprise 
architecture, shared and enabling services) are not handled in a coordinated and comprehensive 
manner.  The existing shared services include the implementation of electronic signature, Electronic 
Documents Management System and in teroperability system “Trembita”, which currently has been 
piloted. More detail s on “Trembita” implementation is provided under the “Interoperability” 
dimension. The requirement stated in the e -Government Concept on “ ensuring the repeated use of the 
ICT sy stems to minimize budget expenses and avoid the duplication of systems and decisions” is not 
properly fulfilled.  
In spite of the progress made, the delivery of e -services in the public administration at all levels 
(central, regional and local) remains dec entralized and is characterized by inefficient spending, 
divergent practices and standards, limited inter -sectoral coordination and planning, and 
fragmentation of ICT capacities.  There are multiple examples of two or more ministries or local 
public authori ties purchasing different aspects  of the same IT systems  without any coordination, i.e. 
human  resources, financial or assets management systems. Similarly, a large majority of organizations 
within the Government outsource some ICT functions to an external entity. However, the outsourcing 
of these activities is rarely harmonized across organizations. In other cases, some IT hardware 
investments have become obsolete before the administration was ready to utilize them . 
Implementation of shared services is used  by most countries as a valid strategy to address the 
above -mentioned problems.  There are opportunities to save costs and to benefit from the economies 
of scale through the development of a unified architectural framework that would integrate all shared 
and sectorial services. Governments around the world are implementing shared services to simplify 
processes and increase efficiency. Implementation of shared services are leading to improved services 
both within the Government and to the public – by reducing  the administration’s burden through 
streamlined, automated administrative processes and by institutionalizing best practice ICT standards, 
such as once only, open data and digital by default.  35 SEGA is making some efforts to implement shared service s, howev er the Government is lacking  
a common vision and strategy of implementation of shared services for all the functionalities that 
are similar from sector to sector and public authorities of the same cluster.  SEGA should become 
de facto an institutional coord inator of shared services implementation. It should lead and oversee the 
development and evolution of the whole -of-Government’s IT enterprise architecture, as well as 
identify technology standards to be used when developing IT solutions. Shared solutions c an be 
implemented for application  for a service , identification, signature, payment, reporting  and other 
common features of services provision.  
Overall,  as shown in the table above Ukraine receives an eGGO status of a “follower” for this 
dimension .  It needs to invest in filtering the services and pursuing  prospects for common solutions  
for common services, as well as implementing cross -sectorial shared and enabling services . 
Recommendations :  
• The implementation of the platforms and services should be guid ed by the EU eGovernment 
Action Plan principles: Digital by default, Cross -border by default, Once only principle on EU 
level, Interoperability by default, Openness and transparency, Inclusiveness and accessibility, 
Trustworthiness and Security . 
• The defini tion of service s, whether (i)  public service , (ii)  administrative service 
(central/sectorial and central/local) or (iii)  communal services need to be clarified to avoid 
duplications and overlaps as well as responsibility vacuums. A common approach to all 
services  delivered by the public sector f or businesses and citizens  should be established . 
• A unified public services registry should be implemented.  
• The roles related to the services modernization should be clearly define d. Currently t here is 
ambiguity  and overlap between the mandates of MoEDT and SEGA .  
• The possibility of implementation  shared services should be analy zed more carefully and an 
approach to shared services implementation should be developed (application /front -office 
digitalization , identifica tion, signature, log, payment, reporting, delivery , etc.).  
• A horizontal review and guillotin ing of outdated and duplicating services should be conducted. 
Cleans e the services register.  
• Prioritization methodology for services subject to modernization shou ld be developed and 
implemented.  
• Methodologies of services re-engineering and digit alization  should be developed.  
• SEGA  should consider clustering of services based on common features and apply the same 
approaches to those services.  
• SEGA  should consider the unification of on -line entry points for receiving the services. 
Modernization of Services Portal  should be implemented .  
• A unified approach to public services tariffs setting should be developed and applied.  
• Define the expected results and targets of the public services reform with indicators and proper 
monitor ing of  the progress .  36 • A system to monitor the quality of delivered services should be implemented.  
• Implementation of a call center to support public service delivery.   
• Capacity building for the  staff involved in the new models of public service delivery.  
• SEGA  needs to  have a strategy to improve the uptake of digitalized public services . The 
strategy should include p ublic awareness camp aigns  and tutorials and training on how to use 
e-services.  
• An approach to assisted service delivery (through a net of centers  like SNAPs or other qualified 
entities) for those who do not have computer/internet at home.  
DIMENSION 6. REGISTRIES AND  INTEROPERABILITY  
 
The problems related to the interoperability are  duly reflected in the e -Government Concept:  
the absence of the automated data exchange and interoperability of the public sector IS; low rate of 
interaction between public authorities and legal entities, especially related to the provision of the e -
servic es and access to open data; and the lack of proper e -identification and e -authentication of 
individuals and legal entities in the process of interaction with public authorities.  
The Law on Administrative Services (Art 9) states:  an entity providing adminis trative services shall 
receive information necessary for the service provision (without the participation of the user) through 
the access to information systems or databases of other entities providing administrative services or 
37 through the interoperabilit y system. Thus, mandating the implementation of the “ once-only” and 
“public information reuse ” principles. In addition, according to the same Law, “the state entities 
possessing the documents or information necessary for the provision of administrative ser vices, are 
obliged: to provide free of charge such documents or information no later than three working days 
from the date of receipt of the request unless otherwise provided by law; take measures to develop the 
system of interagency electronic interaction , provide free and open access to their information systems 
and databases, unless otherwise provided by law; provide free remote access to their own information 
systems and electronic databases (registers) containing information necessary for the provision  of 
administrative services, administrators of the centers for the provision of administrative services and 
entities providing such administrative services, including through the system of electronic interaction 
between public electronic information resour ces”.  
The Government of Ukraine decided to address the above problems through the implementation 
of an interoperability system/platform (hereinafter referred to as “Interop”) that will allow an 
automated exchange of data between  IS. The implementation of the Interop should as well reduce 
the time for obtaining data , improve the quality and relevance of the processed data, end the repeated 
collection and duplication of data in the different registries and IS , improve access to IS and their 
systematization.  Implementation of Interop foresees the integration of core public registries, service 
centers as well as connection to a wider cross -border electronic interaction with various international 
stakeholders  in line with European Interoperability Framework .  
The implementation of Interop is done under coordination of SEGA  with the support of TAPAS 
and U -LEAD projects. Project activities are focused on the development and implementation of the 
interoperability system  and improving of the state registries . This is  a joint project, where TAPAS is 
covering semantic, organizational and legal aspects and  the U-LEAD project is covering technical 
aspects. The technical solution it is called “Trembita” (after its Ukrainian name) and is based on the 
Estonian X -Road develop ed by the e -Governance Academy of Estonia  - one of the implementers of 
the U -LEAD project. At the end of the project SEGA  aims at connection of all state registries to the 
interoperability platform. The “Trembita” will assure exchange of data among  various  public sector IS 
and will serve as a core infrastructure for the digit alization of the administrative services. Public 
authorities and service centers will have direct access to the data contained in the various state registries 
that will enable fast prov ision of the services to citizens and businesses.  
In October 2017 the SEGA  became the official holder of “Trembita” platform.  Technical 
maintenance and operation of the platform is assured by the state enterprise “Government Information 
Recourses”. Some o f the root registries such as population, cadaster, tax payers and demographic 
registries are already connected to the platform for piloting. The SEGA  aims to connect to “Trembita” 
up to 20 state registries by the end of 2018. In 2016 the CoM approved the Decision No. 606 that 
regulates the implementation of interoperability.  
In addition, SEGA  with the support of TAPAS project conducted an inventory and audit of the 
state registries and developed a mapping report “State Electronic Information Resources: St atus 
and Perspectives” . This was the first audit of the information resources of state during the last quarter 
century.  The report outlines the  main problems related to interoperability and provides 
recommendations. Currently there are around 135 registrie s of which 23 are defined as “root” 38 registries. Around 90% of data is duplicated in different registries and therefore registries need to be 
cleansed and aligned to common standards. The data exchange is only partially digit alized and is done 
on a bilatera l basis. The report is focused on the 23 most demanded (“root”) state registries.  The 
maintenance of these “root” registries costs about US$ 21.0 million a year, and over 45% of the cost 
is spent on maintenance of the servers.  The state registries are held by more than 40 various central 
public administration bodies. (In Ukraine there are 18 ministries and 65 other central public 
administration bodies such as agencies, inspections and service ). Some of them have special status and 
are subordinated directly to the CoM such as the space agency, civil service, cyber security service , 
etc. and others are subordinated to the ministries). Main holders of the state registries are Ministry of 
Justice (20 registries), State Tax Service (15 registries) and Ministry of  Internal Affairs (13 registries). 
The SEGA  is planning modernization of the state registries and Register of Registries that is under its 
maintenance.  
The Ministry of Justice  is the biggest owner of various registries such as civil status registry, 
regist ry of ownership rights, registry of movable assets, digital signatures registry etc.  The 
technical maintenance and operation of the registries and information systems it is done by a state 
enterprise under the Minist ry of Justice “National Information Syst ems”. The SE has representations 
in each oblast (regional administrative -territorial unit) and around 550 employees in total. The 
communication with representations currently is done through a unified central data system with web 
based access protocols. Le gal and physical entities such as notaries and state registrars and all the 
service centers can access the MoJ’s registers online through  a bilateral agreement and only if they 
have digital signatures. The access is provided free of charge and each access is registered in a specific 
log. The MoJ’s plans to connect its registers to the interop to facilitate data exchange with subordinated 
entities, professionals from the justice sector and other ministries.  
Based on the conclusions from the report a Roadmap of National Interoperability Development 
(2017 -2020)  was developed.  The Roadmap  defines main steps to be taken by various public authorities 
with SEGA’s coordination in implementation of interoperability platform. Implementing activities are 
structured aro und 5 main blocks: Technical interop; Semantic interop; Organizational interop; Legal 
interop; and Integrated public services.  According to the Roadmap, by the end of 2017 the central 
elements of the interoperability platform was expected to be deployed f ollowed by integration of 
registers. The integration of registries into the interoperability platform was supposed to happen in 3 
stages. By the end of 2017, top -priority electronic registries of the 15 central bodies were expected to 
be integrated and by the end of 2 -nd quarter of 2018, registries of another 30 (2nd line) central executive 
bodies. However, despite  clear implementation plans and responsible entities , the implementation is 
lagging .  
The TAPAS project provided support in the development of dr aft Law on state electronic 
registries. The Law will aim at unification of the criteria and the requirements for all the state registries. 
It will create a legal framework for the creation and maintaining of electronic registries. The draft is 
supporting t he implementation of the EU standards for data exchange and interoperability, including 
cross border data exchange with EU member -countries. The initial draft is currently undergoing public 
consultations. A semantic catalog will be implemented to allow con nection to the EU single digital 
gateway and digital market. The data exchange will be based on the “once -only” principle and unique 39 identification number, to exclude duplication of personal data in all state registers.  The IT committee 
in the Parliament is supporting the draft. It is expected that the draft will be submitted for full 
Parliament ary approval  soon. 
Implementation of the Interop is based on unique ID number s assigned by the Demographic 
Regist ry that will allow the connection of data from the different state registries and data bases. 
Recently Ukraine started to implement unique identification number s for its citizens. Around 8 million 
people from the total of 40 million have received their unique identification number. The number is 
attributed  when people receive their passport o r national ID in a new format. The unique identification 
number is kept in the Demographic Register maintained by the State Migration Service under the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Demographic Register was implemen ted starting with 2015 with the 
issuance of biometric passports for foreign travel - one of the conditions of the Ukraine/EU visa free 
regime. The SEGA  intends to connect the demographic register to the civil status register through the 
interoperability pl atform to allow exchange of data and attribution of the unique identification number 
at birth. Ukraine is planning to cover its entire population within 3 -4 years. Since a unique identification 
number is one of the core elements of interoperability , to acc elerate completion the owner of the 
Demographic Register, SEGA  in collaboration with Minister of Interior is working on develop ing an 
intermediary solution by attributing to citizens so called “temporary unique identification number s”, 
that can be verified  during consequent entries/interaction. In addition, t he TAPAS project is working 
to start generating unique identification number s at birth. A set of legal amendments were developed 
to support this approach, but are not approved yet. The EGOV4UKRAINE /U-LEAD is working on 
the technical solution.  
The Law on access to information provides the right to citizens to verify what data on them is 
kept in the state registries and to request fixing data if that is wrong.  However, the number of 
requests  has been small . There is no electronic user -friendly service to back up this right.  
Overall, as reflected in the table above, the eGGO status for this dimension is a “follower”,  
which is about to be upgraded to a “performer” with implementation of “Trembita ”, connecti on of the 
state registries , and finalization of assigning of the unique ID number to the entire population of 
Ukraine . 
Recommendations :  
• The timeline and deadlines for the interop erability platform  implementation should be 
redefined and set more realistica lly. 
• The SEGA  needs to create an interop erability  implementation inter -sectoral body to hasten 
cleansing of root registe rs (such as population, real estate, tax, business, etc .) and 
implementation of the platform .  
• The SEGA  should discuss with other stakeh olders  the potential solutions and come with some 
ways of accelerati ng attribution of unique ID s or for identification of alternative solution s. The 
uptake of unique ID s is crucial for interop erability .  40 DIMENSION 7. ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY  
 
Ukraine was o ne of the countries that showed faster growth in internet penetration by the start 
of the decade . In 2011 Ukraine was ranked among the top 10 countries in Europe with the highest 
number of internet users, approximately 34  per cent of  its population or more  than 15 million users13.  
However, by mid -decade the pace of internet adoption had slowed significantly and to date Ukraine 
lags in terms of internet  access in comparison with its regional peers . According to the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) , Ukraine ’s progress in bridging the digital divide to internet access 
has been slow, showing a penetration  rate of 41 per cent in 2013, 43 percent in 2014, and 49 percent 
by 2015 .  According to different sources , between 2016  and 2017 internet access in Ukraine was mostly 
urban and varied between 52  and 63 per cent . The Inclusive Internet Index for 2018, commissioned by 
Facebook and conducted by The Economist Intelligence Unit, estimates that only about 55% of 
Ukrainian households  have access to the I ntern et (see the Figure  2 below) .  
  
                                                           
13 The World Factbook. See www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -world -factbook/geos/up.html  
41 Figure 2  – Internet users among households, %  
 
Source : Facebook -EIU I.I.I.-2018 : https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/  
Fixed -line broadband subscribers is about 12% (11. 98 out of 100). High income countries average 
29%. The joint Facebook -EIU I.I.I. -2018 gave Ukraine a maximal score of 2 for national broadband 
strategy.  
 
Figure 3 - Fixed -line broadband subscribers per 100 inhabitants  
 
Source:  Facebook -EIU I.I.I. -2018  
 
  
42 Internet users in Ukraine are mostly young adults (over 18 years old).  
Figure 4 .  Share of the Internet users among the adult population of Ukraine  
 
Source: Kiev International Institute of Sociology (KIIS : http://www.kiis.com.ua/?lang=eng&cat=reports&id=6 21) 
According to the Kiev Inter national Institute of Sociology  (KIIS), there is a reverse relation  
between the age and the use of the Internet - the younger the age, the higher the penetration of the 
Internet.  As report ed over the past four years the numb er of Internet users has increased among all age 
groups younger than 60.  
Figure 5.  Share of the Internet users among different age groups  
 
Source: Kiev International Institute of Sociology (KIIS : http://www.kiis.com.ua/?lang=eng&cat=reports&id=621 ) 
The m ajority of urban population access computers or mobile phones.  Mobile phones seem to be 
the most frequent point of access to the internet in Ukraine, currently estimated at 39 per cent of users 
followed by home laptops (31 per cent) and stationary/desktop c omputers (30 percent), with several 
users/households accessing the internet through more than one device. The number of mobile 
subscribers per 100 people is 130. Gender gap in mobile phone access is 1.12%. Female access to 
mobile phone is 89% of households . 
43 Ukrtelecom is currently the largest  provider of Internet  access and was the only 3G provider  
in Ukraine  until 2015, when all three major operators (Vodafone,  Kyivstar, Lifecell  and Intertelecom ) 
acquired license permits to set up their own 3G networks.  
Figure 6 – Network coverage (min. 3G), % of population  
 
Source : Facebook -EIU I.I.I.-2018  
The main disparity factors in access to the Internet, besides age, continues to be urban/rural 
setting, although Freedom House reports that the digital divide between rural and urban 
continues to narrow14. Less than half of rural population access internet (if the general number is 55% 
and it is very high in urban areas).  Barriers to access in rural settings include lack of connectivity, 
affordability and information.  O ther characteristics on barriers to access for less favored or vulnerable 
population s such as women, lower quintiles of education and income are not being tracked.   
The maturity and appetite among end users to absorb the e -service offerings needs particula r 
government attention.  Beyond improved connectivity and the supply of services, there is a need to 
work on fostering  the demand. One favorable condition is the high level of trust in government 
websit es and apps (64% according to Facebook -EIU I.I.I. -2018 ). Participatory planning of services ha s 
been one of the entry points, but a lot still needs to be done.   
  
                                                           
14 Freedom on the Net. Ukraine Country Report See: https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom -net/2017/ukraine  
 
44 Figure 7 – Internet connection of any type at home  
 
 
Source : Kiev International Institute of Sociology (KIIS : http://www.kiis.com.ua/?lang=eng&cat= reports&id=621 ) 
The more active phase of this growth is for 2015 -2016 , a period which coincid es with an increase in 
market competition due to the entrance of three additional companies as Internet providers.  
Figure 8 . Share of the Internet users among the  population of different types of settlements  (2017)  
 
Source : Freedom on the Net. Ukraine Country Report See: https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom -net/2017/ukraine   
Overall, as re flected in the score -table at the beginning of this dimension, the eGGO status for 
access and connectivity is a “performer”  however there is some room for improvement . 
45 Recommendations : 
• Elaborate a strategy to strengthen access to the Internet and broadband  connectivity from 
disadvantaged groups (rural, old, poor, etc.) to bridge the digital divide and ensure that all 
benefit from the advancement of e -government services.   
• Consider ing that cost can be a barrier to access, points of access in local government s through 
kiosks and one -stop-shops  should be  explored.  
• Exploit the almost universal access to mobile connectivity to offer e -services and connect to 
citizens.  
DIMENSION 8. CUSTOMER RELATION s 
 
During the last two years, Ukraine has risen by 25 points in e -government and by 45 points – in 
e-participation  according to the UN e-Government Development index , placin g itself at  62 out 
of 193 countries . Advances made in the areas of  open data, e -petitions, and transparency as well as 
the efforts displayed by the government to advance the provision of e -services have resulted in Ukraine 
being consider ed above the world average in terms of  e-government development .  
Feedback or complaints mechanisms are seldom used in the public sector . It appears that citizens 
are more used to providing feedback for services provided through private sector operators or civil 
society organizations and NGOs. Among the NGOs the team interviewed during the missions, a 
limited number of them reported that they had set up feedback mechani sms, but monitoring of them 
were very limited. Another area of development is related to the design and implementation of 
feedback mechanisms as well as raising awareness among citizens of the possibility e -platforms offer 
to report on the quality and effi ciency of service delivery and its importance for improving  service . For 
institutions it is also important to record user satisfaction as a mean s to improve the provision of service 
and measure the impact and satisfaction in the implementation of reforms.  
46 Development of electronic tools of for citizen engagement . The implementation of mechanisms to 
foster participation and voice citizens ’ priorities  and concerns  significantly extend s opportunities in 
public administration and influencing decision making, and creates the condition for new levels of 
interaction between  authorities and citizens.  However , only basic feedback mechanisms are in place. 
There are requirements defined at the level of law. Government contact center s receive  grievances and 
documents to  follow -up. SNAPs are using happy and unhappy smiles. Some surveys and exit polls are 
conducted but not systematically. Call centers are created by municipalities and can forward 
complaints to central providers. However, the y do not operate 24/7 and may no t be equipped with 
modern ICT solutions. State Fiscal Service (SFS) is among the few exceptions. It has a large call center 
for tax, which is under the tax service, and a smaller call center for customs under the IT department.  
The SEGA  is planning to impl ement citizens feedback  mechanisms  that could be used for  
improving interaction with citizens, make the public sector more transparent, as well as improv e 
the quality of public services.  
Overall, customer relations are not set -up properly, with eGGO statu s of a “follower”  as reflected 
in the table above . Relevant plans for development are not reflected in formal strategies.  
Recommendations :  
Taking into account the advantages of the electronic tools of involving the citizens into the processes 
of managemen t, the main activities in ensuring the development of e -government in Ukraine under this 
dimension are: 
• developmen t of e-applications and e -petitions;  
• development of the instruments of "open budget", "public budget", on -line discussion of the 
draft regulat ions and other instruments of public participation in decision making;  
• introduction of electronic feedback forms at the official authorities’ web -sites, including 
thematic, for receiving quality feedback on different issues  and ensuring closed  feedback loo p 
that secur es answers  to citizen feedback and suggestions ; 
• wide involvement of non -governmental organizations and industry specific associations in the 
planning , development and monitoring of e -government initiatives ;  
• encouragement of the use of electron ic tools to involve citizens and their support for public 
initiatives in the sphere of e -government.  
  47 DIMENSION 9. DELIVERY MODES  
 
According to the Concept on e -Services Development the services are provided in 
correspondence with an agreed conceptual mo del. The “interaction” level of the conceptual model 
should be implemented based on a single state portal of administrative services, including the 
integrated IS of all executive bodies and local authorities that operate and interact in accordance with 
unified requirements. The “interaction” level should ensure the implementation of the “one -stop-shop” 
principle and the use of a single referral entity’s electronic cabinet and a unified electronic 
identification, authentication and  log systems.  
The portal s hould provide:  
• access to all electronic services from one place;  
• unified interfaces for the provision of electronic services;  
• log the entire history of the interaction of the users with providers;  
• provide a possibility of automatic planning of the need f or administrative services;  and 
• provid e control over the quality of the provision of electronic services.  
The procedure and ways of the service provision are defined by the Law on Administrative 
Services:  a) the off -line administrative services are provide d by the entities providing 
administrative services directly or through the centers of administrative services . The law 
prescribes that a physical person has the right to receive administrative services regardless of the 
registration of his place of reside nce and that a legal entity has the right to receive administrative 
services at its place of registration or where its activity is performed , as well as at the place of the 
facility in which it is located ; and b) the on -line administrative services are pro vided through the 
Unified State Administrat ive Services Portal, including through the integrated information systems of 
state and local governments.  Most of the e -services are we b-based. Mobile version s of e-services will 
be implemented after the roll out of the mobile ID.  
  
48 The holder of the Unified State Administrative Services Portal is the MoEDT.  According to the 
Law on Administrative Services the Portal should provide the following functionalities:  
• availability of information about administrative se rvices and their providers;  
• availability for downloading and filling in electronic forms of applications and other 
documents necessary for obtaining administrative services;  
• the possibility of on -line submission of the application by users;  
• the possibility  for users to receive information on the progress of their applications;  
• the possibility of on -line reception by the users of the results of the provision of administrative 
services; and 
• the possibility for entities to apply for payment for the provision o f administrative services 
remotely, in electronic form.  
As mentioned earlier in the “Platforms and Services” dimension of the Report, in spite of clear 
policy and regulation about the State Services Portal as a single -entry point for the provision of 
on-line services, the on-line services as well as information about off -line services can be found on 
various sources usually containing different information and steps for service provision. For example, 
online public services are provided through the CoM ’s official web page 
(https://www.kmu.gov.ua/ua ), compartment “Services” w here citizens and business es can access 
online services as well as find information about the offline administrative services; and Online state 
services portal “IGov” ( https://igov.org.ua/ ) where only online services G2C and G2B are provided (a 
portal developed on a volunteer base). The information about sectorial services can be found as well 
on the web -pages o f specific ministries and agencies. To address this problem SEGA , in collaboration 
with MoEDT , is trying to come up with an alternative solution that would provide multiple entry point 
but with a unified design code and service application templates.  
The e-Services Concept defines that the access to electronic services may also be implemented 
through the centers for the provision of services (SNAPs), intermediaries with whom users 
interact on an ongoing basis (libraries, banks, telecommunication providers,  etc.) and special 
automated access points to electronic services or mobile applications that interact with a single 
state portal of administrative services.  Creation, development and operation of information systems 
for provision of administrative service s should be based on their compatibility with a single ICT 
infrastructure and interaction with the portal.  There are no specific examples of the public -private -
partnership arrangements (libraries, banks, telecommunication providers, etc.) in the field of e -services 
delivery.   
The U -LEAD project is supporting the implementation of on -line service provision through the 
service centers – SNAPs. The U -LEAD is moderniz ing the  existing 700 centers and aims to open 
several new one s. Only 15% of the processes with in the service centers are automated. In the 
framework of the project a IS has been developed to be used by the SNAPs. The system should allow 
receiving of an on-line application and send it to the service owner (specific agency) for further 
processing. Th e system will use a cloud based  solution that will allow automation of receiving and 
sending of the documents. Also, the system should be integrated to  the interoperability platform and 
documents management system to assure data exchange and smooth documen t flow with assigning 
specific tasks and deadlines. Since such IT products are considered expensive and with hard licensing 49 requirements it was decided to develop a centralized IS. The tender was conducted and a national IT 
development company was selected  in October 2017 to develop the system. After finalization of 
development the system will be piloted in 10 service centers by the end of 2018. The architecture of 
the system is modular and the company will create APIs to allow service centers to develop ad ditional 
modules on a need base.  The administration of the system will be done by the State Enterprise 
“Gover nmental Information Resources” under the SEGA .   
Overall, the eGGO status for the delivery mode is a “follower”, but it is about to be upgraded.  
Recommendations :  
• The unification of the single -entry points for the service delivery should continue. If services 
are to be delivered from multiple sources they should be integrated into the portal or if there 
are more platforms they should adhere to a unified design code.  
• The Services Portal should be redesigned to be more user friendly .  
• The SEGA  should define a model of assisted service delivery for those who do  not have 
computers or internet access.  
• Mobile based e -Services should be broad ly implemented .  
• Public awareness campaign s on how to access e -services via portal or through assisted service 
delivery should be conducted.  
DIMENSION 10. e-IDENTIFICATION  
 
The trust services to support the implementation of the Electronic ID were recently approved 
by Ukraine according to EU Directives. Ukraine issues to its citizens internal ID s in a new format 
that includes elements of digital signature (the chip) and it is considered as digital ID. The issuance of 
the national ID in the  new format (with elements of e lectronic ID) started in 2016.  Also, the public 
sector in cooperation with mobile operators is implementing the concept of mobile identification that 
includes the elements of digital signature. However, in most of the cases the traditional digital signatur e 
(flesh drive or plastic card) are used to access the systems and to sign electronic documents. There are 
50 around 20 centers subordinated to  the Ministry of Justice, Tax Service and Treasury that are issuing 
digital signatures to legal and physical entitie s as well as civil servants. All civil servants in Ukraine 
have digital signatures. Ukraine approved recently the Law on Electronic Trust Services , adopted by 
the Parliament  in 2017 , which established the national standards of digital signature  in line with the 
requirement of the Regulation (EU) No . 910/2014 of the European Parliament and Council from 23 
July 2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in internal market 
and repealing the Directive 1999/93/EU . According to the Law , starting from 2017 e-signatories can 
use other means than flesh drives and plastic cards for digital signatures. As mentioned above, most of 
the digital signatures are issued on the traditional means (flesh drives and plastic cards).  
Individua l require identifying  themselves to access service s through different administration 
entities in different levels of government.   Likewise, governments , as services providers , need to 
identify and authenticate citizens to classify , for instance , the servic es they are entitled to. As such, 
robust i dentification systems become the foundations to improv e access to and efficiency of e -services  
and become a precondition for the expansion of e -services . New and innovative e-government 
technologies are providing countries with the opportunity to leapfrog from the current paper -based 
systems and rapidly establish a robust identification infrastructure  that allows them to serve citizens 
better and more rapidly .  
Ukraine is in the process of  adopting a nationwide digi tal identification (ID) system that would 
serve as a gateway for citizens to access e -services .  The d evelopment of the electronic identification 
infrastructure will allow practical and secure access of citizens and economic agents to defined data 
from the  information systems  currently in the hand of authorities  in different levels (national and 
subnational) , different electronic services and interactive instruments without the need to use several 
accounts in different information systems .  The e -ID will fa cilitate the development of electronic forms 
of cooperation of citizens and the state.  
With the passing of the law on a Unified State Demographic Register on 29 November 2012, the 
introduction of the ID cards was approved and ID cards have been gradually r eplacing old 
passports since January 2016. The Ukrainian ID card (also reference d as the Passport of the Citizen 
of Ukraine ) is mandatory for citizen s aged 14  and above and permanently residing  in Ukraine . The ID 
card is currently issued by local authoriti es of the State Migration Service.  
Overall, electronic identification needs to be developed and rolled -out more broadly to enable 
the desired progress on e-government reforms. As reflected in the table above, the current eGGO status  
is at the level of a “ follower”.  
Recommendations:  
• Development of electronic trust services . 
• Facilitation of filling in of the unified demographic register and promotion of the passports of 
the citizens of Ukraine in the form of ID card . 
• Development of the existing and introduc tion of the new schemes and methods of electronic 
identification and setting the levels of trust to them (including Mobile ID, Bank ID) . 51 • Implementation of the principle “single -sign-on” through introduction of integrated system of 
electronic identification  and verification and repeated use in information and communication 
systems of the authorities.  
 
Area 3. Data and Analytics  
DIMENSION 11. SMART ANALYTICS  
 
Use of data and modern technology is critical for strengthening intelligence in the public sector. 
According to OECD DGT principles, to get the full benefit of public sector information, governments 
should b etter exploit digital technologies and data analys is to understand societal needs. Governance 
arrangements should ensure responsible and coherent use  of data that benefits citizens and strengthens 
public trust. T he use of data and analytics should be embedded  throughout the policy cycle . The culture 
of data analysis and use within the public sector should be developed through comprehensive  civil 
servan t training programs to help predict new needs and trends.  Yet according to the 2014 OECD 
Survey on Digital Government Performance only 18% of member countries ha ve digital literacy 
program s that included development of data analytics skills to develop and stimulate better policies 
and services. Advanced data -driven culture requires a sustainable model of data production, free access 
and re -use across the administration. The free exchange of information between registries through the 
52 interoperability platfor m can significantly enhance the data supply, whereas machine readable data 
from the OGP portal can promote engagement of civil society and private sector in evidence based 
policy formulation.    
The countries with advanced culture of data analysis and use a ssign a designated unit or body 
in charge of data management in the public sector . They are able to perform sophisticated data 
analysis across the public sector that effectively supports policy -making and service delivery . As the 
data is increasingly consi dered a  new natural resource of the twenty -first century transforming 
industries, a new leadership role emerged and became popular in private sector and increasingly 
penetrates public sector at different levels – national, regional (state) and municipal15. France was the 
first country to appoint a Chief Data Officer on September 17, 2014 to coordinate government actions 
aimed at inventorying, governing, producing, circulating and using government data16. The aim was 
to enhance evaluation of government policie s, increase government openness and boost research and 
innovation.  According to the 2014 OECD Survey on Digital Government Performance only 18% of 
member countries ha ve CDOs.   
The “big data” has a potential to make analytics smarter and more powerful if th ere is sufficient 
evidence and data concerning government operations, processes and results.  Government s need 
to create i ncentiv es for public engagement in using these data and enhance public sector’s capabilities 
on big data analytics . 
Data management and  analytics are not sufficiently  streamlined as part of digit alization process  
in Ukraine . There is no dedicated unit (or platform) in charge of data management in the public sector. 
The use of data and analytics in not a norm or part of the current practic e of service delivery. It gets 
more attention in case of MOJ registries. There is a plan to introduce an interactive tool for public 
access to data and analytics with support from TAPAS.  So far  there have been no formal 
interoperability standards , but they will be introduce d with the Trembita platform.  
The data -driven  culture is emerging  gradually.  There are no special courses for teaching evidence 
based policy analyses to civil servants.  The earlier  efforts to use big data at SFS has not succeed ed so 
far. At the central level  SEGA  is responsible for the implementation of the Big Data concept that will 
be based on open data.  Meanwhile, local examples of success ful application of data analysis and 
intelligence  for improving public services  can be found for particular separate systems , for instance at 
State Fiscal Service and ProZorro.  According to the Assessment of ProZorro, the Business Intelligence 
module (bi.prozorro.org) is a great analytical tool  in both its public and private versions.  
Open data  polices  have been quite successful in Ukraine . The Open Government Data Roadmap 
was approved in 2017. The legal framework  of Open Data  includes the Law on Access to Public 
Information and 835 Decree of C oM on Open Data , which  defines the requirements for the form at and 
structure of the data sets to be made public in the form of open data, the frequency of updates, and the 
procedure for their publication, as well as the list of such sets of data. According to the Regulation , 
creation and provision of the operation of the Unified State Portal for Open Data is carried out by the 
                                                           
15 Jane Wiseman, Lessons from Leading CDOs: A Framework for Better Civic Analytics, Civic Analytics Network, Ash 
Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School, 2017.  
16 Gijs Hillenius, France appoints Chief Data Officer: https://join up.ec.europa.eu/news/france -appoints -chief -data 53 State Agency for E -Governance, which is its holder.  The Government Information Resources SOE 
under SEGA is the administrator  of the  Open Data  Portal and monitors use of Open Data on daily 
bases. The Administrator of the Unified State Web Portal of Open Data is responsible, in accordance 
with the law, for ensuring the integrity of the information on the Unified State Web Portal of Open 
Data after disclosure of this information by its administrat ors. 
SEGA  started the implementation of the Open Government Data agenda in 2015. SEGA  is a 
member of the Open Data Charter. It is responsible for the development of the concept and to 
coordinate the activities in this domain. The SEGA  is the holder of the web portal for the Open 
Government Data ( http://data.gov.ua/ ). The portal hosts more than 4 0,000 data sets  and over 3000 data 
providers . According to the law, the information managers are responsible for the authenticity  and 
relevance of the published data sets on the Unified State Web -portal of open data.  
Ukraine is 31st in the Global Open Data Index, with certain start -ups in the area of open data 
aggregation and services.  Startups use open data to deliver various inte resting services. For example, 
the Open Data Bot ( https://opendatabot.com ) is a service to monitor the registration data of Ukrainian 
companies and the judicial register to protect against raider hijackings, which ha s been available 
already for a couple of years. Recently over 200 start -ups applied to compete for Open Data Challenge 
2018 ( http://tiny.cc/UkraineODC -2018 ), based on the success of the Ukraine’s first contest  in 2017. 
The three winning projects target to increase transparency in Ukraine’s coal market; launch an 
application for lawyers that helps them easily find information from the register of court decisions; and 
calculate payment of motorist fines and provi des information on compulsory third party insurance.  In 
addition to the support to the Open Government Data portal, TAPAS project is implementing public 
outreach campaigns on the use of open data.  
The Unified State Open Data Portal, a register of publicly available data sets in the format of 
open data is kept , allows identifying each of the published data sets, obtaining their metadata, 
including the hyperlink to access the data set on the Internet.  The Register of published datasets 
should contain at least  the following information:  
• dataset identification number;  
• name of data set (up to 254 characters);  
• formats in which a dataset is available;  and 
• hyperlink to dataset page.  
The Register of published datasets is hosted in one of these open -readable formats f or reuse . 
These formats include  CSV, XML, JSON, RDFa, HTML, Microdata, or other similar formats.  On the 
page of each data set on the Unified State Web Portal, the following data should be displayed:  
• a dataset datasheet/passport by displaying on a web page (for browsing through a web browser) 
and by placing a file in an open machine -readable format that can be downloaded or accessible 
through the application programming interface (API);  
• a data set structure in an open machine -readable format (an electronic f ile that can be 
downloaded, or an API);  
• a dataset in one or more machine -readable formats defined;  54 • form for user feedback;  
• information on the further use of the data set;  and 
• information on the terms of using an open license.  
Any person may freely copy, pu blish, distribute, use, except for commercial purposes, in 
conjunction with other information or by including in its product the open data with the 
obligatory reference to the source of their receipt.  The condition of any further use of open data is 
the ma ndatory reference to the source of their receipt (including the hyperlink to the web page of the 
open data).  
Nevertheless , there is a substantial progress in opening government data, due to not using at the 
maximal capac ity for analytical and decision -making purposes .  Overall this dimension is among 
the lagging areas of e-government reforms, with eGGO status corresponding to a “beginner” level  as 
shown in the score -table above . 
Recommendations:  
• Create a unit or body in charge of data management in the pu blic sector . 
• Develop a national public sector data management strategy to strengthen a strategic use of 
data in the public sector to improve policymaking and performance . 
• Develop training programs to develop, attract and retain data analysis skills  across the public 
sector . 
• Develop programs to engage with the community of data producers and re -users  on the 
usefulness and re -use of open government data to find innovative solutions  to public issues . 
• Develop the required data infrastructure to enhance data sha ring across the public  sector . 
• Develop close collaboration with subnational  governments on data management issues . 
DIMENSION 12. INFORMATION FOR MANAGEMENT  
 
55 The information for management i s closely related to data -driven culture in public 
administration.  This dimension further emphasizes generation of performance information and 
indicators to inform  managerial decision -making on different aspects of public administration from 
human resource management in the public sector, to budgeting and public procurem ent. There is no 
effective system for exchanging performance information between  systems . Introduction of an 
interoperability platform is sought to expand the base of performance information available for 
managerial decision -making . 
The c urrent systems  generally  do not process and report information on performance of entities, 
services and civil servants.  There is no system for assessing civil service  performance  (HRM in civil 
service) . Nor does management uses performance information in policymaking . Some mechanisms 
exist for tracking performance of SNAP s. Similarly, performance information should be introduced  in 
the e-procurement  area. The  development  and introduction  of a set performance indicators as part of 
an e-GP implementation strategy  was among the  recommendations of the Assessment of ProZorro . 
The need for better use of information for management decisions is  formally acknowledged at 
the level of government strategies.  The 2017 Concept Note for E -government Development in 
Ukraine high lights the  “low pace of development of internal e -document flow and modern information 
and analytical decision -making tools ” among the issues to be solved . The Concept considers 
automation of the big data volumes processing and information and analytical support of deci sion 
making, optimization and automation of the administrative processes, introduction of the electronic 
interaction forms among the e -government instruments that are critical for effective management of 
any sector.  The development of the e -document flow is seen among the steps that will contribute to  
strengthening of the information and analytical support in decision making  in public sector . While the 
Concept highlights the  critical role of data and analytics  in decision -making, no specific targets and 
milestones are defined.  
Overall, this dimension, like the previous one for smart analytics, is at the lowest level of 
development, with eGGO status corresponding to a “beginner” level  as reflected in the score -table 
above . 
Recommendations:  
• Establish a cohere nt monitoring and evaluation ( M&E ) system  for public administration that 
can be used for bringing together various aspects of performance information at the level of 
HRM, PFM  /budget , etc.  The automation of M&E system s will allow incorporating 
information from citizen feedback platforms, statistical data and other registries . SEGA should 
develop key performance indicators for implemented services,  and monitor the evolution of the 
services delivery and financial models.  
• Consider creation of an executive dash board with key indicators for decision -making . 
• Ensure seamless exchange of performance information through the interoperability platform . 
• Consider introduc ing an effective framework for evaluating performance o f public sector 
intuitions and civil servants . 
  56 Area 4. Infrastructure and Security  
DIMENSION 13. DATA CENTERS  
 
The e -Government Concept Note recognizes that ICT infrastructure that is used as the base for 
the e -Government projects and tasks implementation is immature and needs improvement. The 
CoM decided to undertake the following actions related to e -Government infrastructure: 
implementation of the specially protected networks for data transmission, including national 
confidential communication system  and implementation of pro tected data centers, including with the 
application of “Cloud” technologies. IC T infrastructure should assure the compatibility of the 
technologies used for the computerization and e -Government development and safe use of public 
sector cyberspace.  
Public sector registries, in formation system and data bases are operated using data centers assets 
of different ownership and level of sophistication.  In some cases, the infrastructures are rented from 
the state or private data centers, in other cases public authorities will have pri mitive hosting on its own 
servers kept in obsolete conditions. Data centers from the public sector are at different level, some of 
them comply with the ISO standards (e.g. M inister of Interior ) and some of them would meet  just 
minimum requirements for such  data centers. The WB Team could not find evidence of in inventory 
or registry of all public sector data centers with an indication of their level of maturity and types of 
data or IS that are operated in that data centers.  
57 Data center  consolidation is the  only approach to be used, as the existing information and 
communications technology infrastructure is not adequate to meet the needs of government and 
citizen services, and without central support  it is unlikely individual ministries and agencies will 
be able to develop adequate ICT infrastructure in the future.   This may result in a serious shortfall 
in Ukraine’s ability to continue developing and competing in a Europ ean or global economy, as well 
as present additional challenges in meeting the security a nd development needs.  
There is no shared vision for centralized public sector IT infrastructure or development of a 
consolidated model that would assure required standards of safety, redundancy and business 
continuity.  Moreover, there is no coordinated and  thought -through investment in public sector IT 
infrastructure.  
The process of data centers consolidation should start with an inventory of data centers assets 
with an indication of their level of maturity and development of a consolidation plan.  The most  
advanced data centers can be consolidated and used as nodes of a unified public sector virtual 
environment. For the less advanced data centers an upgrade plan with the aim of their future integration 
in the unified public sector virtual environment  should  be developed . Non -compliant data centers and 
server rooms should disappear as a class. If a new facility, or facilities are recommended, the facility 
design should comply with ISO 24764, TIA -942, or BICSI 002 -2010 standards.  These standards also 
make acc ommodation for security, and will give a basis for either local Ukrainian or international 
compliance for data center standards.  
It is globally recognized that Cloud technologies and IaaS enable IT systems and services to 
efficiently share the growing dema nd across infrastructure assets.  The shift of IT investment to 
more efficient platforms and technologies, such as Cloud technologies, will result in substantial cost 
savings, allowing agencies to optimize spending and to reinvest in the most critical needs . The 
Government and agencies must consolidate existing data centers, reducing the needs for infrastructure 
growth by implementing “Cloud First” policy for systems and services, and increasing their use of 
available cloud and shared services.  
Consolidated  data centers that use Cloud technology based computing environment for the 
public sector accompanied by a strong disaster recovery plan will provide a strong backup, 
archival, and near real time applications recovery in the event any planned or unplanned event 
disrupts data center operations. The adaptation and wide use of cloud technology are meeting data 
centers needs for high availability and disaster recovery and improves information security through 
shared security controls managed within the cloud.  
As reflected in the table abov e, data centers are among the weakest dimensions of e-government 
in Ukraine, without clear foresight for development.  Without revisiting the plans of data centers 
consolidation , the eGGO status will not significantly change fr om the current “beginner ” level.  
Recommendations :  
• SEGA  should initiate the process of public sector data centers consolidation.  
• An inventory of all data centers should be conducted by attributing levels of maturity.  58 • SEGA should carefully plan a good clo ud implementation and transition strategy, including 
the concept of hybrid cloud (embedded implicitly in the last recommendation about use of 
public clouds), and cost recovery  strategy . 
• Most mature data centers should be operationally consolidated and a cloud base virtual 
environment should be created based on those data centers that will serve as nod es. 
• Less mature but still advanced datacenters could be upgraded to meet the standards and also 
become a node for single virtual data centers.  
• Government shou ld consider using public clouds for open data and less sensitive data.  
DIMENSION 14. ACCESS TO ICT  RESOURCES  
 
There is full a ccess to ICT equipment in institutions at central level, and in particular, public 
workers in charge of IT departments all have access to the basic equipment they require to 
perform their functions.   The biggest disparity in terms of access to ICT equipment lies between the 
central and subnational level in Ukraine.  At the central level, all civil servants requiring to have a PC 
to perform their functions have access to one as well as those requiring to access the internet have 
access to it, although access to broadband and higher connectivity may be limited at subnational level.  
It is noteworthy that all civil servant s have been gran ted and possess digital signatures,  these are 
used for day to day accreditation but also for example to sign their  corresponding assets declaration 
when starting a job in the public administration.  
Finally, Ukraine public servants make little or no use of telecommuting or of “virtual offices”  - 
that is making use of ICTs to perform their work at home or in any other space beside the institutional 
office, in part because the limited access to the systems from outside the institutional network.  
59 On part of ICT  hardware, Ukraine has been performing well, thus securing an eGGO status of 
a “performer”  as shown in the table above . There is a room for further development through 
planning and introduction  of centralized virtual environment.  
Recommendations:  
• Strengthe n access to ICT equipment and broadband connectivity for subnational employees.  
• Plan ahead to ensure the possibility of tapping  the benefits of telecommuting/virtual offices for 
public sector work. That would entail investing in connectivity, security and privacy.  
DIMENSION 15. BUSINESS CONTINUITY  
 
Incorporating b usiness continuity  mechanisms and standards it crucial to allow public sector  
institution s to continue to perform their core functions in case of a disruptive event (such as a 
fire, natural disas ter, or a security data breach ). Literature often references  three basic dimensions  
to business continuity : (i) resilience : designing  back up storage  for example that allows the institution 
to cope and continue operating despite disruptions ; (ii) recovery : have arrangements in place to recover 
or restore key information and functions ; and (iii) contingency : establish last resort mechanisms for 
when resilience and recovery fail, that is coping and responding to a incident.  
Ukraine has regulat ions in place that establish the need to store information and have a back -
up for institutional system s and  processes .  However, the degree of implementation within the 
different entities at central level varies significantly and  most institutio ns (even within a same sector) 
can have different levels of protection against events and disruptions. Most of  entities have irregular 
and/or ina dequate data back -up and recovery systems, heightening continuity of operations risks. 
Inconsistencies in the a pplication of information security requirements increase the vulnerability of the 
administra tion’s ICT environment to cyber -attacks and data loss.  
60 Furthermore, in terms of archiving, t he Government spends significant financial resources on 
paper, printing,  the storage of physical documents, including the construction and maintenance 
of registries and warehouses.  There is the need to implement plans to consolidate the data of various 
institutions and agencies data centers into a single data center enabling t he provision of virtual services 
such as data storage services ( cloud services ). The SCS is currently piloting the implementation of data 
hubs and analyzing the possibility of replicating such pilots.  
Finally, to ensure the safety of all the information th e Government stores and maintains in its 
various registries and to ensure the continuity of government business operations in the case of 
emergency and unexpected events there is the need to implement a centralized Data Recovery 
Center.  
As shown in the tab le above, “Business continuity” dimension is at the “beginner” level and  
needs to be properly addressed for improving it.  
Recommendations:  
• Ensure that regulations that establish business continuity mandates are updated and respond 
to the best practices.  
• Systematize methodologies for the collection, storage and management of information . 
• A public sector cloud strategy needs to be developed that will cover the migration of the data 
to the cloud environment  as well as the implementation of the Data Recovery  Center . 
• Establish guidelines for the provision of data storage services at central level .  
• Implement a Data Recovery Cent er. 
DIMENSION 16. CYBER SECURITY  ARRANGEMENTS   
 
61  
Note that the coverage of this dimension is limited to checking the availability of the key cyber security 
arrangements  or attributes  at the  higher level. Although the cyber security system has been improving 
after the serious security incidents in 2017, much remains to be done in continuous process of 
improvements that are critical for c oping with the dynamic nature of cyber -attacks.  At the same time 
the consequences of cyber security incidents are dangerous due to the weak business continuity 
arrangement s that are covered by a previous  assessment dimension.  
 
 
The core law in the field of cybersecurity is the Law on Main Measures for Providing Cyber 
Security of Ukraine.17 It defines the legal and organizational foundations for ensuring the protection 
of the citizens, society and the state, the national interests of Ukraine in the cyberspa ce, the main goals, 
directions and principles of state policy in the field of cybersecurity, the powers of state bodies, 
enterprises, institutions, organizations, persons and citizens in this area, and the main principles of 
coordination of their work on t he provision of cyber security.  
Coordination of activities in the sphere of cyber security as a component of national security of 
Ukraine is carried out by the President of Ukraine through the Council of National Security and 
Defense of Ukraine headed by h im. The executive body of the National Security and Defense 
Council of Ukraine is the National Cybersecurity Coordination Center (NCCC). The NCCC 
coordinates and supervises the activities of the security and defense sector that provide cybersecurity, 
and makes proposals to the President of Ukraine on the formation and refinement of the Cybersecurity 
Strategy of Ukraine.  
The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall ensure: the formation and implementation of state 
policy in the field of cybersecurity, protecti on of human and civil rights and freedoms, national  interests 
of Ukraine in cyberspace, fight against cybercrime; organizes and provides the necessary forces, means 
and resources for the functioning of the national cybersecurity system; establishes require ments and 
ensures the functioning of the information security audit system at the objects of critical infrastructure 
(except critical infrastructure objects in the banking system of Ukraine).  
The main subjects of the national system of cybersecurity are:  a) the State Service for Special 
Communications and Information Protection of Ukraine, b) the National Police of Ukraine, c) the 
Security Service of Ukraine, d) the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine and the General Staff of the Armed 
Forces of Ukraine, e) int elligence agencies, f) the National Bank of Ukraine, which, in accordance with 
the Constitution and laws Ukraine perform the following main tasks in the established order:  
The State Service for Special Communications and Information Protection of Ukraine 
(hereinafter referred to as “SSSCIP”) (http://www.dsszzi.gov.ua ) is responsible for the 
development and implementation of the state policy on the protection of state information 
resources and information in the cyber space, cyber defense of objects of critical information 
infrastructure, and exercises state control in these areas.  The SSSCIP coordinates the activities of 
other entities providing cyber security regarding cyber defense. It ensures the development and 
operation of the National Telecommunication Network, including its cyber defense. It carries out 
                                                           
17 Law no. 3163 -VIII from October 5, 2017.  62 organizational and technical measures to prevent, detect and respond to cyber threats, incidents and 
attacks and to eliminate their consequences. The SSSCIP is r esponsible for the implementation of the 
information security audit for critical infrastructure objects, sets requirements for information security 
auditors, and determines the procedure for their certification (re -certification). The SSSCIP ensures the 
functioning of the State Center for Cyber Defense and the Government Response Team for Computer 
Emergencies in Ukraine (hereinafter referred to as “ CERT -UA”).  
Other players such as the National Police, Security Service, Ministry of Defense , National Bank 
of Ukraine and other entities  listed above, also have some attributions to prevention, detection  and 
combating cybercrime  in their fields  of activity , as well as r aising public awareness of security in 
cyberspace .   
According to the Law on Cyber Security t he tasks of CERT -UA are:  
• accumulation and analysis of data on cyber incidents, keeping the state register of cyber 
incidents;  
• providing owners of cyber defense objects with practical help in preventing, detecting and 
eliminating the effects of cyber incid ents on these objects;  
• organizing and conducting practical seminars on cyber defense issues for subjects of the 
national system of cyber security and owners of objects of cyber defense;  
• preparing and publishing on its official website recommendations on th e counteraction to 
modern types of cyber -attacks and cyber threats;  
• interaction with law enforcement agencies, ensuring their timely information on cyber -attacks;  
• interaction with foreign and international organizations for responding to cyber incidents, i n 
particular through participation in the FIRST Security Response Team Response Forum with 
the payment of annual membership fees;  
• interaction with the Ukrainian teams responding to computer emergencies, as well as other 
enterprises, institutions and organi zations, regardless of the form of ownership, engaged in 
activities related to security of cyberspace;  
• processing of information received from citizens about cyber incidents regarding objects of 
cyber defense;  
• assistance to state bodies, bodies of local se lf-government, military formations formed in 
accordance with the law, enterprises, institutions and organizations irrespective of the form of 
ownership, as well as citizens of Ukraine in solving cyber defense and countering cyber threats.  
The State Enterpr ise "Ukrainian Special Systems" (USS) under SSSCIP ( http://www.uss.gov.ua/ ) 
is the provider of confidential communications services. In accordance with the Statute of the State 
Enterprise "USS", the subject of its act ivity is the deployment and maintenance of the functioning of 
the National Confidential Communication System (NCCS).  
The e -Government Concept Note underlines that there is an insufficient level of information 
security and information protection in public s ector ITC.  To address this issue the CoM adopted a 
Cyber Security Strategy in 2016 as well as a new Law on Cybersecurity which  enter ed into force in 
May 2018. There is sufficient capacity dedicated to the field of cyber security, but as in the entire publi c 
sector there is a high turnover and it is difficult to retain qualified staff. This is due to low pay that is 63 five time lower than the private sector. There are certain training courses targeting the population. The 
interaction with the civil servants on  cyber security subject became closer  and the courses became  
more comprehensive .  
Cyber security  arrangements  are among the strongest dimensions, with an eGGO status of a 
“performer”, which in terms of the arrangements in place can potentially be  ready for  a further  
upgrade i n a short timeframe.  In addition to  further efforts to ensure progress in  line with the set 
foresight , it is important to continue improvement of cyber security arrangements, as well as various 
aspects of capacity development that are beyond the higher -level scope of this assessment.   
Recommendations:  
• Continue improving business processes within , and collaboration with , the stakeholders 
responsible for cyber security arrangements and public entities in charge of systems, registries, 
or digitalization initiatives . 
• Continue running simulations and stress tests on a regular basis to identify public sector IS 
vulnerabilities . 
• Continue improving risk assessment system. Invest in developing the capacity to collect and 
process data to assess t he risk and impact of incidents.  
• Invest in user awareness, education and readiness.  
  64 Area 5. Control Mechanisms  
DIMENSION 17. MONITORING AND  CONTROL  
 
Monitoring and control are fundamental aspects of governance.  These control mechanisms are not 
in the m ainstream of the topics covered by e -government strategies and reforms, but are implicitly 
captured in various solutions and discussions, given their fundamental role in definition of the 
governance and underlying agency relations18. This assessment  include d this specific dimension to 
reinforce the importance of monitoring and control in governance, even when supported through 
information technology.  This is a follow -up on earlier discussion s of principal -agent relations in the 
context of WDR 2016 on Digital  Dividends.  
WDR 2016 refers to principal agent information asymmetries to explain why the systems failed 
to combat rent seeking.  It argues that without political commitment and leadership the digit alization 
may further contribute to authoritarian control without producing positive development impact. It 
considers it important to use digital technologies to reinforce institutions, improve monitoring of 
                                                           
18 The ‘agency theory’ was formulated in late 1960s and early 1970s* (Berhold; Ross; Mitnick). In corporate context, the 
agency problem is related with the conflict be tween the interests of shareholders of the company (the principal) and the hired 
executive (the agent).  
* See for original contributions to the literature:  
Berhold, Marvin. “A Theory of Linear Profit -Sharing Incentives.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics  85.3 (1971): 460 -
482. 
Mitnick, Barry. “The Theory of Agency: The Policing "Paradox" and Regulatory Behavior.” Public Choice 24 (1975): 27 -
42. 
Ross, Stephen. “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem.” The American Economic Review 63.2 (1973) : 
134-139. 
 
65 service delivery, strengthen social norms and promote civic behavior like voluntary tax compliance or 
energy conservation through “peer comparisons” (naming and shaming).  Like in the case of 
monitoring of hired managers by the board  members,  company shareholders  or financial institutions  
in the private sector, the monitoring of public officials by various stak eholders (other public entities 
and various auditors, CSOs, citizens, etc.) is critical for controlling fiduciary risks related with use of 
public resources and the quality of public service delivery. One of the important outcomes of any 
digitalization ini tiatives should be enhancing the efficiency of such monitoring and control 
mechanisms.  
Currently, Ukraine does not have commonly accepted standards for handling monitoring and 
control aspects of digit alization projects.  In practice, this means that in the best case the developed 
information systems will incorporate already existing monitoring and control mechanisms described 
in regulations. The efficiency of the digit alization initiatives is further hindered due to the absence of 
formally adopted (participa tory) BPR methodology.  While there are informal BPR approaches used 
by SEGA they are not public and there is no clarity on how the checks and balances are handled. 
Digit alization might still implicitly contribute to improve monitoring and control of agency  relations 
but it is not properly articulated.  There is no evidence to track from  logs that can be used for audit.  
While there have been very few discrete systems in some specific cases, the use of advanced 
digital solutions in monitoring is not a norm.  There are no defined procedures and requirements for 
using the technology (e.g. big data and analytics, AI, etc.) for improved monitoring or citizen 
engagement and processing customer grievances. There are no t many examples where the public is  
engage d as ext ernal monitors , except a few specific contexts.   
Electronic government procurement is one of the examples where some solutions for monitoring 
have emerged. The ProZorro  system  was created to introduce transparency in Public Procurement in 
Ukraine. The abil ity of NGOs, including Transparency International (TI) , to be able to see everything 
that is happening in the system provides a transparency environment for monitoring . TI is creating a 
monitoring portal  and online forum , where interested parties can discu ss procurement questions and 
procedure s. Providing such an open monitoring portal  aims to ensure transparency and integrity in the 
public procurement.  According to findings of the Assessment  of ProZorro , the CSOs are much more 
involved in the monitoring the public procurement . Many of the CSOs and NGOs found ProZorro to 
be a great tool for monitoring and analysis of procurement.  According to the Assessment of ProZorro, 
the Business Intelligence module (bi.prozorro.org) is also a great analytical tool that c an be used for 
procurement monitoring by NGOs.  
At the level of strategies , the wide involvement of non -governmental organizations and industry 
specific associations in the monitoring of the e-government development  is highlighted in the 
context of electron ic tools for citizen engagement in  line with the e -Government Development 
Concept Note.  
Overall, the eGGO status for this dimension is a “follower”  as reflected above . 
  66 Recommendations:  
• Adopt a robust BPR methodology  that, among other things, identifies a ll agency relation risks 
and opportunities for (mutual) monitoring between the parties concerned  to reinforce checks 
and balances.  
• Ensure that automation equips the parties with effective and innovative electronic tools to 
facilitate monitoring . 
• A good e -government strategy needs a solid M&E framework, including the  creation of an 
executive dashboard with key indicators for decision -makers.  
• Ensure that all digit alization initiatives ensure proper track of logs that can be used for 
monitoring.  
• Establish fram ework for motivating and engaging customers, civil society and media through 
effective feedback mechanisms.  
• As applicable, use technology solutions, including interoperability platform, blockchain 
technology, artificial intelligence and big data to reduce the transaction costs of monitoring 
and control of agency relations.  
DIMENSION 18. CROSS CHECKS  
 
The essence of this dimension of the assessment is  related with  the concept  cross -checks . The 
third-party  cross -check are  among the common technique for verif ication of reported information by 
various inspection and enforcement agencies, which have been routinely embedded in information 
management systems. These are usually popular for implementation of risk -based systems, for 
example automated solutions in tax  administration or anti -corruption (e.g. IAD systems) , public 
financial management , social assistance, etc . 
67 Interoperability and data exchange is the main enabling condition and requirement.  While  the 
“Trembita ” interoperability platform is not rolled -out yet, the cross -checks are imbedded on case by 
case bases  without any strategic and regulatory framework . In the absence of specific  regulatory  
framework , the international good practices were perhaps the main source for introducing third -party 
cross -check in number of systems.  These are currently implemented in tax administration and IAD 
systems, which also exchange data between themselves using exchange protocols (in absence of 
“Trembita ”). Yet the risk management and cross check mechanisms do not use adva nced technology, 
despite earlier SFS attempts to use big data, which have not succeed ed yet.  
Overall, the eGGO status for this dimension is a “follower”  as shown in the score -table above . 
Recommendations :  
• Use the interoperability platform to establish re al time data exchange between registries.  
• Ensure there is clear regulation (and guidelines) enabling accessing required information and 
use for automatic cross checks.  
• Observe prospects of introducing risk management culture in other areas and automated 
systems.  
Overall Snapshot  of the Assessment  
According to the findings there is a strong correlation between the progress and foresight at the 
aggregated level of areas.  The areas  have composite structure, and one still should  bear in mind that 
they do not n ecessarily reveal the weaknesses at the level of dimensions due to averaging.    
In terms of the foresight, the vision for the reforms is relatively advanced for such areas as 
“digital services ”, “control mechanisms ”, and the “planning and implementation ” of policies, 
which are at the level of 65% and above.  While the area of “infrastructure and security ” seemingly 
does not lag too much  compared to the highlighted three areas , the contrast and heterogeneity in term 
of included dimensions is huge.  For instanc e, due to the averaging the score of 56.8% for this area does  
not immediately reveal the weakest and most concerning dimension  - “data centers ” - which is the 
obvious “Achilles heel”  in Ukraine’s e-government architecture . Although , at the level of areas, the 
“data and analytics ” is the area  with the most limited foresight.   
The progress generally ech oes the foresight with certain implementation lag.  The area of the data 
and analytics is again the one which has not see n any significant progress .  
Overall, as it can be s een from the below figure, there is a room to significantly improve all the areas 
of e-government covered by the eGGO assessment.  
  68 Figure 9  – eGGO  assessment by areas  
 
As it was mentioned above, the real picture on the strengths and the weak nesses of the e-
government system is revealed through discussion at the level of the dimensions , dully reflected 
in the figure below . Certain correlation between the foresight and progress still can be traced at the 
level of dimensions, although less consi stently.  Most notably, there is no clear foresight for some 
critical dimensions. In particular, for “data centers” and “customer relations” the scores for the progress 
and the foresight converge.  
  0%20%40%60%80%100%Planning and
implementation
Digital services
Data and analyticsInfrastructure and
securityControl
mechanisms
Progress Foresight69 Figure 10 – eGGO  assessment summary by dimensions and area s 
 
  Data and analytics   Planning and implementation  
     
  Infrastructure and security   Digital services  
     
  Control mechanisms    
 
 
The shell -shaped chart below reflects the ranking of the dimensions bases on the current 
progress. This provi des a useful picture to inform the priority setting. The most sluggish dimensions 
include:   
• Information for management ( 0.0% ); 
• Data centers ( 7.1% ); 
• Smart analytics  (14.3% ); 
• Business continuity  (20.0% ); and  
• ICT procurement  (25.0% ). 
The score for the progres s on Ukraine’s  top five vulnerable  dimensions  of e-government  listed 
above does not exceed 25%, which corresponds to the reform status of a “beginner”.  0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%1-Policymaking
2-Implementation
3-ICT procurement
4-Strategic and
regulatory framework
5-Platforms and services
6-Registries and
interoperability
7-Access & connectivity
8-Customer relations
9-Delivery modes
10-Identification11-Smart analytics12-Information for
management13-Data centers14-Access to ICT
resources15-Business continuity16-Cyber security
arrangements17-Monitoring and
control18-Cross checks
Progress Foresight 70 At the same time, there are a few dimensions that have been performing relatively well and 
deserved a st atus of a performer (with a score above  50%). These dimensions include:  
• Cyber security  arrangements  (75.0%);  
• Access to ICT resources  (70.0%);  
• Access & connectivity (60.0%); and  
• Strategic and regulatory framework (56.3%).  
 
Note: Although the “Cyber securit y arrangements” above show the highest score (75%) and , according to 
the benchmarks used by the current methodology , in relative terms is the most advanced dimension, the 
coverage of this dimension is limited to checking the availability of the key cyber s ecurity arrangements or 
attributes  at the higher level. Although the cyber security system has been improving after the serious security 
incidents in 2017, there is still much remains to be done in continuous  process of improvements that are 
critical for c oping with dynamic nature of cyber -attacks. The implementation of the cyber security 
arrangements at the sectorial and regional levels is still lagging. At the same time the consequences of cyber 
security incidents are dangerous due to the weak business co ntinuity arrangements .  
 
 
Figure 11– EGGO  assessment dimensions by priorities  
 
0.0%7.1%
14.3% 20.0%
25.0%
30.0%0.0%10.0%20.0%30.0%40.0%50.0%60.0%70.0%80.0%90.0%100.0%Information for management
Data centers
Smart analytics
Business continuity
ICT procurement
Identification
Policymaking
Customer relations
Cross checks
Platforms and servicesMonitoring and controlImplementationDelivery modesRegistries and interoperabilityStrategic and regulatory
frameworkAccess & connectivityAccess to ICT resourcesCyber security arrangements
Progress Foresight71 It is evident from the figures 10 and 11, that setting proper foresight directly contributes and 
informs the advancement of the progress of the reform under the respective are a. 
Having the foresight scores by dimensions allows using the eGGO framework for simulation of  
scenarios19 improving the average score by addressing the identified major weaknesses.  Under  
the “Status Quo” scenario  (Scenario -1), presumable achiev ement of  the current  foresight targets will 
ideally increase the average score to 58.7%, which would allow upgrading the overall reform category  
to a “performer”.  The proposed Scenario -2 assumes setting maximal targets for the two dimensions 
covered by  the area of “data and analytics” , which is the weakest at the level of areas . The more 
ambitious Scenario -3 adds to the Scenario -2 additional focus on full -scale advancement of the ICT 
procurement framework, which needs centralized policy coordination and introduction of  ICT specific 
provisions and arrangements. The most ambitious Scenario -4 would go beyond the targets under the 
Scenario -3, by making the political decision to opt for establishment of centralized virtual datacenter 
and implementation of a robust business c ontinuity system.  Among the options reflected in the Table 
1 below , only implementing the Scenario -4 would enable an upgrade to a status of a “frontier”, which 
should be interpreted as comparability with the frontiers of the e-government reform.  
Table 1. F oresight Scenarios  
Scenario  Scenario Name  Average Score  Status  
1 Status Quo  58.7%  PERFORMER  
2 Plus:  Data and Analytics  (D-11 & D -12)  67.6%  PERFORMER  
3 Plus:  ICT Procurement  (D-3) 70.9%  PERFORMER  
4 Plus:  Infrastructure and security  (D-13 & D -15) 78.8% FRONTIER  
Note:  The scores and reform statuses are derived by attributing 100% score t o respective dimensions referenced in 
the parentheses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
19 Simulation of scenarios is based on manipulation of the foresight numbers reflected in the Annex.  72 Conclusion  
 
Addressing the  identified five  key vulnerabilities of e-government  is critical for the futu re success 
and sustainability of Ukra inian reforms.  Ignoring any of  them  may hinder reform  progress and 
constrain “leap-frogging ” potential. Next steps should ideally focus reforms that prioritize 
consolidation of datacenters. Implementing a centralized po licy for ICT procurement requires strong 
political will and high -level support.  The first manifestation of such political support could be a clear 
definition of the stakeholder roles and, most importantly, separation of implementation from  
policymaking . The latter is not among the top five vulnerabil ities, but could be included in the 
expanded list of top seven, together with the challenges of citizen identification, which is another key 
enabler of future progress in digit alization that requires continued a ttention from the authorities in 
charge of demographic regist ries. An efficient approach to further modernization of services requires 
stronger emphasis on implementation of cross -sectorial shared services , where ver applicable.  
The eGGO assessment provide s a broad  view on strengths and vulnerabilities of e-government 
in Ukraine, and outline s key scenarios for  consideration by policymakers.  Acting on them will 
require further analysis and consultations regarding specific approaches to  addressing weaknesses . 
Required analyses may include , but will not be limited to , SWOT analyses  of lagging dimensions , as 
well as inventory and gap analysis of infrastructure  and services . Also required will be an in -depth  
review of the policy and regulatory framework  with the aim to identify and implement required 
amendments .       73 Annex  1: eGGO Assessment Summary  
 
Areas  Dimension  Progress  Foresight  Status  
I-Planning and 
implementation  1-Policymaking  33.3%  83.3%  Follower  
2-Implementation  44.4%  66.7%  Follower  
3-ICT procurem ent 25.0%  40.0%  Beginner  
4-Strategic and regulatory framework  56.3%  68.8%  Performer  
II-Digital 
services  5-Platforms and services  40.0%  60.0%  Follower  
6-Registries and interoperability  50.0%  81.3%  Follower  
7-Access & connectivity  60.0%  80.0%  Performe r 
8-Customer relations  40.0%  40.0%  Follower  
9-Delivery modes  50.0%  62.5%  Follower  
10-Identification  30.0%  80.0%  Follower  
III-Data and  
analytics  11-Smart analytics  14.3%  28.6%  Beginner  
12-Information for management  0.0%  12.5%  Beginner  
IV-
Infrastr ucture  
and security  13-Data centers  7.1%  7.1%  Beginner  
14-Access to ICT resources  70.0%  70.0%  Performer  
15-Business continuity  20.0%  50.0%  Beginner  
16-Cyber security  arrangements  75.0%  100.0%  Performer  
V-Control 
mechanisms  17-Monitoring and control  41.7%  66.7%  Follower  
18-Cross checks  40.0%  60.0%  Follower  
 
  74 Annex 2: List of Recommendations  
 
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
1. Policymaking  1) Policymaking function should be streamlined  
and consolidated.  
(Risk: High)  1) Clear delineation of policy making 
versus implementation is needed.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) The Intersectoral Council on e -Government 
should be strengthened. Decreasing the number of 
Council members shoul d be considered, while 
retaining sufficient representation and 
incisiveness. This recommendation stems from 
the high number of members that might make the 
functioning and decision making of the Council 
difficult.   
(Risk: Medium)  2) Clear delineation of ma ndates and the 
policy/decision -making roles is 
warranted amongst the key actors in the 
e-Government agenda.  
(Risk: Medium)  
3) Given that any policy is ultimately approved by 
the CoM, Council’s management and 
membership could be set up at a more technical  
level to make the scheduling and sessions more 
agile, technical, and productive.  
(Risk: Medium)    3) Public outreach to communicate about 
plans and achievements of e -Government 
reform is needed.  
(Risk: Medium)  
4) Strong political support to advance th is agenda 
that has been declared a national priority. The 
Head of SEGA should be given the status of 
Advisor to the PM on e -government reform.  
(Risk: Low)   
2. Implementation  1) Implementation should be guided by following 
principles stated in the EU e -Government Action 
Plan: Digital by default, Cross -border by default, 
Once only principle on EU level, Interoperability 
by default, Openness and transparency, 
Inclusiveness and accessibility, Trustworthiness 
and Security.  
(Risk: High)  1) The e -Government refo rm should help 
systematize projects and programs 
management related to IT development, 
implementation and maintenance from 
the ministries, subordinated agencies, 
regional and local authorities to a 
qualified central unit or net of units. 
Public authorities  should deal only with 
strategic planning of the use of modern 
technologies and digitization (sectorial e -
transformation), as well as participation 
at the concept development phase for the 
IT projects and solutions and use of the 
implemented solutions.  
(Risk: Medium)  
 
2) IT project and programs design and 
management capacity of the public sector should 
be consolidated. Quality assurance of the provided 
IT solutions should be improved.  
(Risk: High)  2) Development of all systems should 
follow the same rule s, practices and 
procedures to assure acceptable quality, 
documentation and sustainability plans.  
(Risk: Medium)  
3) Deployment of the shared services should be 
embraced by the key guiding principles of the e -
Government implementation.  
(Risk: High)  3) Cl ear delineation of institutional 
mandates related to the IT cycle (design 
and development, testing, placement in 
production, technical operation and 
maintenance, service delivery, quality 75  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
assurance, monitoring and evaluation) is 
needed.  
(Risk: Medium)   
4) SEGA should consider narrowing its scope of 
activities and responsibilities to become more 
focused. It should be decided what can be done in -
house and what can be delegated or outsourced.  
(Risk: Medium)  4) Reform Delivery Unit under PM can 
monitor and evaluate the progress of 
reform implementation through a 
Scorecard based on KPI and foster 
reforms implementation.   
(Risk: Medium)  
5) e-Government transformation agents (persons 
or units) should be strategically established in 
public sector entities to ensure proper 
implementation of activities under the e -
government development plan. The person 
responsible for sectorial e -transformation should 
not have a rank lower than deputy minister (state 
secretary). It must be understood such persons or 
units are i n charge of advising on e -Government 
policy implementation and should not be placed in 
operative units such as IT departments (or units in 
charge of maintenance of the IT hardware in 
ministries or agencies). They need to be change 
agents in the sector and work tightly with SEGA.  
(Risk: High)   
6) Business model and financial sustainability 
plans for implemented solutions should be 
developed, approved and followed.  
(Risk: High)    
3. ICT Procurement  1) Establish a unit in charge of ICT procurement 
policy at the central government level, and 
establish co -operation and collaboration with 
subnational levels of government to avoid 
duplicities and improve value for money of ICT 
investments.  
(Risk: High)  1) Develop a central data base on all 
existing assets in t he public sector 
including their age, as a next step to 
earlier initial stocktaking exercises. 
Develop a strategy for ICT procurement 
based on the inventory of existing assets.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Develop an ICT procurement strategy 
applicable across the p ublic sector.  
(Risk: High)  
 2) Establish a central repository for all 
ICT tenders, contracts and payments 
across the public sector at the central 
levels. ProZorro should provide a good 
foundation for it. Expand the central open 
repository to include ICT te nders, 
contracts and payments at the subnational 
level.  
(Risk: Medium)  
3) A more coordinated and unified investment 
in public sector IT needs to be implemented. At 
the local public authorities should coordinate 
their investments in IT with the central le vel.  
(Risk: High)  3) Adapt ICT procurement policy to more 
agile and iterative delivery methods and 
facilitating access to small specialized 
firms to compete for contracts in their 
area of expertise.  
(Risk: Medium)  
4) Develop an open database of previous  supplier 
performance for ICT projects. The Assessment of 
ProZorro made a relevant general 4) Although in contrast to the general 
trends and the logic of reduced 
transaction co st in the procurement 76  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
recommendation to establish a black and white list 
of suppliers.  
(Risk: Medium)  sector, in -line with OECD 
recommendation over longer term there 
could be significant benefits from 
breaking down large projects to smaller, 
more manageable sizes as appropriate. 
One immediate result would be reduction 
of the risk of f ailure for smaller and 
simpler tasks. The smaller sized projects 
will also allow smaller bidders to 
compete and bring quite interesting and 
specialized expertise that some small 
start-ups or companies may offer.  
(Risk: Medium)  
4. Strategic and 
regulatory  framework  1) Explore the option of standardizing by adopting 
international best practice or benchmark 
regulations, for example on the quality of public 
services, management of registries, etc.  
(Risk: Medium)  
 1) Revise the legal framework to provide 
a clearer definition and delineation of 
mandates and responsibilities related to 
policy making and implementation of the 
various players involved.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2)Establish a Ukrainian Interoperability 
framework, in line with the European 
Interoperability Framework, as well as a whole -
of-government Enterprise Architecture as the 
overarching operational document.  
(Risk: High)  2) A more detailed regulatory framework 
on e-Government implementation at the 
regional and local level is needed due to 
the high -level of decentralization.  
(Risk: High)  
3) Methodological support documents in such 
areas as re -engineering and digitization of 
services, registry cleansing, data protection, etc. 
needs to be developed and provided.  
(Risk: Medium)   
4) A better implementatio n mechanism for the 
Law on Personal Data Protection should be define 
and implemented.  
(Risk: High)   
5. Platforms and 
services  1) The implementation of the platforms and 
services should be guided by the EU eGovernment 
Action Plan principles: Digital by de fault, Cross -
border by default, Once only principle on EU 
level, Interoperability by default, Openness and 
transparency, Inclusiveness and accessibility, 
Trustworthiness and Security.  
(Risk: High)   
2) The definition of services, whether (i) public 
service, (ii) administrative service 
(central/sectorial and central/local) or (iii) 
communal services need to be clarified to avoid 
duplications and overlaps as well as responsibility 
vacuums. A common approach to all services 
delivered by the public sector for  businesses and 
citizens should be established.  
(Risk: High)  1) SEGA should consider the unification 
of on -line entry points for receiving the 
services. Modernization of Services 
Portal should be implemented.  
(Risk: Medium)  
3) A unified public services registry should be 
implemented.  2) Define the expected results and targets 
of the public services reform with 77  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
(Risk: Medium)  indicators and proper monitoring of the 
progress.  
(Risk: Medium)  
 
4) The roles related to the services modernization 
should be clearly defined. Currently there is 
ambiguity and overlap between the mandates of 
MoEDT and SEGA.  
(Risk: High)  3) A system to monitor the quality of 
delivered services should be 
implemented.  
(Risk: Medium)  
5) The possibility of implementation shared 
services should be analyzed more carefully and an 
approach to shared services implementation 
should be developed (application/front -office 
digitization, identification, signature, log, 
payment, reporting, delivery, etc.).  
(Risk: High)  4) Implementation of a  call center to 
support public service delivery.   
(Risk: Medium)  
6) A horizontal review and guillotining of 
outdated and duplicating services should be 
conducted. Cleanse the services register.  
(Risk: High)  
 5) SEGA needs to have a strategy to 
improve  the uptake of digitized public 
services. The strategy should include 
public awareness campaigns and tutorials 
and training on how to use e -services.  
(Risk: Medium)  
7) Prioritization methodology for services subject 
to modernization should be developed and 
implemented.  
(Risk: Medium)    
8) Methodologies of services re -engineering and 
digitization should be developed.  
(Risk: Medium)   
9) SEGA should consider clustering of services 
based on common features and apply the same 
approaches to those servic es.  
(Risk: High)   
10) A unified approach to public services tariffs 
setting should be developed and applied.  
(Risk: Medium)   
11) Capacity building for the staff involved in the 
new models of public service delivery.  
(Risk: Medium)   
12) An approach  to assisted service delivery 
(through a net of centers like SNAPs or other 
qualified entities) for those who do not have 
computer/internet at home.  
(Risk: High)   
6. Registries and 
interoperability  1) The timeline and deadlines for the 
interoperability platform implementation should 
be redefined and set more realistically.  
(Risk: Medium)   
2) The SEGA needs to create an interoperability 
implementation inter -sectoral body to hasten 
cleansing of registers and implementation of the 
platform.  
(Risk: High)   78  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
3) The SEGA should discuss with other 
stakeholders the potential solutions and come with 
some ways of accelerating attribution of unique 
IDs or for identification of alternative solutions. 
The uptake of unique IDs is crucial for 
interoperability.  
(Risk : High)   
7. Access and 
connectivity  1) Elaborate a strategy to strengthen access to the 
Internet and broadband connectivity from 
disadvantaged groups (rural, old, poor, etc.) to 
bridge the digital divide and ensure that all benefit 
from the advancement of e-government services.  
(Risk: Medium)  1) Exploit the almost universal access to 
mobile connectivity to offer e -services 
and connect to citizens.  
(Risk: Law)  
2) Considering that cost can be a barrier to access, 
points of access in local governments th rough 
kiosks and one -stop-shops should be explored.  
(Risk: High)   
8. Customer relations  1) Wide involvement of non -governmental 
organizations and industry specific associations in 
the planning, development and monitoring of e -
government initiatives.  
(Risk: Medium)  1) Development of e -applications and e -
petitions.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Introduction of electronic feedback forms at the 
official authorities’ web -sites, including thematic, 
for receiving quality feedback on different issues.  
(Risk: High)  
 2) Enc ouragement of the use of 
electronic tools to involve citizens and 
their support for public initiatives in the 
sphere of e -government.  
(Risk: Medium)  
 3) Development of the instruments of 
"open budget", "public budget", on -line 
discussion of the draft reg ulations and 
other instruments of public participation 
in decision making.  
(Risk: Low)  
9. Delivery modes  1) The SEGA should define a model of assisted 
service delivery for those who do not have 
computers or internet access.  
(Risk: High)  
 1) The unific ation of the single -entry 
points for the service delivery should 
continue. If services are to be delivered 
from multiple sources they should be 
integrated into the portal or if there are 
more platforms they should adhere to a 
unified design code.  
(Risk: M edium)  
2) Public awareness campaigns on how to access 
e-services via portal or through assisted service 
delivery should be conducted  
(Risk: Medium)  2) The Services Portal should be 
redesigned to be more user friendly.  
(Risk: Low)  
 3) Mobile based e -Services should be 
broadly implemented.  
(Risk: Medium)  
10. e-Identification  1) Development of electronic trust services.  
(Risk: Medium)  
 1) Development of the existing and 
introduction of the new schemes and 
methods of electronic identification and 
setting the levels of trust to them 
(including Mobile ID, Bank ID).  79  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
(Risk: Low)  
2) Facilitation of filling in of the unified 
demographic register and promotion of the 
passports of the citizens of Ukraine in the form of 
ID card.  
(Risk: High)  2) Implementati on of the principle 
“single -sign-on” through introduction of 
integrated system of electronic 
identification and verification and 
repeated use in information and 
communication systems of the 
authorities.  
(Risk: Medium)  
11. Smart analytics  1) Create a unit  or body in charge of data 
management in the public sector.  
(Risk: Medium)  1) Develop training programs to develop, 
attract and retain data analysis skills 
across the public sector.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Develop a national public sector data 
management stra tegy to strengthen a strategic use 
of data in the public sector to improve 
policymaking and performance.  
(Risk: Medium)  2) Develop programs to engage with the 
community of data producers and re -
users on the usefulness and re -use of open 
government data to find innovative 
solutions to public issues.  
(Risk: Low)  
3) Develop close collaboration with subnational 
governments on data management issues.  
(Risk: High)  3) Develop the required data 
infrastructure to enhance data sharing 
across the public sector.  
(Risk: Medium)  
12. Information for 
management  1) SEGA should develop key performance 
indicators for implemented services, and monitor 
the evolution of the services delivery and financial 
models.  
(Risk: High)  1) Establish a coherent monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system for public 
administration that can be used for 
bringing together various aspects of 
performance information at the level of 
HRM, PFM /budget, etc. The automation 
of M&E systems will allow incorporating 
information from citizen feedback 
platfor ms, statistical data and other 
registries.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Ensure seamless exchange of performance 
information through the interoperability platform.  
(Risk: Medium)  2)Consider introducing an effective 
framework for evaluating performance of 
public sec tor intuitions and civil servants.  
(Risk: Medium)  
13. Data centers  1) SEGA should initiate the process of public 
sector data centers consolidation.  
(Risk: High)  1) Less mature but still advanced 
datacenters could be upgraded to meet 
the standards and a lso become a node 
for single virtual data centers .  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) An inventory of all data centers should be 
conducted by attributing levels of maturity.  
(Risk: High)  2) Government should consider using 
public clouds for open data and less 
sensitive  data.  
(Risk: Low)  
3) SEGA should carefully plan a good cloud 
implementation and transition strategy, including 
the concept of hybrid cloud (embedded implicitly 
in the last recommendation about use of public 
clouds), and cost recovery strategy.  
(Risk: High)   80  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
4) Most mature data centers should be 
operationally consolidated and a cloud base virtual 
environment should be created based on those data 
centers that will serve as nodes.  
(Risk: High)   
14. Access to ICT 
resources  1) Strengthen access to ICT eq uipment and 
broadband connectivity for subnational 
employees.  
(Risk: High)  Plan ahead to ensure the possibility of 
tapping the benefits of 
telecommuting/virtual offices for public 
sector work. That would entail investing 
in connectivity, security and priva cy.  
(Risk: Medium)  
15. Business 
continuity  1) Systematize methodologies for the 
collection, storage and management of 
information . 
(Risk: High)  1) Ensure that regulations that establish 
business continuity mandates are updated 
and respond to the best pr actices.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) A public sector cloud strategy needs to be 
developed that will cover the migration of the data 
to the cloud environment as well as the 
implementation of the Data Recovery Center.  
(Risk: High)  2) Implement a Data Recovery Center . 
(Risk: Medium)  
3) Establish guidelines for the provision of data 
storage services at central level.  
(Risk: Medium)   
16. Cyber Security 
arrangements  1) Continue improving business processes and 
collaboration within the stakeholders responsible 
for cyb er security arrangements and public entities 
in charge of systems, registries, or digitalization 
initiatives.  
(Risk: High ) Invest in user awareness, education and 
readiness.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Continue running simulations and stress tests 
on a regular ba sis to identify public sector IS 
vulnerabilities.  
(Risk: Medium)   
3) Continue improving risk assessment system. 
Invest in developing the capacity to collect and 
process data to assess the risk and impact of 
incidents.  
(Risk: High)   
17. Monitoring and 
control  1) A good e -government strategy needs a solid 
M&E framework, including the creation of an 
executive dashboard with key indicators for 
decision -makers.  
(Risk: Medium)  1) Adopt a robust BPR methodology that, 
among other things, identifies all agency 
relation risks and opportunities for 
(mutual) monitoring between the parties 
concerned to reinforce checks and 
balances.  
(Risk: Medium)  
2) Ensure that all digitization initiatives ensure 
proper track of logs that can be used for 
monitoring.  
(Risk: High).  2) Ensure that automation equips the 
parties with effective and innovative 
electronic tools to facilitate monitoring . 
(Risk: Medium)  
3) Establish framework for motivating and 
engaging customers, civil society and media 
through effective feedback mechanis ms. 
(Risk: Medium)  3) As applicable, use technology 
solutions, including interoperability 
platform, blockchain technology, 
artificial intelligence and big data to 81  
Dimension  Short -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  Medium and longer -term priority  
(Risk – Low/Medium/High)  
reduce the transaction costs of monitoring 
and control of agency relations.  
(Risk: Low)  
18. Cross checks  1) Use the interoperability platform to establish 
real time data exchange between registries . 
(Risk: High)  1) Observe prospects of introducing risk 
management culture in other areas and 
automated systems.  
(Risk: Low)  
2) Ensure there is clea r regulation (and guidelines) 
enabling accessing required information and use 
for automatic cross checks.  
(Risk: Medium)   
Note: The reported risks refer to a situation when the recommendations are not followed  
 
 