Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia1
Strategies 
for supporting 
inclusive 
innovation: 
insights from 
South-East AsiaStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia2UNDP  partners with people 
at all levels of society to 
help build nations that can 
withstand crisis, and drive 
and sustain the kind of 
growth that improves the 
quality of life for everyone. 
On the ground in nearly 
170 countries and territories, 
we offer global perspective 
and local insight to help 
empower lives and build 
resilient nations.
The views expressed in 
this publication are those 
of the author(s) and do 
not necessarily represent 
those of the United 
Nations, including UNDP, 
or the UN Member States.Nesta  is an innovation 
foundation. For us, 
innovation means turning 
bold ideas into reality 
and changing lives for 
the better.
We use our expertise, skills 
and funding in areas where 
there are big challenges 
facing society.
Nesta is based in the 
UK and supported by 
a financial endowment. 
We work with partners 
around the globe to bring 
bold ideas to life to change 
the world for good.
About the authors:
Alex Glennie Nesta
Juliet Ollard Nesta
Isaac Stanley Nesta
Robyn Klingler-Vidra King’s College London
Copyright © UNDP 2020Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia3Foreword 
Innovation is not neutral: it has both a rate and, crucially, a direction. 
The style of innovation frequently touted as the answer is often not 
inclusive at all – it can exacerbate social and economic inequality 
and have  unintended environmental consequences. 
As current events across the globe are 
demonstrating, the “move fast and break things” 
mantra so dear to techno-utopians is producing 
many detrimental effects, eroding trust and 
locking us up into obsolete logic of development.
We believe that there is a major opportunity 
for policy makers in the Asia Pacific region 
to play an active role in creating the conditions 
for a different type of innovation: one that is 
not focused on single point solutions but more 
coherent to the nature of the complex challenges 
faced by the region. A type of innovation that 
fosters inclusion and reinforces the SDGs, rather 
than  exacerbating inequality.
So, this report is driven by one fundamental 
question: are we seeing models of inclusive 
innovation emerging in the Asia Pacific region 
and, if so, are they pointing to concrete 
alternatives to the dominating innovation 
narrative (driven by Silicon Valley)?
To answer this question, we partnered with Nesta, 
building on their comprehensive framework of 
inclusive innovation, to produce case studies from 
across ASEAN countries, particularly Myanmar, 
the Philippines, Indonesia and Viet Nam. The 
research team conducted dozens of interviews 
with key stakeholders from grassroots to 
government to  seek patterns and outliers. 
In Viet Nam, UNDP is currently hosting a series 
of conversations with different stakeholders 
on the practical implications of adopting 
an inclusive innovation framework.This report draws on the insights from 
these case studies, to present concrete 
recommendations for policymakers 
in Asia and the Pacific who are interested 
in developing a more coherent approach 
to innovation as a means of addressing 
societal  challenges and fostering more 
inclusive ecosystems. We hope that many 
will take up the challenge. We firmly believe 
that those governments who shape the 
innovation narrative around inclusion 
will reap  major benefits and induce new 
dynamics that will help achieve the SDGs.
Please take a look and let us know your 
thoughts, considerations, and if you note 
gaps. More importantly, do get in touch 
if you want to further pursue this research 
agenda and if you want to work on concrete 
initiatives that can demonstrate the value 
of an inclusivity in  innovation policies 
and projects.
The strategies set forth are not a final 
statement – they are a starting point 
for a collective inquiry.
Join us on Twitter @ricap_undp  
and join the #inclusiveinnovation  
#NextGenUNDP  conversation.  
Giulio Quaggiotto,  
Head of the Regional Innovation Centre,  
UNDP Asia and the Pacific Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia4Contents
Foreword  3
Introduction  5
1. The context for inclusive innovation policies in South-East Asia 6
2. Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation 10
Technology should save us  13
Innovation, everywhere  17
Innovation for the foundations  20
3. Conclusions and policy directions 23
Endnotes 27
Appendix: Methodology and list of interviewees 29Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia5Introduction 
A mostly vacant office block in Yangon might not be the first place you would picture 
if asked where innovation is happening in South-East Asia. But the Tamwe Plaza is 
more than meets the eye. 
Its sixth floor is home to 360ed – an education 
startup that uses cutting edge technologies and 
ideas to address challenges in the education 
system in Myanmar. In a  series of soundproofed 
rooms and art studios, designers, developers, 
and technology students are creating a range 
of virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality 
(AR) tools and products to be used by teachers 
and students across the country. Work is also 
being done to pilot new teacher training models 
and provide access to educational technologies 
in remote or conflict-affected areas.
The organisation’s founder started her career 
as an elementary school teacher in Myanmar, 
following in the footsteps of her mother and 
grandmother. She came up with the idea 
for 360ed while going through an incubator 
programme in Silicon Valley, after studying 
for a postgraduate degree in education at 
a university in the United States. Sharing her 
motivation for launching the initiative, Hla Hla 
Win told us that “the teacher training model 
in Myanmar is 100 years old. We don’t want to 
replace the teachers with technology, but instead 
to use technology to upgrade their abilities to 
create a culture of self-learning and confidence.” 1
At the time of publication, Nesta has gathered 
stories and insights from entrepreneurs like 
Hla Hla, as well as from practitioners, experts 
and policymakers across a range of ASEAN 
countries.2 Working with the UNDP, we have 
been researching the ways in which different 
innovation models are being applied in this region 
to address key development and sustainability 
challenges.3 Interest in developing more inclusive 
forms of innovation is growing in many parts of 
the world. Various theories and frameworks have 
been developed to conceptualise what this might 
look like, including by Nesta.4 However, policymakers remain in  need 
of inspiration and examples of what this 
looks like in practice, as well as support in 
selecting and  applying the approaches that 
will be most relevant for their own context.
This report aims to make a contribution to that 
agenda. Section  1 shares the findings of a rapid 
literature review of the ways in which inclusive 
innovation is understood in the ASEAN region, 
while Section  2 starts to build a typology of 
some of the ‘strategies’ that we observed different 
actors using to bring these ideas to life. It includes 
case studies  illustrating different approaches 
from the four ASEAN countries in which we 
conducted field research: Indonesia, Myanmar, 
the Philippines, and Viet Nam (see  Appendix 
for a note on methodology and a full list of 
interviewees). A concluding Section  3 offers 
some ideas for governments and other actors 
in the innovation ecosystem about how they 
could develop their approach to supporting 
these models of inclusive innovation.  
Image:  360ed Myanmar1. The context 
for inclusive 
innovation policies 
in South-East Asia
Image:  Vulcan Augmetics, Viet NamStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia7Inclusive innovation describes 
the pursuit of innovation 
that has social aims, and 
local context, at its heart. 
One can think of it as either – 
and both – a more inclusive 
approach to innovation, or 
a more innovative approach 
to driving social inclusion. 
The myriad promise, and understandings, 
of inclusive innovation has led to the development 
of numerous approaches that consider the social 
purpose of innovation, the distribution of its 
benefits and the roles and  power relationships 
of those  involved.
The concept of inclusive innovation has roots 
in the ‘appropriate technologies’ movement 
which emerged in the 1970s, advocating 
the pursuit of context-relevant technologies 
in emerging economies. Inclusive innovation 
as a specific lexicon was established in 2007, 
when Mark Dutz used the phrase ‘inclusive 
innovation’ in a World Bank report on sustainable 
innovation in India. He defined it as “knowledge 
creation and absorption efforts that are most 
relevant to the needs of the poor”.5 Shortly after 
the term appeared, inclusive innovation was 
invoked by  practitioners, academia, and policy 
makers across the ASEAN region.6 An early 
study on the topic, published by the International 
Development Research Centre, identified 
“innovation in and for the base of the pyramid 
(BOP)” as a key issue for ASEAN.7
From 2008, the thrust of inclusive innovation 
efforts in ASEAN was clearly on engaging 
poor and rural communities. The focus on the 
BOP persisted in major initiatives in the region, 
such as the 2010 Krabi Initiative on Science, 
Technology and Innovation for a  Competitive, 
Sustainable and Inclusive ASEAN.8 The World 
Bank’s Viet Nam Inclusive Innovation Project, 
the Bank’s first inclusive innovation effort 
globally, was initiated in 2013 and emphasised 
sustainability, the environment and the BOP.There has been a broadening in the 
engagement with inclusive innovation, 
as the term is increasingly invoked as 
a form of mission-oriented policy, with 
social  distribution9 and the importance of 
‘social  missions’10 at the fore. For innovation 
to matter, so the argument goes, there 
needs to be a social purpose.
Research has identified four themes that 
animate the recent proliferation of inclusive 
innovation policies:
1 Production versus consumption 
orientation:  Producer-oriented strategies 
aim to activate more segments of society 
as producers of innovation. Consumption-  
focused initiatives, comparatively, focus on 
encouraging the development of technologies, 
business practices or services in order to solve 
social challenges for particular demographic 
groups, such as applying innovation 
to agriculture in order to improve crop 
production  and benefit farmers.
2 Criteria according to demographic, 
spatial and industrial characteristics. 
Demographically-motivated efforts point 
to ascriptive groups, meaning disadvantaged 
groups according to factors assigned by 
birth, not achievement, such as gender, age, 
and minority or ethnic status. Spatial efforts 
aim to diminish the gap between urban/
rural, wealthy/poor and core/periphery. The 
third realm is that of promoting innovation 
in traditional industry, which strives to infuse 
technological innovations or socially innovative 
approaches into firms’  production  processes.
3 Technological innovation and/or 
social innovation.  Efforts focused on 
technological innovation speak of the 
need to insert a greater section of society 
into high-technology innovation, to help 
the marginalised better reap the gains to 
come from high value-added employment. 
Simultaneously, technologically-focused 
inclusive innovation initiatives strive to protect 
underrepresented groups from downside 
risks of emerging technologies. For example, 
innovation is associated with “unfavourable Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia8or even dangerous working conditions (e.g. in 
recycling of heavy metals used in ICT), jobless 
growth (e.g.  through automation of services) 
and environmental damage through pollution 
or degradation of ecosystems (e.g.  overfishing 
due to the use of more efficient nets)”.11 
Another brand of efforts promote social 
innovation, emphasising the benefits to come 
from new ways of organising communities and 
productive activities. In the realm of social 
innovation, the emphasis is on the novelty 
of the process rather than the technology.
4 Distinct efforts across governments. Within 
government, inclusive innovation policies have 
been initiated by numerous ministries, often 
without coordination across government. 
Ministries of Social Affairs and Education, for 
instance, act by way of active labour market 
policies, skills training, benefits transfer and 
redistribution more broadly.12 Ministries of 
Science and Technology, without linking with 
the Social Affairs initiatives, strive to craft “distribution-sensitive innovation policy”, 
in which R&D budgets are more dispersed, 
in demographic and spatial terms, across 
society.13 The net result is that governments 
have an opportunity to better leverage their 
myriad policies to promote more inclusive 
innovation across society. Drawing on 
state-of-the-art scholarship, as  discussed 
above, Nesta has developed an inclusive 
innovation policy framework. 
It incorporates a focus 
on equitable outcomes 
and the need for more 
active  governance 
of innovation, in view 
of the fact that innovation 
can increase as well as 
decrease inequality. 
Image:  360ed MyanmarStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia9The Nesta framework contends that 
innovation policies may be inclusive 
if they are concerned with:
• Focusing the direction  of innovation towards 
inclusive goals: Policies that acknowledge 
the differing impact innovation may have on 
social groups and that attempt to meet the 
needs of wider society, including groups that 
are particularly marginalised or  excluded.
• Broadening participation  in innovation: 
Policies that seek to encourage broad 
participation in terms of who is employed 
as an innovator or in innovative sectors. Such 
policies may focus on demographic groups, 
regions, or economic sectors (including 
traditional industries) not typically included 
in mainstream  innovation  promotion.• Inclusive governance  of innovation: Policies 
that actively involve a wide section of society 
in setting priorities for innovation, and seek 
to regulate and govern innovation in a way 
that fairly shares its benefits and  mitigates 
its tendency towards reproducing inequality.
Indicators associated with these 
different dimensions of more inclusive 
innovation policies are set out in Table  1. 
We have  used this  framework throughout 
the research as a basis for exploring 
questions of inclusive innovation with 
our stakeholders and interviewees.
Dimension of inclusion Indicator of an inclusive approach
Direction of innovation
What kinds of innovations are being 
supported through innovation policy 
interventions? Whose needs are being met?Innovations that address societal challenges 
and needs
Innovations that address the particular needs 
of disadvantaged social groups
Participation in innovation
Which regions, sectors and demographic 
groups are being enabled  to participate 
in innovation?Underrepresented and disadvantaged 
demographic  groups
Disadvantaged or lagging regions and districts
Low-productivity, traditional or informal sectors
Social economy/community organisations, 
social  enterprises, cooperatives
 Governance of innovation
Who sets priorities for innovation policy, 
and how are its outcomes managed?Citizens or civil society are involved in setting 
priorities for innovation policy
Citizens or civil society are involved 
in the  regulation of innovation 
(e.g. emerging  technologies)
Measures to identify and mitigate the risks 
and negative impacts of innovation for 
particular  groups
Measures to more equitably distribute the  
rewards   of innovationTable  1: A framework for inclusive innovation policies142. Strategies 
for supporting 
inclusive 
innovation
Image:  Disability Research and Capacity Development (DRD), Viet NamStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia11Our field research in Indonesia, Myanmar, 
the Philippines and Viet Nam revealed 
a number  of different interventions that are 
being employed to encourage more inclusive 
forms of innovation across the ASEAN region. 
From these, we discerned three distinctive types 
of strategy being employed. Each approach is 
based on a different set of assumptions about 
how to create change, and involves different 
stakeholders in a range of ways. Each has 
various implications in terms of the outcomes, 
benefits and risks they may generate for various 
demographic groups, regions and sectors.
Table  2 captures the main features of these 
strategies, which we have named in order to 
give a sense of their animating principle. We 
outline their overall approach, which actors are 
involved in implementing them, who may benefit 
from them, and the links we see to promoting 
inclusive innovation.  
 The rest of this section then describes each 
strategy in more detail, illustrated by case 
studies  gathered from  our field research.
These three approaches 
are not mutually exclusive, 
and there is overlap 
between them in terms 
of their objectives and 
target  beneficiaries. 
However, there are some clear differences 
in terms of the vision of innovation that 
underpins  them, and the roles of the different 
actors involved. These are described in more 
detail below.
Technology 
should save us 
Technology-driven 
(often  platform-based) 
solutions to social or 
economic challenges 
that are developed by 
innovative startups. 
These solutions often 
seek to address problems 
created by existing 
institutions or systems, 
or to fill needs that are 
not otherwise being met.Innovation,  
everywhere
Typically government-
led strategies which 
harness research and 
development to a  project 
of national development 
where high-value 
activities are  regionally 
distributed.Innovation for 
the foundations
Typically (although 
not always) low-tech 
innovation that aims 
to improve the material 
well-being of poorer 
members of society, 
by strengthening their 
capabilities either as 
producers or  consumers.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation12Strategic approach Who is involved? Who benefits? What makes this inclusive 
innovation?
Technology should save us
Technology-driven (often 
platform-based) solutions 
to social or economic 
challenges that are 
developed by innovative 
startups. These solutions 
often seek to address 
problems created by 
existing institutions or 
systems, or to fill needs 
that are not otherwise 
being met.• Startups   
(socially-oriented, 
technology-based 
startups)
• Funders   
(government agencies, 
IGOs, banks, investors)
• Intermediaries  
(incubators and 
accelerators)
• Civil society  
(NGOs, citizens)• Excluded or underserved 
parts of the population  
(enhanced services, 
choice, market access, 
tools and opportunities)
• Government   
(new/scalable solutions 
to social challenges)
• Startups   
(markets and customers 
for their solutions)These activities are 
inclusive in that they are 
directed primarily towards 
solving challenges faced 
by those who are currently 
least well-served by 
innovation, rather than 
those who are already 
well placed to benefit 
(e.g. developing precision 
farming systems that 
can be easily used by 
individual farmers).
Innovation, everywhere
Typically government-led 
strategies which harness 
research and development 
to a project of national 
development where 
high-value activities are 
regionally distributed.• National government 
(typically Ministries of 
Science and Technology, 
Research, Industry etc)
• Regional governments
• Companies
• Local primary 
commodity producers  
(such as farmers groups)• Research institutions 
(access to funding)
• Local industry 
(commercialisation 
opportunities)
• Wider local population 
(potentially job creation 
in higher-value sectors, 
more demand/higher 
prices for primary 
products)These activities are 
inclusive in that they 
use innovation to drive 
the development of 
regional economies and 
thus address inequalities 
between regions. This 
may be expected to 
create opportunities 
for local businesses and 
entrepreneurs. They may 
also give opportunities 
for primary commodity 
producers (e.g.  farmers) 
to benefit from (or even 
directly participate in) 
commercialisation.
Innovation for the foundations
Typically (although not 
always) low-tech innovation 
that aims to improve 
the material well-being 
of poorer members of 
society, by strengthening 
their capabilities either 
as producers or consumers.• Government agencies 
(working closely with 
communities to respond 
to their needs, often in 
partnership with private 
sector actors)
• Social businesses 
(developing affordable 
solutions / technologies for 
poor consumers)• Excluded and 
underserved parts 
of the population  
(upgraded infrastructure, 
production technologies, 
other technologies for 
specific needs  e.g.  
high-quality prosthetics 
or cleaner fuels)These activities are 
inclusive in that they 
are directed towards 
solving issues for groups 
that are excluded or 
underserved. In  some 
cases, communities 
experience human 
capital  development, 
which   enables them to 
become producers as well 
as users or consumers of 
innovation and to achieve 
greater productivity 
themselves (e.g.  being 
able to work as a result 
of a prosthetic limb).Table 2: Strategies for supporting inclusive innovationStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia13Technology should save us 
This strategy involves the development of technology-based solutions to 
social or economic challenges such as waste collection, education provision, 
low incomes in the agricultural sector, or infrastructure issues facing excluded 
groups. It is based on the assumption that technology has a key role to play 
in addressing these challenges. 
For example, Vulcan Augmetics is a Viet 
Nam-based startup that develops modular 
prosthetics to enable amputees to engage 
in work. Amputees as a group suffer from lower 
education and employment outcomes, and 
Vulcan sees access to employment as a major 
first step towards a more positive perception 
of amputees in society, and amputees’ own belief 
in their potential. Specialised prosthetic modules 
enable easier participation in specific jobs, such 
as waitering.Case study 1 shares the case of Disability Map, 
a Vietnamese smartphone application developed 
by DRD, using data to provide better information 
about accessibility of public buildings for the 
disabled community in Viet Nam.
The solutions often seek to address problems 
created by existing institutions or systems, 
or fill gaps such as a lack of accessible 
infrastructure or  insufficient capacity within 
national or regional authorities. 
Case study 1: DMap, Viet Nam 
Overview
People with disabilities face significant challenges in travelling to work and to social events in Viet Nam. 
With a more effective means of planning journeys, people with disabilities will have improved mobility, 
which would, in turn, drive greater employment opportunities and the ability to participate in more 
social activities. Dr. Vo Thi Hoang Yen at the Disability Research and Capacity Development (DRD), 
developed Dmap (short for Disability map) as an app that helps people with disabilities plan their travel 
and navigate accessible buildings in Viet Nam. It was launched in Ho Chi Minh City, with the aim of being 
rolled out in other Viet Namese cities in the future.
Key features
Launched in April 2019, the app has information on the accessibility of thousands of buildings, including 
restaurants, shopping malls, entertainment centers, and religious buildings. The Dmap app was 
developed with the support of foundations, philanthropists, UNDP and USAID. The Dmap app offers 
an easily accessible tool, given that it is readily available on smartphones, and smartphone penetration 
rates are very high in Viet Nam. It offers information about the reality of the accessibility of public 
buildings in Viet Nam today, rather than waiting for the system itself to become more accessible.
Beneficiaries
Dmap constitutes a technological platform – readily accessible via smart phones – to improve 
mobility for people with disabilities and to drive greater societal awareness of the challenges facing 
people with disabilities. Dmap shows the systematic challenges encountered by people with disabilities, 
which could further motivate action on the part of national and municipal authorities to improve 
physical  infrastructure.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia14For example, Recyglo is a Myanmar-based 
startup that seeks to develop platform-based 
and environmentally friendly solutions to 
waste management and recycling. It started as 
an ‘Uber for recycling’15 but has now expanded 
to provide services such as training to businesses 
and households on how to separate waste and 
recycle, as well as logistics and traceability 
solutions for waste management. Recyglo’s 
founder, Okka Maung, told us that “Yangon’s 
municipal government try, but they can only 
serve a quarter of the eight million people who 
live here. Lots of waste goes to landfill, which is 
bad for the environment and results in pollution.” 
He acknowledged that “this sector is not fancy 
and it is not easy to make a lot of money in 
a short time, but it is a long term game.”16
Some of the startups that we interviewed during 
our field research observed that they are trying 
to use technology as a means of enhancing 
conditions and opportunities for workers on 
lower incomes, rather than to automate the 
services they provide. 
For instance, Recyglo uses their platform to 
connect local waste collectors in Myanmar to 
domestic and international waste buyers, rather 
than cutting them out of the value chain. In Viet 
Nam, a software startup called Enablecode is 
employing and training people with disabilities 
to work as freelance developers, coders, web  
designers and experts in AI business processes.As Enablecode’s CEO Colin Blackwell told us: 
Technology can solve so 
many problems, and people 
can work in technology 
without having to have 
technological backgrounds.” 17
Who is involved in this strategy, and how?
Socially-oriented, technology-based startups 
sit at the heart of this approach. In terms of 
their methods and business models, many 
of these startups would not look out of place 
in a Silicon Valley incubator. The difference 
lies in their missions, which are directed much 
more towards solving challenges faced by those 
who are excluded or underserved. For example, 
Hydro Plant is a tech startup in Myanmar that is 
developing cost-effective solar-powered smart 
Internet of Things (IoT) farm control systems 
for food processors, traditional, aquaculture 
and hydroponic farms. These are designed to 
help farmers reduce operation costs, increase 
operational efficiency and gain consistent 
quality outputs. They aim to support the 
creation of modern farms that can access 
and use farm-level, weather and market data 
to support precision farming. One of Hydroplant’s 
key impact metrics is the number of farmers that 
they reach, so they need to focus on developing 
products and services that can be used by 
individuals who are typically less well-served 
by technology and innovation.18
Funders  (such as government agencies, inter-
governmental organisations, banks and investors) 
have a key role to play as potential sources of 
financial support and as customers for these 
startups. For example, the Lotus Hub – an impact 
investment fund operating across South-East 
Asia – works with Viet Namese social enterprises 
to improve their operations management in order 
to improve their ability to raise follow-on impact 
investment funding anywhere between $500,000 
and $3,000,000.
Innovation intermediaries (such as accelerators 
and incubators) are also  critical. They can 
provide a  range of advisory and wraparound 
support services, signpost funding opportunities, 
and broker connections between startups and 
“
Image:  DMap Viet NamStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia15key partners, such as investors or researchers. 
For example, the Hub of Inclusion for Innovation 
(HiFi) in the Philippines provides funding and 
non-financial support for the development 
of social impact projects that aims to include 
“the last, the lost, and the least” in the words of 
founder and director Abigail Mapua-Cabanilla. 
HiFi is attached to De La Salle University’s 
College of Saint Benilde – known for providing 
accessible education to those living in poverty 
or with disabilities – and runs an incubation 
programme for startup founders who are working 
on innovative projects relating to inclusion.
Case study 2 describes the Yangon Innovation 
Centre, a  government-initiated incubator 
that supports startups in Myanmar.
Finally, civil society or community 
organisations  and wider members of the 
target population may be involved in this 
approach as relationship brokers or  participants 
in the design, prototyping and implementation 
stages of the innovation process.Who may benefit from this strategy, 
and in what ways?
Innovations developed by socially-oriented 
technology-driven startups are often designed 
to address the problems facing the most excluded 
and underserved members of society. They may 
combine this with a focus on environmental 
sustainability. For example Bambuhay in the 
Philippines is seeking to address the twin 
problems of plastic waste and low incomes 
in the farming community by supporting the 
farming and development of bamboo, which 
is a biodegradable and reusable alternative 
to plastic.
Beneficiaries of these types of innovations receive 
products and services that are more affordable 
and tailored to their needs and circumstances, 
improved market access, and enhanced 
opportunities to use innovative approaches and 
tools that can boost their incomes. The startups 
themselves can also benefit by generating 
knowledge, networks and power in relation to 
different economic activities. There is a clear 
Case study 2: Yangon Innovation Centre, Myanmar 
Overview
The Yangon Innovation Centre (YIC) was established in 2018, following a sustained campaign by 
a Minister within the Yangon regional government who was keen to support the development of 
a local innovation ecosystem. It was designed to be a place where young entrepreneurs could connect 
with technology companies and develop their capabilities and ideas. The Centre is managed by 
Seedstars, a global network of tech entrepreneur hubs that operates primarily in emerging markets. 
It has links back into the regional government, and is advised by a Yangon Regional Innovation 
Committee, which includes representatives of the private sector, as well as government officials.
Key features  
The Yangon Innovation Centre aims to promote cross-sectoral innovation. U Ravi, the CEO of YIC, told 
us that the Centre “supports innovation from Yangon – not just innovation for Yangon – so we connect 
with people from the health system and agriculture, among other areas.” There is also a focus on 
affordability, so that innovation capabilities can be spread more widely among the population.  
According to U Ravi, “the Yangon Innovation Centre wants to reduce barriers and has therefore adopted 
a pricing strategy that is attractive to locals and foreigners alike. We encourage everyone to become 
part of our community no matter their sector focus, background, religion, gender or ethnicity. We are 
an inclusive space that aims to foster and drive the innovation agenda for Myanmar.”19 
Beneficiaries
High-tech startups are the primary beneficiaries of the services offered by the YIC, but a technology 
focus  is not a prerequisite for having access to the hub. It offers a range of services to the startups 
it incubates, including the provision of co-working space and a programme to promote investment 
readiness. It also runs  events, training programmes and hackathons.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia16opportunity for governments to benefit from 
working closely with these startups, given their 
efforts to find solutions to systemic or complex 
social  challenges.
Strengths and shortcomings of this strategy
One of the key strengths of this approach 
is the potential ability of startups to identify 
and respond to social problems in a responsive 
and iterative way, leveraging existing platform-  
based innovation models. They can be disruptive, 
and test and evaluate innovative solutions that 
governments and other actors can then take 
to scale, if there is clear evidence of impact.
However, there is a risk of an over-reliance 
on technological solutions for problems 
that might require more social or systemic 
responses. As observed by one interviewee, 
“the process of inclusive innovation could 
produce a new product or service, and should 
be social, but does not necessarily have to 
be technological. Technology could be a part 
of the solution, but…it is more about the purpose 
than the means.”20
 Another issue associated with this approach 
relates to the role that may be played by 
the beneficiaries of the ideas, products or 
services  developed by technology-oriented 
startups. Founders of these organisations 
typically have a personal or professional 
connection to the challenges they are trying 
to solve, but do not always come from excluded 
or underserved  communities themselves. 
This potentially creates 
a situation where they 
may innovate for underserved 
communities rather than 
with them, and in doing so 
reinforce existing inequalities 
in terms of access to 
power and opportunities.
Image:  Yangon Innovation Centre, MyanmarStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia17Innovation, everywhere 
The ‘innovation, everywhere’ strategy refers 
to government-led interventions which harness 
research and development to a project of 
national development, where high-value activities 
are regionally distributed. This strategy sees 
innovation as an economic process,  designed 
to strengthen existing systems rather than 
encourage disruption. It is insofar as this strategy 
can share the rewards of innovation across 
regions, and  generate benefits that can be shared 
by different social groups within those regions, 
that it can be considered inclusive. Case study 3 presents an example 
from  Indonesia, the  Regional Innovation 
Cluster  programme.
Who is involved in this strategy, and how?
These strategies tend to be led by national 
government, usually by a ministry primarily 
responsible for research and development, 
or industrial strategy. A role may also be played 
by regional governments. Other key partners 
are research institutions (typically universities 
Case study 3: Regional Innovation Clusters, Indonesia 
Overview
An important element of the Indonesian government’s current innovation strategy has been 
the encouragement of regional innovation activity, notably through the Regional Innovation 
Clusters programme. This programme, led by the Ministry of Research, Technology and Higher 
Education (RISTEKDIKTI), brings together regional governments, research institutions, industry 
and local communities in an attempt to establish specialisations in Produk Unggulan Daerah 
(PUD), or high-value regional products. Funding is provided to research institutions to work with 
local industry and farmers’ groups to develop and transfer innovative products based on existing 
local resources. In some cases this collaboration has taken the form of Science-Techno Parks, 
which  co-locate  research and industry activities.
Key features  
To date, 14 high-value regional products have been developed and commercialised through the 
regional innovation cluster programme. A good example has been the development of innovation 
clusters around patchouli oil, prized for its use in perfumes, cosmetics and insecticides. While the Aceh 
province in Western Indonesia once supplied 70% of the world’s patchouli oil, the industry has been 
heavily hit by civil conflict and natural disasters. More recently, a team of researchers at a university 
in the region have developed a novel distillation method for the oil which can increase production 
quantity and quality. A Centre for Patchouli Innovation Cluster has been established, with funding from 
RISTEKDIKTI, which has brought researchers together with government actors, industry and local Aceh 
farmers. The centre has supported the commercialisation of patchouli oil by SMEs and also involves 
farmers in the commercialisation process, enabling them to sell their products in store or online.
Beneficiaries
The most immediate beneficiaries of the regional innovation cluster are research institutions and 
firms which get the opportunity to commercialise the ‘high-value regional products’. However, a major 
rationale for the clusters is the wider benefits they can create for ordinary people across Indonesia’s 
regions. As Jumain Appe, the Director General for Innovation Strengthening puts it, when giving the 
example of the Coconut Innovation Clusters being supported in the North Sulawesi Region: “we need to 
improve the added value of coconut in order to raise the price of one piece of coconut…This means we 
will improve the income of our people in the local area.” Innovation which transforms local products into 
“high-value regional products” has the potential to both create new jobs in higher-value sectors, and 
raise prices for local agricultural products, thus improving farmer’s incomes.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia18or specialist research institutions linked to 
government ministries), industry, and  in some 
cases primary commodity producers (such 
as farmers’ groups). Case study 4 shares the 
example of the Regional Inclusive Innovation 
Centres in the Philippines, which are currently 
being developed and implemented by the 
Department for Trade and Industry.
Who may benefit from this strategy, 
and in what ways?
The most obvious beneficiaries of the ‘innovation, 
everywhere’ approach are research institutions 
and firms that receive the opportunity to 
commercialise the ‘high-value regional products’. 
However, core to their rationale is the possibility 
these activities generating benefits that are 
much more widely shared. Using R&D activities to 
generate higher value economic activities across 
regions holds the possibility of generating new, 
high quality jobs across the country, combatting 
the tendency of concentration of opportunities 
in the capital. If these high-value activities are 
linked to other parts of the local economy, there 
is also the potential for wider benefit. If the 
new products are based on the processing of locally-produced primary commodities, there 
is the possibility of driving up the prices of these 
commodities, and thus increasing the income of 
those who produce them (notably farmers).
Strengths and shortcomings of this strategy
This approach to inclusive innovation offers, 
in principle, a  systematic means of creating 
regionally spread development and greater 
shared prosperity. The degree to which these 
benefits are realised will likely depend on the 
form it takes in practice. If the new industries 
and sectors promoted through ‘Innovation, 
everywhere’ type strategies create a significant 
number of new, good-quality jobs, and if there 
are strong linkages between them and other 
parts of local economies (e.g. if they are based 
on the processing of local agricultural products), 
there is good reason to believe that they may 
enable offer significantly shared benefits 
in regions that may have traditionally been 
neglected. However, if the promoted industries 
are highly capital intensive, creating few jobs, 
and if they lack any significant linkages to 
other parts of the local economy, it is unlikely 
that their benefits will be shared widely beyond 
Case study 4: Regional Inclusive Innovation Centres, the Philippines 
Overview
In July 2019, a new Philippine Innovation Act was signed into law. One of its flagship policy initiatives 
is a planned set of new Regional Inclusive Innovation Centres (RIICs), which will link government 
departments with industry and academic institutes across all regions of the Philippines to carry out 
market-oriented R&D and develop new products, business models and processes. Describing the impetus 
for setting up the RIICs, Rafaelita Aldaba from the Department of Trade and Industry explained that the 
government “wants to ensure that our innovation programmes reach the greatest number of people and 
as many areas as possible, in order to address poverty and inequality.’’21
Key features
The development of the roadmap and plan for the RIICs was a more bottom-up policymaking process 
than is typical in the Philippines. Consultation and validation workshops were run across many different 
regions of the country, bringing together representatives from different sectors of industry, academia 
and civil society to share their views and needs.
Beneficiaries
Four RIICs are being piloted in areas outside the capital city of Manila. These are currently virtual 
rather than physical, but the aim is to develop them into hubs that will enable startups as well as 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) across all areas of the Philippines to access 
support and develop collaborations with industry partners, universities, government agencies and 
other  innovation intermediaries.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia19a narrow elite of politicians, researchers and 
business owners. If the new industry in question 
is heavily polluting to the local environment, this 
may also undermine its  potential benefits for 
the population.How inclusive this approach 
to innovation really is, then, 
will depend much on the types 
of industry and product which 
receive attention and support, 
which in turn draws attention 
to the process of priority 
setting and the question of 
who has a chance to set the 
agenda  – i.e. the governance 
of innovation.
Image:  Regional Inclusive Innovation Centres, the PhilippinesStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia20Innovation for the foundations 
This approach aims to enhance the 
quality of life and work in poor communities, 
sectors and regions. Projects might seek to 
improve workplace technologies, processes 
and institutions towards greater productivity 
and higher incomes, or upgrade the infrastructure 
of people’s daily lives in order to enable a richer 
experience (be that via access to employment, 
or through better health). A key feature of this 
approach is its focus on social and economic 
context: interventions build up from where 
communities are, with contextually relevant 
and accessible technologies responsive to the 
kind of work around which local economies are 
already  based.
Within this broader approach are projects 
founded on technologies and the particular 
instrumental benefit they bring for a demographic group. These innovations 
are characterised by their enabling effect, 
in that they provide better conditions from which 
marginalised or disadvantaged groups in society 
can engage more fully with work and the world 
around them.
For example, Gaz Lite, a liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG) canister developed by Filipino firm PR 
Gaz to solve the problem of indoor air pollution 
from the use of solid fuels such as wood and 
charcoal in the home. Benefits are multi-faceted: 
better health, shorter cooking times, lower 
household expenses, and  micro-entrepreneurship 
opportunities (PR Gaz has set up over 800 
community stores as canister retailers).
Our research identified innovative activities 
that aim to improve traditional sectors in ways 
Case study 5: Proximity Designs, Myanmar 
Overview
Proximity Designs is a design company and international NGO that operates as a social enterprise. 
It was launched in Myanmar in 2004 to help farmers and agricultural workers access better technology, 
based on a perception that this need was not being met by the public and private sectors, or by 
humanitarian aid work. Proximity Designs develops affordable products for rural workers, involving 
them in the design process to make sure they meet user needs. Proximity aims to encourage other 
organisations to embark on similar activity and innovate in the low-cost sector, and move on to new 
projects once they see other players developing similar products.
Key features
The organisation has three business units: farm technology, farm advisory services (FAS), and Proximity 
Finance, which develops loan products for farmers. Proximity’s R&D focus is on irrigation, aiming to 
address the challenge of water management in Myanmar where percentages of irrigated farmland are 
amongst the lowest in Asia. The FAS provision offers free advice at village level on topics such as seed 
selection, soil health, fertiliser usage, and pest and disease management. Over 100 field agronomists 
work in concert with local government to identify needs and implement changes to maximise yields and 
incomes. Proximity Finance has  been running since 2014, predominantly lending to village groups but 
currently piloting individual loans.
Beneficiaries
As a social business, Proximity Designs is a profit-generating organisation. However, the primary 
beneficiaries of their activities are workers in Myanmar’s agricultural sector, which represents around 
70 per cent of the country’s economy. We heard from Sreydao Lenain that “the agriculture sector is 
really important for poverty reduction in Myanmar so we want to make farmers participants in the 
innovation system and entrepreneurs.”22Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia21that increase their value for the local community. 
Pasar Sejahtera, described in more detail in the 
case study below, is a programme that introduces 
new processes to  upgrade traditional markets 
as public spaces and strengthen their position 
in the local economy; business model and 
institutional innovations such as “waste banks” 
and cooperatives contribute to better livelihoods 
for market traders.
This upgrading of traditional sectors can also be 
technological, in the tradition of the ‘appropriate 
technologies’ movement. Government agencies 
such as the Centre for Appropriate Technologies 
Development (CATDev) in Indonesia, and social 
enterprises such as Proximity Designs in Myanmar 
(see Case study 5 ), work to apply contextually 
relevant technologies to improve agricultural production. This often includes a significant 
capacity-building element, as farmers and 
agricultural workers receive advice and 
training  from agronomists to enable continuous 
improvement. Efforts are also often made 
to create stronger relationships between farmers 
and regional research and  innovation centres, 
and amongst farmers themselves, to enable the 
sharing of knowledge and resources.
Who is involved in this strategy, and how?
This type of activity is supported by a range 
of different actors in the countries we studied. 
Whilst Indonesia has a  dedicated government 
agency for appropriate technologies, CATDev, 
in other country contexts, this work is initiated 
by social businesses. Often it is the expertise 
Case study 6: Pasar Sejahtera, Indonesia 
Overview
Pasar Sejahtera (“prosperous market”) aims to increase the competitiveness of traditional markets, or 
pasar, to contend with the growth of modern supermarkets. Improvements to pasar as physical spaces 
encourage more local people to choose to shop here rather than in modern supermarkets (which are 
less tied into the local economy and community). This brings potential benefits to local economic growth 
and community cohesion, as well as health and wellbeing.
Key features
Improvements in waste management processes, in the form of inorganic waste banks and composting 
facilities, help markets meet hygiene standards, and provide financial opportunities for traders  – they 
receive cash in return for waste delivered to the banks, which they can then use to build their business. 
Other measures include the formation of trader and labourer cooperatives, and education on financial 
literacy, health, and sustainability. The programme is funded and delivered by independent foundation 
Yayasan Danamon Peduli (YDP) in partnership with the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry, and has been running since 2010 in 13 sites across Indonesia. Both ministries had previously 
been involved with pasar in limited capacities, but local government funding for development was 
very low. YDP provides initial funding and advice on financial infrastructure elements such as waste 
banks and cooperatives, while Ministries provide training in their areas of expertise. Ministry of Health 
involvement also includes a mandatory clinic within the market space, and a radio station informing 
market users on health matters.
Beneficiaries
12 million people in Indonesia rely directly on traditional markets for their income, with 50 million (almost 
a fifth of the population of Indonesia) relying on them indirectly. This makes the sector the second biggest 
in terms of employment after agriculture. Efforts to improve livelihoods here thus have the potential to 
bring great benefit to a significant number of households in Indonesia. President Joko Widodo identified 
traditional markets as a part of his Nawacita (“nine-point”) development programme for Indonesia. This 
election pledge has been developed into a national market revitalisation programme (Revitalasi Pasar 
Rakyat) led by the Ministry of Trade, launched in 2015 with the aim of developing 5,000 markets across 
Indonesia by the end of Widodo’s term in 2019.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia22of multiple actors working together, and closely 
with communities, that leads to success. For 
example, the Pasar Sejahtera programme  
(see Case study 6 ) leveraged the financial 
expertise of Yayasan Danamon Peduli 
(a non-profit foundation responsible for the 
corporate social responsibility activities of 
Bank  Danamon, one of Indonesia’s largest 
banks) along with input from the Ministry 
of Health and  local government.
Who may benefit from this strategy, 
and in what ways?
Those working in low-wage sectors benefit 
from improved livelihoods. Those experiencing 
particular barriers to participation in economic 
life, such as those living without electricity or 
clean fuels, benefit from innovative products 
designed specifically for their needs. Further 
economic opportunities can arise from the 
introduction of these new technologies, such 
as in the case of Gaz Lite, mentioned above, 
which sets up local micro-entrepreneurs to sell 
the product, or Pasar Sejahtera, which improves 
traders’ financial stability through an  innovative 
approach to waste management.
Strengths and shortcomings of this strategy
A key strength of this approach is the emphasis 
on community embeddedness: most projects 
in this area make a great effort to understand 
target communities (through methods such 
as design thinking) and work closely with them 
in creating solutions that are responsive to 
their needs. This type of activity therefore has 
the potential for lasting effects on its target 
communities, particularly when programmes 
are oriented towards institutional and ecosystem 
change along with technology transfer (as in 
the case of CATDev, Proximity Designs, and 
Pasar  Sejahtera).
The involvement of multiple stakeholders 
(government, IGOs, charitable foundations, 
social enterprises) can be a great strength 
of such projects, allowing a range of expertise 
and capabilities to drive the development and 
implementation of successful initiatives. Several 
interviewees noted the importance of  government 
support for projects initiated from  outside 
government, or local government support 
for projects initiated centrally.
 However, multi-stakeholder involvement can be 
a shortcoming if there is variable understanding 
between these stakeholders over project aims 
and processes. For example, the Viet Nam 
Inclusive Innovation Project (VIIP), a  World 
Bank-led project launched in 2013, largely failed 
to materialise due to mismatched expectations 
of the main partners (the World Bank, and two 
government bodies, the Ministry of Planning and 
Investment (MPI) and the National Foundation 
for Science and Technology Development 
(NAFOSTED)). Specifically, the different teams 
struggled to agree and operationalise a  shared 
understanding of inclusive innovation, which 
inhibited the distribution of project funds. 
The policy imperative: 
at the outset it is 
essential to ensure shared 
understandings  – across 
stakeholders – of how to 
conceptualise inclusive 
innovation and agreed 
expectations for what it 
is expected to look like 
in practice.
Image:  Pasar Sejahtera, IndonesiaStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia233. Conclusions 
and policy 
directions
Image:  360ed, MyanmarStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia24This research set out to investigate the models 
of innovation that are being applied across the 
ASEAN region to address key development and 
sustainability challenges, and to see whether we 
could identify a  distinctive regional approach to 
supporting inclusive innovation. Our literature 
review, stakeholder interviews and field research 
shows there isn’t a single ASEAN model of best 
practice. Instead policymakers, and actors in 
other sectors, are combining tools, ideas and 
techniques from a range of sources, creating 
new strategies to promote innovation and 
spread  its benefits more equitably.
We observed three key types of inclusive 
innovation initiatives, which we characterise 
in the following way:
• Technology should save us: mostly 
bottom-up  entrepreneurial initiatives 
seeking  to develop technological 
solutions  to societal challenges 
(i.e. directing  innovation towards 
achieving  inclusive outcomes).
• Innovation, everywhere: mostly top-down 
government initiatives seeking to ensure that 
high-value innovative activities are regionally 
distributed (i.e.  encouraging the participation 
of more people, places and sectors in the 
innovative economy).
• Innovation for the foundations:  a mix of 
top-down and bottom-up activities seeking 
to improve the quality of life and work for 
those in the poorest and most marginalised 
communities (i.e.  supporting the development 
of contextually-relevant innovations that 
address some of the root causes of poverty 
and inequality).
A key similarity between these three 
strategies is their focus on developing initiatives, 
products, services and business  models that have 
the potential to create value and opportunities 
for those who face structural disadvantages 
in becoming either consumers or producers of 
innovation. This applies to places as well as 
people, and to sectors of the economy that 
are often neglected in discussions of ‘frontier 
technologies’ or the ‘fourth industrial revolution’.
These types of outcomes are not always 
prioritised by mainstream innovation policies, which are often more focused on reinforcing 
existing national strengths and centres of 
excellence, rather than democratising access 
to the power, knowledge and tools needed 
to innovate.23 There is inspiration to be taken 
here for innovation policymakers everywhere, 
irrespective of the developmental stage of 
their  national economy.
However, these strategies still feel emergent 
rather than fully-formed. Our research found 
a clear interest on the part of government 
policymakers and other actors in the ASEAN 
region to use innovation as a means of 
addressing societal challenges and bringing 
more people, places and sectors into innovation 
ecosystems. But we also observed a general 
lack of coordination within governments on 
this agenda, and a disconnect between what is 
happening inside and outside government. Many 
of the socially-oriented tech startups we spoke 
to in the region felt like they were operating in 
a ‘grey area’ – without the funding, policies and 
regulations required to really develop or scale up 
their solutions.
Drawing on our analysis, we suggest ways in 
which governments can build on and strengthen 
these strategies in order to develop a more 
coherent and impactful approach to supporting 
inclusive innovation.
1 Coordinate cross-government action 
on inclusive innovation   
“It is important to ensure that science, 
technology and innovation (STI) 
is feeding  economic growth and 
development  processes.”24 
 
A key issue preventing the emergence of 
more inclusive innovation policies is that 
responsibilities for inclusion and innovation 
often sit in different parts of government. 
Innovation promotion tends to be the 
responsibility of ministries or departments 
that oversee science and technology policies 
or economic and industrial development. 
These departments tend to  prioritise 
supporting the development of  new 
technologies, and building up regions, sectors 
and firms that already have high economic 
growth potential. Meanwhile, responsibility 
for questions relating to inequality, poverty, 
and social growth tends to sit within ministries Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia25of social affairs. Cross-fertilisation of ideas 
and solutions between these areas could 
be a powerful stimulus for inclusive forms 
of innovation, but the mechanisms to allow 
for collaboration across government in these 
areas are often underdeveloped or lacking.  
 
In the Philippines, the government has tried to 
address this challenge by framing the country’s 
new innovation law as an ‘inclusive innovation 
industrial strategy’. Government stakeholders 
told us that the new law’s intention is to make 
the Filipino innovation system more cohesive 
and to ensure that STI policies promote social 
inclusion, as well as technological invention. 
Within the Philippines, the National Economic 
Development Authority has been tasked 
with creating a  cross-government National 
Innovation Council, which will bring together 
all the main government departments with 
innovation responsibilities to increase  R&D in 
both high value sectors and to address social 
challenges – particularly those that affect low 
income groups.
2 Tailor innovation support models 
to local  needs   
“Myanmar is very different from other 
countries – so we need our own approach 
to development. People are crazy about tech 
but the infrastructure isn’t there yet. We’re at 
a stage before that.”25 
 
There is enormous pressure – in the ASEAN 
region and more widely – to build local Silicon 
Valley-styled ecosystems. Such clusters 
promise a  panacea; to advance disruptive 
innovation, which in turn boosts productivity 
and spurs job growth. In order to do so, 
policymakers may study which policies have 
been pursued in the Valley, or more proximate 
innovation clusters. However, copying what 
has worked elsewhere is unlikely to prove 
effective locally, if initiatives are not tailored to 
fit the local economic conditions, social values, 
and needs of a  country’s government and 
its people.  
 
 
 
 Multi-stakeholder dialogue processes 
can advance a  shared understanding of 
inclusive innovation; one that goes beyond 
seeing innovation as synonymous with 
technological advance, and explores structural 
impediments, such as education, to wider 
society’s participation in innovation. For 
example, a workshop organised by the UNDP 
in Hanoi in December 2019 brought together 
government policymakers from two ministries, 
union representatives, and researchers to 
define inclusive innovation policy in the Viet 
Namese context. Participants explored which 
international models could be relevant to the 
local context, as well as how existing local 
policy efforts could be adapted to better 
drive innovation that delivers economic and 
social benefits. One of the key takeaways 
was that innovation is currently too narrowly 
understood in relation to science and 
technology policy. This links to insights from 
our case studies, which suggest that advances 
in productivity and societal welfare can also 
come from the development of innovative but 
non-technological processes and products.
3 More inclusive policymaking processes  
“Government agencies…need to get closer 
to the ground and really start involving the 
beneficiaries of their programmes.”26 
 
A key observation from our field research in 
the ASEAN region – which fits with what we 
have seen in other parts of the world – is that 
there are limited efforts to involve those who 
stand to benefit from inclusive innovation 
policies and activities, in their design and 
governance. This risks creating a system 
where people are innovated for, but where 
they have little agency of their own to become 
producers as well as consumers of innovation. 
To deliver positive impact, the policymaking 
process needs to begin with giving a voice to 
those who are impacted, to understand their 
objectives and  obstacles.Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia26Final thoughts
This research shows that there is a significant 
emerging field of inclusive innovation practice 
in the ASEAN region that is seeking to answer 
some of the big challenges posed by the SDGs, 
but that it requires nurturing on the part of 
government policymakers, funders, innovators 
and citizens alike. There are opportunities for shared learning across this region and more 
widely, which networked organisations like the 
UNDP – for example, through their Accelerator 
Labs – are well placed to support. We hope that 
this report will contribute to this agenda, and that 
it will prompt others to share ideas and further 
case study examples to advance the development 
and dissemination of the strategic typology.
 
Image:  Proximity Designs, Myanmar
Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia27Endnotes
1  Interview with Hla Hla Win, 360ed, Myanmar
2  The members of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations are Indonesia, Thailand, 
Singapore, the Philippines, Malaysia, Viet 
Nam, Brunei, Cambodia, Myanmar (Burma), 
and Laos
3  This work was commissioned to support 
the ASEAN-China-UNDP Symposium on 
Innovation in Achieving the SDGs and 
Eradicating Poverty, held in Ha Noi, Viet 
Nam on 4–5 September 2019. For more 
information see www.innov4sdgs2019.org/
4  See Stanley I., Glennie A. and Gabriel M. 
(2018) How inclusive is innovation policy? 
Insights from an international comparison, 
London: Nesta
5  Dutz M.A. (2007) Unleashing India’s 
Innovation: Toward Sustainable and Inclusive 
Growth, Washington, DC: World Bank
6  CIEM, British Council, United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia 
and the Pacific, and Social Enterprise 
UK (2019) Social enterprise in Viet Nam. 
Hanoi.  March
7  Spence  R. (2008) ‘Research Councils and 
Support Organisations in South-East Asia: 
Institutions, Issues and Collaboration’, 
International Development Research 
Centre, November, page i
8  ASEAN (2010) “Krabi Initiative 2010”, 
available at: www.asean.org/wp-content/
uploads/images/archive/documents/
Krabi-101217.pdf. Accessed on 
14 November 2019
9  Fressoli M., Around E., Abrol D., Smith A., 
Ely A. & Dias R. (2014) ‘When grassroots 
innovation movements encounter 
mainstream institutions: implications for 
models of inclusive innovation’, Innovation 
and Development, 4(2), 277–29210  Kattel R. & Mazzucato M. (2018), 
‘Mission-oriented innovation policy and 
dynamic capabilities in the public sector’, 
Industrial and Corporate Change, 27(5), 
787–801
11  Voeten J. & Naudé W. A. (2014) Regulating 
the negative externalities of enterprise 
cluster innovations: lessons from Viet Nam, 
Innovation and  Development,  4:2, 203–219
12  Klingler-Vidra R. (2019) Global Review 
of Diversity and Inclusion in Business 
Innovation, London: LSE Consulting 
and Innovate UK. February
13  Zehavi A. & Breznitz D. (2017) 
‘Distribution sensitive innovation policies: 
Conceptualization and Empirical Examples’, 
Research Policy, 46, 327–336
14  Adapted from Stanley I., Glennie A. 
& Gabriel M. (2018) How inclusive is 
innovation policy? Insights from an 
international comparison, London: Nesta
15  This mirrors initiatives in other parts 
of the world, such as Chile’s ReciclApp. 
See: www.vice.com/en_us/article/
jpaqn8/chiles-uber-of-recyclin
g-is-sparking-a-recycling-revolution
16  Interview with Okka Maung, 
Recyglo,  Myanmar
17 Interview with Colin Blackwell, 
Enablecode,  Viet Nam
18  Interview with Pwint Pwint San and 
Tin Thandar Oo, Hydro Plant, Myanmar
19  Interview with U Ravi, Yangon Innovation 
Centre, Myanmar
20  Interview with Dr. Ca Tran Ngoc, National 
Institute for Science and Technology Policy 
and Strategy Studies (NISTPASS), Viet NamStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia2821  Interview with Rafaelita Aldaba, Department 
of Trade and Industry, The Philippines
22  Interview with Sreydao Lenain, Proximity 
Designs, Myanmar
23  See Unger R., Stanley I., Gabriel M. 
& Mulgan G. (2019) Imagination Unleashed: 
Democratising the knowledge economy, 
London: Nesta24  Interview with Richard Ballester, National 
Economic Development Authority (NEDA), 
The Philippines
25  Interview with Okka Myo, Impact 
Hub Yangon, Myanmar
26  Interview with Emil Tapnio, PhilDev Labs, 
The PhilippinesStrategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia29Appendix: Methodology 
and list of interviewees
Our study took a qualitative research approach, comprising a review of literature 
and policies, semi-structured interviews and field visits to identify and analyse 
emerging models of inclusive innovation across the ASEAN region (undertaken in 
August–September 2019). To glean a representative picture of the region, we focused 
on four case study countries: Indonesia, Myanmar, the Philippines and Viet Nam. 
The main research activities included:
• Literature review: a rapid review of relevant 
political, policy, academic and other research 
on inclusive innovation and development in 
the ASEAN context, with a particular focus 
on policy statements that apply to the region.
• Stakeholder interviews:  interviews with 
policymakers, social entrepreneurs and experts 
in each case study country. We took a ‘snowball 
sampling’ approach to finding interview 
subjects – starting with individuals already in 
the networks of the research team and UNDP, 
and then asking for recommendations of other 
individuals to speak to.
• Case study research:  a review of high-level 
policy statements of each of the selected 
countries with respect to innovation promotion, 
social inclusion and poverty reduction and the 
collection of local stories of practice to inform 
and inspire policymakers with examples of what 
is already happening on the ground.
• Action research:  a research session with 
participants at the ASEAN-China-UNDP 
Symposium on Innovation in Achieving the 
SDGs and Eradicating Poverty, held in Ha 
Noi, Viet Nam on 5 September 2019 that 
used a group exercise as well as interactive 
presentation software tools to identify insights, 
ideas about priorities and case studies from 
their own contexts. We also developed a short 
research questionnaire that was shared with 
participants at the conference, and more widely 
across our collective networks.The names and organisational affiliations 
of our interviewees are listed below, along 
with the date on which they were interviewed. 
We are grateful to them for sharing their time 
and their ideas with us.
Indonesia
Agus Triwahyuono  & Jenik DS Andreas , 
Yayasan  Danamon Peduli, 2  September 2019
Pamitra Wineka  & Grace Dwitiya Amianti , 
TaniHub, 2  September 2019
Jumain Appe , Ministry of Research and 
Technology (RISTEKDIKTI), 3 September 2019
Manaek Simamora , Indonesian Institute for 
Sciences (LIPI), 3  September 2019
Sophie Kemkhadze  & Joanne Manda , UNDP 
Indonesia, 3  September 2019
Rachmini Saparita , LIPI, 4 September 2019
Mona Usmani , Centre for Innovation Policy 
and Governance (CIPG), 4  September 2019
Myanmar
Peter Batchelor , UNDP Myanmar, 
9 September 2019
Okka Myo  & Kyaw Myat Soe , Impact Hub 
Yangon,  9 September 2019  Strategies for supporting inclusive innovation: insights from South-East Asia30Debbie Aung Din  & Sreydao Lenain , Proximity 
Designs, 9  September 2019
Hsan Winn Hlaing & Joao Dutra , Phandeeyar, 
10 September 2019
Suhail Baht , Ooredoo, 10 September 2019
Anders Kirstein Møller , Myanmar Development 
Institute, 11 September 2019
Peter Crowhurst , British Chambers of Commerce, 
11 September 2019
Peter Brimble , DaNa Facility, 11 September 2019
U Aung Naing Oo , Ministry of Investment and 
Foreign Economic Relations, 11 September 2019
Win Thaing Oo , Department of R&I, Ministry 
of Education, 12 September 2019
Hla Hla Win , 360ed, 12 September 2019
Ravi Chhabra , Yangon Innovation Centre, 
13 September 2019
Doris Clemenz &  Mo Lebekwe , Seed Stars, 
13 September 2019
Okka Maung , Recyglo, 13 September 2019
Pwint Pwint San &  Tina Oo , Hydroplant MM, 
13 September 2019
The Philippines
Kristine Mae Magtubo , Veris Tech, 30 July 2019
Richard Ballester , National Economic and 
Development Authority (NEDA), 9 August 2019
Peter Immanuel D. Tenido , De La Salle University 
Innovation & Technology Office, 21 August 2019
Goldy Yancha &  Emil Tapnio , PhilDev Labs, 
27 August 2019
Gonzalo Serafica , Senior Consultant to RTI, 
implementing USAID STRIDE, 28 August 2019Rafaelita Aldaba , Department of Trade 
and Industry (DTI), 28 August 2019
Andrew Parker , UNDP Philippines, 29 August 2019
Carlo Arcilla , Department of Science 
and Technology (DOST), 28 August 2019
Rior Santos , Department for Information 
and Communications Technology (DICT), 
29 August 2019
Sreeni Narayanan &  Mukesh VS , Asia Society 
for Social Improvement and Sustainable 
Transformation, 29 August 2019
Dir. U-Nichols Manalo , System-wide Climate 
Change Program of the Dept. of Agriculture (DA), 
30 August 2019
Abigail Mapua-Cabanilla , Hub of Innovation 
for Inclusion, 30 August 2019
Viet Nam
Le Vu Cuong , Project 1516, 6 August 2019
Rafael Masters , Vulcan Augmetics, 6 August 2019
Vo Thi Hoang Yen , DMap, 7 August 2019
Nguyen Quynh Anh , Viet Nam Institute of 
Science, Technology and Innovation (VISTI), 
7 August 2019
Ca Tran Ngoc , VISTI, 7 August 2019
Nguyen Van Tang , National Technology 
Innovation Fund (NATIF), 9 August 2019
Phan Huong , Newton Fund Viet Nam, 
12 August 2019
Colin Blackwell , Enable Code, 13 August 2019
Smita Kuriakose , World Bank, 23 September 2019Curious for more? Find us on 
Twitter @ricap_undp @nesta_uk  
and join the #inclusiveinnovation 
#NextGenUNDP  conversation.