Updating infrastructure regulation 
for the 21st century in Latin America and the Caribbean
Antonio Estache 
Tomás Serebrisky
IDB-TN-01856Infrastructure and Energy
TECHNICAL 
NOTE Nº
January 2020Updating infrastructure regulation 
for the 21st century in Latin America and the Caribbean
Antonio Estache 
Tomás Serebrisky
January 2020Cataloging-in-Publication data provided by the 
Inter-American Development Bank Felipe Herrera Library Estache, Antonio. Updating infrastructure regulation for the 21st century in Latin America and the Caribbean / Antonio Estache, Tomás Serebrisky. p. cm. — (IDB Technical Note ; 1856)Includes bibliographic references.1. Infrastructure (Economics)-Government policy-Latin America.  2. Infrastructure(Economics)-Government policy-Caribbean Area.  3. Infrastructure (Economics)-Latin
America-Accounting.  4. Infrastructure (Economics)-Caribbean Area-Accounting.  5.
Public utilities-Latin America-Accounting.  6. Public utilities-Caribbean Area-Accounting.I. Serebrisky, Tomás.  II. Inter-American Development Bank. Infrastructure and EnergySector.  III. Title.  IV. Series.IDB-TN-1856
Key words: Regulation, infrastructure services, governance 
JEL Classifications: G18, O16, O18 
This document is a product of the research program developed for the preparation of 
the Inter-American Development Bank 2020 flagship report: Infrastructure Services in Latin America. To know all the documents from the research program, see: www.iadb.org/infrastructureservices 
Copyright ©              Inter-American Development Bank. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/
legalcode ) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any non-commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed. 
Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB's name for any purpose other than for attribution, and the use of IDB's logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user and is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license. 
Note that link provided above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Inter-American 
Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent. http://www.iadb.org
2020 
 
Updating  infrastructure regulation  
for the 21st  century in Latin America and the Caribbean 
 
 
 
Antonio Estache  
ECARES, Université  libre de Bruxelles  
 
Tomás Serebrisky  
Inter -American Development Bank  
 
 
 
 
Abstract  
This paper argues that, while most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have  managed to 
significant ly improve the short -term efficiency of  their  infrastructure services since the widespread  
liberaliz ation of  the 1990s, they have  been slow to ensure a fair distribution of the gains . They  have  also 
been slow in mak ing the investment s needed to ensure the prospects of  future generation s, including by  
protect ing the environment for the long term.  The paper places at least part of the blame on regulatory 
failures . It also shows how  past  mistakes can be corrected by the  significant sectoral transformation s, 
driven by new technologies, now  underway . Digitaliz ation is altering  the economic characteristics  of 
infrastructure services . Resulting  changes in governance and financing options demand adjustments to 
economic regulatio ns, including by  broadening the regulatory toolkit to integrate  new insights offered by 
developments in behavioral economics . 
  1 
 1. Introduction  
This paper  considers  why and how i nfrastructure regulation s need to further evolv e in Latin America 
and the Caribbean.  Despite decades of reform , a large share  of the production and delivery of 
infrastructure services is still assigned to  regulated  monopolies. The formal regulation s applied to  
these monopolies , whether they are public or private, are  typically handled by regulatory agencies 
that are separate from sector ministries.  These regulations look good on paper but are rarely put 
into practice —and it is this gap between formal  and effective regulations,  observed across the 
region , that underlies the need for greater change.  
Formal regulation s in the region have  historically been designed based on  international best 
practice s, specifically  the regulatory approaches  of the United States and United Kingdom . 
Meanwhile,  the regulation s that actually get implemented  are adapt ed to the economic, 
institutional, and political context . Since this context evolves, effective regulation s evolve as well, to 
adapt to new constraints and new opportunities  while addressing the mistakes of old er regulatory 
approa ches.  This process of  adaptation can be guided in part by  existing regulatory arrangements. 
But for deeper change to occur , more  structural and institutional adjustmen ts are needed .  
Guiding the process of  regulatory adaptation largely depends on the political will to adjust 
pricing, standards , or service obligations to address changes in political or societal preferences. The 
most obvious ex amples are the changes required  to address growing  concerns about  environmental 
health and  poverty in the region . The options are clear, and most fit  reasonably  well within available 
regulatory tool kits. The degree to which  available tools adapt to changes in preferences  largely 
depends on the skills of the design and implementation units in each country and on the political will 
to allocate or reallocate the ne cessary resources .  
The capacity to make deeper  adjustments  depends on  the extent to which regulatory agencies 
and related  institutions can adapt to the  comple x, largely innovative, changes taking place in sector 
financing, production , and consumption. For instance, t he growing role  of institutional investors has  
changed the way regulated firms manage their corporate finances —and it has also changed the 
governance of infrastructure  sector s and the way financing strategies impact regulatory outcomes  
(e.g. , Georgoulias et al. , 2018a ). Similarly, digitaliz ation changes  the way firms produce , users 
consume , and governments use and share information , increasing the market power of firms in the 
process (e.g ., Calligaris , Criscuolo, and Marcolin,  2018) . This, in turn, leaves room for abuses many 
regulators are not yet ready to deal with.  
Constrained in many contexts by tight budgets, countries in the region have been slow to address 
these changes. This has  widened  the gap between formal and effective regulation s, and the ongoing 
widening of this gap represent s a key but often overlooked  reason why sector s are not able to 
deliver on their  long -term  efficiency or equity goals. It may also explain why they  are unable to find 
the financing needed to meet the growing infrastructure needs of the region.  Recent developments 
in many countries indeed suggest that changes in market structures , financing sour ces, t echnologies , 
and governance  preferences  in the region  have seldom been met by appropriate  adjustment to the 
regulatory framework. The result  is that now b oth formal and effective regulation s are lagging 
demand for regulat ory oversight .  
This paper suggest s directions for regulatory reforms in the region . To this end, s ection 2 takes  
stock of current and emerging regulatory challenges . Section 3 summarizes key emerging changes  
that are likely to define  the future of regulat ory frameworks in the region. Section 4  concludes.  2 
 2. An unfulfilled policy agenda  
From now to 2030, the average country in Latin America and the Caribbean  requires  investment of 
about 0.5  percent  of gross domestic product (GDP) in water and sanitation  services , 1.2  percent in 
energy , and 1.4 percent in transport (Rozenberg and Fay , 2019). Between 2008 and 2015,  only about  
0.3 percent was spent on  water and sanitation, 1.0  percent  on energy , and 1.6  percent  on transport . 
This was n ot enough  to ensure their quantity , in some cases, and not enough to secure their quality 
in all cases.   
Various recent global reviews of the state of infrastructure services  have highlighted the central 
role of regulatory weakness in the ir underperformanc e (e.g. , Fay et al. , 2017 ; Georgoulias et al. , 
2018 ; Watkins et al. , 2017 ). Also, there is a  mismatch between institutional capacit y and the 
assignment of mandates across agencies, ministries , and government levels (Estache, 2020).  Some 
failures can also be linked to an  inability or unwillingness to adjust regulatory  design to evolving 
political and societal preference s. How these failures  affect  each infrastructure sector will be 
summarized, followed by general recommendations for structural regulatory reforms  in the region .  
Water  and sanitation . In most countries of the region , the performance of this sector falls below 
the average observed in other regions  at similar levels of development. Physical assets, maintenance  
practices , and service quality all need to be improved to meet growing  demand , and yet the sector 
remains  underfunded  (Bertom éu-Sánchez and Serebrisky , 2019 ; Suarez -Aleman, Serebrisky and 
Perelman , 2019) . For now , performance is following a declining trend , with negative effects on an 
increasingly large  share of the region’s population, in particular the poor and , increasingly , the 
lower -middle class  (about 40 million people , or 6.5  percent  of the population , still have no access to 
safe water sources) . In many  major cities of  the region, water scarcity is expected to become a 
reality within a decade. This , by itself, justif ies a reassessment of regulation s, since price signals do 
not seem to be doing the job . A closer looks reveals further  indication s of a problem. For instance, 
water pollution is becoming a n increasingly pressing issue  (about 80  percent  of the region’s 
wastewater is discharged directly into rivers).  The sector seems unable to finance the growing 
population’s significant need for sanitation services, as the  promise of massive private financing has 
not materialized .  
Taking on regulatory design  is not only a technical challenge ; it is also political.  The way water is 
produced  and consum ed and the way wastewater is treated in the region reflect, in part,  the way 
political decisions have been implemented . For instance, the decentralization  of water  provision and 
treatment responsibilities has  not always been matched by an assignment of regulatory mandates 
that accounts for obstacles to  physical and political coordination . This in itself  limit s the ability of 
regulat ors to deliver on some of their  core goals. Recent research on the Brazilian experience has 
shown that  the extent to which political parties are aligned across government levels, from the 
federal to the municipal, strengthens  regulat ors’ ability to address water treatment requireme nts 
(Estache , Garsous, and Seroa da Motta,  2016 ; Colombo , 2019) . It is possible that policy makers  have 
focused too much on the formality of processes rather than on outcomes.  
Electricity . Although the electricity sector may be doing better than the water and sanitation 
sector in many ways, a recent analysis indicates that poor households still face obstacles to access 
and affordability , and that the sector is excessively  slow in adapting to  environmental change  (De 
Halleux et al. , 2018a ). Both problems have been  linked to the design of institution s and particular 
the sector’s  governance.1 As of 2018, regulatory governance choices made in the region  focused 
 
1 The concept of governance covers a wide range of criteria.  Depending on which are  measured, the very same 
sector in a given  country may appear to enjoy good governance or suffer from bad governance . Jordana, 
 3 
 more on improving technical quality than  providing access for all. The social achievements of the 
sector are more likely due to fiscal interventions (i.e. , tariff structures or the targeting of low -cost 
technological or service options to the poorest)  than regulatory  design . A significant fine -tuning of 
price structure s and of the targeting of subsidies should be on the agenda.  
The sector is also trying to adapt to the increased digitaliz ation of several of its activities. Smart 
grids and smar t meters  are changing the nature of the business. This promises  many payoffs in the 
medium to long term. Meanwhile, the  data -intensive transformation of the sector is increasing the 
scope for operational synergies with other sectors . For instance, joint investment with 
telecom munications  companies to collect data or with financial or insurance companies to use the 
data collected is an increasing ly attractive  option for energy operators . This raises  a new set of issues 
to be internalize d in regulatory design . Indeed, as  electricity utilities diversif y into nonregulated 
activities, the risk s of anticompetitive cross -subsidies and dumping cases  increase  even amid  the 
entry  of new , specialized competitors .2 The trend toward  diversification is also blurring the division 
of regulatory mandates across agencies .  
Transport.  Despite the significant role of the private sector in the operation and financing of key 
transport infrastructure and services , as in most other emerging markets , the role of the public 
sector continues to be quite significant  in Latin America and the Caribbean  (Estupiñan et al. , 2018).  
This is not a problem  in and of itself, but growing  congestion and poor performance across modes 
suggest that som ething is not working. Yet governments have been quite good at  sequentially 
increasing investments over the past  20 years  (Infralatam , 2018 ). Instead of investment, the likely 
culprit is  regulatory governance . Planning, pricing , and monitoring are  failing to deliver on the fast-
growing and constantly evolving demand  for mobility (Marcsak et al. , 2016; Fay et al. , 2017 ; Yáñez -
Pagans  et al.,  2018 ; Chauvet and Baptiste , 2019) . As with other sectors , this governance problem  has 
social consequences , particular for the  poor (Rivas , Suárez -Alemán, and Serebrisky,  2018). And it also 
has implications  for the region’s competitiveness . International business is  indeed  losing out amid  
shipping a nd logistics failures . In some parts of Latin America , packages can take much longer to 
reach their destination s than in advanced economies  in the Organisation  for International Co -
operation and Development (OECD) .3 
As in the case of electricity,  the sector is looking for new technologi cal solutions to  process the 
large volume s of information handled by transport companies.  Despite some  progress , the adoption 
of new  artificial intelligence ( AI) technologies has been slower overall than in other regions, notably 
Asia (e.g. , Opertti , 2019).  For instance, the electronic exchange of trade -related data is yet to be  
systemized. But to be able to do this at the regional level requires a coherent approach to new forms 
of regulation that protect both traders and consumers  (Giordano  et al.,  2017) .  
Cross -sectoral issues.  Financing continues to be an issue for all sectors , and subsidies continue to 
be larger than were anticipated when the reforms of the 1990s were launched. If the governments 
of the region were to consider increasing the scope for self -financing allowed by sectors’ 
 
Fernández- i-Marín , and Bianculli  (2018) show this in an analysis of the institutional features of 799 agencies in 
115 countries and 17 sectors , including many in Latin Ame rica and the Caribbean. Their study focuses on 
regulatory responsibilities, managerial autonomy, political independence, and public accountability . 
2 Farboodi  et al. (2019) show that data accumulation can increase the skew  results according to  the 
distribution of  firms’  sizes, since  large firms generate more data and invest more in active experimentation. On 
the other hand, small data -savvy firms can overtake more traditional incumbents, provided they can finance 
their initial money -losing growth.  
3 At the global level, improvements in border administration, transport , and communication infrastructure 
could increase global GDP by 4.7 percent  ($2.6 trillion in 20 13) according to the World Economic Forum (2013) . 4 
 consumption characteristics , they  could  do so through various forms of price discrimination . But this 
solution has been underused in the region , even though it could reduce the distortions associated 
with rely ing on public financing (Estache , Serebrisky, and Wren -Lewis,  2015). A ny regulato ry reform 
in the region should systematically account for  the opportunity cost s of subsidies , which are too 
often ignored in the region.  This would, among other benefits,  help make the case for regulated , 
targeted price discrimination to improve both equity and efficiency as well as to reduce the sector’s 
fiscal burden . The exact size of this burden  needs to be measured if effective regulation is to be 
achieved . Digitalization should help a lot in the proce ss, but the  data  involved need  to be supervised 
closely. Indeed, digitalization will also make it easier  for firms  to identify and target high -value or 
low-cost users.  
How could the region do better ?  A new wave of regulatory reforms of the infrastructure sector 
has various  challenges  to address . The sector needs to fine- tune the way it regulat es prices and 
profits to make the most of available  data. It also needs to more closely  monitor the financing 
strategies adopted by both the public sector and service providers . These needs in turn call for  a 
restructuring  of governance and institutional organization , and possibly a reevaluation of mandates 
across agencies and government lev els.  
These actions  are necessary  if the public’s long- lasting tolerance for (in many countries and 
sectors)  inefficient and unequitable  service delivery  is to be addressed. And t heir implementation 
will be eased by the new technologies  on offer . The public has an important role to play in ensuring 
that policy makers are held accountable for the implementation of regulation . A vocal civil society 
can have  significant political effects .  
Redesigning institutions is also  essential , to ensure the political viability of the more technical 
sector reforms likely to follow expected  technological changes.  The region has been experimenting 
for over 20 years now with a relatively standardized approach to institutional governance that  
includes the crea tion of separate regulatory agencies, the increase d decentralizatio n of mandates , 
and notable efforts  to attract private sector players to invest in the sector. But the results of this  
approach have not delivered on policy objectives. Why? I nstitutional de sign can’t be the only culprit . 
Some of the problems also stem from depend ing on a fairly rigid set of regulatory tools. Most 
regulators in the  infrastructure sector have been less keen than those in  other sectors in the region, 
and certainly than infrastr ucture regulators in other regions, to adopt new  lessons in behavioral 
economics. Broadening the regulatory toolkit should thus also be part of the reform agenda if the 
region is to improve its ability to deliver on social, financing , and sustainability goals.  
 
3. Emerging regulatory priorities   
The evidence reviewed in section 2 suggests four  key dimensions of regulatory reforms :  
(i) Leverage  the possibilit ies offered by new data processing technologies  to improve regulatory 
effectiveness ; 
(ii) Address the mismatch of  institutional design, governance rule s, and regulatory tools  to close 
the gap between formal and effective regulation ; 
(iii) Rethink how the investment financing decisions of both  public and private sector actors  are 
monitored to improve infrastructure financing options ; and  
(iv) Experiment with  alternative regulatory tools, in particular those emerging from applied 
research in behavioral economics, to close the performance gaps allowed by the more 
traditional instrume nts.  5 
 These four dimensions are clearly not equally relevant to all infrastructure sectors or all countries  in 
the region , but they are applicable in the majority of cases.  Any specific recommendations based on  
analysis of these dimensions will have to  account for the local fiscal and institutional capacities of  
each country and also each of its sector s.  
The regulatory impact of technology. The evol ving role of digitaliz ation , the many applications of 
AI, and the growing presence of mobile applications  are having significant  effects  on the production 
and consumption processes of most regulated services.  And much related learning has already been 
internalized  by service providers.4 Smart meters, smart billing , and smart phone applications are 
standard management tools in regulat ed industries , and have been proven to increase profit levels.5  
Although hard data  on the  payoffs  of adopting comprehensive digital strategies for  infrastructure  
are not yet available for the region , it is  useful to consider global estimates .6 First, as background, 
according to the World Economic Forum ( WEF, 2019 ), worldwide investment in infrastructure is 
expect ed to rise to  $79 trillion by 2040 , though  actual needs will be  closer to $97 trillion.  Almost 
three- quarters of this  global infrastructure investment gap of $18 trillion can be attribut ed to the 
road and electricity sectors.  On an annual basis, this means that every year, about $3.7 trillion 
should be invested in the se sector s to meet the demand of a rapidly growing  global population . 
Consider , first, the case of the energy sector . Accordi ng to the International Energy Agency  (IEA, 
2017), the sector’s digitalization will enable global savings i n the order of $ 80 billion per year over 
the 2016 –40 period , or about 5  percent  of total annual power generation costs.  About 25  percent of 
these gains will be achieved through a drop in operation and maintenance  costs (notably thanks to 
better predictive maintenanc e). Better efficiency in planning and loss and outage managements will 
further cut costs. In  the long term, digitalization will also extend the operational lifetime of power 
plants and network components . On average, reduced  investment needs in powe r plants and in 
networks would explain about 42  percent  and 25  percent  of an nual gains , respectively . These 
medium - to long -run benefits would involve  significant short -run annual investments , however. 
According to the same source, global investment in digital electricity infrastructure and software 
reached  $47 billion in 2016. This was about 40  percent  higher than investment in gas -fired power 
generation worldwide  at a time when many governmen ts were  cutting spending rather than 
increasing it, at least in the short run . 
In the water and sanitation sector , many processes have already been largely automated , and 
remote control technology and also digital office communication have been well integrated in bes t 
management practice s. There are no global estimat es that allow the  cost savings to be compared to 
those in the energy sector . But already there are good indications of improvements on both the 
demand and supply side of the market. On the demand side, service providers are using digital 
technologies to improve the strength of price signals for  water across competing uses (from 
agriculture —which represents a bout 70  percent  of water use in the region —to residential 
consumption). On the supply side , the smart integration of information and operational technology 
is cut ting costs by smoothing the production chain, from “upstream” supply management at the 
extraction stage (basins, aquifers, potable reuse , or desalination) to real- time  monitoring of water 
treatment “midstream ,” to “downstream ” utility operations. At the level of water utilities, 
 
4 See Goldfarb and Tucker (2019) for an economic  survey of the various ways this can be cut thanks to 
digitalization.  
5 See Jamasb , Triptar , and Baidyanath  (2018) for more on the use of smart technologies in the electricity sector 
of developing countries.  
6 Jorisch et al. (2018) provide a detailed overview of technology ’s environmental payoffs —a key dimension 
that will also need to be internalized in regulatory assessments.  6 
 technological improvements should help reduce the significant amounts of water lost in leaks and 
bursts , estimated at 25–35 percent of total available water  supply . Liemberger and Wyatt (2018) 
estimate the global volume of water that is  not accounted for at about 346 million cubic met ers per 
day, or 126 billion cubic met ers per year. This amounts to a loss  of about $39 billion per year, if 
water is valued at $0.31 per cubic met er. For Latin America, they estimate the loss at $8 billion/per 
year. Keeping in mind that to achieve the United Nations’  Sustainable Development Goals  for 2030 , 
the sector’s annual investment needs (water and sanitation) are $115 –$120 billion , these are not  
minor savings . Also, these payoffs provide  a lower bound of potential  economic gains since they do 
not account for  any reduction in  the aggregate water footprint.  Ongoing efforts to reduce this 
footprint, and water losses, will be aided by  the sector’s di gitaliz ation.  
In the transport sector , there are no estimates of the  global payoffs due to the sector’s  
technological evolution , but there are a few helpful  indicators.  Looking first at public transport , 
recent estimates put forward by the Global Mobility Report (2017) suggest that the gains from 
making services  more  sustainable and efficien t, thanks to information technology, could add up to 
$70 trillion by 2050, or about $2 billion annually. An increase in s hared transport  is essentia l to 
achieve these gains.7 For freight , a study of Europe conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC  
2018)  suggests that between 2017 and 2030 digitalization will cut  the costs of  trucking logistics by 47 
percent (largely by  reduc ing demand for labor amid increased  automation ) and delivery lead times  
by 40 percent . Trucks ’ efficiency, as measured by the percentage of time on the road, will also rise 
markedly, from 29 percent to  78 percent. Looking into the future, many analysts predict the gradual  
replacement of long- distance drivers and freight forwarding companies with  automated solution s. 
These trends have  regulato ry implications , since they point to an increased concent ration of markets  
and a  bigger role for large tech companies.   
 
Regulators  have been slower in  internalizing the significance  of these trends than have  service 
providers . Not only do they  underestima te the rate of return on short -term investments in 
digitaliz ation  but also the regulatory challenges likely to be stirred up by technological 
transformation. Early evidence from  the OECD points to the likelihood that digitaliz ation and many 
related changes will prompt  higher mark -ups in infrastructure  sector s if there is no change in how  
regulated industries  are being monitored  (Gal et al. , 2019) . And this will be in response to  the 
multiple ways that fundamental  costs will be cut —that go well beyond straightforward reductions in  
production cost s (Goldfarb and Tucker , 2019).  Many channels of  costs savings  will be hard for 
regulators  to track . Yet  at least some of these cost cuts should be passed on to the users and 
taxpayers subsidizing infrastructure . Unless th is is done, t echnology will simply be come a source of  
tension  between  operators and consumers, and hence governments,  in the region.  
Regulating the  changes  emerging from the increased role of AI and the digitaliz ation of processes 
is going to be a complex challenge for each infrastructure sector in the region  and will demand a lot 
of pragmatism since it  will involve  many regulatory concerns simultaneously . For instance, in the 
case of transport, the changes go beyond  smart traffic management and new  price discrimination 
options made possible becaus e usage is easier to measure. It will also be necessary to  rethink safety, 
pollution, traffic coordination , and data -sharing  practices . This is in addition to the management of 
new approaches and forms of m ultimodal transport,  for both passengers and freight. Regulation will 
have to be far more detailed and dynamic  than in the past.   
 
7 Shared mobility includes  (i) shared public and private transportation (with shared financial or physical 
ownership); (ii) product innovation (next -generation vehicles and tr ansportation equipment relying on data 
analysis); (iii) real -time customer services (including timetables, fares, travel times ); and (iv) d ata-driven 
assistance in decision  making  (Canales et al. , 2017) . 7 
 Most of these changes are likely to be welcome if regulat ors manage to ensure that some of the 
cost savings are shar ed. But t hey will also raise questions about data privacy and ownership. For 
instance, demand response technologies rely on large quantities of consumer -specific, real- time 
usage data. A nyone with  access to the data can glean a lot of information about  household  
members ’ personal daily routines. How much of this should be confidential, how well it should be 
protected (e.g. , how much data collection may be outsourc ed or shared,  and under what  
conditions) , and who has ownership  rights over  these data are all topics to consider in the re design 
of regulation.   
Similar questions around  pricing techniques, market structures , and gove rnance  and institutional 
arrangements are likely to arise  across  all regulated industries.  For instance, in electricity , 
digitaliz ation is accelerating a shift toward a multidirectional, distributed energy system. Demand 
sources will increasingly participate in balancing supply at all scales as  improved connectivity make s 
it easier to link, agg regate,  and control energy  production and consumption units. This will change 
the traditional distinction between suppliers and consumers built in to traditional forms of price 
regulation.   
The increas ed integration of networks allowed by AI solutions will also raise  new security  
concerns . Harmoni zing countries’  approach to cybersecurity will help  minimize the risks of a weak 
link in interconnected networks  and resource pools . It will also be increasingly important  to 
anticipate and develop  common response plans to cyberattacks , for instance . And all of this comes 
at a cost that  the region will have to account for . Policy makers will need to consider how these costs 
might  impact  pricing or the level of subsidies to be allocated to sector  producers and users . At the 
same time  new technologies are likely to increase the reliability of supply and the penetration of 
renewable energy sources , which will themselves reduce operating and capital expenditure ( OPEX 
and CAPEX ).  
What  specific regulatory decisions are made will help decide  how much can be done with 
emerging  technologies . Differences across countries will increase if the changes are not coordinated. 
One of the most basic decision s is the degree to which  user data  can become a source of rent for an 
operator. The maximum consumer protection is provided by “opt -in” programs , by which  client s 
must  authoriz e which  data are shared. This is likely to be the preferred by  a fair share of users —
though  there is the pos sibility of a generation gap in  this. Meanwhile , most firms are likely to prefer 
“opt -out” programs because this allows them to collect data that  can then be used for pricing and 
service targeting to maximize profits.  
The regulator’s  choice does not have to be binary , however . It is possible for clients to self- select 
confidentiality options ranging from “minimal ,” or sufficient to allow essential smart ope rations 
(including for regulated prices and quality preferences) , to “full”  or “maximal” within specified 
ethical limits to be defined by the regulator. The regulator thus has some margin to acknowledge the 
interest of both consumers and suppliers.  
The div ersity of changes wrought by  new technologies is already impressive but it is not clear 
how much of this has been internalized in either formal or effective regulation s. Regulators would 
do well to formalize their awareness of the challenges ahead and to identify strategies and 
instruments that will best  reach their goals.  It is remarkable , for instance , to note how little has been 
done to think through how  the new technolo gies could be used to help  regulated firms address  the 
needs of the poor or growing  environmental conce rns. And unequitable service and environmental 
damage were identified as key challenges  in various recent surveys of the state of infrastructure  
sector s in Latin America and the Caribbean . As discussed below, solutions are being tested in a few 
countries of the region (most notably Chile and Colombia) but the scale of trials remains  small— too 8 
 small to suggest that a ny real change is coming in  the way regu lators are using new tools to deliver  
on their mandates.  
Another needed response is to  rethink the instituti onal architecture of regulation . If new 
mandates associated with the growing role of data are needed, they have  to be recognized formally 
and assig ned to a specific regulatory agency. Since data are  often provided and managed by firms 
subject to the oversight  of the telecom munication s regulator but end up being used by electricity , 
transport , and  water regulators, the division of mandates becomes blurry. And to the extent that 
data management is subcontracted to various, often small,  companies, it can also raise competition 
issues. Collaboration across institutions become s more important , and may call for a reassignment 
of mandates across institutions . One option is to  assign authority for  all data- related issues  to the 
competition agency. Another option is to set up a separate agency for data regulation.   
The number of regulatory changes required  is unavoidable , and may be hard to digest in practice . 
Improving and adapting countries’  regulatory capacity to internalize the potential gains of  
technological change will indeed demand an effort to educate all stakeholders  (e.g. , WEF , 2018b) , 
including regulators, users  (across all demographics) , and producers . The transition to new 
technologies poses a challenge to users of all ages .8 For regulators and consumers who are now 
lagging the sector’s frontier companies  catching up is  a must.   
Yet big data literacy has not been high on  the regional policy agenda . In 2016, only 45.5 percent  
of Latin American households had an I nternet connection. Even if the region ’s connectivity rates  are 
catching up, this  figure is still far below  the OECD average of 86.3  percent . Similarly, in 2016, only 64  
percent  of households relied on mobile broadband and 11  percent on fixed broadband as compared 
to 85  percent  and 46  percent  in OECD countries , respectively . Latin America and the Caribbean  
continues to have the lowest mobile data traffic rates in the world, with an average of 449 terabytes 
per month, or  seven times less than in the Asia -Pacific region.  Access rates are particularly low 
among the lower -middle class and the poor.  In 2016,  the ratio of households with Internet access in 
the richest income quintile as compared to households in the poorest was close to 2 in Costa Rica, 
Chile, and Uruguay; between 2 and 10 in Brazil,  Bolivia, and Ecuador; and over 20 in Paraguay and 
Peru.  This is a regulatory issue. It points to regulators’  inability to address equity concerns , with 
brutal consequences for efficiency —since a lack of access  makes it harder for countries to exploit the 
gains of technology. And it is also politically costly , since it fuels inequality and hence social 
instability.  
Enhancing regulatory  capacity is thus not a minor  challenge . It involves both training and the 
development of access to the latest technologies . It may indeed have to start with a significant effort  
to make access to online and information and communication technology  services more affordable , 
as stated by  the Economi c Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ( ECLA C, 2018 ). How fast 
and how well this is done will make a difference. Time  management is at the heart  of the transition 
to new technologies and appropriate  forms of regulation . The change will have to be progressive 
and may require creativity to reach all the populations excluded so far. Utilizing  media, TV shows 
(even including telenovelas ), or free massive open online courses  would help . This may also require 
 
8 The potential contribution of education is strong,  but the evidence suggests its effectiveness is mixed.  The 
need to train both trainers and educators to make the most of new technologies and to share this ability is a 
key but often underestimated driver of success ( e.g.Eshet -Alkalai  and Chajut , 2010 ). Ed ucation is particularly 
important for older populations (e.g., Sunkel and Ullmann , 2019), and is also necessary for regulators and 
policy makers (Dunlop and Radaelli , 2016).  9 
 some fiscal support , as is often the case with the implementation of industrial policies. And this 
needs to be factored in as well in th e design of regulatory budgets and efforts to target subsidies.9  
Overall, what this discussion implies is that a change is needed in the design and implementation  
of regulation. Standardized regulatory solutions are likely to be  even more distorting now than they 
were in  the past. N ew data should allow more evidence -based assessment of the potential adverse 
effects of specific behavior s and practices. And new , associated  methodological development s 
should allow both better ex  ante and ex  post diagnostics of potential or actual harm identified by 
market - or firm -specific audits.  This does not change the purpose of regulation, but  should allow it  to 
be more effective in reaching its goals.  
The regulatory impact of governance . In spite of  the significant changes in the political sphere  in 
the past 25 years,  most countries  in Latin America and the Caribbean  have not yet adopt ed a 
governance structure that ensures  strong performance and administrative accountability (Trillas and 
Modiano , 2011).  Evidence shows that the prevailing governance and institutional choices have not  
deliver ed the expected performance  level s in infrastructure  (e.g. , Estache , 2020).  The sector s have  
evolved ; the institutions have not.  Decisions are influence d by the capture or corruption of 
politicians or regulators and collusion between service providers . The forms of capture, collusion , 
and corruption (CCC) are endogenous , and policy makers have to keep up  with the creativity of 
corrupt players . But policy  makers and regulators have been slower to adjust to changes in context  
and behaviors  than have either producers or consumers . This is why  the influence  of politicians and 
bure aucrats is emerging as a n ever -larger obstacle  to solving the ineffectiveness  issues  of 
infrastructure sectors.  
To handle  these failures of regulatory governance , it is important to consider the  interactions 
between regulated firms and politicians . At the institutional level, the focus has often been on the 
creation of separate regulatory institutions and the opening up of processes to greater civil society  
participation to improve accountability. A t the political level, the sector -specific consequences of 
decentraliz ing key mandates a re increasingly well understood (Estache , 2020).   
There is robust evidence on the b udget overruns, delays , or white elephants  (i.e., expensiv e 
projects without use or value ) caused by  corrupt decision -making processes ( which most often 
center on excessive red tape , or complex administrative procedure s that enable  subjective ad hoc 
decisions influenced by bribe s). This situation was  recognized  in academic circles  (e.g. , Locatelli et 
al., 2017)  long before  the recent Odebrecht scandal  served as  an eye-opener  for the more casual 
analyst s of infrastructure  activities .10 The scandal placed infrastructure -related  corruption on the 
front pages of newspapers  around the world, and fueled Latin Americans’  growing unha ppiness  with 
the region’s powerful  public service providers, civil servants , and politicians.11 The crisis also 
revealed regulators’  limited ability to protect infrastructure sector s from political interference.  
CCC is prevalent  because  many of the standard tools used by regulators and policy  makers are 
easy to manipulate or instrumentalize  at all stages of the infrastructure service  value chain  (including 
 
9 Though beyond the scope of this paper, it is worth noting that the labor market s of most countries will have 
to undergo a critical transformation . The growing importance of the platform economy made possible by new 
types of work arrangements is a serious c hallenge. This topic may eventually trickle down to regulators as they 
benchmark firm performance to labor productivity .  
10 Odebrecht is a Brazilian construction giant that admitted to paying bribes in more than half the countries in 
Latin America, as well  as in Angola and Mozambique in Africa. I t was associated with the financing of election 
campaign s in exchange for large construction contracts.  
11 See OECD (2018b)  for a recent analysis of the drivers of the growing discontent of the middle class and the 
poor, especially  with regard to public service delivery.  10 
 planning, consultation, procurement, financing, auditing, and regulatory processes ).12 The failure of 
existing administrative structures  help s explain  why, as of 2017, c lose to two -thirds ( 63.9 percent ) of 
Latin American citizens had  no confidence in their national governments  (OECD , 2018b ). Also to 
blame is  growing  awareness of the power  large infrastructure  firms have over  politicians through 
their willingness to finance (re-)election  campaigns  (e.g. , Casas -Zamora and Zovatto , 2015) . 
Perhaps  the design ers of regulatory proces ses have, to date, underestimated the complexity of 
regulatory tasks . A failure to m atch regulatory mandates, tools , and processes with local capacity, 
implicit in the extensive adoption of imported , standardized approaches , is likely one of the main 
reasons for subpar  outcomes .13 Further , more transparent process es are required throughout the 
value chain to minimize the risks of Odebrecht -like scandals . Designing these processe s should be 
eased by digitaliz ation. Coming up with an algorithm to identify  the odds that a project or a 
regulatory decision is likely to be corrupted should not be too difficult.  
More data will, however , come with their  own share of problems. Beyond the question of  which 
agency will regulate their  use, their  ethical treatment should  be addressed as part of reform s.14 
More precise measurement of production and consumption decision s in regulated industries  would  
make it easier to assess compliance with obligations throughout  the value chain. However, 
producers ’ and users ’ right to privacy must be recognized . Meanwhile,  the counterproductive 
information overload  allowed by big data  could  increase the scope of regulatory manipulation . For 
instance, increasing disclosure requirements  without supervision might  prompt a regulated  firm to 
deliberately inflate the flow of information to focus the regulator’s attention on the less relevant 
dimensions of its cost accou nting. This may als o be done to mislead consumers (e.g. , Persson , 2018 ). 
Both these problems could be dealt with through a reform of the auditing mandate of regulatory 
institutions. This reform would be part of the  technical  changes to be brought about by the 
digitaliz ation of information. T hese in turn will also have to account for the cybersecurity risks  that 
could easily erase all the potential payoffs of regulatory reform processes (e.g. , WEF, 2018a) .  
One of the most obvious parts  of the regulatory process to be  reform ed is the design of 
procurement rules in the region.  The adoption of e-procurement has become the norm in many 
public administrations at the national level,  and in some at the subnational level , and it has delivered 
many advantages . But there is significant scope for  improve ment . In most countries, current 
practice s still allow for bid rigging  (including arrangements  that involve  direct contracting) . Too 
often, new entrants, including local ones, are excluded because of collusion  (with firms competing in 
some markets and making joint bids in others) , mispricing  (based on outdated or biased 
benchmarks) , and mismatches of quality standards (for both goods and services, including those 
offered by consultants to governments and regula tors trying to comply with  mandates  for which 
they do not have the internal capacity ).15 Most of these weaknesses have contribute d to the ongoing 
prevalence of CCC in the region, as illustrated by the Odebrecht crisis . 
To address  these issues , processes  will have to be simplified  to match local implementation  
capacity , and upgrades should be considered only as and when  capacity is actually reinforced. This 
 
12 For an assessment of the way contract renegotiation processes  have been distorted  in eight  countries of the 
region, see Campos et al. (2019) . 
13 See Estache (2020) for a recent survey . 
14 See,  for instance , Le Ray and Pinson (2019) for a stimulating discussion of the role of ethics in the 
development and use of smart meters. For a more general conceptual survey of issues related to privacy and 
mach ine learning, see Ji , Lipton , and Elkan (2014) ; and for a more policy -oriented approach , see Kahn , Baron 
and Vieyra  (2018).  
15 See,  for instance , Estache and Iimi (2010) for a discussion of potential new  entrants.  11 
 also demand s the more systematic coordination  of stakeholders , including sector regulators, 
competition agencies , and procurement agencies .16 These  lessons are relevant to more than the 
procurement of infrastructure : similar adjustments are needed to correct the historically poor 
performance of the region’s institutions, and to harness the promis e of  new technolog ies (e.g. , 
Querbach and Arndt , 2017).  
The drawbacks of poor institutional quality  should inform  the new wave of regulatory 
gove rnance . Reforms  would do well to  focus on the specific role of institutions responsible for the 
design and implementation of decisions. A ccording to Djankov , Georgieva, and Ramalho  (2018), a 10 
percent improvement  in a country’s institutional quality  (using the World Bank ’s Doing Business 
indicators as a proxy ) results in a 2 percentage point reduction in the poverty headcount . It can also  
attract  private financing. For instance, t he extent to which the creation of a separate economic 
regulator y agency, national or subnational, will improve governance  so as to  attract large -scale 
private operators to engage in public -private  partnerships or reduce corruption  has been a recurring 
topic among analysts and policy  makers for more than 25 years . But the evidence is mixed. Such a 
regulatory agency is  typically not a necessary n or a sufficient condition  to attract investment , 
although it has done more  in several Latin American countries  than in developing countries  of other 
regions to attract private investment in the water sector ( e.g., Bertom éu-Sánchez, Camos, and 
Estache, 2018)  and to reduce corruption in the electricity sector (Wren -Lewis , 2015) .  
Political sc ientists have highlight ed that the effectiveness of these agencies  is contingent on  the 
factors determining their formal independence (e.g. , Gilardi and Mag getti , 2011). I ndependence 
depends, among other dimensions, on the way regulators are nominated (e.g. , they are appointed 
rather than elected officials), are audited (e.g. , by parliament, ministries , or independent auditors) , 
or are financed (e.g. , through taxes or regulatory fees paid by users). Differences in any of the se 
dimensions across agencies may explain why outcomes vary  across countries or sectors (as in Latin 
America ) (e.g. , Pavón Mediano , 2018).  
The first step  for countries willing to engage in the next wave of regulatory reforms is  to 
undertake a  detailed diagnostic covering the full spectrum of agencies, mandates, tools , and 
processes (e.g. , Estache , 2020) . This is  to understand the  strength s and  weaknesses t hat need to be 
accounted for , including the degree to which mandates, tools , and processes  are matched (e.g. , 
Estache and Wren -Lewis , 2009).  Over the past 25 years, many reforms have tended to overestimate 
the good and underestimate the bad , result ing in formal regulatory designs that were at best naïve 
or simply unable to deliver on expectations . This has also slowed down efforts to match tools and 
processes . Simpler solution s will often deliver greater  efficiency, equity, financial viability , and 
accountability than will standardized and more complex solutions tested in stronger institutional 
contexts or alternative legal systems.  
Not all potential solution s are administrative or bureaucratic , however.17 The political decision to 
decentraliz e regulation offers an additional way to match the regulatory framework with local 
capacity and constraints  (when there is no reason to keep it centralized ). This usually demand s 
institutional changes in the definition  of regulatory mandate s, authority , and resources , and their 
distribution across government levels, within countries , and sometimes across countries.18 But a  lack 
 
16 Ecuador offers a useful example of this approach to reform with its creation of the Unit for Regulatory 
Improvement and Control and its mandate to  assist the National Transport Agency in simplif ying transport 
regulat ions.  
17 See Mookherjee (2015) for a sur vey o f political decentrali zation.  
18 It also demands a careful design of election rules. As Ferraz and Finan (2011)  show in the case of Brazil , there 
is significantly less corruption in municipalities where mayors have the chance of getting  reelected.  12 
 of integrity at the subnational level or an overestimation of implementation capacity is also a 
possibility to account for when considering decentrali zation.  
In practice, for political reasons, h ybrid decentralization arrangements in which responsibilities 
are shared across government levels are  quite  common  in the water  and sanitation and transport 
sectors . While these arrangements are often the outcome of complex political negotiations that 
sometimes end up being built in to laws or constitutions, they can make it harder to assess the 
perform ance of each of the government layers involved.  Information about the vertical (across 
government levels) or the horizontal (across various subnational governments) distribution of power 
may be imperfect  and lead to underperformance in service delivery. They may also have political 
consequences as voters  may end up blaming politicians for the  poor design of decentralization 
decided by earlier administrations ( e.g., Joanis , 2014 ; Mookherjee , 2015 ). As shown  by the Brazilian 
experience, it is  easier to play  the blam e game if politicians at the various government levels are not 
from the same party (Estache , Garsous, and Seroa da Motta, 2016) , or easier to collude if they are 
from the same party (Colombo , 2019).  
As with institutional quality , the next step is  a diagnostic of the extent of the mismatches 
between  mandate s and actual implementation. This may be difficult to accomplish amid the 
explosion of data resulting from e -government and digitalization. Instead of resolving  moral hazard 
and CCC proble ms, more data to parse might end up making responsibilities less clear.  Strengthening  
the integrity  of data  should help , as should more systematic a udits  of formal checks and balances  to 
test their reliability (Avis , Ferraz, and Finan,  2018).  Among other benefits, these boost popular  
support of further reforms . 
Overall, the discussion of governance dimensions has highlighted the costs of not de aling with 
factors that, in re trospect, should have been addressed long ago. Many of these omissions can no 
longer be ignored . This review also highlights the diversity of dimensions that should be considered. 
Even i f similar issues are being faced across  the region, their relative intensity may vary significantly 
by country . This implies that standardized solutions are unlikely to be effective.  
The next wave of reforms should probably start with a detailed country - and sector -specific 
governance diagnostic that  cuts across themes, the  details of regulation and its interaction with the 
political sphere, the structure of institutions and the allocation of mandates across stakeholders , and 
the political fine -tuning of decentrali zation preferences. T he interactions of these dimensions are 
likely to be just as important  as the performance of each on its own . In view of the continuous 
changes brought about by adjustments to new data and new uses of th ese data , policy makers  
should account for the possibility of having to switch  from  broad -brush ex  ante legislation  
implemented by sector -specific regulat ors to ex  post enforcement by a competition agency or an 
agency specializing in monitoring data -related abuses.   
The regulatory impact of corporate financing strategies. The impact of changes in technology is 
a forthcoming challenge, and r egulators need to quickly address the relevance of corporate financing 
strategies to face it . The financing structure of Latin American firms is influenced by a number of 
predictable facto rs (size, tangibility, current liquidity , and returns on assets , for instance ) that are 
similar to those of economically and politically stable regions (e.g. , Valcacer Rodrigues et al. , 2017). 
But the degree of uncertainty regarding  returns and limited access to capital markets lead to  a 
greater  dependence on equity and short -term funds in Latin America than in more stable regions. 
Industries dealing with long -term  assets are seldom addr essed by regulatory debates in the region.  
The widespread failure of regulation to internalize the importance of financing strategies for 
basic regulatory functions such as costing, pricing , and ensuring compliance with investment 
obligations is unusual  in a region that still needs to invest significant amounts in its in frastructure to 
meet demand (Serebrisky et al. , 2018).  If we include  the telecommunications sector, these needs are 13 
 estimated to be 4–5 percent  of GDP on average per country over the next 15 years at least 
(accounting for the cost of adju sting to environmental concerns ). These are significant figures , but 
they are lower bou nds at least in the short run  as they underestimate the short- term costs of 
adjusting to new technologies. This is because m ost of the investment needs assessments available 
to policy  makers are based on backward -looking best practice costs , which  do not factor in the costs 
of improving technologies in the sector.  
Up to now, most of the discussions on financing strategies have focused on contract design, risk 
assessments , and risk levels with the cost of capital as a proxy for the minimum expected rate of 
return to investors.  This is very similar to the way most countries have adopted  private financing 
options for infrastructure sectors . Recent regulatory debates in the United Kingdom  reflect some of 
the infrastructure financing concerns in Latin America and the Caribbean , and illustrate why 
regulators and policy  makers should also weigh in  on corporate financing strateg ies.19 The debate s 
were  triggered by the observation that water companies in England hav e been borrowing to 
increase dividend payments and , to a lesser extent, payments to  chief executive officers and  board 
member, rather than to finance investment needs. De facto, investments been lagging targets and 
service quality has been dropping in vari ous dimensions.   
The current financing strateg ies of most utilities and large -scale  public service operators in Latin 
America and the Caribbean  raise similar issues. Many (if not most) rely on a model of debt financing 
anchored in the securiti zation of revenue flows. Under current regulatory practices, th is model has 
tended to favor shareholders and financial intermediaries over consumers by allowing sizeable 
steady dividend payments over time , a long -term characteristic of the corporate financing strate gies 
of the region. For instance, Benavides , Berggrun, and Perafan  (2016) and Von Eije et al. (2017) show 
that the target dividend payout ratios (and their speed of adjustment) are much higher in Latin 
America than in North America, for instance.  Benavides , Berggrun, and Perafan  (2016) argue that in 
Latin America and the Caribbean , the target dividend payout ratio is positively related to governance 
indicators at the country level but that the speed at which firms adjust their dividends to changes in 
earnin gs is lower in those countries where  governance is relatively better . In other words, since good 
regulation tends to be associated with good governance, there is an endorsement of high dividends 
from  good regulators.   
A strong commitment to dividends is no t necessarily an issue  in itself, but in the current context it 
is an unusual  strategy  since  it suggests that firms do not rely on  retained earnings to finance much -
needed investment. A regulatory tolerance for this type of bias would be particularly inappropriate  
in a risky environment  where  the cost of borrowing is  the least  desirable option to minimize 
financing costs.  Yet this bias is confirmed by Benavides , Berggrun, an d Perafan  (2016) , who observe  
a negative impact of retained earnings on dividends. The consequences of this bias are further 
observed if  new debt is used to fund  dividends  instead of  financ ing investment.20 This seems 
unjustified especially in  regulated industries, in view  of their  ability to rely on steady cash flows and 
their greater potential  to self-finan ce.  
 
19 See Bertomé u-Sánchez and Estache (2019) for a recent survey of the relevance of omitting the role of 
dividends in the design of infrastructure r egulation.  
20 Blaiklock (2012 : 28–29) made a similar observation in a public hearing in the United Kingdom:  “ . . . the non -
UK Companies have been shrinking in capital terms. Their financial strength has been weakened by owners 
paying to share holders divide nds, which cannot be fully paid out of ordinary profits, so owners have turned to 
debt to  finance the shortfall, which in turn increases the leverage in the Companies’ balance sheets.” Blaiklock 
defined this as asset stripping in the British context  in med ia interviews .  14 
 An explanation for this unusual pattern may lie in the degree to which ownership is concentrated, 
and in what parties.  This is of  potential concern in Latin America and the Caribbean,  where , as in 
other regions, investors in infrastructure  are increasingly large investment and pension funds with 
significant lobbying leverage with  the poli tical and regulatory authorities and the management of 
regulated firms. While this has not yet been studied specifically in the context of regulated 
industries, Gonzalez et al. (2017) provide some relevant insights when studying the effect of 
ownership con centration on dividend policy in six Latin American countries. They find that in 
regulated industries  it is increasingly observed  that if the largest shareholder of a firm with a highly 
concentrated ownership is based in a common -law country, the dividend paid is significantly higher 
than the average.21 Therefore, matching the evolution of dividends in regulated industries with the 
evolution of ownership should be of interest to regulators and policy  makers as it will impact the 
costs and investment prospects of infrastructure sector s. For instance, if investors manage to bias 
corporate financing decisions in favor of borrowing to pay dividends, in a context of rising interest 
rates (e.g. , due to higher risk premia associated with an uncertain political or foreign exchange 
context) , the bias will result in higher borrowing costs  and further lower the margin of retained 
earnings for financ ing CAPEX or even OPEX. This is something regulators should focus on  when  
defining service or operational obligations.  
An additional interesting detail revealed by a diagnostic of reform options conducted by Gonzalez 
et al. (2017) is that increasing the ownership of the second -largest shareholder leads to a decrease in 
firm dividends. This can be  explained  by this shareholder’s  stronger monitoring role. It  remains  
unclear  whether  this shareholder being private or public make s a difference, particularly  in a context 
where  adjustments are needed to increase the scope of the regulated firm’s self -financing. In the 
current context, investors’ interest in a  sector is bound to be sensitive to the risks o f new regulatory 
decisions interfering with their financing strateg ies. 
The largely unsupervised decisions made to date regarding  leverage and dividend payments may 
have underestimated implications for  the concrete operational demands of  sector s in which the 
balance between OPEX  and CAPEX  is particularly important to address during regulatory monitoring. 
Most of the arguments against the regulatory monitoring of corporate financing strategies revolve  
around the need to avoid micromanagement. This concern would be reasonable if it were not for 
the lack of investment and insufficient service quality  in the infrastructure sectors. Penaliz ing 
noncompliance ex post is the most common practice in the field, but correcting mistakes takes time. 
Sectors  associated with environmental concerns and a strong commi tment to mak ing the most of 
technological improvements  require  both an ex  ante and a short -term ex  post approach to corporate 
financing decisions. The next generation of regulatory mandates in the region should account for 
both.  
The regulatory impact of behavioral  economics. As has been noted,  the three key structural 
changes that infrastructure  sector s are under going suggest that not only does the institutional 
design prevailing in the region  require fine -tuning but also the common  regulatory toolkit. A focus 
on prices, taxes, subsidies , and quality standards flows from the assumption  that consumers and 
prod ucers are rational at all times. If this were the case, these tools would indeed be enough to get 
firms to deliver and consumers to behave as expected. In many countries, t hey have certainly 
succeeded in  generat ing the cash needed to get firms going , and in convinc ing investors that the 
market is worth their long -term commitment. But the slow pace of investment, the continuous 
exclusion of the poor and lower- middle class , and the growing environmental consequences of 
 
21 Gonzalez et al. (2017) also show that the  opposite happens  when ownership is concentrated in the hands of 
an individual , who will  tend to extract benefits from minority shareholders . 15 
 underinvestment in wastewater treatment,  in cleaner vehicles , and in  cleaner energ y sources, all 
confirm that the signals sent by the current regulatory approach do not trigger needed  behavioral 
change. Policy makers at the national and subnational levels may want to revisit  conceptually 
attractive pricing methods such as peak -load or congestion pricing and widespread subsidies , and 
consider alternative or complementary tools.   
Similar observations were made about a decade ago in OECD countries. Traditional instruments 
were n ot enough to  get consumers and producers to align  their private interest s with the wider 
public interest. Multiple sector diagnostics across OECD countries show ed that few energy users 
demand ed green energy , and few service providers were  willing to make t he investments needed to 
cater to the needs of the poorest. Even when regulators price d things correctly  to send the right 
signals , consumer  behaviors were  slow to adjust , as many held on to the  status quo.  
In response, OECD governments have been experimenting for close to a decade now with 
alternative ways of changing the behavior of consumers, producers , and investors (Lunn , 2014 ; 
OECD , 2017). Many of the lessons learned from their adoption might be  relevant to Latin America 
and the Caribbean . Several of the  new regulatory tools adopted and scaled up in OECD countries 
have internaliz ed lessons from research on nonrational behaviors in consumption, production , and 
investment. A diversity of cognitive, emotional, cultural, and social biases can help  explain the 
inadequate performance  of traditional regulatory instruments. F or instance, there is strong evidence 
that water consumption patterns are in large part driven by societal values, emotions , and social 
identit ies (e.g. , Seyranian , Sinatra, and Polikoff,  2015). These can differ across cultures or across 
income or age groups.  
Integrating research -based considerations  in regulation s is relatively easy , and  at a relatively low 
administrative cost.  Behavioral economists have developed  various  methods to identify, analy ze, 
and use relevant nonprice dimensions in the design of policies, including regulatory ones . The most 
popular of these methods is the “nudge .” Its application  is relatively nontechnical, and  gets generally  
positive  media coverage , which means it is likely to receive  political endorsement .  
Often used as a complement to more traditional incentives  (e.g., Thaler and Sunstein ), the 
“nudge” encourages consumers or producers to make an optimal  choice without restrictive 
regulation and usually  without income - or price -driven incentives. It has become one of the most 
popular ways of encouraging consumers to make  rational decision s. One method of doing this is  to 
remind consumers —and producers —of social norms . Define d as widely shared beliefs about how 
members of society should behave in the interest of the group rather than the individual , social  
norms have been used in regulation, with a significant degree of success,  to stimulate efficiency and 
conservation. They have also be en used to make the most of people’s interest in “ fairness ” to 
improve social or financial performance. Because their design must be suited to particular contexts  
and culture s, it varies across countries and often across regions within  countries  (Sunstein , Reisch, 
and Rauber, 2018) .  
Advances in technology, including mobile technolog y, are making it easier to reach consumers 
and monitor producers to improve the effectiveness of regulation in many ways. For instance, 
messages delivered th rough regular and social media , targeted to specific concerns and behavioral 
biases or delivering comparisons between user groups , can be designed to prompt  people to use less 
water or energy. In several  experiments, these nonprice stimul i reduced  consumpt ion in an amount 
equivalent to a significant price increase —simply by correcting misperceptions, making a specific 16 
 behavior more salient , or raising social awareness o f possible actions to take.22 This suggests that 
these new tools not only complement traditional tools but can be useful substitutes.23 Given that 
affordability is an ongoing challenge , a behavioral intervention is  worth considering as long as it is 
used in a regulatory toolkit that also improves  the financial viability of the se rvice.24 
In Latin America and the Caribbean,  as in the rest of the world, people change their mind s about  
what they want (for a number of varied  reasons , including changing emotions, context s, or 
information), hold  biased beliefs (perceptions), tend to prefer receiving benefits sooner rather than 
later, can be pressured by peers in their communities, are uncertain regarding  their perceptions of 
key dimensions (notably quality), and are afraid of switching providers (because they f ear the 
unknown  or simply because they procrastinate even when offered good deals). Consulting firms 
tend to advise service providers  to use these biases  in their commercial policies ( neuro -marketing  is 
now  a dynamic field ), including in regulated industri es. Even though most related research is of 
North American and European companies  operating in their home region s, the findings are indeed 
relevant  to many contexts in Latin America and the Caribbean where infrastructure services are 
comparable . Related  analysis has shown that pricing is easier to manipulate in  categories of users 
with the largest degree of cognitive biases and, unless controlled, firms may use framing techniques 
to influence consumer s’ inertia and in the process increase profits. These biases also favor collusion 
in many situations in which policy  makers hop e for competition. And this is not only about pricing , 
since firm s’ assessment s of the relative significance  of cognitive biases also drive monopolists’ 
decisions regarding  the quantity -quality trade -off. 
Latin America and the Caribbean  has a significant margin to adopt many of these instruments and 
adapt them  to try to tackle some of the factors behind  the disappoint ing performance o f the region’s  
infrastructure regulation s. The few trials conducted in Colombia and  Costa Rica, mostly in the water 
sector, suggests likely  payoffs in the region. For instance, in a village in Costa Rica, Datta et al. (2015) 
show  that neighbors who were no tified of how their water consumption volumes compared to those 
of neighbors  reduc ed consumption  from 3.4  percent  to 5.6  percent . Torres and Carls son (2016) 
consider  the impact of information campaigns in Colombia and find that they  induce d a drop in 
water demand of 6.8 percent  in the targeted population and also a 5.8  percent  drop in households 
that were not targeted, thanks to the informal spread of information by w ord of mouth. Lopez 
(2017) finds  similar effects for another “nudge” experiment in Colombia , although with a larger  
differenc e between targeted and untargeted  populations (7 .0 percent  versus  4.4 percent ),  
Unfortunately, these experiments are outlier s in the region. A quick glance at the websites  of key 
infrastructure regulators in Latin America and the Caribbean  shows  that few have  internaliz ed 
behavioral economics  except in upgrades to  communications and user education. Many countries 
have experiment ed with using behavioral research  in education, health pensions , or tax collection 
 
22 The possibility of perverse effects should not be discounted , however  (e.g. Schultz et al. , 2007 and  Schubert , 
2017).  
23 Sudarshan (2017) shows how, in urban India, weekly reports comparing the recipient household’s electricity 
usage with that of peer households reduce d summer electricity consumption by 7  percent. This represents 
cost savings equivalent to increasing tariffs by about 12.5 percent . In the U nited States , these types of reports 
have been shown to prompt savings of  about 1 to 2 . percent  of total consumption . The impact is greatest 
among above -average consumers.  
24 Nauges and Whittington (2019) identify sources of uncertainty associated with the adoption of social norms 
when compared to price -based instruments for residential users.  17 
 efforts but little has  been attempted in infrastructure sectors , at least on a scale significant enough 
to be statistically robust.25  
This may be the right time for infrastructure regulators in the region to  join the efforts made by 
their colleagues in other sectors. T his will demand trials, initiall y, to fine -tune the design and 
targeting of tools. And once the specific design of new tools  has been decided , it is often necessary 
to introduce legal and administrative changes to accommodate the adoption of new instruments in 
the general regulatory framework (Alemanno and Spina, 2014). This would help  protect citizens from 
the possible abuse of data collected through behavi oral instruments.26 This is important because 
cognitive, emotional,  or cultural biases are relatively easy to instrumentalize for the wrong reasons if 
information is not ring -fenced (an issue similar to the regulatory risks associated with the increased 
digitaliz ation of information ). But this is not the only challenge to the adoption of behavioral 
regulation in the sector. As argued by Trillas (2016), it is also important to account for the fact that 
regulators are likely to have cognitive, emotional,  and c ultural biases. One of the most common 
concerns is the  expression of personal bias in experts’  design and implementation of regulation 
(Perez , 2015).  
Being a ware of the limitations of the  new tools produced by behavioral economics  does not make 
them irrelevant. It points to  the need to commit to doing what it takes to use them correctly . This 
new generation of regulatory tools is to become an essential complement to the older generation. 
Ignoring the insights of  behavioral economics  boils down to accepting that effective regulation will 
continue to differ from formal regulation and that the gap between goals and achievements will 
continue to grow as the old tools continue to underperform.  
 
4. Concluding comments  
The 25 years that have followed the liberalization and institutional transformation of 
infrastructure sector s in Latin America and the Caribbean have brought  significant technical 
improvement s. Many users enjoy a  better level of service than did their parents  a generation ago. 
But many potential users, especially the poor and vulnerable , remain excluded —and unless 
investment picks up  to match demand , many more will be excluded. Looking ahead, t he next 
generation may be worse off than its forebears if the se sector s do not quickly find a way of tackling 
ongoing environmental deterioration. Something has to change , and regulation s are at the core of 
this change.   
The needed  adjustment s to regulation s will have to take place in a dramatically shifting  
technological, institutional , and financing environment.  In a domino effect, as new technology 
prompts  change s in market structure s, these will in turn lead to institutional and governance 
changes . Eventu ally, all these changes  will influence the way the sector is  financed. The specific 
solution s adopted will necessarily be country , time , and context specific. It is therefore difficult to 
provide clear recommendations . Upcoming changes  will affect,  in significant ways , the role of  
 
25 In a recent meta -analysis of 117 studies from 1975 to 2017 tha t studied the effect of providing nonprice 
information on residential customers’ consumption of electricity (94 studies ), gas (10  studies ), and water (23  
studies ), Nemati and Penn (2018)  identified  only four studies  that focused on Latin America and the Caribbean 
(two on Ecuador and one  each on Colombia and Costa Rica).  
26 As discussed  by Brennan (2018) in a  recent evaluation , behavioral economics is likely to continue to be a 
complement to mor e traditional forms of re gulation rather than a  subs titute.  But as suggested by Robinson 
and Hammitt (2011a, 2011b), it is still useful in this role by pointing to new factors that influence costs and 
benefits.  18 
 coordina tion across sectors , users, producers , and institutions. They may , as well,  demand the 
redistribution of regulatory mandates across agencies and possibly the creation of a new agency 
devoted to overseeing the  big data increasingly being collected and used in  the sector. And finally, 
they will make a case for adopting the new set of tools provided by behavioral economics .  
There is little doubt that within less than a generation , the way  public infrastructure service s are 
produced, financed, delivered , and consumed in Latin America and the Caribbean, as around the 
world, will be quite different from what we observe toda y. Critically, u nless a new wave of 
regulatory reforms is designed and implemented, the share of rationed users , the environmental 
damage , and the deterioration of sector governance will continue. Importantly, and in a departure 
from past practice, t hese changes should no t only be formal and  process  oriented . They need to be  
effective, and outcome -oriented , for the sector  to deliver on its essential social and economic role.  
This means that real -life needs should drive formal regulatory reform s. This is possible only  if all 
stakeholders are consulted in the design of the next generation of  sector  reforms. And this 
consultation should  probably  start now  in each country , informed by the large volume of research 
forecasting  the coming changes . 19 
 5. References  
Alemanno, A., a nd A. Spina. 2014. “Nudging Legally: On the Checks and Balances of Behavioral 
Regulation.” International Journal of Constitutional Law  12 (2): 429 –56. 
Avis, E., C. Ferraz, and F. Finan. 2018. “Do Government Audits Reduce Corruption? Estimating the 
Impacts of Exposing Corrupt Politicians.”  Journal of Political Economy  126 (5): 1912 –64. 
Benavides, J., L. Berggrun, and H. Perafan. 2016. “Dividend Payout Policies: Evidence from Latin 
America.” Finance Research Letters  17 (May): 197– 210.  
Bertoméu -Sánchez, S., and A. Estache. 2019. “Are Dividends an Infrastructure Regulation Problem?” 
Mimeo, ECARES, Universite libre de Bruxelles.  
Bertoméu -Sánchez, S., and T. Serebrisky. 2019. “Latin American Countries.” In Facing the Challenges 
of Water Governance. Palgrave  Studies in Water Governance: Policy and Practice, edited by S. 
Porcher and S. Saussier, 189 –221. Palgrave Macmillan.  
Bertoméu -Sánchez, S., D. Camos, and A. Estache. 2018. “Do Economic Regulatory Agencies Matter to 
Private -Sector Involvement in Water Utilities in Developing Countries?” Utilities Policy 50 (C): 
153–63. 
Blaiklock, M. 2012. “Written Comments to the Consultation on Water & Sewerage Infrastructure 
Projects in England Phase 2.” I n Consultation on a Regime for Specified (Special) Water and 
Sewe rage Infrastructure Projects in England— Phase 2 Summary of Responses & Next Steps , 
edited by UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 24 –30. London .  
Brennan, T. J. 2018. “The Rise of Behavioral Economics in Regulatory Policy: Rational Choice  or 
Cognitive Limitation?”  International Journal of the Economics of Business  25 (1): 97 –108.  
Calligaris, S., C. Criscuolo, and L. Marcolin. 2018. “Mark -Ups in the Digital Era.” OECD Science, 
Technology and Industry Working Papers  2018/10, OECD Publishing,  Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development,  Paris.  
Campos, N., E. Engel, R. Fischer, and A. Galetovic. 2019. “Renegotiations and Corruption in 
Infrastructure: The Odebrecht Case.” Mimeo, February 13 version.  
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3447631 .  
Canales, D., S. Bouton, E. Trimble, J. Thayne, L. Da Silva, S. Shastry, S. Knupfer, and M. Powell. 2017. 
“Connected Urban Growth: Public -Private Collaborations for Transforming Urban Mobility.” 
Coalition for Urban Transitions, London and Washington, DC. 
http://newclimateeconomy.net/content/cities -working -papers . 
Casas -Zamora, K., and D. Zovatto. 2015. “The Cost of Democracy: Campaign Finance Regulation in 
Latin America.” Policy brief, Latin America Initiative, Foreign Policy at Brookings, July.  
https://www.brookings.edu/wp -content/uploads/2016/06/The -Cost -of-Democracy -
CasasZamora- Zovatto.pdf .  
Chauvet, P., and A. Baptiste. 2019. “Road Transport in Latin America: Evolution of Its Infrast ructure 
and Impact between 2007 and 2015.”  FAL Bulletin No. 367,  Economic Commission for Latin 
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) , Santiago, Chile .  
Colombo, A. 2019. “ Why Do Local Institutions Matter? The Political Economy of Decentralization .” 
PhD thesis,  ECARES, Universite libre de Bruxelles.  20 
 Datta, S., J. J . Miranda, L. Zoratto, O. Calvo -Gonzalez, M. Darling, and K. Lorenzana. 2015. “A 
Behavioral Approach to Water Conservation: Evidence from Costa Rica.”  Policy Research 
Working Paper 7283, World Bank, Wa shington, DC.  
De Halleux, M., A. Estache, and T. Serebrisky. 2018a. “Institutional Governance and Performance in 
the Electricity Sector in Latin America and the Caribbean.” IDB Technical Note 1525, Inter -
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.  
———. 2018b. “How Much Does Technology Affect the Management of Cities in Latin American and 
the Caribbean.” ECARES Working Papers  2018- 24, European Center for Advanced Research in 
Economics and Statistics , Universite Libre de Bruxelles , Brussels.  
Djankov , S., D. Georgieva, and R. Ramalho. 2018. “Business Regulations and Poverty .” Economics 
Letters  165 (C): 82 –87. 
Dunlop, C. A., and C. M. Radaelli. 2016. “Teaching Regulatory Humility: Experimenting with Student 
Practitioners.”  Politics  36 (1): 79– 94. 
ECLAC  (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). 2018. State of Broadband in 
Latin America and the Caribbean 2017.  Santiago: ECLAC.  
Eshet -Alkalai, Y., and E. Chajut. 2010. “You Can Teach Old Dogs New Tricks: The Factors that Affect 
Changes over Time in Digital Literacy.” Journal of Information Technology Education 9: 173– 81. 
Estache, A. 2020. “Institutions for Infrastructure in Developing Countries: What We Know and the 
Lot We Still Need to Know.” In The Handbook of Economic Development and Insti tutions , edited 
by J. M. Baland, F. Bourguignon, J. -P. Platteau, and T. Verdier, 634 –88. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.  
Estache, A., and A. Iimi. 2010. “Bidder Asymmetry in Infrastructure Procurement: Are There any 
Fringe Bidders?” Review of In dustrial Organization 36 (2): 163– 87. 
Estache, A., and L. Wren -Lewis. 2009. “Towards a Theory of Regulation for Developing Countries: 
Following Jean -Jacques Laffont’s Lead.” Journal of Economic Literature  47 (3): 729– 70. 
Estache, A., G. Garsous, and R. Ser oa da Motta. 2016. “Shared Mandates, Moral Hazard, and Political 
(Mis)alignment in a Decentralized Economy.” World Development  83 (C):  98–110.  
Estache, A., T. Serebrisky, and L. Wren -Lewis. 2015. “Financing Infrastructure in Developing 
Countries.” Oxford R eview of Economic Policy 31 (3– 4): 279– 304.  
Estupiñan , N., H. Scorcia, C. Navas, C. Zegras, D. Rodriguez, E. Vergel- Tovar, R. Gakenheimer, S. Azán 
Otero, and E. Vasconcellos . 2018.  Transporte y desarrollo en América Latina 1(1). Caracas: IDB 
and CAF. http://scioteca.caf.com/handle/123456789/1186 .  
Farboodi, M., R.  Mihet, T. Philippon, and L. Veldkamp. 2019. “Big Data and Firm Dynamics.” NBER 
Working Paper  25515 , National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  
Farias, P., S. Goldsmith, M. Flumian, G. Mendoza, J. Wiseman, M. Porrúa, P. Castillo Páez, A. C. 
García, and G. Zanabria. 2017.  Governments That Serve: Innovations That Improve Service 
Delivery to  Citizens . Washington, DC:  IDB.  
Fay, M., L.  A. Andres, C. Fox, U . Narloch, and M. Slawson. 2017. Rethinking Infrastructure in Latin 
America and the Caribbean: Spending Better to Achieve More.  Washington, DC : World Bank.  
Ferraz, C . and F . Finan . 2011. "Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of 
Local Governments." American Economic Review , 101 (4): 1274 -1311 21 
 Gal, P., G. Nicoletti, T. Renault, S. Sorbe, and C. Timiliotis. 2019. “Digitalisation and Productivity: In 
Search  of the Holy Grail— Firm -Level Empirical Evidence from EU Countries.” OECD  Economics 
Department Working Papers 1533, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
Georgoulias, A. G., L. Frisari, H. Meller, M. C. Ramirez, T. Serebrisky, and G. G. Watkins. 2018a. 
“Attractors of In stitutional Investment in Latin American Infrastructure: Lessons from Envision 
Project Case Studies .” IDB Technical Note  IDB-TN 1386, Inter -American Development Bank, 
Washington, DC.  
Georgoulias, A., J. Carvalho Fernandes de Oliveira, H. Meller, M. C. Ramirez, T. Serebrisky, and G. G. 
Watkins. 2018b. “ Assessing the Institutional Capacity of Latin American Countries for 
Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Delivery .” IDB Technical Note  IDB-TN 1393, Inter -
American Development Bank, Washington, DC.  
Gilardi, F., and M. Maggetti. 2011. “The Independence of Regulatory Authorities.” In Handbook on 
the Politics of Regulation , edited by D. Levi -Faur,  201–14. Cheltenham: Edward El gar.  
Giordano, P.,  A. Ramos Martínez, K. Michalczewsky, and B. Ramos. 2017. Trade and Integration 
Monitor 2017: Beyond the Recovery: Competing for Market Share in the Digital Era. 
Washington, DC: IDB.  
Goldfarb, A., and C. Tucker. 2019. “Digital Economics. ” Journal of Economic Literature  57 (1):  3–43. 
Gonzalez, M., C. Molina Manzano, E. Pablo, and J. W. Rosso. 2017.  “The Effect of Ownership 
Concentration and Composition on Dividends: Evidence from Latin America.”  Emerging Markets 
Review  30 (C): 1– 18. 
IDB (Inter -American Development Bank) and OECD  (Organisation for Economic Co -operation and 
Development). 2016 . Panorama de las Administraciones Públicas: América Latina y el Caribe  
2017.  Washington, DC: IDB . https://publications.iadb.org/en/publication/15675/panorama- de-
las-administraciones -publicas -america- latina- y-el-caribe -2017 .  
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2017. Digitalization and Energy. Paris: IEA, OECD.  
https://www.iea.org/reports/digitalisation -and-energy .  
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2017. “The Role of the Fund in Governance Issues —Review of 
the Guidance Note —Preliminary Considerations —Background Notes.” IMF, Washington, DC. 
http://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy -Papers/Issues/2017/08/01/pp080217- background -
notes -the-role-of-the-fund -in-governance -issues- review -of-the-guidance -note . 
Infralatam . 2018. “Transport.”  http://en.infralatam.info/dataviews/227373/transport/ .  
Jaime Torres, M. M., and F. Carlsson.  2016. “Social Norms and Information Diffusion in Water- Saving 
Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment in Colombia.” Working Papers in 
Economics  652, Department of Economics, University of Gothenburg.  
Jamasb, T., T. Triptar, and B. Baidyanath. 2018. “Smart Electricity Distribution Networks, Business 
Models, and Application for Developing Countries.”  Energy Policy  114 (C): 22 –29. 
Ji, Z., Z. C. Lipton , and C. Elkan. 2014. “Differential Privacy and Machine Learning: A Survey and 
Review.” https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.7584 .  
Joanis, M. 2014. “Shared Accountability and Partial Decentralization in Local Public Good Provision.”  
Journal of Development Economics  107: 28– 37. 22 
 Jordana, J., X. Fernández -i-Marín, and A. C. Bianculli. 2018. “Agency Proliferation and the 
Globalization of the Regulatory State: Introducing a Data Set on the Institutional Features of 
Regulatory A gencies.” Regulation & Governance  12 (4): 524 –40. 
Jorisch, D., C. Mallin, M. Accurso, A. Garcia Zaballos, and E. Iglesias Rodríguez. 2018. Technology for 
Climate Action in Latin America and the Caribbean: How ICT and Mobile Solutions Contribute to 
a Sustai nable, Low -Carbon Future . Washington, DC: IDB.  
Kahn, T., A. Baron , and J. C. Vieyra. 2018.  “Digital Technologies for Transparency in Public 
Investment: New Tools to Empower Citizens and Governments.” IDB  Discussion Paper IDB-DP-
634, IDB, Washington, DC.  
Le Ray, G., and P. Pinson. 2019. “ The Ethical Smart Grid : Enabling a Fruitful  and Long -Lasting  
Relationship  between Utilities  and Customers .” Mimeo, Centre for Electric Power and Energy, 
Technical University of Denmark.  
Liemberger, R. , and A. Wyatt. 2018. “Quantifying the Global Non -Revenue Water Problem.” Water 
Supply  19 (3): 831 –37. 
Locatelli, G. , G. Mariani, T. Sainati, and M. Greco. 2017 . “Corruption in Public Projects and 
Megaprojects: There Is an Elephant in the Room!” International Journal of Project Management  
35 (3): 252– 68. 
Lopez, J. D.  2017 . “Spreading the Word: Effects of a Nudge on Resi dential Water Conservation: A 
Field Experiment in Small Urban Villages in Colombia.” LACEEP Working Paper Series  WP#96, 
Latin American and Caribbean Environmental Economics Program, August.  
http://www.laceep.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=333:spr eading- the-word -
effects -of-a-nudge -on-residential -water -conservation -a-field -experiment- in-small -urban -
villages -in-colombia- jos%C3%A9 -david -lopez -2017&Itemid=87.  
Lopez, A., M. Rodríguez, and M. Valentini . 2017. “How Does Political Finance Regulation Influence 
Control of Corruption? Improving Governance in Latin America.” Working Paper  50, European 
Research Centre for Anti -Corruption and State -Building (ERCAS ), Berlin.  
http://www.againstcorruption.eu/wp- content/uploads/2017/08/WP -50-Political- Finance -
Regulation.pdf .  
Lunn, P. 2014 . Regulatory Policy and Behavioural Economics.  Paris: OECD.  
Marcsak, J., D. Engelke, D. Bohl, and A. Saldarriaga Jiménez. 2016. Latin America and the Caribbean 
2030: Future Scenarios . Washington, DC: IDB . 
Monteiro, L. F.,  G. Rozman, and A.-M. Carrick . 2018 . “Digital Transformation in Latin America: A 
Leapfrogging Opportunity ?” Case Study, INSEAD Business School.  
Mookherjee, D. 2015 . “Political Decentralization.” Annual Review of Economics  7: 231 –49.  
Nauges, C., and D. Whittington . 2019. “Social Norms Information Treatments in the Municipal Water 
Suppl y Sector: Some New Insights on Benefits  and Costs.” Water Economics and Policy  5 (3) . 
https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S2382624X18500261 . 
Nemati, M., and J. Penn. 2018 . “The Impact of Social Norms, Feedback, and Price Information on 
Conservation Behavior: A Meta -Analysis .” Econpaper 274431 prepared for the 2018  Agricultural 
and Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting, Washington, DC,  August 5 –7. 
OECD  (Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development). 2017. Behavioural  Insights and 
Public Policy: Lessons from Around the World. Paris:  OECD Publishing.  23 
 ———. 2018a. Maintaining Competitive Conditions in the Era of Digitalisation.  OECD report to G- 20 
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, Paris, July. Paris: OECD Publishing.  
———. 2018b. Integrity for Good Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean: From 
Commitments to Action . Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264201866 -en. 
Opertti, F. 2019 . “Trade Globalization and Digitalization. ” https://blogs.iadb.org/integration -
trade/en/trade -globalization -digitalization/ . 
Pavón Mediano, A. 2018 . “Agencies’ Formal Independence and Credible Commitment in the Latin 
American Regulatory State: A Comparative Analysis of 8 Countries and 13 Sectors.” Regulation 
& Governance  14 (1): 102 –20. https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12187 . 
Perez, O. 2015 . “Can Experts Be Trusted and What Can Be Done About it? Insights from the Biases 
and Heuristics Literature.” In Nudge and the Law: A European Perspective , edited by A. 
Alemanno and A. -L. Sibony,  115–38. Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Persson, P. 2018 . “Attention Manipu lation and Information Overload.” Behavioural Public Policy  2 
(1): 78 –106.  
PwC  (PricewaterhouseCoopers). 2018. The Era of Digitized Trucking: Charting Your Transformation to 
a New Business Model . https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/file/The -era-of-digitized -
trucking- charting -your -transformation .pdf. 
Querbach, T. , and C. Arndt. 2017. “Regulatory Policy in Latin America: An Analysis of the State of 
Play.” OECD Regulatory Policy Working Papers  7, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
Rivas, M. E., A. Suárez -Alemán, and T. Serebrisky. 2018. “How Affordable Is Transportation in Latin 
America and the Caribbean?” IDB Technical Note  IDB-TN 1588, IDB, Washington, DC.  
Robinson, L. A., and J. K. Hammitt. 2011a. “Behavioural Economics and Regulatory Analysis.” Risk 
Analysis  31 (9): 1408 –22. 
———. 2011b. “Behavioral Economics and the Conduct of Benefit -Cost Analysis: Towards Principles 
and Standards.”  Journal of Benefit -Cost Analysis  2 (2): 1– 51. 
Rozenberg, J., and M. Fay, eds. 2019.  Beyond the Gap: How Countries Can Afford the Infrastructure 
They Need while Protecting the Planet . Sustainable Infrastructure Series. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.  
Schubert, C. 2017.  “Green nudges: Do they work? Are they ethical? ”, Ecological Economics , 132:  329-
342  
Schultz, P. W., J.M. Nolan, R.B. Cialdini, N.J. Goldstein  and V. Griskevicius . 2007. “The Constructive, 
Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms ”. Psychological Science , 18(5) : 429–434 
Serebrisky, T., A. Suárez -Alemán, C. Pastor, and A. Wohlhueter. 2018. “Lifting the Veil on 
Infrastructure Investment Data in Latin America and the C aribbean.” IDB Technical Note 1366, 
Inter -American Development Bank , Washington, DC.  
Seyranian, V., G. M. Sinatra, and M. S. Polikoff. 2015. “Comparing Communication Strategies for 
Reducing Residential Water Consumption.” Journal of Environmental Psychology  41: 81 –90. 
Suárez -Alemán, A., T. Serebrisky , and S. Perelman . 2019 . “Benchmarking Economic Infrastructure 
Efficiency: How Does the Latin America and Caribbean Region Compare?” Utilities Policy 58: 1–
15. 24 
 Sudarshan, A. 2017. “Nudges in the Marketplace: The Response of Household Electricity 
Consumption to Information and Mone tary Incentives.” Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization 134 (C): 320– 35. 
Sunkel, G ., and H. Ullmann . 2019. “Las personas mayores de América Latina en la era digital: 
superación de la brecha digital.”  Revista CEPAL , No.  127, 243 –68, Santiago . 
Sunstein, C. R., L. A. Reisch, and J. Rauber. 2018. “A Worldwide Consensus on Nudging? Not Quite, 
but Almost.” Regulation & Governance  12 (1): 3– 22. 
Sustainable Mobility for All.  2017. Global Mobility Report 2017 : Tracking Sector Performance . 
Washington , DC: Sustainable Mobility for All.  
Thaler, R. H ., and C.  R. Sunstein. 2008.  Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
Trillas, F. 2016. “Behavioral Regulatory Agencies.” Working Papers  wpdea1606 , Department of 
Applied Economics , Universitat Autonoma of Barcelona.  
Trillas, F., and M. A. Montoya . 2011.  “Commitment and Regulatory Independence in Practice in Latin 
American and Caribbean Countries.” Competition and Regulation in Network Industries 12 (1): 
27–57. 
Valcacer Rodrigues, S., H. J. de Moura, D. Ferreira Lopes Santos, and V. Amorim Sobreiro. 2017. 
“Capital Structure Management Differences in Latin American and US Firms after 2008 Crisis.”  
Journal of Economics, Finance and Administrative Science  22 (42): 51 –74. 
von Eije, H., A. Goyal and C. B. Muckley. 2017.  “Flexible firm -level dividends in Latin America ”. 
Finance Research Letters  23: 133-136 
Watkins, G., S. -U. Mueller, H . Meller, M. C. Ramirez,  T. Serebrisky, and A. Georgoulias. 2017.  Lessons 
from Four Decades of Infrastructure Project Related Conflicts in Latin America and the 
Caribbean. Washington, DC: IDB.  
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2013. Enabling Trade —Valuing Growth Opportunities . 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_SCT_EnablingTrade_Report_2013.pdf.  
 ———. 2018a. “ This is the Biggest Threat to Latin America’s Digital Transformation. ” 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/03/this -is-the-biggest -threat -to-latin -america- s-
digital- transformation/ . 
———. 2018b. “ For Latin America to Thrive in the Digital Era, it must First Teach Minds, then the 
Machines .” https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/03/here -s-how -latin -america- can-thrive -
in-the-digital- era/ . 
———. 2019. “Infrastructure around the World Is Failing. Here’s How to Make It More Resilient.”  
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/01/infrastructure -around -the-world -failing -heres -
how -to-make -it-more -resilient/ . 
Wren -Lewis, L. 2015. “Do Infrastructure Reforms Reduce the Effect of Corruption? Theory and 
Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean.” World Bank Economic Review  29 (2): 353– 84. 
Yáñez -Pagans, P., D. Martinez, O. A. Mitnik, L . Scholl , and A. Vázquez. 2018.  “Urban Transport 
Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean: Challenges and Lessons Learned.” IZA Discussion 
Paper DP 11812, IZA Institute of Labor Economics, Bonn, Germany.  