 
 
USAID  DIGITAL FRONTIERS  
 
VIETNAM DIGITAL INNOVATION  
ECOSYSTEM ANALYSIS  
 
 
SEPTEMBER  2020  
ANALYSIS Team  
Albert Antoine, CEO, Avaiga.com  
Dinh Thi Minh Thu, Vietnam E -Government Activity Manager, Digital Frontiers /Assessment Coordinator  
Hoanh Minh Duc, Special Counsel  
Alana McGinty, Senior Program Manager , Digital Frontiers /Assessment Coordinator  
Rob Ryan -Silva, Senior Director , DAI Center for Digital Acceleration  
Trương Lý  Hoàng Phi, Founder BSSC, CEO Techplus Investment Company, Vice President YBA HCMC  
 
Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank the many stakeholders who contributed their time and thoughtful responses to 
this analysis .  i     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS    USAID.GOV  CONTENTS  
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVI ATIONS ................................ ................................ ..........................  II 
1. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  1 
1.1. SCOPE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 1 
1.2. METHODOLOGY ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  1 
1.3. THE USAID DIGIT AL STRATEGY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  2 
1.4. THE MASSACHUSET TS INSTITUTE OF TECH NOLOGY D -LAB INNOVAT ION  
ECOSYS TEM ANALYSIS FRAMEWO RK ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
1.5. INDUSTRIAL REVO LUTION 4.0  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
2. THE VIET NAMESE DIGITAL INNOV ATION ECOSYSTEM  ................................ ..............  4 
2.1. SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  4 
2.2. ACTORS AND ROLE S ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 4 
2.3. LEGAL AND REGUL ATORY ENABLING ENVIR ONMENT  ................................ ................................  18 
3. OPPORTUNITIES FOR  PROGRAMMING  ................................ ................................ ............ 25 
3.1. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 25 
ANNEX A: RELEVANT DO NOR PROJECTS  ................................ ................................ .......... 32 
 
  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     ii ACRONYMS  AND ABBREVIATIONS  
ADB   Asian Development Bank  
AI  Artificial Intelligence  
API  Application Programming Interface  
ASEAN   Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
B2C  Business to Consumer  
BSSC   (Ho Chi Minh City) Business Startup Support Center  
CNC   Computer Numerical Control  
CPTPP   Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans -Pacific Partnership  
CSIRO   Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation  
DF   Digital Frontiers  
DPI  Department of Planning and Investment  
EVFTA   European Union Vietnam Free Trade Agreement  
Fintech   Financial Technology  
GVN   Government of Vietnam  
HCD   Human -Centered Des ign 
HCMC   Ho Chi Minh City  
ICT  Information and Communication s Techno logy  
IoT  Internet of Things  
IP  Intellectual Property  
IPO  Initial Public Offer ing 
IPP2  (Vietnam -Finland) Innovation Partnership Program Phase II  
IR  Intermediate Result 
IR4.0  Fourth Industrial Revolution  
IRC  Investment Registration Certificate  
IT  Information Technology  
IVR  Interactive Voice Response  iii     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  KYC  Know Your Custo mer 
LoC  Law on  Cybersecurity  
LoCIS   Law on Cyber -Information Safety  
MOET   Ministry of Education and Training  
MOLISA  Ministry of Labor, War Invalids, and Social Affairs  
MOST   Ministry of Science  and Technology  
MNO   Mobile Network Operator  
MPI  Ministry of Planning and Investment  
NAFOSTED  National Foundation for Science & Technology Development  
NATIF   National Technology Innovation Foundation  
NIC  National Innovation Center  
NGO   Non-Governmental Organizati on 
R&D  Research and Development  
SME  Small and Medium -Sized Enterp rise 
SOE  State-Owned Enterpri se 
STEM   Science,  Technology, Engineering , and Mathematics  
USAID   United States Agency for International Developmen t 
USD  U.S. Dollar  
VND   Vietnamese  Dong  
WB  World  Bank 
WISE   Women’s Initiative for Startups and Entrepreneurship  
WTO   World Trade Organization  
YBA   Young Business Association  
 1     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS    USAID.GOV  1. INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, the Southeast Asian economy has experienced a digital transformation of staggering 
proportions, with firms like Grab and Go -Jek rapidly transforming  how large parts of the private sector 
do business . While Vietnam is not as far along in that transformation as other countries in the region, its 
internal market of nearly 100 million people , the second -highest mobile telecommunication penetration 
in Southeast Asia , and its technically capable workforce  give it a strong  base from which to work . Some 
observers even see  parallels between Vietnam’s current stage of digital development and the earlier 
stages of Indon esia’s thriving online  economy.  
The COVID -19 pandemic is serving  as a crucible for Vietnam’s digital economy . The country’s overall  
gross domestic product ( GDP) growth fell to 1.81  percent  in the first half of 2020 , as compared to  a 
growth rate of  6.7 percent for the first half of 2019 ; however,  some companies in the financial 
technology (fintech) sector estimate that mobile banking transactions have increased six -fold in the same 
period . Prepared food, grocery , and household product  delivery services have seen dramatic increases in 
orders, and a recent Nielsen poll  shows that  63-64 percent  of consumers are interested in us ing those 
services once the pandemic subsides.  
Such a dramatic economic transformation brings both exciting  opportunities and risk. To foster a digital 
economy that adds rather than subtracts value for small businesses , provides opportunities  and 
protections  for all Vietnamese  people , and propels the country on its journey to self -reliance, the 
Government of Vietnam (GVN) must build the digital innovation ecosystem with care and intention . It 
will need support from the international community  to do so . 
1.1. SCOPE  
Digital Frontiers is a $74.4 million buy -in mechanism that is available to  U.S. Agency for International 
Development ( USAID ) Bureaus and Missions from 2017 -2022. The project  works closely with USAID’s 
Global Development Lab, the Center for Digital Development, USAID Missions, the private sector, and 
international and local development organizations to identify successful and sustai nable digital 
development approaches and scale their impact globally.   
USAID/Vietnam executed a buy -in to Digital Frontiers to explore issues related to e -governance and the 
country’s Industrial Revolution 4.0 strategy. Under that buy -in, a team was engaged to provide an 
analysis of the country’s digital innovation ecosystem using a recognized framework in order 
to assess  gaps that prevent Vietnam’s private sector digital economy from being  competitive, innovative, 
responsible, and inclusive , and to provide USAID with recommendations for areas of programming it 
could consider contributing  to help address those challenges . 
1.2. METHODOLOGY  
The analysis team conducted extensive desk research to prepare for what was anticipated  to be a wide -
ranging s eries of site visits and in -person stakeholder consultations . Because of public health measures 
to contain the COVID -19 pandemic, those consultations were not possible and were replaced with a 
more focused set of virtual stakeholder consultations undertake n remotely. Twenty -four calls, most 
taking approximately one hour, were held with a range  of stakeholders in the Vietnamese digital 
innovation ecosystem representing startups, investors, large enterprises, GVN officials, incubators and USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     2 
accelerators, busine ss networks, educators and researchers, NGOs, donors, and others . This analysis is 
based on  those consultations , desk research, and the extensive knowledge of team members in Vietnam 
and the region.  
1.3. THE USAID DIGITAL ST RATEGY  
In June 2020, USAID released its 2020-2024 Digital Strategy , intended to guide the Agency’s approach 
“to achieve and sustain open, secure, and inclusive digital ecosystems tha t contribute to broad -based, 
measurable development and humanitarian -assistance outcomes and increase self -reliance in emerging 
market countries.”   
This analysis takes as its central organizing principle  Specific Objective  2 of th e Strategy (“ Strengthen th e 
openness, inclusiveness, and security of country -level digital ecosystems ”) – particularly  Intermediate 
Result (IR) 5 and its sub -IRs: 
IR 5: Digital economies led by the private sector are competitive, innovative, responsible, and inclusive  
IR 5.1: Priva te sector investments in digital infrastructure and services align with internationally  
established best practices  
IR 5.2: Private sector skills, incentives, and capabilities contribute to development and promote inclusive 
and responsible service delivery in the digital economy  
IR 5.3: Local innovators, especially women, youth, ethnic and religious minorities, and Indigenous Peoples , 
participate in the digital economy  
1.4. THE MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY  D-LAB 
INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM  ANALYSIS FRAMEWO RK 
The Understanding Innovation Ecosystems  
framework  by the  D-Lab at the  
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  is a 
useful  lens through which to undertake this 
analysis. Unlike some other innovation 
ecosystem frameworks, the D -Lab 
framework is designed to cover a diversity 
of developing country environments and 
makes few assumptions with respect to the 
context of the ecosyste m. 
The D-Lab model places the  user-definable  
purpose of the ecosystem at its center, 
organizing the actors and roles around that 
purpose, inside a context of resources and 
an enabling environment.  
D-Lab defines the key roles as  follows : 
• Innovate : Innovators identify, develop, 3     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  and put into use new and improved ways of doing things within a specific local context.  
• Connect : The role and activity of connecting different actors to each other , whether through social 
networking or value chain developmen t. 
• Celebrate : Actors who promote local innovators , whether through positive press, innovator showcases, 
competitions and prizes, and/or storytelling.  
• Train : Training and capacity -building , whether in specific technical domains or more general business 
leadership skills, is a key activity within innovation processes.  
• Share knowledge : Sharing knowledge between different domains, sectors, and types of actors 
contributes to the production of inn ovation and the spread of innovative practices throughout a system.  
• Convene and facilitate : Bringing diverse members of the ecosystem together and facilitating 
productive, mutually beneficial interactions . 
• Advocate : Advocacy for the conditions needed to support innovation and for a level playing field for 
community -based innovators and entrepreneurs is often necessary in order to address system -level 
constraints and barriers to success.  
• Fund : In healthy innovation ec osystems, a variety of different actors offer a diverse range of funding 
types and sizes, ensuring that innovators and entrepreneurs can obtain the financing they need at each 
stage in their innovation process.  
The ecosystem purpose at the center of this a nalysis is  that of IR 5 of the USAID Digital Strategy : 
“Digital economies led by the private sector are competitive, innovative, responsible, and inclusive.”  
While the D -Lab framework addresses a broad range of resources and enabling environment factors, w e 
have focused on t he legal and regulatory  enabling environment as the most critical addressable area for 
development intervention.  
The analysis below addresses each of the D -Lab’s actor categories (businesses, networks, government, 
funders, research and education, and CBOs and NGOs) and adds international donors as an additional 
actor category. The roles these various actors play in t he ecosystem are highlighted in italics in the text.  
1.5. INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIO N 4.0  
The term “Industrial Revolution 4.0 ” or IR4.0 was popularized by Prof. Klaus Schwab of the World 
Economic Forum , who made the case that new technologies are blurring the l ines between digital, 
physical, and biological spheres, with consequent opportunities and disruption. The core digital elements 
of this shift in Schwab’s view  are artificial intelligence (AI), the Internet of Things (IoT), and big data.  
GVN has pushed an aggressive innovation strategy under the banner  of IR4.0, with the Central 
Committee resolving to “promote applications; develop science, technology and innovation; improve 
access; and actively participate in the Fourth Industrial Revolution.”  While GVN  contemplates policy to 
address some of Schwab’s specific  IR4.0 elements, particularly AI, it is fairly clear that the intention is a 
general  emphasis on  promoting  innovation , without necessarily tying it to arbitrary trends or 
technologies. “IR4.0” is commonly used to refer to various topics around innovation, but t o avoid 
confusion , this document does not adopt the IR4.0 terminology  except when referring to Schwab’s IR4.0 
concept  or the GVN strategy ; it instead speaks broadly to digital innovation.    USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     4 2. THE VIETNAMESE DIGIT AL INNOVATION ECOSYS TEM  
2.1. SUMMARY  
The Vietnamese digital innovation ecosystem is marked by enthusiasm and a sense of tremendous 
possibility. The country’s entrepreneurial spirit , combined with  a solid technical education system  and a 
domestic market of almost 100  million people , make it a strong contender to have  a vibrant digital 
economy  in the near future . The government has clearly communicated its intent to foster that growth .  
In examining the key features of the ecosystem and comparing them to successful innovation hubs  
elsewhere , the primary tendency that emerges is a disconnection of actors in the Vietnamese 
ecosystem. Many startups serve a market of small and medium -sized enterprises,  but that relationship is 
often one -way, with little feedback sought by or offered to the startup . Large domestic enterprises 
rarely acquire startups ; instead, they invest in them primarily as a matter of social responsibility than of 
market imperative . Foreign tech companies offer little in terms of technology transfer or transformative 
development of a foundational innovation workforce . Government programs are too often built on a  
supply rather than a demand basis, offering support  that is not much wanted or that add s little value. 
Academic research lacks links to market application or need. There  are exceptions to all of these  
features , but the general tendencies remain.  
The legal and regulatory framework is improving, but major challenges remain , particularly with respect 
to the investment  and business environment, intellectual property,  the uncertain environment for 
fintech,  and use of data. Some of these issues create significant barriers to progress.  
USAID might consider programming that is organized along human -centered design principles to help 
alleviate some of these problems and better connect the ecosystem’s actors to one another and to 
consumers – particularly consumers from underserved communities. A range of options for such 
programming is presented at the close of this d ocument.  
2.2. ACTORS AND ROLES   
In the D -Lab model, o rganizations and individuals  that create, support, and enable innovation are known 
as actors  and may play any number of eight key roles in the ecosystem: innovate, connect, celebrate, train, 
share knowle dge, convene and facilitate, advocate , and fund. This section addresses businesses, networks, 
government, funders, research and education, community -based organizations  (CBOs ) and non-
governmental organizations ( NGOs ), and donors as actors in the ecosystem . It also describes the key 
roles they play.  
2.2.1. BUSINESSES  
We will examine four key classes of businesses involved in the digital innovation ecosystem: 1) startups 
and their related infrastructure ; 2) small and medium -sized enterprises ( SMEs ); 3) large domestic 
enterprises ; and 4) foreign technology companies.  
2.2.1.1. Startups and Related Infrastru cture  
Startups are often seen as primary drivers of technological progress , and are prominent in the GVN 
plans for innovation . A small company, usually led by young professionals, unencumbered by existing 
business models, customer relationships, and entrenched attitudes, can take risks that an established 5     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  company would not. The spectacular success of once-scrappy upstart technol ogy companies like Google, 
Amazon, Facebook , Uber, and Airbnb serve as templates worldwide for the staggering growth potential 
of the right idea implemented well in a conducive context. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia’s Go -Jek, 
Singapore’s Grab, and many others have demonstrated that the startup model can be similarly 
transformative in the region.  These successes  have led to intense interest in the potential for startups to  
likewise  drive explosive growth  in Vietnam .  
Unfortunately, there  are no reliable gover nment or private statistics tracking the number of startups. 
While the number “more than 3,000” has been quoted for years in official and unofficial sources, i t is 
difficult to say how many startups exist in Vietnam , since their business registrations are not 
distinguished from more traditional SMEs. Vietnamese startups are often registered in Singapore, as 
many investors consider this a precondition of investment  (see Legal and Regulatory Enabling Environment  
below) , making the problem of tracking them eve n more difficult . The popular Startup Wheel 
competition attracted about 1,800 applicants last year; given that the competition primarily attracts  only 
early stage startups, the oft-cited 3,000 figure seems likely to be low ; however, without better statisti cs 
it is difficult to be sure . 
The history of Vietnam’s startup scene is commonly divided into three phases:  
Early 2000s.  The wide adoption of the Internet  brought new business opportunities in Vietnam 
just as it did elsewhere. Companies that successfully  built products and services on the Internet  
in this period include Yeah 1 and VinaGame (VNG).  
Late 2000s – early 2010s . A second phase  produced some of the top tech startups in e -
commerce  and marked the entrance of several regional venture capital  funds like CyberAgent 
Capital and pioneering accelerator/incubator s like Ho Chi Minh City ’s Business Startup Support 
Center  (BSSC) . Successful startups from this period include Tiki , an e-commerce venture 
sometimes referred to as  the Amazon of Vietnam ; and Foody , a food and beverage  review 
platform acquired by Singapore’s Sea Ltd.  for $64 million in 2017 . 
Present day.  One of the characteristics  seen in the current phase of startup development is the 
internationalization of the Vietnamese startup. A number of companies have management in 
Silicon Valley and tech and operations based in Vietnam ( e.g., ELSA, Got It Inc ., Earable, and 
Bonbouton ). Some stakeholders view internationalization as an endorsement and an investment 
in Vietnamese tech talent. Today’s Vi etnamese startups and their investors generally consider it 
important  to consider the international market from day one .  
COVID -19 may well be marking another transition point in the evolution of the startup subsystem. 
Many startups that were in a poor cas h position at the beginning of the pandemic have not been able to 
stay in business. Investors have become more risk -averse in this period, and foreign investors  in 
particular have found it operationally difficult to do due diligence and make deals. Some st artups that 
offer good prospects for digital transformation  of traditional business sectors  have seen dramatic growth 
driven by sudden need , but many others have been eliminated by the general economic downturn . 
Investors interviewed for this analysis view ed this shakeout as a good and healthy development for the 
startup subsystem and  were optimistic about  what it means  for the post -COVID era . 
The primary role of startups in the ecosystem is to innovate . While there are exceptions, Vietnamese 
startups ’ innovations  do not generally take the form of technological advances, but rather USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     6 implementation of digital business models that are novel to the context. Usually these models have been 
implemented successfully elsewhere  and are being imported to Vietnam. While this approach may fall 
short of the GVN ’s vision of  bold technological innovation driven by startups, it does provide an 
important avenue for  digital transformation of the economy . For many SMEs, it may be the only realistic 
means to  successfully  help drive digital transformation.   
Stakeholders had various views as to why Vietnamese startups generate few technological innovations. 
Most commonly cited was a lack of creativity, either because the education system fails to inculcate it or 
because Confucia n cultural tendencies inhibit it. From a Western perspective, one obvious hypothesis is 
that because the intellectual property  (IP) regime is weak , it is difficult to make an asset of  technological 
innovatio n around which one can build productive exchange . Interestingly, while all stakeholders agreed 
the IP regime is weak, and most agreed this weakness was a problem, none could offer an example 
where the IP regime  prevented them from undertaking anything  they were otherwise inclined to do. 
These stakeholder s included investors ; none cited weak IP protections as having dissuaded them from 
making an investment  in an otherwise attractive idea . A health ier IP economy might  create new 
circumstances from which innovation could better grow, but stakeholders  notabl y do not feel a need for 
this change . 
Several clusters of views emerged from stakeholders around the ecosystem  of deficits  within the startup 
subsystem that limit its development:  
• Creativity . The rolls of Vietnamese startup founders include incredibly talen ted people, many with 
world -class technical and creative skills. There was general agreement, though, that just as the 
workforce in general lacks creative problem -solving  skills, so does the pool of prospective 
founders. Many stakeholders saw this  deficit  as a reason for what some described as a “copy -
and-paste” approach to applying business models from other contexts in Vietnam, with  varying 
degrees of reference to local context.  
• Business experience . Startup founders often begin with an idea and at least a n outline of a plan of 
how to implement it technically. They may not have the business experience or knowledge of 
the market they are entering to execute their plan properly. This approach is not limited to 
Vietnamese startups, and the incubator/accelerato r system exists primarily to offer support to 
companies  and founders  as they gain a practical understanding of the business considerations of 
their chosen model.  
• Connection to market . Some  stakeholders expressed a view  that startups too often offer their 
product or service without actually engaging with its intended customers, leading to poor 
outcomes .  
2.2.1.2. The Exit 
Most startups  fail. Failure is a necessary function of the experimentation  and risk -taking  process that is 
central to the idea of the startup. While startup founders dream of Grab-like success, only a few will be 
lucky enough to achieve  even a more modest exit . 
A successful exit strategy, or “exit,” for a startup involves  either an initial public offering (IPO) on a 
stock market or acquisition by another company. On achieving an exit, a startup’s investors realize a 
return on their investment , and the founders and sometimes early hires are able to monetize their 
ownership stakes. Often a successful founder will reinvest  those earnings in new startups, either as a  
repeat  founder or as an “angel investor ,” contributing to an innovative cycle.  7     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  Because the exit provides the primary financial incentives for investors and founders  as well as a source 
of capital for future inve stment , it serves as the engine  for startup -driven innovation. In Vietnam,  parts of  
that engine may be  missing  or broken . 
Only one Vietnamese  tech startup, Yeah 1, is listed on a stock exchange  (though one other , VinaGame 
(VNG), is traded over  the counter). Almost all stakeholders cited a requirement of the Securities Law  
that listed companies must be profitable for two consecutive years  before IPO  as a reason for this 
absence . Even Tiki, considered a hugely successful startup, is not eligible under  these criteria, having 
booked losses of trillions of Vietnamese Dong (VND). This  dynamic  contrasts with major U .S. 
exchanges, which have income rather than profit requirements ; however, the Vietnamese prerequisite is  
not as stringent as other major exchan ges in the region (see table below ).  
TABLE 1: LISTING REQUIREMENTS  FOR SELECTED STOCK EXCHANGES  
EXCHANGE  CAPITAL 
REQUIREMENT (USD 
EQUIVALENT) * INCOME/ REVENUE/PRO FIT REQUIREMENT 
(USD EQUIVALENT) * 
Ho Chi Minh City  Stock Exchange  $5.2M (VND 120B)  Profitability for two consecutive years  
Hanoi  $1.3M (VND 30B)  Profitability for two consecutive years  
Australian Securities Exchange  $7.8M  $777,000 net profit over last three years; $310,000 
net profit in most recent  year 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange  $26.5M  $3.8M profit over  last two years; $2.5M profit in most 
recent year  
NASDAQ  $4M $750,000 income before tax in latest fiscal year  
NYSE  $500M  $10M adjusted pre -tax income over last three years  
Singapore Stock Exchange  n/a $4.9M pre -tax profit over last three years  
Tokyo Stock Exchange  $16.6M  $5.2M pre -tax profit over last three years  
*Listing requirements are complex , and these equivalents have been simplified for the sake of comparison.  
Many stakeholders expressed the belief that technology investments are simply not attractive to most 
Vietnamese investors, who prefer real estate opportunities . For this reason, a local IPO is not a good 
way to raise capital.  
Acquisition is thus the primary means of exit for Vietnamese startups. An established  company might 
want to acquire  a startup  for many reasons , but the following are typical:  
• To acquire intellectual property.  A startup may have developed a patented innovation or valuable 
trademark that an established company sees as important either to own  or to keep out of the 
hands of competitors. In an ecosystem like Silicon Valley, this is how startups form an important 
part of the research and development (R&D) system, and many startups are founded and funded 
specifically with the aim of developing IP that is likely to  be attractive to acquisition -minded 
companies. The difficulty of declaring and transferring ownership of IP makes this route to exit 
difficult, reducing the incentive to produce innovative IP.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     8 • To absorb talented teams.  A startup that has assembled and motivated a particularly talented team 
can be an acquisition target for a company that would rather absorb that team than build its 
own organically. In Vietnam there are examples of this  approach, said to be one reason for 
Vingroup’s acquisition of Money Lover ; however, because connections between startups and 
companies that have the capital to make such acquisitions are weak in Vietnam, such 
transactions are less likely.  
• To access a new market.  Often a company will acquire  a startup in a complimentary sector to get 
access to a new geography. Vietnamese startups are proving to be attractive acquisition targets 
for foreign companies for this reason, but this sword is two -edged . Vietnamese entrepreneurs 
gain capital and exposu re to international markets, but some portion of the value produced by 
their companies is thenceforth exported from the country .  
• To access an existing user base.  A startup that has succeeded in attracting a user base for its 
product or brand might be an a cquisition target for a company seeking an easy way to reach that 
audience.  
• To eliminate a potential competitor.  An established company that sees a growing startup with the  
potential to disrupt its market may choose to acquire the startup rather than face the risk. The 
startup’s product can then be integrated into the purchaser’s portfolio or quietly eliminated. 
None of the stakeholders interviewed believed that large Vietnamese enterprises see startups as 
enough of a threat to make this  a likely reason .  
While many of the incentives for acquisition are missing or weaker in Vietnam than in other countries , 
and while an IPO is not seen as a viable option by most,  investment in the startup sector is  rising. A 
recent report from Do Ventures put  2019 investment in Vietnamese startups at $861 million, as 
compared to Singapore’s $693 million  for the same year , a remarkable comparison.  
Exit-driven innovation is not universally popular  and can serve to make an ecosystem less inclusive . It 
encourages quick wins  over long -term value generation , often for the benefit of a short list of specific 
players that are known to be likely acquirers. Innovative ideas that will not obviously lead either to an 
acquisition in the short term or a large -scale IPO in the medium t erm can struggle for funding  even in 
very well -developed ecosystems .  
2.2.1.3. Accelerators and Incubators  
Incubators and accelerators are key infrastructure  elements  for launching  early-stage startups. Both offer 
founders help in growing their businesses and attracting investment.  
Incubators aim to hatch disruptive ideas to build them into business models and companies. Participants  
in incubator programs  typically  get co -working or office space  (often at concessionary rates ), mentoring,  
business assistanc e like legal and accounting services,  and some connection to a larger community of 
other incubated companies and interested parties. Many incubators are organized around a specific 
market or vertical. Because first -time founders typically have limited  connections and little business 
experience, an incubator can play a critical role in launching a promising idea – or in giving it space to 
change when the original concept runs into problems.  The most effective incubators offer  an intentional 
program of servic es and support that helps the incubated companies transform to more effectively  meet 
their intended market challenge . 
Accelerators seek to turbocharge the growth of existing early-stage companies. Offerings differ from 
program to program, but a typical acc elerator provides a small seed investment – generally in exchange 9     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  for equity in the accelerated company – mentorship, and connections to investors. Accelerator 
programs are usually structured around a small group of accelerated companies, selected through a 
competitive application process . This cohort  progress es together along a fixed schedule of mentorship 
and development, with  “graduation” from the program typically  culminating in a pitch day for 
prospective investors. Accelerators can nurture a promising  early-stage startup , turning it  into a more 
serious growth prospect.  A strong accelerator lends its graduates credibility and access to investors and 
other connections.  
The primary roles of incubators and accelerators in the ecosystem are to share knowledge  – providing 
critical mentorship to startup founders – and connect  – creating communities of innovators and plugging 
them into existing parts of the ecosystem. While participation in an accelerator program can provide 
funding , capital is not the p rimary value added. The private sector ecology of incubators and accelerators  
in Vietnam  is robust and serves these roles well . There are not enough places in these programs for all 
prospective startups, but this is normal and imposes a certain amount of h ealthy competition , and the 
level of that competition would  not seem to indicate a severe mismatch between supply and demand . 
Many public sector programs billed as incubators and accelerators in fact offer little more than free or 
concessionary -rate office  space , and do not attempt to serve these roles at all  – or do not serve them 
well because they are not actually connected to the market systems in which startups will need to 
operate .  
As with much of the infrastructure of the innovation ecosystem in Viet nam, incubators and accelerators 
are clustered in Ho Chi Minh City ( HCMC ) and Hanoi, and to a lesser degree in Da Nang, leaving 
entrepreneurs and markets outside these areas underserved. Other gaps in the incubator/accelerator 
landscape when compared to ot her countries include involvement from large corporations and 
programs focused on specific verticals or “deep tech” innovations (substantial scientific advances like AI, 
robotics, etc.).  
2.2.1.4. Small and Medium -Sized Enterprises  
The lion’s share of Vietn am’s private sector lies in SMEs , which are understood  to comprise 98  percent  
of all businesses  and generate 40  percent  of GDP. While many Vietnamese SMEs doubtless engage and 
benefit from process innovation  and make iterative product improvements , traditi onal SMEs – as 
differentiated from startups – are not considered  to be drivers of technological innovation.  
Digital transformation of SMEs in Vietnam is proceeding largely without their intention, and the COVID -
19 pandemic has only accelerated that proces s. Without the capacity  and funding  to undertake their 
own digital transformation, SMEs depend largely on startups’ platforms in order to access digital 
ordering, inventory, customer management, and similar services . There are significant upsides  to 
traditional businesses from  many of  these platforms , but SMEs are also vulnerable to the downsides.   
Worldwide, the most conspicuous recent startups have been platforms for facilitating transactions 
between private individuals to provide services or ac cess otherwise underutilized resources – a model 
known as the sharing economy. Go -jek, Grab, Uber , and Airbnb are prominent examples. The net 
economic impact of sharing economy businesses is hotly debated; they clearly generate new transactions 
by enabling  novel or more efficient interactions, but they also cannibalize existing transactions by 
undercutting or otherwise competing with existing businesses. Similarly, business -to-consumer (B2C) e -
commerce sites like Tiki and Amazon are formidable competitors t o local retailers, but e -commerce 
platforms like Alibaba and eBay can enable SMEs to reach customers in distant markets – also potentially USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     10 displacing local SMEs in those markets. The net effect is hotly debated, but it is clear that these 
platforms create downward pressure on prices while extracting rent for the platform owner.  
For good or ill, these platform -driven transformations have accelerated for many SMEs because of the 
disruptions caused by COVID -19. Many retail SMEs like restaurants have had to sh ift to interacting with 
customers primarily through platforms, since in -person contact  has been limited.  
Stakeholder interviews left the impression that  few startups engage in human -centered design processes 
with the SMEs they expect to serve, tending ins tead to make a platform offering and expecting SMEs to 
want to engage with it on its inherent merits.  
2.2.1.5. Large Domestic Enterprises  
Large domestic companies and state -owned enterprises (SOEs)  are heavily involved in technological 
innovation , with Viettel’s ambitious 5G research program and Vingroup’s efforts on AI  being high -profile 
example s of increased R&D spending . With relatively large budgets to work with, these companies have 
had good success in luring qualified overseas Vietnamese back to the country. With exceptions, these 
companies generally approach innovation with little interaction with outside actors.  Collaboration with 
universities  on research  does not often align  with the  enterprises ’ R&D, as will be seen below, and none 
of the interviewed stakeholders saw R&D of value coming from the startup community.  
Some large enterprises have provided funding to the startup subsystem, but this  investment  is generally 
made due to a sense of social responsibility rather than the perception of  a sound financial or R&D 
investment. Acquisitions of startups  by these companies  are rare, with Vingroup being the most active 
corporate player.  Few other  large companies seem interested  in acquiring startups, and SOEs are not 
legally permitted to do so.   
Notably, several large Vietnamese enterprises have  established  their own universities  – FPT Universit y 
and VinUniversity are prominent  examples in the digital innovation space. In some cases,  these 
universities were  founded to train workforces suitable fo r the needs of the enterprises, either because 
the quality or quantity of those produced by the public system were seen as lacking , or to tap into a 
perceived lucrative education market . Interestingly, none of the large corporate or education 
stakeholders interviewed for this analysis saw these private universities as major drivers of commercial 
research.  
Together with extensive training programs for new employees – six weeks seems to be typical – the 
efforts of these  universities mean that large enterprise s in Vietnam  fulfil a different training  role than is 
common in other countries.  
2.2.1.6. Foreign Companies  
A number of  large foreign technology companies have made investments in production facilities in 
Vietnam. Intel, Samsung, and Apple are among the mo st high -profile of these. Typically, these 
investments are touted as bringing the prospect of technology transfer, workforce upgrades, and other 
benefits to the economy. These benefits  would make these companies important actors  in the 
Vietnamese digital i nnovation ecosystem, but the evidence for them to date is thin.  
Certainly some  middle management cohorts gain valuable experience working with global supply chains, 
international standards, and top -tier production and management practices ; however, these workforces  
are small,  and it is not clear how mobile they really are. Production floor workers  also gain experience 11     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  with modern production equipment, processes, and standards, but it is not apparent that this 
experience is readily transferable to other jobs  in Vietnam or that these employees  circulate widely.  
Technological  supply chain inputs to these production facilities come almost exclusively from overseas, 
and no obvious  local ecosystem to produce  them is being created or strengthened.  
These firms see the local workforce as having  acceptable quality and being reasonably  competitive on 
cost. Infrastructure and geographical advantages are similarly seen as good but not exceptional. For the 
most part, the motivations for these large foreign technology comp anies to produce goods in Vietnam is 
based on the tax and other incentives national and local governments offer  rather than on fundamentals.  
2.2.2. NETWORKS  
There are robust traditional business networks in Vietnam , with strong roots across conventional SMEs 
and large enterprises. The Young Business Association  (YBA) , for example, is a vibrant organization with 
more than 70 local chapters around the country. There are also well-established  special interest 
networks, like the HCMC Association for Women Executives & Entrepreneurs , that address the specific 
needs of targeted underserved groups. These general business associations promote trade and 
partnerships among member businesses. Various industry -specific associatio ns that advocate for the 
interests of specific sectors  are also active across the country.  
These networks seem to be an obvious entry point for startups to more closely  engage  with the SMEs 
whose sectors they hope to transform . They could serve a variety o f roles in the innovation ecosystem : 
connecting  startups and other innovators to SMEs, advocating  for policies that would improve prospects 
for digital transformation, sharing knowledge  among the various actors, and convening and facilitating  
diverse actor s.  
Startups have begun to be active participants in some of these networks, like the HCMC chapter of the 
YBA. In practice, however, this connection is not always made smoothly.  Because  conventional SMEs 
make up the lion’s share of the Vietnamese economy, they are also the largest part of the membership 
base of business networks. Startups face very different business challenges than conventional SMEs, and 
as startup founders and staff join these networks, many find it difficult to engage  meaningfully  with 
membership. These cultural issues, combined with the relatively small startup cohort within the 
networks, mean that startups are often relegated to the margins.  
2.2.3. GOVERNMENT  
The GVN effort to promote innovation through its IR4.0 strategy is taken seriously throughout the 
ministries charged with carrying it out, but the approach differs from ministry to ministry. There is no 
unified set of key performance indicators, and those that do exist – such as  those for Project 844 (see 
text box) – focus on metrics like numbers of startups and amount of investment in startups. These are 
not necessarily good indicators of the quality or economic transformation enabled by startups, and 
moreover are difficult to trac k across the whole ecosystem  given current systems  for capturing 
statistics . USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     12 Many GVN efforts to boost the digital innovation 
ecosystem are markedly  disconnected from the 
existing ecosystem. They often focus on  provision 
of office space , labs,  and other facilities, but these 
needs are  rarely the most restrictive for the 
growth of innovative businesses. Areas of focus 
seem to be chosen based on the input of 
international consultants on  perceived hot growth 
areas like smart factories , rather than by 
examining the current capacity and demand , and 
analyzing what capacity could be most readily built 
to address existing market needs , or what 
capacities would be most pertinent to the most 
likely applications .  
At least six separate ministries, the  State Bank of 
Vietnam , 63 provincial governments , and People’s 
Committees from across the country are 
specifically charged with governing and/or 
supporting the innovation ecosystem under the 
GVN IR4.0 plan (see chart). Their responsibilities 
and legal authorities are often ambiguous, 
sometimes overlap ping, and not answerable to a 
unified set of key performance indicators. Under 
Vietnam ’s civil code legal system, legal normative 
documents issued by one ministry may not be 
consistent with those issued by another , and new 
provisions may conflict with those issued by the 
same ministry ear lier. Furthermore, international 
treaty obligations often interact with this mix in 
complex ways (see Legal and Regulatory Enabling 
Environment, below). Even given the best of 
intentions, a unified purpose, and a lack of 
bureaucratic protection of turf, su ch a 
fragmentary approach would structurally tend to 
lead to inefficiencies and missed opportunities. A unified data collection structure such as that outlined 
in Opportunities for Programming , below, would provide a necessary infrastructure for unifying a nd 
managing a coordinated GVN innovation effort.  Project 844  is a GVN initiative led by  the 
Ministry of Science and Technology  (MOST ) to 
support the national startup ecosystem. Taking 
its name from the Prime Ministerial decis ion 
that founded it (Decision No. 844/QD -
TTg/2016), Project 844 aims to create favorable 
conditions to dramatically grow the national 
innovative startup ecosystem by 2025 by:  
• Developing a national startup portal;  
• Establishing startup service centers to 
provide physical and digital workspace for 
startups and provide these at concessional 
rates;  
▪ Renovating office space for incubators, 
trade promotion organizations, and other 
support services for startups;  
▪ Funding an annual technology event called 
TECHFEST;  
▪ Creating infrastructure to assist startups 
with networking ; 
▪ Funding  training startup personnel ; and 
▪ Drafting new legislation and regulation s 
favorable to the ecosystem.  
This initial effort by GVN remains in the early 
stages of implementation – for example,  
approval, funding allocation, monitoring of 
disbursement, and evaluation of project quality 
are works in progress.  While Project 844 is 
breaking new ground for public -private 
partnership in the innovation ecosystem, it is 
somewhat hobbled by government bu dgeting 
rules.  13     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV   
 
All of the ministries interviewed ha ve processes in place to review and recommend changes to 
legislation and regulation , and reported that these were actively engaged. With the exception of Project 
844, ho wever, it was not clear that these processes connected to stakeholders outside government. So 
while the various ministries are in a unique position to advocate  for the ecosystem, a lack of connection 
to other ecosystem stakeholders hampers their effectiven ess in that role.  
At least one notable event sponsored by GVN, 844’s TECHFEST, is effective at connecting , celebrating , 
and convening and facilitating , and it is worthwhile to build on this success . 
USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     14 2.2.4. FUNDERS  
For Vietnamese startups, finding funding for early stages of development – ideation, R&D, prototype 
development and testing, and market validation – is difficult. Bank loans are difficult to obtain for 
companies without a track record , and venture capital is focused on later -stage startups .  
Because funding for innovation is focused in major cities , specifically  HCMC, innovators from other 
areas are at a particular disadvantage  in getting started.  Documents reviewed in desk research, and 
consultations with Women’s Initiative for Startups and E ntrepreneurship (WISE , described below in 
CBOs and NGOs ), indicated that women entrepreneurs face particular barriers in accessing finance , due 
to inherent bias and weaker networks with funders.  
2.2.4.1. Banks  
Banks are generally reluctant to give the smal l loans that early -stage startups  need, preferring to deal 
with large enterprises that are seen as low risk and are able to cultivate long -term relationships with the 
banks. Banks will give loans to traditional SMEs that can put up assets as collateral, bu t startups  have few 
physical assets . Intellectual property is difficult to secure  and transfer , and there is little legal  basis for 
valuing it . For these  reason s, banks are not a major source of funding for startups.   
2.2.4.2. Venture  Capital and Angel  Investment  
The domestic venture capital scene in Vietnam is nascent, and  the majority of  deals are small. Domestic 
venture capital was only legalized in 2018, with the promulgation of Decree 38/2018/ND -CP, and 
because of restrictions and ambiguities in th at law (see Legal and Regulatory Framework: Investment , 
below), there are still few active local funds. A seed -round deal is generally in the range of $200,000, far 
smaller than, for example, a typical Silicon Valley deal.  There is very little Series A and  B investment. 
That said, 2019 was a record year for tech investment in Vietnam, with South Korean , Singaporean, and 
Japanese investors leading the way.   
While a ngel investment  is growing, it  is a less significant contributor to overall startup investment in 
Vietnam than in other innovation ecosystems. The typical angel investor in Vietnam is someone already 
heavily involved in the ecosystem, a businessperson who is tempted by stories of fantastical growth of 
startups, or in a few cases, successful former f ounders. Typically , these investors put $30,000 -50,000 
each into one  to three deals per year, also providing their expertise, mentoring, and networks. 
Inexperienced investors sometimes run into or create problems by having unrealistic expectations, e.g. , 
requiring an outsized stake in the company, demanding an early cash out, or presuming  unrealistic 
returns.  
Because comprehensive government data on the startup sector are weak , investors rely on their 
networks with other investors and actors in the ecosyst em to crowdsource information on what is 
happening and what opportunities may be promising. Stakeholders from the investment community 
reported confidence in this information, but because it relies on personal connections, it likely 
inadvertently excludes groups who for various reasons are not connected to the existing core players.  
2.2.4.3. Large Enterprises  
Large companies have occasionally served as investors in startups, notably FPT in the form of FPT 
Ventures. The larger companies generally see those t ransactions less as potentially advantageous 
investments and more as the fulfillment of a social responsibility. Because of this  dynamic , large 
companies cannot be considered to be major or consistent funders of startups . They do , of course , in 
some cases underwrite large internal R&D budgets , though the details of these dealings are often closely 15     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  held either for commercial or, in the case of SOEs, national security reasons . Vingroup, through  the 
Vingroup Innovation Foundation, does provide some grants for basic and applied research, particularly in 
so-called “deep tech” fields like AI, robotics, nanotechnology, and materials science with an eye toward 
commercialization.  
2.2.4.4. Government  
Some GVN programs provide funding for private sector innovation, notably the Ministry of Science and 
Technology ’s (MOST )’s National Technology Innovation Foundation (NATIF). Legally a non -profit, 
NATIF is meant to provide no -equity grants and preferential loan guarantees for technology companies 
to invest in R&D, innovation, and technology transfer . NATIF funds basic and applied research , but its 
selection criteria focus  more on the novelty of the  proposed  research than in its possible  commercial 
applications.   
The National Agency for Technology, Entrepreneurship , and Commercialization Development  
(NATECD) under MOST provid es training, mentorship, incubation /acceleration , and funding to startups , 
but was mentioned  as a driver  in commerc ial R&D by none of the stakeholders interviewed , apart from 
those from MOST. The National Foundation for Science and Technology Development (NAFOSTED), 
also under MOST, provides funding for research in a wide variety of areas  but seems principally to 
benef it academia.  
Some of the public sector incubator/accelerator programs like Vietnam Silicon Valley also provide cash 
funding , but their contributions are primarily in -kind in the form of office space and other support 
services.   
In addition to the non-financial support it provides, HCMC’s BSSC makes loans available  at 
concessionary rates  to HCMC -area startups , effectively as fund manager for the HCMC government . It 
has extended  more than VND 100 billion in credit to more than 1,000 projects to date . Because  these 
loans are made within the context of BSSC’s support structure for startups, the default rate is quite low.   
2.2.4.5. Donors  
There are cases where international donors have provided financial assistance to the Vietnamese private 
sector to promote inn ovation. The Vietnam -Finland Innovation Partnership Program Phase II (IPP2) gave 
some grants to startups, and g rants under the Aus4Innovation project (see Annex A  for more on both ) 
have gone to Vietnamese universities to work toward commercializing their r esearch. But while these 
effort s have had an outsized impact on the impressions of stakeholders of donors’ role in the 
ecosystem, direct financial support to the private sector by donors is rare and not really a feature of the 
ecosystem.  
The GVN has called  on the International Finance Corporation (IFC) to invest in startups, but thus far 
there seem to be only limited initiatives in that direction, with the IFC pledging to support three 
agriculture tech firms with $15,000 each through an accelerator program.  The Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) has supported SME s and women -led SMEs in Vietnam  through loans and access to finance.  
Recently, the U.S. Development Finance Corporation ( DFC) expressed its interest in investing in 
Vietnam ; however, these investments are for established sectors, not for startups.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     16 2.2.5. RESEARCH AND EDUCATI ON 
With remarkable consistency, stakeholders across the ecosystem cited a lack of creativity, problem -
solving skills, and teamwork skills as being central deficits  of the Vietnamese workforce. Most believed 
that universities produce a workforce for digital innovation that is technically credible but lacking in 
these soft-skill areas. While some  also cited cultural factors, there was broad agreement that the 
educatio n system, starting from primary school, is the best place to look to solve  these deficits in soft 
skills.  
2.2.5.1. Primary and Secondary Education System  
The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) is in the process of revising primary and secondary 
curricula to follow a more learner -centered model than has traditionally been the case, and a new 
hands -on science, technology, engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) curriculum  is part of this effort. The 
curriculum revision effort appears to be serious and base d on widely  recognized best practices, but it 
faces a number of obstacles.  
The hands -on learner -centered model being promoted by MOET is a departure  from the traditional 
examination -focused model, and as such faces conscious and unconscious resistance  from teachers, 
parents, and students . Many parents react negatively to the unfamiliar curriculum and teaching style, 
worrying  that because  their children do not learn the same facts they did when they were in school , the 
new model of  education is less rigorous . The heavy social focus on exams as arbiters of  educational  
success is  also difficult to dislodge. Teachers need training and retraining in order to implement the new 
curricula effectively.  
The revised hands -on STEM curriculum encourages teamwork to build  projects , conduct experiments, 
and engage in creative problem -solving, but th is effort requires more classroom space to implement than 
is available in many schools. The se projects  and experiments  require consumable materials that will 
place pressure on sc hool budgets and administration to keep stocked .  
In recent years, private education companies have been providing extracurricular STEM education 
activities for a fee  or, in some cases, with support from a sponsor . The robotics  and science  clubs and 
compet itions offered by these companies have become popular in some areas, primarily  in the larger 
cities. Some stakeholders allege that these private companies push back on MOET’s efforts to provide 
STEM education through the public schools , a charge the compan ies deny . 
An annual STEM Festival, held at Hanoi University of Science and Technology since 2015, has served to 
celebrate  the achievements of students, convene and facilitate  educators, and connect  various stakeholders 
in STEM education.  
Female students a re underrepresented in STEM subjects in Vietnam and have slightly lower average 
scores in math and science than their male counterparts. That said, data from the mid -2010s shows that 
40.7 percent  of graduates with STEM degrees in Vietnam are women, which  while well less than half,  
beats  the United States (31.9  percent ), Australia (31.0  percent ), and South Korea (27.9  percent ). 
2.2.5.2. University System  
With few exceptions, the stakeholders engaged in this analysis rated the technical quality of university 
graduates highly. (It should be noted that almost all  of these informants work in software,  so the quality 
of hardware engineering talent was largely u naddressed.) University stakeholders agreed that students 
lack soft skills when arriving at university, and many emphasized intensive efforts by the university to 17     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  inculcate a sense of inquiry  in incoming students. An unwillingness to proffer a potentially unpopular idea 
was one quality often cited by university educators as being a common problem in incoming students. 
Many also cited English language proficiency as lacking.  
The universities engaged for this analysis said they seek regular  formal feedback from industry and 
graduates on the suitability of the topics taught. Industry stakeholders  gave mixed reactions to this 
process , though some indicated they see improvement . Few people with industry experience take 
faculty jobs , limiting faculty connection w ith commercial needs ; however, student internships in the 
private sector are increasingly common.  
The increasing pace of technological change is a challenge, making it difficult to keep both pre -service 
and in -service training current.  
2.2.5.3. Research  
Research produced by the university system is largely disconnected from commercial considerations . 
The primary method by which academic research reaches the market is that a faculty member goes 
outside the university to commercialize it. The vast majority o f research funding is provided by the state, 
with no inherent connection to the market. Patents filed for state -sponsored research are permitted to 
be licensed only after going through a poorly -defined  valuation process that is rarely completed  (see 
Legal and Regulatory Enabling Environment , below ). This is likely why  patents are rarely filed by universities 
– in the 2006-2016 period, universities applied for 811 patents, of which  just 99 were granted.  
This breakdown in the commercialization of university IP means that  the feedback loop that provides 
substantial funding for many U .S. universities1 –– cannot develop in Vietnam, inhibiting incentives for 
keeping research market -oriented.  For these incentives to overpower the always -powerful imperative 
for faculty to publish, a much more efficient process of commercializing university IP will be necessary.   
Even when funded by enterprise, research is often not actually tied to the needs of the sponsoring 
enterprise, whose motivation is instead merely to build the country’s capacity to do research. A notable 
exception is the VinTech Fund, which sponsors commercially relevant university research . 
2.2.6. CBOS AND NGOS  
Several NGOs play important roles in the digital innovation ecosystem, notably:  
• Business St artup Support Center (BSSC)  was launched in Jan uary 2011 as a non -profit organization 
under the  HCMC People's  Committee and Youth Union to provide support for startups and 
young entrepreneurs in HCMC.  BSSC has developed a wide range of  programs  and activit ies. In 
addition to providing financial and non -financial support for startups and entrepreneurs, BSSC 
seeks to kindle an entrepreneurial spirit among Vietnamese youth and to promote startups as a 
valid career path in that segment.  BSSC provides training  on business management and 
                                                
1 Research done by faculty and students is patented and licensed to industry, funding more research aimed at 
securing future licensing arrangements.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     18 entrepreneurship skills for aspiring founders, connect s through regular networking events, and 
connects  and celebrates  through the nationally  known Startup Day and Startup Wheel events.  
• Women’s Initiative for Startups and Entrepreneurship (WISE)  is a support network for female 
entrepreneurs supported by  USAID,  Australian Aid , the Asian Development Bank , ANDE, and 
other donors . WISE offers diverse programming to its stakeholders, including an accelerator 
program , training  and capacity building, programs to ease access to finance, and connection  
through networking support .  
• Viet AI is a small NGO working to build the capacity of Vietnamese developers to work with 
artificial intelligence tools and frameworks. They provide low -cost training and hold events to 
discuss relevant issues in the field.  
These are  a few high -profile, high -impact examples  of CBOs and NGOs that lead in the innovation 
ecosystem in Vietnam in specific area s of expertise . In general  NGOs and CBOs are not major players in 
the innovation ecosystem.  Though when they are involved , CBOs and NGOs can play a  key role in 
mobilizing social resources to build up the innov ation ecosystem in Vietnam  through  facilitat ing the 
participation  of different players in the  ecosystem .  
2.2.7. DONORS  
International donors have long taken an interest in the Vietnamese digital innovation ecosystem and  
have at various times served to train through capacity building programming, connect  and share knowledge  
among various actors domestically and internationally, and advocate  for and in limited cases fund 
innovators. M ajor non -USAID efforts are catalogued in Annex A.  
2.3. LEGAL AND REGULA TORY ENABLING ENVIRO NMENT  
From 1954  in the North and 1975 across  Vietnam  to 1986, Vietnamese business law centered around 
the operations of state-owned enterprises and cooperatives. The “ Doi Moi ” (“Renovation”) reforms of 
1986 aimed to shift the country to a “socialist -oriented market economy.” Since then, many areas of 
law, particularly those on investment, have been converging toward values found in Western law 
systems.  
Vietnam’s legal framewo rk has shifted rapidly in recent years, with changes to the Civil Code, enterprise 
law, and investment law, as well as major treaty obligations arising from Vietnam’s participation in the 
World Trade Organization (WTO), Comprehensive and Progressive Agreem ent for Trans -Pacific 
Partnership (CPTPP), and European Union Vietnam Free Trade Agreement (EVFTA). These changes 
generally have been perceived  positive ly by the business community, but there remain some 
shortcomings that affect  the digital innovation ecos ystem.  
2.3.1. INVESTMENT   
Investment in the digital innovation ecosystem, as other areas , is governed by the  Investment Law  of 
2014 and the Enterprise Law  of 2014  and their guiding regulations. Additional regulations may apply to 
investment in certain sec tors – for example, investments in fintech businesses may be subject to 
restrictions in  the Law on Credit Organizations  (2010) , Law on Insurance Businesses  (2014) , and the 
Law on Securities  (2006) . 19     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  2.3.1.1. Foreign Investment  
Only certain sectors of the Vi etnamese economy are required by treaty obligations to be open to 
foreign businesses, including investors . Restrictions on foreign involvement in other sectors take various 
forms, including limited ownership ratios, mandatory investment forms, and limited scopes of 
operations. This “positive approach,” in which only specified sectors are open, means that all other 
sectors are subject to the discretion of diverse state bodies on a case -by-case basis. The uncertainty 
created by this regime causes confusion and likely dissuades foreign investment. While other economies 
in the region, like Singapore, also impose restrictions on foreign investment, they do so on the ba sis of a 
“negative approach ” – i.e., clear restrictions are placed only on specific sectors (banking, finance, media, 
and real estate in the Singaporean case), providing investors with a more predictable regulatory 
environment.  
Foreign investors are subje ct to a licensing process to which domestic investors are not. For a 
“greenfield” investment – that is, investment in a new venture rather than acquisition of an existing 
concern – a foreign investor making a first investment in Vietnam must present its “investment project ” 
– similar to a business plan – to the provincial Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) or, if inside 
an industrial zone  or similar zones , to the provincial  authority of th ese zones, to obtain an investment 
registration certificate (IRC) for the project. By law , this process should take from 15 to 45 days, but in 
practice often takes longer. Licensing authorities  have wide autonomy in how they interpret the foreign 
investment concessions agreed to by treaty , which often leads to wild ly inconsistent results.  
In the case of mergers and acquisitions, a different process is followed ; however, foreign investors are 
still required to seek approval from licensing authorities , which is  not required of Vietnamese investors.  
Because of th ese procedure s, prospective foreign investors typically insist that startups be registered in 
Singapore rather than Vietnam before making a deal. Savvy founders or those with access to good advice 
will generally make their initial registration in Singapore for this reason. A second likely impact of this 
process is that investors may steer clear of projects outside the most populous provinces, where an 
unfamiliar DPI may seem like a greater risk  than one that is more used to the process . 
Vietnamese individuals are prohibited from taking offshore loans, a restriction that can serve to inhibit 
angel investment.  
2.3.1.2. Venture Capital  
Decree 38/2018/ND -CP dated March 11, 2018  (Decree 38) was promulgated specifically to address 
limitations of the existing legal framework with respect to venture capital. Fewer  local venture capital 
firms have been founded to date  than had been hoped for , which  may be explained by some limitation s 
imposed by Decree 38:  
• Venture capital funds’ total investment in a startup cannot exceed 50  percent  of the startup’s 
charter capital (paid -up equity) post -investment. Because it is unclear how that 50 -percent  cap is  
to be  interpreted, some investors feel  uncertain on how much they can invest and how much 
control they can have over their investment . This rule also obviously limits startups’ ability to 
raise capital.  
• The decree calls for accounting guidelines for venture capital funds to be issued by the Mi nistry 
of Finance, but to date these have not been forthcoming, potentially creating risks for funds.   
• The number of investors in a venture capital fund can be no more than 30.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     20 • Foreign investors must open local accounts in order to invest – no direct trans fers from 
overseas are permitted.  
By contrast, none of these restrictions exist under Singaporean law.  
Decree 38 encourages provincial authorities to use state funds to invest in startups, but no such 
investment has yet been made, as another existing law o n state budgets (Decree 138/2007/ND -CP of 
August 28, 2007 ) does not consider startups to be eligible entities for state funding.  
2.3.1.3. Crowdfunding  
Crowdfunding – seeking relatively small investments from a large number of investors, often through a 
specialized  platform – is increasingly popular in many countries but is not yet accounted for  in 
Vietnamese law. Without specific guidance on the roles and responsibilities of the parties, including the 
crowdfunding platform, opportunities to grow this means of funding are limited. By contrast, 
crowdfunding is well -regulated in Singaporean securities law , and used to good effect . 
2.3.1.4. Shares  and Shareholders’ Rights  
Vietnamese enterprise law does not give specific guidance on the enforceability of funding documents 
that are commonly used in other jurisdictions, such as voting agreements and shareholders’ agreements. 
Another common international practice, that of giving different rights to different shareholders of the 
same class, is specifically restricted by Vietnamese law. These variances from common international 
practice narrow the potential exit options of investors and the  flexibility of investors and businesses to 
create mutually beneficial investment arrangements.   
The dissol ution  process  of a solvent company  is also lengthy  and involves multiple state organs , 
sometimes taking one or two  years to resolve .  
2.3.2. INITIAL PUBLIC OFFER INGS  
As noted above, the Law on Securities requires that companies making an initial public off ering be 
profitable for two years preceding the year of the IPO , a rule that even the most successful startups find 
difficult. Many stakeholders pointed to this as a barrier to IPO, citing high -profile U .S. startups like Uber 
and Lyft that have had success ful IPOs despite being unprofitable. Other  major stock exchanges in the 
East Asia region , though,  have similar or more restrictive rules than Vietnam’s . 
2.3.3. DATA  
The Law on Cybersecurity (LoC) dated June 12, 2018 imposed controversial provisions that co uld have 
a chilling effect on the digital economy in Vietnam. It is distinct  from the Law on Cyber -Information 
Safety (LoCIS) dated November 19, 2015, but the two laws overlap to some degree . 
The most controversial elements of the LoC involve  requirements to: 
• Verify users’ information when they open digital accounts ; 
• Block or delete users’ information within 24 hours of GVN request ; 
• Store any users’ data  and personal information  locally in Vietnam for a period to be specified in 
the guiding decree ; and 
• Maintain a mandatory commercial presence in Vietnam.  21     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  These onerous , ambiguous,  and, in many cases, impractical requirements  of the LoC  fall broadly on all 
“domestic and foreign service providers on telecom networks and on the Internet and other value -
added  services in cyberspace in Vietnam ,” making the scope far broader than data security laws in 
Thailand , Singapore, and most other countries . 
Some  of these requirements would ostensibly violate Vietnam’s international treaty commitments under 
the WTO and CCT PP. They would certainly have a chilling effect on the availability of digital services 
from both domestic and international providers. It is unclear how providers could actually perform user 
validation, but  it is likely that it would be more difficult for  users in rural and ethnic minority 
communities , just as  is the case  with Know Your Customer laws  in the financial sector . 
Because t he LoC still lacks a guiding decree, it is effectively not currently  being implemented. None of 
the stakeholders interviewed cited the LoC as stopping them from doing anything they otherwise 
wanted to do, but it is certainly possible that investors and entrepreneurs may be holding back until they 
see how implementation of this law evolves.  
2.3.4. FINTECH  
Financial technology (fintech) – the use of digital tools and platforms to improve and automate the 
delivery of financial services – is a sector  that has seen a lot of activity in Vietnam and is  of particular 
interest from a development perspe ctive. However, the  legal framework around financial services is 
adapted to a traditional banking structure . Know Your Customer (KYC) laws require in -person 
presentation of documents in order to open financial accounts, effectively negating much of the ben efit 
fintech can bring to rural and other underserved areas. Other financial rules can be subject to 
ambiguous interpretation, since fintech  approaches  were not contemplated in the existing rules.  
The lack of a clear legal framework prevents startups from  offering services and creates ambiguity for 
fintech companies and investors . This vacuum has created space for peer -to-peer lending apps from 
China – technically illegal in Vietnam – to mushroom in popularity.  There is broad recognition of the 
positive potential of fintech, but there is a debate as to whether to take a laissez -faire approach or to put 
fintech activities under the strict control of the State Bank of Vietnam.  
A draft decree on a regulatory “sandbo x” for fintech is currently available for public comment. The 
sandbox arrangement is meant to create a n environment limited in territory and time , in which  services 
can be tested so that regulatory bodies can assess how to create an appropriate permanent f ramework.  
The proposed sandbox arrangement is a positive step, but it has some problems:  
• Key terms remain vague. In order to qualify, fintech projects must be “ feasible and commercially 
viable” and “contain no risks that may affect the banking/financial se ctor in particular and the 
economy in general .” This ambiguity leaves room for interpretation that creates unnecessary  
risk for entrepreneurs and investors.  
• The sandbox takes a “positive approach” – allowing only seven specified activities, rather than 
creating a true sandbox for experimentation  that would allow room for truly innovative ideas . 
• The sandbox is intended to cover  banking  activities, excluding  other financial applications  such as 
insurance . 
• It is not clear what happens to fintech companies that were operating before the decree comes 
into effect.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     22 By way of  comparison, Thailand also has no specific laws on fintech,  generally  regulating these activities 
under the existing Payment Systems Act of 2017. The Kingdom also has a regulatory sandbox pr ogram , 
administered by the Securities and Exchange Commission rather than the national bank . 
2.3.5. INTELLECTUAL PROPERT Y 
Vietnam’s intellectual property regime comes from a combination of domestic laws  – primarily the 2005 
Law on Intellectual Property and  its numerous implementing circulars – and international treaty 
obligations . Vietnam is a party to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, the 
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, the Rome Convention , the Patent 
Cooperation Treaty, and the Madrid Protocol. Many of Vietnam’s free -trade agreements, including 
EVFTA, CPTPP, and numerous bilateral agreements, contain provisions on IP. All told, there are 34 legal 
instruments  and 38 guiding decrees and circul ars dealing with IP.  Some of these conflict with other areas 
of law – for example, one of the possible penalties for IP violation is revocation of the violator’s 
enterprise registration certificate , a sanction not actually provided for in the Enterprise La w. A draft law 
that could  drastically change the IP regime is on the docket for review in 2021 and scheduled for 
issuance in 2022.  
It is effectively not possible to patent software in Vietnam, a fact that came up in several stakeholder 
interviews. Software  patents are controversial but are permitted in at least some cases in the U nited 
States, Canada, Europe, Australia, Japan , and elsewhere . (Thailand and Indonesia are among the 
countries that do not permit software patents. ) Trademarks eligible for protection in Vietnam are 
limited to those  that have “a visible sign in the form of letters, words, drawings, or images including 
holograms ,” excluding trademarks based on  sound or scent.  
Cutting -edge technology creates new issues that are not addressed in the Vietnamese IP regime, such as 
ownership of IP created by AI  and the status of shape files used for 3D printing and other computer 
numerical control (CNC) processes, but Vietnam is certainly not alone in dealing with these issu es. 
Valuation of IP produced with public funds was a particular sore point for some stakeholders  
interviewed for this analysis , as this is a substantial barrier to licensing university research. Under Article 
18.4 of Decree 103/2006/ND -CP, the Ministry of Finance and MOST are charged with coordinating to 
provide detailed guidance on determining the value of IP produced with state funds, but as yet no such 
guidance has been issued, leading to inconsistent application of or simple failure to implement the law .  
More than the law itself, stakeholders found the IP registration  process to be problematic. By law, 
trademarks should be issued within 12 months of application, but in practice  they can take significantly 
longer. Some stakeholders spoke of patents that took five or more years to register, effectively making 
them useless. One problem is likely the capacity of the National Office of Intellectual  Property, which is 
said to be overwhelmed with the number of applications and lack ing modern equipment and proce sses. 
Three  avenues of  recourse  are open to IP holders in the case of violations: administrative action, civil 
court action, and criminal court action. Vietnam is unusual in that administrative action is the most 
commonly used. Administrative penalties are most often levied on counterfeit goods and are relatively 
light. The rarity of civil and criminal court action may be due to a lack of trust in the judicial and 
enforcement system in such cases.  23     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  2.3.6. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT T O THE  ECOSYSTEM  
The primary laws directly affecting GVN support and subsidies to the innovation ecosystem are 
Decision 844 (commonly known as Project 844 ) and the  Law on Provision of Assistance to Small and 
Medium Enterprises  (commonly known as the  SME Law ).  
Decision 844 focuses  exclusively on support of startups  and serves mainly as a policy -guiding docume nt, 
requiring specific projects developed by GVN and provincial governments for implementation , without a 
central implementing authority . This dynamic  leads to somewhat inconsistent application  across the 
country.  The law envisions direct assistance  to startups as well as to support services, but in fact only 
support services are covered  through  the project’s most recent annual workplan  (nhiem vu hang nam ). 
Decision 844 sets targets of 2,000 startup projects yielding 600 startups, 100 of which will receive 
venture capital or capital through mergers and acquisitions (M&A)  by 2025 . So far , the project reports 
500 startups receiving investment of VND 900 billion . 
The SME Law was introduced on June 12, 2017, shortly after Decision 844. It provides for general 
support to SMEs , such as improved access to support capital from banks ; tax, accounting , legal, and 
technology  support ; access to industrial zones and cluste rs for production ; training ; incubators; and 
more. The SME Law places  startups in a legally defined category of “innovative SMEs .”  
The SME Law creates some tax incentives for SMEs that are not actually reflected in the tax laws. The 
National Assembly is currently reviewing this issue , but there is no clear  timeline on a change. The law 
provides for interest -rate subsidies on loans for startups  and tax - and land -related incentives for 
incubators, but neither has been implemented through guiding documents.  
2.3 7. AUTONOMY OF UNIVERSI TIES 
Prior to 2012, universities were under the direct supervision of relevant ministries . For example, Hanoi 
University of Law was managed by the Ministry of Justice, and the International Relations Institute was 
run by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The Law on Higher Education of 2012 (as amended in 2018) 
developed a framework for autonomy for universities in the areas of organization, personnel, finances, 
property, training, science and technology, international cooperati on, and quality assurance. Resolution 
77, issued in 2015, gave the new law a guiding document, implementing university autonomy on a pilot 
basis. Currently 23 universities operat e under the umbrella of Resolution 77.  
While Resolution 77 and other implement ing documents of the Law on Higher Education have produced 
some positive outcomes, some major issues remain unresolved due to  conflicts with clauses of other 
relevant laws, such as the Law on Bidding on 2013, the Law on Management and Use of Public Propert y 
of 2017, the Law on Construction of 2013, and the Law on Public Employees of 2010. These conflicts 
lead to confusion and inconsistent implementation by various state bodies and the universities 
themselves. Because Resolution 77 is only a pilot scheme – and has officially ended – its implementation 
gets low priority with respect to conflicting laws and codes. The inability to fully realize autonomy in 
financial and personnel matters  has the biggest impact on the role of universities in innovation.  
Some uni versities believe their spending plans are still subject to approval by state bodies such as the 
provincial Departments of Finance. These departments are known to refuse universities’ proposals to 
increase tuition rates on the grounds of outdated regulatio ns. Without sufficient budget to make 
investments in facilities, equipment, and infrastructure, universities remain dependent on state budgets. USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     24 Even given sufficient resources, universities’ “autonomous” decisions to invest may well be blocked by 
conflicts  with the Law on Construction or the Law on Bidding.  
The Law on Public Employees neutralizes universities’ autonomy on personnel to some extent, making it 
difficult to offer competitive employment packages to attract the highest quality talent.   25     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  3. OPPORTU NITIES  FOR PROGRAMMING  
Many of the barriers to  creating a more competitive, innovative, responsible, and inclusive digital 
innovation ecosystem in Vietnam stem from a lack of connection . Government programming meant to 
promote private sector innovation  is disconnected from feedback from the market and the ecosystem at 
large. University research is disconnected from commercial  considerations and applications. Too often, 
innovative products and services are disconnected from the stakeholders they are mean t to serve, and 
particularly from traditionally underrepresented communities . The entire ecosystem is poorly connected 
to people living outside the major urban areas of Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, and Da Nang.  
Intermediate Result 5 of t he USAID Digital Strate gy encourages the application of human -centered 
design (HCD)  to achieve the IR , and an HCD lens is most useful in evaluating solutions to these 
disconnections. HCD is simply an approach to problem solving that involves the end users and other 
stakeholders in all aspects of the  scoping,  ideation, development, and execution of a solution to a given 
problem. There are many frameworks for implementing HCD approaches, and neither the USAID 
Digital Strategy nor this analysis  take any view with respect to the use of a given framework. Typically , 
they involve ideation, prototyping, testing and iteration, and deployment phases , all with the end users 
and other stakeholders included in the design loop . The best HCD approaches are flexible and intuitive .  
From the gaps identified in the above analysis and the approach encouraged by the USAID Digital 
Strategy, it seems clear that building structures and capacity to implement human -centered design 
approaches is a natural theme for USAID/Vietnam programming in  this area. This would include 
encouraging HCD thinking in the primary, secondary, and post -secondary education systems ; promoting 
the use of HCD in the  private sector , particularly among startups ; and promoting HCD thinking and 
structures to implement HCD  approaches in government programming aimed at the digital innovation 
ecosystem.  
3.1. RECOMMENDATIONS  
3.1.1. DIRECT SUPPORT TO GO VERNMENT  
Support to the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) and other GVN stakeholders on 
legal and regulatory reform . The issues described in the Legal and Regulatory Enabling Environment  
section above are complex and involve many stakeholders , including multiple GVN and local government 
stakeholders with interests  that potentially oppos e one another . While there is broad a greement that 
reform in these matters is needed  – and is , in many cases , already in progress  – executing  that reform in 
a way that supports the GVN’s ambitious goals , accounts for the needs of the private sector,  provides 
responsible protect ions for  the public, and includes considerations of more vulnerable stakeholders will 
be a huge challenge.  
USAID could serve a valuable facilitation and support role by providing technical, advisory , and material  
support to the reform process. Convening a broad b ase of stakeholders to provide transparent 
feedback , building realistic results frameworks based on that feedback , and mapping proposed legislation 
and regulation transparently to that feedback could make the process  more  legible so that  a broader 
array of  stakeholders could more actively engage in the process.  Providing research support to answer 
legislative, regulatory, or operational questions or analyze scenarios could provide GVN officials with 
critical information to base the legal framework on specif ics. Supporting and designing domestic and USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     26 international study tours for stakeholders could bring them in closer contact with people and issues that 
are crucial for  decision -making and help connect the process to international best practices . And a n 
inclus ive approach that includes all GVN stakeholders could provide diverse actors with a basis for 
common understanding.  
Outstanding legal and regulatory issues that warrant particular attention follow : 
• Investment  
o Provision of a level playing field for foreign and local investors, eliminating the IRC 
procedure  and drastically streamlining the licensing process.  
o Adoption of a “negative approach ” to restrictions on areas for foreign investment – i.e., 
certain categor ies of business  are restricted  to foreign investors , rather than permitting 
only certain categories.  
o Introduction  of a fast -track approach to IRC applications and  M&A and other approval 
requirements for foreign investors.  
o Promulgation of detailed, respons ible, and permissive guidance on crowdfunding 
platforms.  
• Data  
o Ideally, i mplementation of the LoC  should be permanently shelved.  Failing this  step, the 
law’s more impractical obligations, such as authentication of users , should be removed, 
and other onerous items applied only to a narrower list of affected entities . These 
actions  should be taken – or at least telegraphed – as soon as possible to minimize the 
chilling effect of uncertainty and potential abuses of power  that are  possible without an 
implementing decree . 
o Data privacy protections that follow international best practices would provide security 
for Vietnamese consumers as well as a framework for Vietnamese companies to build 
trust in international markets should be drafted and enacted.  
• Fintech  
o Accelerated issuance of the Sandbox Decree , including:  
▪ Removal of subjective, ambiguous criteria for participation . 
▪ Adoption of a “negative approach” – restricting certain business activities or 
sectors  rather than permitt ing specific  ones. 
▪ Inclusi on of a wider variety of financial activities, giving as open -ended a field for 
experimentation as possible.  
o Provision of clarification  that fintech activities  that may not have negative socioeconomic 
impacts  should be subject to partners’ agreements under  the Civil Code, in order to 
eliminate  ambiguity.  
• Intellectual property  
o Engagement of a broad cross -section of innovation ecosystem stakeholders in the IP law 
revisions currently underway.  
o Provision of international perspectives and exposition of best practices on this complex 
topic.  
• Government support to the ecosystem  
o A reconciliation of Decision 844 and the SME Law could resolve some of the overlap 
between the two and provide for more consistent implementation.  27     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  • University autonomy  
o Issue a permanent d ecree generalizing the provisions of Resolution 77 and other 
implementing guidance of the Law on Higher Education , and allowing those provisions to 
prevail over conflicting laws that cover issues of construction, investment, and 
personnel.  
Institutional su pport to the National Innovation Center . The National Innovation Center (NIC) 
is MPI’s flagship program to support the innovation ecosystem. It has resources and a  great deal of 
ambition, but its agenda is still emerging  and is not well connected to the needs of stakeholders. USAID 
support could provide structure and capacity to help the NIC become  a more  effective facilitator of 
private sector innovation.  Potential support could include:  
• Building a n advisory  structure  rooted in the ecosystem . Assembling a  diverse  advisory board for the 
NIC and, to the extent legally possible, giving it a role in the Center’s governance would put 
diverse stakeholder perspectives at the heart of the initiative. Board members would represent 
expertise and experience from acro ss the ecosystem  and could be selected to ensure an 
inclusive range of voices. USAID could engage  international expertise on various topics to 
introduce best practices and ideas from around the world.  
• Developing  an HCD-based strategic planning process . USAID could support a more responsive NIC 
by providing technical and material support to a  NIC strategic planning process that is based on 
HCD principles, convening diverse stakeholders, and designing feedback mechanisms so that the 
connection to stakeholders  is maintained .  
• Building capacity for leadership and staff . Providing training and mentoring to leadership and staff of 
the NIC could provide them with tools to better understand the drivers of the innovation 
ecosystem, effectively engage with stakeholders, and tra ck and adapt to changes in performance 
indicators. A cohort of local and international trainers and mentors could be assembled t o serve 
the NIC’s future programs.  
• Develop ing a truly useful data source  for the ec osystem . Reliable data on the innovation ecosystem is 
difficult to come by. While GVN performance indicators include metrics like number of startups 
launched and the amount of investment in them, these data are not actually collected across the 
whole ecosy stem. Comprehensive, reliable  data would  help GVN better understand the impact 
of its interventions . Investors, entrepreneurs, and other actors in the ecosystem  also suffer from 
the lack of this information. Including gender metrics could enable better man agement of 
inclusive support to women in the ecosystem. Collecting these data and putting into place 
sustainable procedures to ensure continued data integrity is not a trivial task but could be 
accomplished with USAID support , starting with an inclusive process to identify the key data 
points of value to all ecosystem stakeholders .  
• Encouraging  better, open -access market data . Building on the data portal infrastructure , collection 
and open access provision of more granular market data on all economic sectors would be an 
even larger  task but would bring legibility to underserved sectors like agriculture and textiles to 
make them more accessible to startup s, other entrepreneurs, and their investors.  
Launching  other government  programming in support of the ecosystem . Harder for MPI to 
implement on its own, these initiatives could be under taken in partnership with other GVN entities like 
Project 844, perhaps using NIC facilities or other collaborative resources : USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     28 • Support for  establishment of  an international standards facility . A primary concern for the current 
generation of startups in Vietnam is the need to appeal to an international market. As with  
other sectors in the country, the understanding of and ability to work with  international 
standards is a barrier to accessing global markets. The establishment of a  facility that would 
assist entrepreneurs with understanding and certifying products, processes, and services against 
International Organization for Standardization ( ISO) and other standards could provide an 
invaluable tool in accessing international markets.  
• Supporting a government interface with private sector innovators. A service window for various GVN 
departments to access innovators, and vice versa , would help cre ate important connections 
useful to both sides . This facility could provide clarity on  government procurement procedures 
for startups and other innovators and advocate with GVN departments for a more expansive 
pool of potential suppliers. Programs similar to the U .S. National Science Foundation’s i -Corps 
and the Small Business Administration’s Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR) could provide 
substantial value to the GVN and the innovation ecosystem alike. Incentives for women - or 
minority -owned busin esses, similar to those provided in U .S. Government programs, could be 
included.  
Support to Intellectual Property Enforcement . Capacity building for courts and enforcement 
agencies on IP issues could be undertaken, perhaps in cooperation with other U .S. Government entities 
with an interest in the area. This work could be done with freestanding programming or integrated as a 
goal of the IP Support Center (below), or both.  
3.1.2. SUPPORT TO INNOVATORS  
Public -Private Incubator/Accelerator Partnership.  Many government  programs billed as 
incubators or accelerators provide office space for free or at concessionary rates but provide little else. 
These programs can be found around the country, and in many underserved areas they are the only 
“incubator/accelerator ” programs available.   
Connecting these programs with a strong private or non -profit incubator/accelerator partner could yield 
benefits in both directions. By leveraging the facilities of the public program with the p rogram content 
and experience of the pr ivate program, potentially with additional subject matter expertise , the capacity 
of the public incubator/accelerator to run a more effective program would be enhanced . The private 
program, presumably based in one of the major cities, would gain experience  in working in unfamiliar 
sectors, value chains, and contexts, and these connections could bring lasting benefits. Programming 
could target specific , promising , underserved value chains like agriculture. Ideally, innovator cohorts 
from urban areas could be embedded with local innovators to foster the growth of additional networks , 
and targets for participation of women founders could be included .  
Building connections between innovators  and SMEs . Many startups’ business models revolve 
around platforms for digital transformation of SMEs , but few founders come from a traditional SME 
background or have a deep understanding of the context of the businesses whose problems they aim to 
solve. SMEs, in turn, may ha ve an incomplete or incorrect understand ing of how platforms work or the 
benefits and risks they may entail.  
USAID could build connective tissue between these two actors by supporting programming to connect 
them with facilitators who have experience in bot h areas. Subject matter experts in sectors of interest 
could help innovators better understand prospective partners’ market contexts , which are often 29     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  complex. Capacity building  could improve SME awareness of the issues around digital transformation. 
Progra mming that explains an HCD approach would lead  both to a better product and increased  
capacit y to adopt these approaches in the future.  
Business associations would seem to be natural partners for such programming. Women or other 
specific underserved SME sectors or groups of entrepreneurs could be targete d. Alternatively, 
programming could be general.  
Capacity building for women and other vulnerable entrepreneurs on digital transformation 
issues . SMEs often do not have the awareness  of digital issues or platform business models that would 
enable them to engage as full partners with the startups trying to transform their industries. This 
obstacle is especially problematic f or women , with work/life balance issues that put them at a fur ther 
disadvantage ; for ethnic minorities , who face language and cultural barriers; and  for other vulnerable 
populations . Capacity building for these groups of entrepreneurs can help put them on a secure  footing 
in a platform -driven digital transformation.  
Support to a fintech industry association. Vietnamese fintech companies have formed  an informal 
industry association, referred to as the “Fintech Club,” that gives th em a venue to advocate for common 
interests . Because fintech can have a  transformative impact on marginalized communities with little 
access to traditional financial services, USAID might  consider technical and other support to this 
association to build its capacity  to advocate, develop best practices, integrate gender sensitivity in to 
busin ess models and implementation, and serve as a platform for future programming.  
A technical platform to enable reach to underserved communities . Several interviewed 
stakeholders noted that some underserved communities are difficult to reach because they hav e no 
access to Internet  services. Rural areas have limited bandwidth , the poor are less likely to have access to 
a smartphone, and literacy can be an issue  – as can Vietnamese language ability for ethnic minorities, 
some of whose languages are not well -supported by Unicode.  
An interactive voice response (IVR) system could enable access to these underserved communities if 
entrepreneurs could access the system through an application programming interface (API).  Users could 
interact with fintech and other ser vices without needing  an Internet  connection  or smartphone, or be ing 
literate in Vietnamese. Such a system would also be very useful for a variety of development 
programming unrelated to innovation.  
Very good open source frameworks for IVR exist, and devel opment of an instance with support for 
Vietnamese and ethnic minority languages would not be technically difficult. Local mobile network 
operators  (MNOs)  would need to be persuaded  to make the system available on their networks. Fees 
for API users could be imposed to ensure continued maintenance and sustainability of the system.   
Potential local partners to own this system could include MNOs, entrepreneurs through public -private 
partnership, business associations, or NGOs that may  wish to use the system for development 
objectives but maintain it with fees from private sector customers.  
Competitions to promote innovations in under addressed  areas . Some areas of potential 
innovation may be of interest to USAID  (e.g., e-government tool s or smart cities) ; however, because of 
gaps in GVN procurement mechanisms or other reasons, they attract few startups. Competitions that USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     30 attract startups to these issues could allow them to create  attractive solutions and build the case for 
startup involv ement in those areas.  
3.1.3. SUPPORT TO EDUCATION  
The MO ET is revising the primary and secondary school curriculum to be more learner -centered and to 
include an explicit hands -on STEM component.  Curriculum change is always difficult but would be the 
best way to address  the creative problem -solving, teamwork, and other soft -skill gaps in the workforce 
that stakeholders identified. USAID could provide support to this process directly , indirectly , or both . 
Direct support  to curriculum change.  This change will  require extensive teacher training and 
retraining  to adapt to the learner -centered model. Development of teacher -training materials and 
retraining of the current teacher corps could require significant resources but would be a one -time cost 
with ongoing b enefits to workforce development.  
Hands -on STEM exercises require consumable materials . While the materials needed for the MOET 
curriculum are not expensive, this will be a permanent ongoing need. The group work and hands -on 
exercises also require more spa ce than is available at most current school facilities. While fulfilling these 
needs directly would be difficult to justify , there may be value in pilot programs that demonstrate how 
the curriculum could be successfully accommodated, giving GVN  the tools t o plan its own investments.  
Support to ancillary activities . Because of the  cultural and historical centrality of exams in 
Vietnamese education, the shift to a hands -on model of learning faces some resistance from teachers, 
parents, and to some extent, st udents. Supporting the expansion of organizations and events that 
provide opportunities to celebrate student achievements in STEM , and offering the prospect of 
alternative credentialing of hands -on work , are two ways to support this shift . Awards  for outstanding  
work in these areas, and media amplification of those stories, could help change the cultural value  
ascribed to academic performance outside of examinations.  
The annual STEM Festival, held at Hanoi University of Science and Technology, is one such event , 
providing also the opportunity for educators and government officials to network on topics of STEM 
education. The Vietnam instance of the International Science and Engineering Festival  is another. 
USAID/Cambodia support ed bringing the  Technovation  program to that country, specifically targeting 
technology achievement for girls, with great success for a limited investment.  
In the United States and elsewhere, Maker Faire and similar events provide an opportunity for 
enthusiasts of all ages to demonstrate compelling  things they have made . They have provided a cultural 
touchstone for creating excitement around  intrinsically  motivated problem solving, showing that such 
programming need not be restricted to schoolchildren.  
Introduction of HCD training in the university system.  It will be decades before the pupils 
trained through the new MOET curriculum enter the workforce. In the meantime, training university 
students in human -centered design principles would create a workforce better equipped and more likely 
to apply them. Support to  the development of curriculum, ideally with real -world applications , could 
improve graduate s’ ability to responsive ly solve problems.  
Support to U .S.-Vietnam university partnerships . Pairing U .S. higher education institutions with 
Vietnamese ones could provide valuable perspective on international practices in advanced training . 
Deans and admini strators could provide models for connecting curriculum to commercial needs and 31     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  keeping up with the pace of technological changes. Faculty -to-faculty interaction could introduce new 
ideas for inculcating creative problem -solving among students.  
Introductio n of ethic s in training around AI  and responsible data use . AI is perhaps the hottest 
single topic in the digital innovation ecosystem right now, with a great deal of training happening in the 
university system and elsewhere ; however, little attention is paid to the many ethical issues with applied 
AI. Making sure that practitioners understand the ethical risks around AI is critical to ensuring a 
responsible digital innovation ecosystem if these technologies have their anticipated impac t. Supporting 
curriculum development in universities and with other partners like the NGO Viet AI would help.  
Similarly, issues around responsible use of data are under -addressed, and strengthening education in this 
area would make for a  more  responsible e cosystem.   
Improvement of cybersecurity training . Cybersecurity will be an ongoing critical need  in 
maintaining a responsible digital innovation ecosystem . Support to curriculum development and perhaps 
centers of excellence in this area would squarely alig n with the USAID Digital Strategy.  
3.1.4. SUPPORT TO RESEARCH  
An IP support center.  Licensing for commercial use of IP produced by research is a major source of 
funds for many international universities and creates incentives for connecting research areas and 
facilities to market needs, a self -reinforcing cycle. Because of Vietnam’s weak IP regime and 
simultaneously restrictive and ambiguous requirements around valuing IP creat ed with state funds, this 
connection is broken in Vietnam.  
Supporting the creati on of an IP support center  affiliated with one or more universities but incorporated 
as a separate entity, could provide a solution. The center could sponsor research on topics of particular 
interest to industry, seeking industry contributions to do so, and could register IP on that research – 
either domestically or internationally – in the name of the support center . Proceeds from  licensing  that 
IP could go to the university producing the research, with a percentage  withh eld to support the center . 
This approach  would give corporations and other interested parties a place to go to sponsor targeted 
research  with commercial application , with the knowledge that the produced assets could be protected 
and properly licensed, while also building a longer -term feedback loop for university -driven research to 
remain commercially relevant.  
The center could also provide guidance and support to innovators on IP issues, promote awareness of 
IP rules and their importance, advocate for bett er IP rules, and build the capacity of legal and other 
advocates to work in this area.   
Twinning . Aus4Innovation’s partnership grants for research (see Annex A), pairing Vietnamese and 
Australian researchers in selected areas and with an eye toward commerc ialization, have been well -
received. There is ample room to replicate  this model in research areas of specific concern to USAID  or 
of central relevance to GVN’s IR4.0 strategy.  
  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     32 ANNEX  A: RELEVANT DONOR PRO JECTS  
Australian Aid  
Aus4Innovation  (2018 -2022) is an AUD 11 million program implemented by the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation  (CSIRO) to strengthen Vietnam’s innovation system to 
prepare it to meet its IR4.0 goals. The project has four workstreams:  
• Digital foresight . Worki ng with MOST, CSIRO has thus far produced two reports  – one 
analyzing the state of Vietnam’s digital economy ( Vietnam Today ) and the other examin ing the 
trends affecting the development of Vietnam’s digital economy through  2045 (Vietnam’s Future 
Digital Ec onomy: Towards 2030 and 2045 ). 
• Innovation partnership grants . Currently in the awards process for its second of two rounds 
of competitive grants, Aus4Innovation is funding technologies or activities with an existing proof -
of-concept, an articulated path to  impact, and an existing relationship with a Vietnamese or 
Australian entity. Under the first round, Aus4Innovation funded:  
o University of Technology Sydney (UTS) and The Vietnamese National University of Engineering 
and Technology (VNU -UET), to transfer a  model of commercializing  university research  
and demonstrate its application in  water treatment and monitoring systems using IR4.0 
technolog ies. 
o Australia’s  University of the Sunshine Coast (USC) and Vietnam’s  Research Institute for 
Aquaculture Number Three (RIA3) to produce a hormone to boost the productivity of sea 
cucumber farming . 
o The University of Sydney and Vietnam’s  National Health Strategy and Policy Institute to 
introduce a methodology to transform breast cancer diagnostic efficacy.  
• Science Commercialization Partnerships . Working specifically in the agriculture and food 
sector, Aus4Innovation aims to  build more robust pathways to connect research to markets, 
build the capacity to commercialize research, and scale these connections for sustain ability and 
impact . Activities in this workstream include : 
o A training -of-trainer s program  on commercialization issues for staff of technology transfer 
offices in three partner universities covering areas like IP considerations, business model 
development, market analysis, and gender and social inclusion.  
o Helping to develop a ten -year commercialization strategy  for the Vietnam Academy of 
Science and Technology.  
o Helping to develop a national commercialization guide  for agriculture and food technology.  
o Seven technology transfer pilots  for projects like zero -waste pig farming and nano -
fertilizers for greener farming.  
o A regional innovation cluster in the Central Highlands  exploring opportunities for innovation 
in coffee, tea, and pepper.  
o An agri -food innovation club connecting agriculture and food SMEs with researchers to 
foster innovation.  
o An industry -focused graduate program  to tailor education to current and emerging food 
processing industry needs.  
o An intermediary innovation pilot to explore how intermediary f ood and agriculture 
companies can better collaborate with public sector research organizations.  
• Policy Exchange . Aus4Innovation runs policy exchange activities in collaboration with MOST to 
address challenges related to the implementation of GVN’s innovati on agenda. The three 
activities undertaken to date are:  33     |     VIETNAM DIGITAL  INNOVATION ECOSYSTE M ANALYSIS   USAID.GOV  o A collaboration with MOST to develop economic models to assess the impacts of 
technology creation and adoption efforts on productivity and GDP growth in Vietnam.  
o Support to the Vietnam Institute for S cience, Technology and Innovation (VISTI) in 
developing an Innovation Center using best practice models and policies from Australia.  
o Bring ing together an expert team to advise the GVN  on effective inclusion of innovation 
in the national science and technology strategy development process.  
The Mekong Business Initiative (MBI)  (2015 -2019 ) was a development partnership between the 
Asian Development Bank  and Australian Aid  to accelerate gr owth in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and 
Vietnam  based on the premise that sustainable business growth in the Mekong region will require 
innovation, flexibility, and a willingness to take risks.  MBI’s programming in Vietnam included:  
• The Women’s Initiative for  Startup and Entrepreneurship (WISE)  described above in 
Incubators and Accelerators.  
• Assistance to the public -private partnership to found the Saigon Innovation Hub , a business 
support facility.  
• Entrepreneur and Venture Support Programs in Ho Chi Minh City , Da Nang, and Phnom 
Penh , a 2016 report describing  young companies and their founding entrepreneurs in those 
three cities , and an assessment of the venture support programs for their growth ; Fintech 
Vietnam Ecosystem Report 2017 , a publication describing the Fintech ecosystem; and 
Vietnam Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Assessment , a 2019 report on the entrepreneurial 
ecosystem.  
Asian Development Bank (ADB)  
The Second Secondary Education Sector Development Program (SESDP II) (2016 -2023)  is 
a $100-million loan fr om the ADB with a $7-million contribution from the GVN to support the 
development of innovative curriculum and pedagogical models for education. SESDP II is meant to 
support 440 schools nationwide in implementing the new models, including training 30,000 teachers. 
STEM subject s are a particular focus of the project.   
University of Science and Technology of Hanoi Development (New Model University) 
Project (2011 -present)  is a $190-million loan package for planning, constructing, and equipping a new 
university on the grounds of Ho a Lac High Tech Park. The project has experienced numerous delays , 
and construction is expected to begin in 2021.  
Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs  
The Vietnam -Finland Innovation Partnership Program Phase II (IPP2)  (2014 -2018)  was an 
€11 million program – of which GVN contributed 10  percent  – to enable the development of an 
ecosystem to support innovative companies, promote collaboration with Finnish and other international 
partners, and contribute to innovation -led economic development. The program’s thr ee workstreams 
were:  
• Institutional development and capacity building . IPP2 developed an open -source curriculum on 
innovation and entrepreneurship and trained more than 150 instructors from 50 universities on 
its delivery.  
• Partnerships for innovation  focuse d on creating linkages between Finnish companies and market 
opportunities in Vietnam.  USAID.GOV  VIETNAM DIGITAL INNO VATION ECOSYSTEM ANA LYSIS       |     34 • Innovation funding . IPP2 offered support to Vietnamese companies through coaching, networking 
support, and competitive grants.  
The World Bank  
The Vietnam Inclusive Innov ation Project (2013 -2017)  sought to strengthe n Vietnam ’s capacity 
to undertake inclusive innovation  by financing the development, adaptation, adoption, scaling up , and 
commercialization of inclusive technologies, as well as  building the innovation capacity  of SMEs and R&D 
organizations . Original funding  in the amount of $55 million was reduced to $6.4 million , and the project 
was prematurely cancelled. Less than $1.4 million was actually disbursed. The Bank rated the project’s 
outcome as “unsatisfactory ,” citing:  
a) lack of enforcement by MPI in implementing institutional and legal agreements; b) implementation 
capacity constraints at the level of MPI and the technical level of NAFOSTED within the Ministry of 
Science and Technology (MoST ) the main implementing agency for the matching grants components of 
the project; and c) weak inter -ministerial collaboration between MPI and MoST and other implementing 
agencies.  
The Bank nevertheless concluded in its final assessment report that the goal s of the project remained 
sound.  
The British Council  
Applying the U .K. STEM Approach in Vietnam (2016 -2017)  was a pilot project to build the  
capacity of teachers and school leaders in 15 schools to teach STEM topics, develop and revise relevant 
textbooks and teaching materials, and design materials for extracurricular STEM education like science 
clubs and competitions, and camps.  
United Nations Development Programme  
UNDP Accelerator Lab Viet nam is part of a network of 60 such labs around the world that st arted 
in early 2019. These labs aim to bring a systems -thinking approach to UNDP’s development work. The 
Vietnam lab is fairly young but is currently engaged in some work with Da Nang’s Department of 
Natural Resources and Environment on an experimental app roach to waste sorting.  