 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Comparison of Selected Stimulus Packages in 
2008 and 2020 : investing in Renewable Energy, 
Sustainable Agriculture and Food  Security , and 
Gender Equality  and the Empowerment of Women  
for Structural Economic transformation  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  NOTES  
 
Where the designation ‘‘economy ’’ appears, it refers to a country, territory or area. The assignment of economies to 
speci fic groups is done for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding the political or other 
affiliation of these economies by the authors . Likewise, the designations ‘‘developing ’’, ‘‘transition ’’ and ‘‘developed ’’ 
are int ended for statistical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgement about the stage reached by a 
particular economy in the development process.  
 
Unless otherwise specified, the values of groups of economies represent the sums of the values of the individual 
economies included in the sample of countries within a group. Calculation of these aggregates may take into account 
data estimated by the authors  that are not necessarily reported separately.  Due to rounding, values do not 
necessarily add up exactly to their corresponding totals.  
 
United States dollars (US$) are expressed in current United States dollars of the year to which they refer.  
 
 
The publication has not been formally edited  
 
CLASSIFACTION OF ECONOMIES AND COUNTRIES  
 
There is no established convention for the designation of ‘‘developing ’’, ‘‘transition ’’ and ‘‘ developed ’’ countries or  
areas in the United Nations system. The designation of economies used in this document  is the classification used 
by UNCTAD  or the classification used by the Word Bank . The differentiation between developing and developed 
economies follows, in general, the definition of the M49 classification1 (United Nations, 2019 a). However, there are 
exceptions. Notably, the group ‘transition economies’ that was establi shed to take account of the particular 
circumstances of that group of economies; shaped by socialism and now in transition to a market economy.  
 
Throughout the document , the group of developing economies is further broken down into the following 
groupings :  
o LDCs, according to the United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,  
Landlocked Developing Countries and the Small Island Developing States (UN -OHRLLS)2 (United Nations, 2019 b), 
o Low -income countries, according to the World Bank Country groups  (The World Bank , 2020 )3 
o Lower -Middle -income countries, according to World Bank  Country groups (ibid.),  
o Upper -Middle -income countries, according to World Bank Country groups (ibid.),  
o High-income countries, according to the World Bank Country groups (ibid.),  
 
 
 
This document was prepared by the UNCTAD Office of the SG Office in New York ’s team under the supervision of 
Chantal Line Carpentier, Chief of the Office. The team members included Bruno Zuccolo (summer intern), Drew 
D’Alelio (summer intern), Raymond Landveld (Economic Affairs Officer) and Olivier Combe (Economic Affairs 
Officer).  
 The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do  not necessarily 
reflect the views of the United Nations or its officials or Member States.
   
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
Facing the second global financial crisis in the past twelve years, governments are spending in the 
trillions to support workers and businesses and revive their economies . The calls for governments 
to target these funds to accelerate achievement of the Sustainable Development Goal s (SDGs)  are 
growing. From a selected sample of 20 countries4 and the European Union, this paper compares 
the response to the global crises of 2008 and 2020 with respect to the extent of the use of  
government stimulus packages to enact structural economi c reform to achieve SDG 7 (affordable 
and clean energy) , SDG 2 (zero hunger, improved food security and sustainable agriculture) , and 
SDG 5 (gender equality and women’s empowerment) . While acknowledging that we are still in 
the phase of immediate responses, the hypothesis is that now that the 2030 Agenda for sustainable 
development has been adopted in 2015 by all nations , which committed  in September 2019  to a 
decade of actions to accelerate its implementation  and delivery, more funds will be channeled to 
the SDGs  than in 2008 before their adoption. And, given that several meta studies have shown that 
achieving the SDGs by 2030 is feasible if we invest massively in SDG2, SDG5 and SDG7 , we 
expect these sectors to be targeted.  
 
Surprisingly, we found that renewable energy packages were more common in 2008 than so far in 
2020, despite the successful implementation of several renewable energy stimulus packages in 
2008. The 2008 renewab le energy stimulus packages  proved uneven, with some countries such as 
South Korea, Canada and China implementing bold policies to accelerate the transition to 
renewable energy, while other s in the sample lacked the fiscal space or political will to provid e 
large stimuli . In 2020, despite committing to the 2030 Agenda , most countries doubled down on 
existing support to carbon- intensive and polluting industries.  
 We also f ound that stimulus packages targeting  sustainable agriculture and food security  have been 
more prevalent in response  to both crises , especially among low- and middle -income countries, 
which spent more on rural and agriculture support  compared to developed countries. However , 
more countries supported food security and sustaina ble agriculture in 2008- 2009 than in 2020, so 
far.  
 
Despite strong public commitment to  SDG 5, we also f ound that few countries have used stimul i 
to advance gender equality and women’s economic empowerment  in response to either crisis. This 
is especially concerning given the disproportionate effect of the COVID19 crisis on women and 
girls which risk setting them  back decades.  
 
The lack of alignment of stimulus packages so far with the 2030 Agenda and its 17 SDGs   is a 
missed opportunity to advance the SDGs, especially in advanced economies with deeper pockets  risking locking societies  into economic model s that advance s the well-being of  some people at the 
expense of others and the planet.  
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION  
When UNCTAD first estimated the annual investment gap of $2.5 trillion to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  in developing countries , the global community realized 
that to move from billions to trillions, business as usual would not work, and that massive 
investments from both the public and private sectors would be needed.
5 
 
The global response to the COVID -19 pandemic has shown that the international community  is 
capable of radical and forceful societal responses and investmen ts in time of crisis. Unfortunately, 
that investment gap is widening with UNCTAD forecasting a 40% decline in global foreign direct 
investment ( FDI) and 4.5% decline in global GDP  for 2020. Yet, G20 countries have put in place 
stimulus  packages that approaches $ 11.5 trillion.6 If these fiscal policies aiming to revive national 
economies were also aligned with the SDGs, they could provide needed investment to accelerat e 
implementation  and de livery of the SDGs . This is particularly true in developing countries facing 
the most severe economic  and social impacts of the crisis (along with the climate and biodiversity 
crises) and most in need of investment often limited by real or perceived risks. However, only 2% 
of these funds are dedicated to developing countries. The unprecedented mobilization of resources 
by governments to revive national economies provides an opportunity to recover  better  if aligned 
with the SDGs in all countries if done with  international solidarity instead of decrease in ODA 
commitments.  
 
This paper compares  how government stimulus packages in the crisis of 2008- 09 and in 2020, until 
September,  have facilitated or impeded structural economic reform  in line with the SDGs ,  
particularly  how countries’ packages advanced ( or not ) efforts to meet SDG 5 (gender equality 
and women’s empowerment), SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy) and SDG 2 (zero hunger, improved food security and sustainable agriculture). We used a representative sample of 20 
countries  and the European Union, selected based on geographic and income level diversity, as 
well as availability of data .  
 
Although the severity of each crisi s and the mechanisms through which each economy was 
affected vary by country, these two crises nonetheless provide a natural experiment where different 
countries are faced with relatively similar  problems that occur in the same time period. This makes 
a comparison across countries more feasible than trying to compare fiscal responses to purely 
domestic crises in each country. The caveat is of course that the current crisis is still ongoing, and 
several governments have yet to announce their stimulus package s beyond initial responses or as 
a whole .   3. GENERAL  OVERVIEW OF STIMULUS S PENDING  
 
Table 1: Average of s timulus s pending  for different income level in constant United States 
dollars1 
 Average of 2008 -
2009 Stimulus 
package in 2015 
constant $ million  Average of 2020 
Stimulus package 
in 2015 constant 
$ million  Change in %  
Developed  104,591  673,372  544 
Developing  79,654  89,952  13 
HICs 51,395  123,617  141 
UMIC s  179,262   133,498  -26 
LMIC s  7,260   50,856  601 
LICs  101   365  262 
Transition economies  172,968  49,055  -72 
 
Table 1 above shows the averaged amounts in 2015 constant United States dollars (USD) disbursed 
in stimulus packages by the sampled countries of this study during the Global Financial C risis 
(GFC) and the Covid- 19 pandemi c, until September 2020. While International Organizations and 
developing countries continue to plea for more resources to be devoted to fight the health  and 
economic impacts of the crisis, figures in Table 1 show that developed countries have mobilized 
on average about six times more funds after 6 months of crisis than for the entire GFC  while high-
income counties have mobilized on average  well over twice the amount for the GFC . Similarly, 
but at a different magnitude, poorest countries (LICs and LMICs) have mobilized on average  3.6 
to 7 times more in the C OVID crisis than in the GFC.  
 
The picture is more contrasted for Transition economies  and, upper middle -income countries 
which have so far mobilized less than during the GFC. This could reflect the limited size of the sample u sed in this study with the Russian Federation the only representative for Transition 
economies, while China, the main actor in the UMIC sample has effectively mobilized less funds 
to cope with the current crisis so far than it did for the GFC.  
 Still, while the gap of funds directed to stimulus packages between developed and developing 
countries was on average about USD 25 billion for the GFC, it amounts to USD 583 billion for the 
current crisis and increasing. In other terms, as of end September  2020, the gap in money spending 
 
1 Selected countries have been grouped according to their income level in table 1 and table 2. Australia, Canada 
and EU  are in developed countries. Russian Federation is in Transition economy. Saudi Arabia  and Korea  are in 
HIC. Argentina, China, Costa Rica, Mexico and South Africa are in UMIC. Bangladesh, I ndia, Indonesia, Kenya and 
Vietnam are in LMIC. Rwanda is in LIC.  between developed and developing countries is 23 times wider during the Covid- 19 pandemic than 
during the GFC.  
 
Table 2: Average of s timulus spending  for different income level countries as % of their 
GDP  
 
 Average of 2008 -2009 
Stimulus package as a % 
of GDP  Average of 2020 
Stimulus package as 
a % of GDP  Change 
in %  
Developed  2.63 9.73 270 
Developing  4.62 5.46 18 
HIC 7.65 8.40 10 
UMIC  6.04 6.42 6 
LMIC  2.50 3.76 50 
LIC 2.00 3.30 65 
Transition economies  13.20  3.40 -74 
 Table 2 shows the disbursed stimulus packages as an average percent  of GDP per country for the 
selected countries of this study, categorized by income level. On average, developed countries were able to mobilize more than 10% of their GDP in stimulus packages , the level advocated by 
the UN Secretary General,  to fight the Covid- 19 pandemic and its impacts. It equals to an increase 
of 270 per cent compared to the GFC.  
 
Developing countries show an increase in mobilized funds but to a much lesser extent with 18 
percent increase on average per country compared to the GFC. Among developing countries, LICs and LMICs are making the biggest effort, with an average per country of 65 percent and 50 percent 
of increase respectively. However, these increases translate to  USD 201 million on average for 
LICs and USD 43 billion on average for LMICs in additional money from the GFC times, which 
pales in comparison to the additional ave rage of USD 569 billion per country for developed 
countries (see table 1). The situation for UMIC and Transition economies shows an even bigger 
gap to catch up than for LICs and LMICs, if they would address the pandemic impact at par with what is done in developed countries.  
 Possible sources of funding to allow developing and transition economies , with the exclusion of 
China,  to catch up with the level of support of developed countries, at least in terms of per cent of 
GDP, are narrowing down with a reducing fiscal space aggravated by an economic downturn and 
debt level s already high with several developing countries facing potential debt default . That limits 
the prospect s for further borrowing, while remittances have fell, and international trade revenues 
are expected to decrease by more than 10 per cent and investments, in particular FDI, are expected to contract by 40 per cent in 2020/20212 . In addition, the ability of  developing countr ies’ central 
banks  to supply their economies with added liquidities, as happened in developed countries, is 
limited without triggering severe inflation and currency devaluation. In the short run, ODA 
remains the primary lifeline for many developing countries . That said, one should also count on 
reducing illicit financial flows which accounts for up to an estimated USD 89 billion in los t 
revenues per year just in Africa3.  
 
4. RENEWABLE ENERGY  
 
The crisis of 2008- 09 and the ensuing economic downturn decreased greenhouse gas emissions, 
but that trend reversed as the global economy recovered.7 The COVID- 19 crisis has led to a rapid 
decline in economic activity, which has once again led to a sharp decline  in greenhouse gas 
emissions.8 Just as in 2008, if governments around the world don’t channel r esources to 
decarbonize the economy, emissions levels will quickly rise when  economic activit y picks up and 
another opportunity will be missed to recover  better.  Fiscal stimulus directed toward projects with 
large economic multiplier  effect s can achieve both economic and environmental objectives. 
Policies such as green construction, energy efficiency retrofits, renewables projects and grid 
expansion all have a track record of being good for job c reation , the planet  and long- term economic 
growth.9,10,4 
 
While the fiscal stimulus in 2008 was far from  a sufficient response to the climate crisis, it was an 
unprecedented mobilization of resources  by many countries to advance ambitious green objectives . 
South Korea, China, the United States, the European Union and Canada  all prioritized green 
infrastructure and clean energy projects . While a surge in emissions followed, especially in Asia, 
the stimuli marked a clear turning point in realizing the potential of green development goals and 
their  effects lingered on long after. Wind and solar technologies have seen costs fall by 70 and 90 
percent, for example, in the decade following the crisis of 2008. That holds true especially for 
some of the countries that led the way in the production of clean energy inputs.11   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 UNCTAD, World Investment Report 2020, 
https://unctad.org/en/pages/PublicationWebflyer.aspx?publicat ionid=2769  
3 UNCTAD, Economic Development in Africa Report, 2020, 
https://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/aldcafrica2020_en.pdf  
4 Investment in the care economy or purple economy also has great social returns especially in gender equality 
creating decent jobs for women and freeing more of their time to work but is beyond the topic of this paper.  Figure 3a. 
 
Source: Open source research. Random sample of 2 0 countries  and the European Union .   
 
As figure 3a shows, the responses in 2008 sought to achieve different renewable energy goals, 
with investments in renewables, buildings and appliances, and transportation systems being the 
most popular. Thus far in 2020, few countries have come forward with stimulus targeting 
renewable energy investments, instead focus ing on supporting household incomes  and preventing 
rising unemployment. That may be starting to change, however, as governments begin crafting 
recovery packages providing more targeted  funds to industries and projects. The European Union, 
for example, just released the topline numbers for i ts stimulus package and the green portion of 
the package is still in discussion at the time of writing this paper. The European Commission has 
identified more than 1,000 green projects that could be targeted for funding, which include projects 
in renewable  energy, energy storage, building upgrading, low -carbon transport, and green 
manufacturing.12 The example reaffirms the importance of interpreting the 2020 numbers reported 
in this paper as a snapshot at early stage in the crisis , given that more recovery packages will 
come in the months ahead and many may involve green projects. 
 
South Africa and China were the only middle -income countr ies that took ambitious steps to 
accelerate the clean energy transition in 2008. China implemented  a RMB 4 trillion  (12.7 percent 
of GDP)  package that included a mix of fiscal policies and investments in the required 
infrastructure for a low -carbon economy.13 Estimates suggest that the green component of the 
stimulus package was in the hundreds of billions of dollars. Much of these investments were 
financed by national development and commercial banks and were disbursed to local and 
provincial governments and state -owned enterprises. The policies included massive subsidies 
(USD 1.5 billion) to low -carbon vehicle compani es, and a halving of the sales tax for cars with 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18TransportBuildings/AppliancesGrid ExpansionRenewablesNo Renewable Energy StimulusNumber of Countries With Renewable Energy Stimulus 
Packages
2020 2008small engines. USD 50 billion went to energy efficiency (subsidies to purchase energy- efficient 
light bulbs) and environmental improvement, USD 85 billion to rail transport investments, and 
USD 70 billion to new grid infrastructure.14 The stimulus  impacts have gone beyond increasing 
investments in renewable s. By making alternative energy sources cheaper  worldwide , dirtier 
energy sources have become relatively more expensive, as indicated by slowing growth in the 
cement sector and a decline in annual steel output. One study provided strong evidence that the 
parts of China that focused on clean energy and green jobs found higher increases in employment, 
debunking the myth that clean energy investments and job cr eation are at odds.15 That said, China’s 
carbon emissions still rose by 27 percent from 2007 to 2010. In 2008 t he government also 
supported the industrials sector (airlines , auto manufacturers), the construction sector, and the oil 
and gas industry, which employ millions of people, with billions , without any conditions attached 
towards decarbonized economies .16 
  
  CASE STUDY A: South Korea’s Green New Deal (2008 -2009)  
 
South Korea spent USD 36 billion on fiscal stimulus over four years broken up into four key 
areas: conservation (green cars, clean energy, and recycling), quality of life (green 
neighborhoods and housing), environmental protection (river and w ater resources), and future 
green transportation and IT infrastructure. Energy efficiency was the top priority: USD 5.84 
billion was allocated to public buildings and households to upgrade their energy efficiency, and two million green homes were built. USD 1.8 billion went to fuel efficient vehicles, USD 7 
billion went to low -carbon railways, bicycle tracks, and other public transit systems, and USD 
1.8 billion went to low carbon power. USD 14 billion went to river and forest restoration as well 
as medium -sized dams. The government also set up a USD 7
2 million fund to attract private 
investment in renewable power projects, and provided research and development support to its large companies for investments in electric vehicles.
17 
  
Some investments were cri ticized for  propping up construction companies in the short -term. 
Projects to construct dam and embankment s along rivers (USD 20 billion in total), and 
investments in the cement  sector (albeit to create new bike paths on roads) rose concerns .18 The 
investm ent in renewables w ere also lackluster compared to other areas, with less than USD 100 
million going to investments like solar -powered homes, photovoltaic heating, and geothermal 
sources for apartment blocks. The key barrier to these investments according to government sources was limited land potential for large projects like solar and 
wind, and limited hydro 
potential due to lack of rivers. Per an independent evaluation, the recovery did not achieve the objectives of green growth as set out in the government’s strategy.
19 An emissions trading 
system ( ETS) or carbon tax could have provided the incentives for economic restructuring, rather 
than a situation with significant investment in renewables but high carbon- intensive growth still 
driving the recovery and the uptick in economic activity. The ETS was in place by 2012 at which point CO2 increases were far lower than GDP growth, indicating declining CO2 energy 
intensity, counteracting the spike in fossil fuel use in 2009 and 2010.
 20 
 
 CASE STUDY B: South Africa’s Environmental Fiscal Reform (2009)  
 
Though the South African government never announced it explicitly as a stimulus package, there 
was nonetheless an increase in the 2009/2010 fiscal budget of ZAR 39 billion, or around 1.2% of GDP. The package centered around large increases to public welfare programs, some infrastructure spending, and tax cuts for consumers .  
 The budget also included a modest increase in spending on climate -conscious policies in the 
form of new or revamped taxes, branded a s “Environmental Fiscal Reform”. With a particular 
focus on improving energy efficiency in the country, the measures called for an additional ZAR 500 million in government expenditure
21. Made up of incremental changes to incentives and tax 
policies, the ref orm package called for these “mitigation and adaptation measures to address 
climate change”22: 
 
• a new accelerated depreciation allowance for companies who make any investments in 
energy -efficient equipment , given there is proof of the increased efficiency;   
• an increase in the tax on plastic bags  by 33%, from 3 to 4 cents per bag;  
• Introduction of a  new tax on incandescent light bulbs  of ZAR 3 per bulb. With a dual 
purpose of reducing energy demand and improving efficiency, the tax was applied to manufacturers and importers.  
• a tax exemption for Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) was proposed for any 
income from the sale of primary CERs .
5  
• A change in t he calculation of excise taxes on new vehicles  to reduce  the “luxury” tax 
(based solely on price) and add a new portion based on emissions.  
• the international air passenger departure tax was raised  to ZAR 150 per passenger 
headed to an international destination (from 120) and ZAR 80 (from 60) per passenger 
on flights to other Southern African Customs Union member states.  
• an increase to fuel taxes  of 23 cents per liter of petrol and 24 cents per liter of diesel.   
 
Climate change has become  increasingly evident to the general population as droughts, wildfires, 
and floods increase in frequency and intensity, temperatures continue to rise, and millions migrate 
due to climate -induced disaster . The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Cha nge Fifth 
Assessment Report underscored that much of the contribution of climate change has been caused by human activity, and that a 1.5 C global average temperature increase would be catastrophic for 
economic growth, poverty reduction efforts
23, and the global financial system.24.  
 Despite all this, the urgency to act does not seem to be reflected in the stimulus packages  issued 
so far to recover from the current cris is. Thus far , governments have shied away from using green 
stimulus in response to the COVID- 19 crisis  as a “big push” compared to 2008- 2009. The 
immediate responses across both developed and developing countries have centered around cash 
transfers and employment protections due to the COVID- 19 induced lock down. It  remains to be 
 
5 According to the Kyoto Protocol th ese certifications are issued to recognize reduction in the emission of 
greenhouse gases and can then be traded on a secondary market.  seen if later packages will target clean energy, as the EU package seems intended to do with its 
Green New Deal . The experiences of China, South Korea, and South Africa offer a few examples  
of how to drive down the costs of clean energy and reduce carbon intensity, while us ing a range 
of investment and fiscal tools to shape outcomes.   
 
 
5. SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY 
  
In our sample, stimuli  to the agriculture sector tend to focus on supporting food production and 
primary goods exports  in times of crisis , especially in 2008 when  the financial crisis followed in 
the step s of a food crisis.25 In 2020, the COVID- 19 crisis underscored the risks of  zoonotic diseases 
and the depletion of natural resources on the world’s food systems. In a recent paper, UN Food 
and Agricultural Organization tied the lack of investment in sustainable agriculture and industrial 
livestock production processes to risks of increased animal and human health.26 Countries in both 
the 2008- 2009 crisis and the COVID -19 crisis have used stimulus  packages  as a mechanism to 
channel investment to sustainable projects in the agricultural sector.  
 
Figure 4a. 
 
  
Low-and middle -income countries in our s ample have taken the lead on crafting sustainable food 
production stimulus packages in both crises. Many of those low -and-middle income countries have 
either not industrialized or are at an early stage of industrialization , with a greater proportion of 
the population working in agriculture. These countries directed investments to each of the different 
areas we examined, and did so using a mix of grants, loans, insurance, subsidies, and public 
investment.  
 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16Irrigation/Flood ControlInputs (Seeds, Fertilizer, Machinery)Farm ModernizationStorage, Food Protection, Food ProductionCrop and Farm InsuranceNo Sustainable Food StimulusNumber of Countries that Used Stimulus Packages to Improve 
Food Sustainability
2020 2008-09Several of the measures introduced are not clear cut in their effects on food sustainability. Many 
of these policies, such as support to primary food exports, agri -insurance, investments in inputs, 
and food storage all support farmers and the agricultural sector and reduce the likelihood of food waste. That said, governments rarely conditioned these support measures on improving sustainable 
agricultural practices, and sometimes sustainable food stimulus went to products that are 
considered unsustainable. For the purposes of this study and each of the packages in question, we 
did count packages as being sustainable if they met these categories, but did not count the parts of 
those packages that clearly had no sustainable impact, and maybe had a negative impact (such as 
support to the meat industry). We did not exclude countries that supported unsustainable practices  
and have aimed to document those instances of potential negative harm in the  annex. 
 Kenya in 2008- 09 represents a mobilization effort perhaps worth emulating, distributing USD 11 
billion in funds , some of which went to support food systems in parts of the country in most need 
and using locally available labor . Despite being hard hit by the crisis, limiting spending to 1 percent 
of GDP, Nairobi ran a reasonable budget deficit of 6 percent of GDP and managed to subsidize improvements in inputs (seeds and fertilizer), sustain its competitive advantage in flowers and 
horticulture, and offer a sustainable infrastructure bond.
27 Its package also increased financing for 
irrigation schemes, allocated funds to increase the Strategic Grain Reserve, and more.28 
Development spending was re -allocated to fund a surge of investment in water supplies, incl uding 
a USD 16 million investment in fish pond construction and sustainable fish farming techniques.29 
35,000 acres of land were earmarked for irrigation programs, most of which were in the central regions which have been historically the poorest. The inve stments in irrigation came at a time of 
water insecurity due to melting glaciers and declining rainfall, supporting adaptation to climate change .
30 The agricultural focus of the stimulus program limited the crisis’ negative impact on 
rural employment and c ontributed to efforts to invest in environmental conservation.31 
  
 
CASE STUDY C: Canada’s Response to the COVID Crisis  
 
Canada’s 2020 stimulus package in response to COVID -19 marked an unseen level of 
ambition to transition the country to sustainable food systems. To improve agriculture 
practices , bolster food security, and encourage sustainable farming, the government 
appropriated additional funds to a number of existing programs, including32: 
  
● USD 77.5 million emergency fund to get food producers PPE, and help them automate 
their facilities and processes  
● Increased the Dairy Commission’s borrowing limit by USD 200 million to help with 
storage and avoid food waste  
● Expansion of the Surplus Food Purchase Program  with an initial USD 50 million  fund 
to redistribute unsold inventories to local food organizations supporting vulnerable Canadians  
● Agri-Insurance to include labor shortages as an eligible risk in the horticulture sector, insuring against lost production due to labor shortages  
● USD 62.5 million to the Seafood Stabilization Fund to support new manufacturing and 
automated technologies to improve productivity and quality of seafood products 
(distributed via regional development agencies)  
● Fishermen  grants (up to $10,000 per self -employed fishermen, targeted at freshwater 
fishermen, excluding commercial and recreational fishermen)  
● Agri-insurance for those in the horticulture sector to insure against lost production due 
to labor shortages  
● USD 1.72 billion to provincial governments to clean up orphan and inactive oil and gas 
wells  
 
 
 
CASE STUDY D: Bangladesh’s Response in 2008 -09 and 2020  
 In 2009, Bangladesh implemented a USD 500 million (.5 percent of GDP) stimulus package 
focused on propping up the power and agriculture sectors, along with key export industries. 
Extra subsidies were provided for the export of jute, leather, and frozen food. Traditional sectors like garments and ceramics were not included in the package. 43 percent went to the  agricultural 
sector, 18 percent to power and energy, 15 percent to export promotion, and 13 percent to social security spending.
 33 
 The package included the recapitalization of agricultural loans and additional farm subsidies. Along with the stimulus pac kage, the newly elected Prime Minister in 2009 slashed the prices 
of diesel (for irrigation) and non- fertilizer items. A program in 2010 to distribute organic, green, 
and bio fertilizers to 9.7 million families helped popularize the use of natural fertiliz ers. 
Bangladesh also extended insurance to some farmers, extended and rehabilitated irrigation facilities , and froze fertilizer prices to boost production.
343536 
 
Developing a targeted package in 2009 allowed the government to quickly surge available resources to mitigate worst case scenarios in 2020. Bangladesh’s  
COVID relief package is 
already over USD 12 billion, 24 times the amount from 2009 and nearly 4 percent  of GDP, 
relatively higher than its wealthier neighbors Malaysia, Vietnam, and Pakistan. It includes funds 
to make loan refinancing more easily available to farmers and the agricultural sector. It also includes increased allocations to transfer programs that provide cheaper staple foods, like rice, and other programs that distribute food to the poor. Nearly 20 percent of the package is earmarked for small, medium, and micro- enterprises.
37 
 
The government relied on banks to disburse the funds. So far, there have been challenges due to 
interest rate caps for banks at 9 percent and the expectation that the banks will also need to ensure 
the loans. The central bank has stepped in to subsid ize interest rates, but some banks are still wary of SME lending due to hi gher or perceived higher default rates.38 Bangladesh is trying to 
channel some money through microfinance institutions, which charge even higher rates , but will 
reach the more remote and poor parts of the country. 
 
 
 
 
6. POLICY TOOLS AND BENEFICIARIES  
 In addition to the issue areas outlined above, this paper  also looked into how governments 
structured their fiscal stimulus packages along two axes. The first is what policy tools were used; 
what were the main methods used to spend money in each of the tar get areas. The second was who 
were the direct beneficiaries; which groups or sectors were the ones who first received support from the government in each area as part of the packages. In regard to direct beneficiaries, this 
paper also investigated how frequently stimulus packages directly targeted women as a vulnerable 
group and budgeted for policies intended to promote gender equality. Looking at these two 
characteristics and observing any changes in the structuring of stimulus packages can provide 
better insight into what governments see as the most significant changes since 2008 and the best 
feasible way s to carry out these packages, both politically and economically.  
 
Policy Tools  
 From the sample of countries this paper  identified 10 major policy tools  that were used by 
governments during the observed time period: (a) Providing easier access to credit; (b) Loans; (c) 
Direct grants; (d) Tax changes; (e) Conditionalities on government funds; (f) Public investment 
and research; (g) Infrastructure spending; (h) Social insurance programs; (i) Consumption 
subsidies; and (j) Export/import subsidies. These categories are not meant to be exhaustive, and 
this list was created organically by observing what  tools emerged from this sample of countries . 
This list was meant to capture the most common ways expenditure is structured and any 
commonalities between countries.  
 One important note is that there was a use of more tools overall in the areas studied dur ing the 
2008- 09 crisis than in 2020 thus far, so there is a higher use frequency across most of the tools for 
the period of 2008- 09. For the purposes of counting, one “use of a tool” is defined a s an instance 
of a government us ing one of the above ten policy tools as a part of the economic stimulus package 
directly targeted to one of the two target areas, renewable energy or sustainable agriculture. For example, if a government announced stimulus to the renewable energy sector through tax cuts and 
direct grants, that would count as two “uses of a tool”. However, if they did so through a variety 
of tax cuts but no other tools, that would still only count as one “use of a tool”, independent of 
how many different taxes were altered. Counted this way, there were 40 “uses of a tool” in the 2008- 09 crisis, compared to 27 in the COVID -19 crisis. Figure 4b also shows that the total number 
of countries in the sample that took no action in the renewable energy area increased in 2020, as 
well as  the total number of countries that took no action in either area.  
 Figure 5a. 
 
 
Figure 5b.  
 
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Easier access to creditLoansDirect grantsTax changesConditionalitiesPublic investment/researchInfrastructure spendingSocial insurance programsConsumption subsidiesExport/import subsidies
Number of countries that used each tool Policy Tools Used in Fiscal Packages
2020 2008-09
12 12
717
11
9
024681012141618
Renewable Energy Sustainable Agriculture Either areaNumber of countries with no policies in each area (out of 21)
2008-09 2020The two policy most popular tools during both time periods  are “Direct grants” and “Public 
investment and research”. Possibl y because they are seen as a quick method to get money into the 
economy, and typically involve fewer hurdles than projects which might require contractors and 
bidding.  
 Some of the common policy tools in the 2008- 09 crisis  were not used as much during the current 
COVID- 19 crisis: “Consumption subsidies”, “Infrastructure spending”, and “Tax changes”. 
Consumption subsidies went from being used by 7 countries in 2008- 09 to only 2 countries in 
2020. Infrastructure spending likewise decreased from 6 to 4, and tax changes from 4 to 1.  
 One tool has been used frequently in the COVID -19 crisis, and even more often than it was in 
2008- 09: “Easier access to credit”.  While in 2008- 09 it was used by only 3 c ountries in the sample, 
in 2020 it has already been used by 5 countries.  
  
Beneficiaries  
 Equally important to how governments spend stimulus funds put in place to control the pandemic , 
are the target sectors or groups , especially MSMEs and women, which are hard est hit during the 
lockdown. We identif ied, where possible, the primary recipient of this spending versus those 
targeted at economy at large, especially in the three subject areas this paper focuses on. To this 
purpose 6 main targe ts of government funds  were identified : (a) “Households”, (b) “Farmers”, (c) 
“SMEs”, (d) “Corporates (national)” and (e) “Corporates (international)”, and (f) the rest of the 
“Public sector” at large. These are not meant to be exclusive groups; often an agricultural program 
will provide funds for both small and large farms, which can include anything from smallholder 
farmers to multinational agricultural exporters. The same policy might also have two recipients. 
This paper also looked more in- depth at women and girls as the direct target of these stimulus 
programs; see section below.  
 
Before the analysis we have to highlight two caveat s. The first is that this list looked only at the 
primary recipient of the spending as outlined on official stimulus package s. For example, if a 
program was passed at the federal level to send funds to state and local government to spend on food programs, the primary recipient of this spending would be “Public sector”. The reasoning 
behind this is that there might be many layer s to where the money moves before it reaches a final 
target, and it is useful to see how directly governments are structuring their spending. The second caveat is that the recipient of policies and programs was not always clear, especially during the 
2020 crisis that is still ongoing. It was not uncommon for governments to announce spending but 
not provide a detailed plan for it, in which cases it was difficult to identify a primary beneficiary.  
 
 Figure 5c.  
 
 
As Figure 5c  illustrates, there were fairly different patterns in the recipients of spending in the 
three policy areas and between the two crises. In 2008- 09, it was much more common for funding 
to go towards “Farmers”, “National corporates”, and the rest of the “Publ ic sector”. One possible 
explanation is tied to the trends in different policy tools outlined in the previous section: since  
2008- 09 packages were relatively more long- term and with more focus on infrastructure spending, 
the target of this spending would m ore likely be other parts of the public sector. Similarly, 
expenditure directly to farmers makes more sense as a medium to long term strategy for transformational policies in improving food sustainability, rather than providing immediate relief 
and food se curity.  
 One group of recipients which seems to already be receiving more attention in the current crisis is 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Partly this could be due to increased awareness on the 
importance of supporting firms which are the backbone of many countries’ economies and provide 
a majority  of jobs. It could also be due to the nature of the COVID -19 crisis and the resulting 
lockdowns, which tend to disproportionately affect smaller firms which depend more on face -to-
face business and are les s likely to have access to large amounts of savings and/or alternative 
sources of credit to smooth over their costs.   
The group that is equally favored during both periods is households. This makes sense both 
politically, as politicians and governments of ten try to support their constituents and direct voters, 
and economically, as households face similar problems as SMEs in terms of lack of savings and vulnerability to shocks in the economy. Additionally, many countries in our sample and beyond 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14HouseholdsFarmersSMEsCorporates (nat'l)Corporates (int'l)Public sector
Number of countries that used each tool Direct Recipients of Fiscal Packages in Target Areas
2020 2008-09lack suffic ient social safety nets to cope with a shock of this magnitude, and so it becomes even 
more urgent for governments to address extraordinary support to them to ensure households are 
able to survive.  
 
 
Women and Girls as the Direct  Beneficiary 
 This paper also explore s in more detail how women and girls  received particular policy attention 
from governments as part of these stimulus packages. The 1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action identified 12 areas where urgent action was needed to ensure greater equality and opportunities for women and men and girls and boys, among which were “women and the 
economy” and “institutional mechanisms for the advancement of women.”
39 Similarly, the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development , adopted by H eads of S tate and Government  in 2015, 
included this issue in Goal 5, which sought to a chieve gender equality and empower all women 
and girls . It committed the international community to “ensure women’s full and effective 
participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision making in political, 
economic and public life .”40 The Club of Rome also identifies economic empowerment of women 
as one of the 5 requirements to achieve the SDGs by 2030.  
 
This year , 2020, that marks the 25th anniversary of the Beijing Declaration has seen COVID -19, 
a new crisis that further exacerbates these gender inequalities, spread across the world. According 
to a UN Secretary -General policy brief, the economic impact of the pandemic differently a nd 
disproportionately affects women, as they earn less, save less, are more likely to have jobs in the healthcare and informal sector s, and are more likely to be closer to the poverty line.
41 In addition, 
unpaid care work, which is much more likely to fall on women, has increased greatly as children are out of school and at -risk elderly family members require more care, while at the same time 
scarce public health resources are being moved away  from women’s health programs to try to 
contain the COVID -19 outbreak. The social isolation measures enacted to stop the spread of the 
virus also have the unfortunate side effect of greatly increasing the number of women and girls in 
immediate danger of ge nder-based violence .
42 
 
Policies are not neutral and many of them aim directly at limiting women’s opportunities. A 
gender -sensitive stimulus package thus offer s a venue to close t he gender  gap instead of widening 
it. We take a broad definition of gender -budgeting of stimulus packages in this report including 
any policy that was part of a fiscal stimulus package that directly addressed an issue in gender inequities. This included for example providing more educational and job opportunities for 
women; invest ments in women and women- owned businesses; policies that ensured increased 
representation of women in decision- making and leadership roles; or any measure that specifically 
addressed how women were affected differently by these economic crises. Nonetheless , despite 
this broad definition the results were still underw helming .   
Generally, fiscal packages in response to the 2008 financial crisis did not include policies that 
directly targeted issues of gender equality. Some countries did increase funding to pr ograms 
towards vulnerable groups that are disproportionately women, such as Kenya’s investment in fish farming  or South Africa’s investment in the fight against HIV/AIDS .
4344 However, these decisions 
rarely stated a purpose to combat gender inequality or provide more opportunities to women and 
can be considered social support as opposed to gender support.  
 
The current COVID -19 crisis has similarly not yet yielded much focus on combating gender 
inequalities , though there is room to be more optimistic.45 At the time of writing, a few countries 
have made efforts to look at the recovery through a gender lens: the European Union has supported 
research into how the pandemic differently affects women , and has made broad commitments that 
gender equality “should be taken into account and promoted throughout the  preparation, 
implementation and monitoring of relevant programmes .”4647 Canada has made more specific 
commitments, provi ding CAD 15 million in new funding to the Women Entrepreneurship Strategy 
(WES) , a program that seeks to double the number of women- owned businesses by 2025. 48 
 For the most part, however, countries in our sample have dedicated little attention to addressing 
gender -biases in most stimulus to combat the COVID -19 pandemic. Larger commitments and 
much more progress needs to be made to ensure that the current crisis does not roll back progress made on women participation in the workforce and salary gap, for example, and even more needs to be done to guarantee that the economic recovery will bring equal opportunities for women and 
men. As with the other areas, opportuni ty to address gender issues is still available for soon- to-be 
approved stimulus packages, but state and non- state actors, including women groups may need to 
apply pressure to ensure this opportunity is not missed.  
  
7. CONCLUSION 
 
The response to each crisis has differed, with so far more relative emphasis on transformational economic policies in 2008 and more action on immediate relief in 2020. Part of this could be due 
to the fact that the COVID -19 pandemic is still ongoing in most countries in the world, and as 
such, the policies proposed to date have focused on immediate social safety net and health needs and short -term stimulus to maintain employment.  Countries are only now starting to be able to 
think about longer -term economic recovery in a post -COVID- 19 world: t he European Union’s 
package was only realized in July, for example. As many countries are still fighting to get the 
pandemic under control, countries are still in the process of determining what  policy intervention s 
might be needed while ac counting for limited fiscal space.  
 Accordingly, there was more attention dedicated to renewable energy policies in 2008 and more 
attention towards food security in 2020. Nine  of the 20 countries  and the European Union in our 
sample included renewable ener gy promotion measures in their 2008- 2009 stimulus packages, 
compared to four thus far in 2020. The policy acti ons in the area of sustainab le agriculture and 
food security is more even between the two crises, with nine countries acting in 2008- 09 and ten 
so far in 2020. This discrepancy in part stems from the immediate need for measures to secure 
access to food, including through production, in a crisis that has seen much economic activity grind 
to a halt and in countries that have little if any permanent social safety net programs. On the other 
hand, while climate change is a global threat and the transition to renewable energy a crucial one 
for the survival of bill ions of people, efforts to boost clean energy and fight climate change can 
take more time to materialize; as such they tend to be politically more vulnerable in many 
countries, and require public investment with an eye over the medium - to long- term.  
 
Ther e is a lack of meaningful policies that target gender inequalities and actively promote 
opportunities to women during both crises. This is harmful twice -over. First, because by neglecting 
to proactively include women and initiatives towards gender equality in stimulus packages, 
governments miss a large spending opportunity to move towards  realizing  SDG5 . And secondly, 
women and girls tend to be even more vulnerable to loss of jobs, education, and economic 
opportunities in recessions and crises; by failing  to act, governments are failing to close the gender 
gap and indeed allowing it to widen further.   A common reason for failing to make meaningful progress in pursuit of the sustainable 
development goals is that there simply isn’t enough fiscal space. This can be true in many 
instances, especially for developing countries that have smaller tax bases and are much more 
vulnerable to external shocks and fluctuations in the global economy. However, the response to 
the devastating COVID -19 pandemic has shown that governments , particularly in developed 
countries, are indeed capable of large spending and investment programs in the face of 
extraordinary circumstances: 12 of the 20 countries and the European Union examined had 
announced stimulus packages greater than 4 percent of their GDP. Now that this money is being 
injected into economies around the world, it is crucial that i t is used in impactful ways  guided by 
the sustainable development goals  to support economies to recover and be  more resilient and 
equitable . Popular support for and expert consensus on the severity of these problems and the kind 
of action that is needed has grown for many of these areas — certainly in the three examined in 
this paper: renewable energy, sustainable agriculture and food security, a nd gender equality and 
empowerment of women. However, this support does not automatically translate into political 
action  and economic support . It is crucial that stakeholders and action groups in each country build 
coalitions to reinforce this message  and continue to apply pressure on their own governments to 
act. These destructive crises provide  a chance to support economic recoveries  that are more 
inclusive and sustainable . The trillion s invested now will affect our trajectory in the coming 
decades. We can’t afford to not use them to better prepare for the next crisis and accelerate the transition towards decarbonized, sustainable , and equitable  economies that can deliver on the 
SDGs .  
 
 ANNEX A – Methodology 
 
For this paper, 20 countries and the European Union were chosen to be a part of the sample across 
both crises. This group of countries was selected based on three criteria:  
a) Geography  – the sample was designed to be geographically diverse and representative of 
different regions in the world, avoiding an oversampling of any one particular region wherever possible. In the end the group consisted of 5 countries from Africa, 7 from Asia, 
4 from Latin America, 2 from North America, 1 from Europe  and the European Union, and 
1 from Oceania, with further geographic diversity within each continent as well.  
b) Income level  – the sample was designed to be diverse in terms of income level as well, wi th 
a mix of developed and developing countries. Special attention was given to ensure the 
inclusion of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) , which are refer red to in the document  as 
low-income countries for statistical comparison purposes with other World Bank Country 
groups , and in the end four LDCs were selected: Bangladesh, Rwanda, Senegal, and 
Zambia.  
c) Availability of data  – the last criteria is based on how much information and data was 
available for each country. While in general data was more readily accessible for developed 
countries, for many developing countries there was often a lack of detailed information on 
how much money was being spent on specific projects, especially when looking back at 
2008- 09. In the end this meant that in four cases there was insufficient data available, either 
because no evidence of a stimulus package could be found or there was evidence of  a 
package but no details on size or scope. Three of these cases were in 2008- 09, one was in 
2020; none of the countries included had missing data in both periods.  
 All of the research was conducted online, so this paper was restricted by what was readily and 
publicly available at the time of writing. Specifically, we looked for information on stimulus 
packages during the two periods in: official government publications and budgets; media articles 
from the time; and aggregate reports from academia and inte rnational organizations. Any 
initiatives or policies that directly targeted one of the areas of interest, broadly defined, were 
recorded . 
 
The objective was to look at the intent of stimulus packages at the time they were announced, 
seeing what received attention and priority from governments at the time of planning and drafting 
of legislation. This paper did not investigate where stimulus funds were eventually spent and how 
true to the original plan that was, nor did it analyze if this spending was effective in achieving the 
stated policy goal. Given that it is still too early to do much of that analysis for the COVID -19 
crisis, since it is s till ongoing in most countries, it made more sense to keep the comparison 
between the two periods as equal as possible and only look at announcements. While this does not 
capture the effectiveness of particular policies, it nonetheless offers valuable insi ght into what problems governments are dedicating attention to in a time of crisis, and if this has evolved to 
include more concerns in renewable energy and sustainable agriculture and food security.  
 In the 2008- 2009 crisis, any stimulus packages and economic recovery programs announced 
between 2008 and 2010 were included. In the 2020 crisis packages announced up until 1 August 2020 were included.  
 Countries received credit as having taken action in a particular area if they announced any program 
or spending that would directly target either renewable energy or sustainable agriculture and food 
security. As such, there was no comparison between countries on the relative magnitude of these programs: a country which used 1% of their stimulus package in renew able energy initiatives 
would receive the same amount of credit as one that used 25% of their total package.  ANNEX  B – Tables  
 
a. Tools Matrix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Renewable Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
c. Sustainable Food  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
d. Beneficiaries 
 
 
 
References 
 
1 United Nations (2019 a). Methodology: Standard Country or Area Codes for Statistical Use (M49). Available at 
https:/ /unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49.  
2 United Nations (2019 b). UN -OHRLLS. See http://unohrlls.org.  
3 The World Bank (2020). Available at https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519 -world -
bank -country -and-lending -groups  
4 The 20 countries are: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, India, Jamaica, Kenya, 
Mexico, Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, South Korea, Vietnam, Zambia  
5 UNCTAD World Investment Report, 2014 : Investing in the SDGs: A n Action Plan, available at 
https://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2014_en.pdf . 
6 UN Secretary General, Antonio Guterees, Opening remarks at High- Level Meeting on Financing for Development 
in the Era of COVID -19 and Beyond 29 September 2020 available at 
https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/speeches/2020 -09-29/opening -remarks -high -level -meeting -financing -for-
development -era-of-covid -19-and-beyond Financing for Development in COVID19 Era and Beyond.  
7 Peters, Glen P., Gregg Marland, Corinne Le Quéré, Thomas Boden, Josep G. Canadell, and Michael R. Raupach. 
“Rapid Growth in CO 2 Emissions after the 2008 –2009 Global Financial Crisis,” December 4, 2011. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1332.  
8 Quéré, Corinne Le, Robert B. Jackson, Matthew W. Jones, Adam J. P. Smith, Sam Abernethy, Robbie M. Andrew, 
Anthony J. De -Gol, et al. “Temporary Reduction in Daily Global CO 2 Emissions d uring the COVID -19 Forced 
Confinement,” May 19, 2020. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558 -020- 0797 -x. 
9 Hepburn, Cameron, Brian O’Callaghan, Nicholas Stern, Joseph Stiglitz, and Dimitri Zenghelis. “Will COVID -19 Fiscal 
Recovery Packages Accelerate or Retard Progress on Climate Change?,” May 8, 2020. 
https://academic.oup.com/oxrep/advance -article/doi/10.1093/oxrep/graa015/5832003.  
10 Mundaca, Luis, and Jessika Luth Richter. “Assessing 'Green Energy Economy' Stimulus Packages: Evidence from 
the U.S. Program s Targeting Renewable Energy.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews. Pergamon, 
November 18, 2014. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032114008855.  
11 He, Gang, Jiang Lin, Froylan Sifuentes, Xu Liu, Nikit Abhyankar, and Amol Phadke. “ Rapid Cost Decrease of 
Renewables and Storage Accelerates the Decarbonization of China's Power System,” May 19, 2020. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467 -020-16184- x. 
12 “Europe’s moment. Repair and prepare for the next generation.” European Commission. May 27, 2020. 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_940  
13 Wong, Christine. “The Fiscal Stimulus Programme and Public Governance Issues in China.” OECD Journal on 
Budgeting. OECD, October 19, 2011. https://www.oecd- ilibrary.org/governa nce/the -fiscal -stimulus -
programme -and-public -governance -issues- in-china_budget -11-5kg3nhljqrjl.  
14 Seligsohn, Deborah. “A ‘Green Lining’ in China's Economic Stimulus Plan.” World Resources Institute, October 7, 
2019. https://www.wri.org/blog/2008/11/green -lining -chinas -economic -stimulus -plan.  
15 Yi, Hongtao, and Yuan Liu. “Green Economy in China: Regional Variations and Policy Drivers.” Global 
Environmental Change. Pergamon, December 27, 2014. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S095937801400199X
. 
16 Economist Intelligence Unit. “China’s stimulus package: A six -month report card.” The Economist. July, 2009. 
http://ftp01.economist.com.hk/090723/Stimulus_new_main_July20.pdf  
17 Mission2020. “Green Stimulus: Case Studies from 2008 -2009.” Mission2020. April, 2020. 
https://mission2020.global/wp- content/uploads/Green- stimulus_ -case -studies -from -2008 -2009.pdf  
18 Watts, Jonathan. “South Korea Lights the Way on Carbon Emissions with Its £23bn Green Deal.” The Guardian. 
Guardian News  and Media, April 20, 2009. 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/apr/21/south- korea -enviroment -carbon -emissions.  
19 Jung, Yeon- Mi. “Is South Korea's Green Job Policy Sustainable?” MDPI. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute, July 6, 2015. https://www.mdpi.com/2071 -1050/7/7/8748/htm . 
20 Mundaca, L., & Damen, B. (2015). Assessing the effectiveness of the ‘Green Economic Stimulus’ in South Korea: 
Evidence from the energy sector. In [Host publication title missing] International Association for Energy Economics.   
    21 South Africa National Treasury. (2009). “2009 Budget Review: Chapter 1”. 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20budget/2009/review/chap1.pdf  
    22 South African Revenue Service. (2009). “Tax Proposals 2009/2010”. 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20budget/2009/guides/Budget%20Proposals%202009.pdf  
23 IPCC. “Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Specia l Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre -
industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global 
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to  eradicate poverty.” 2018. 
[Masson -Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H. -O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma -Okia, C. 
Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.  
 
24 Grippa, Pierpaolo, Schmittman, Jochen, and Felix Suntheim. “Climate Change, Central Banks and Financial Risk.” 
International Monetary Fund, December 2019. 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2019/12/climate -change -central -banks -and-financial -risk-
grippa.htm.  
25 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2011 Report on the World Social Situation 
2011: The Global Social Crisis. Chapter 4, the Global Food Crises. UNESA. 2011. 
https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/rwss/docs/2011/chapter4.pdf  
26 Otte, J., Roland -Holst, D., Pfeiffer, D, Soares -Magalhaes, R., Rushton, J., Graham, J., and E. Gilbergeld. 
“Industrial Livestock Production and Global Health Risks.” Pro -Poor Livestock Policy Initiative. June, 2007. 
http://www.fao.org/3/a -bp285e.pdf  
27 Jopson, Barney. “Kenya Unveils Record 'Stimulus' Budget.” Financial Times. June 11, 2009. 
https://www.ft.com/content/0e48b85c -5690 -11de -9a1c-00144feabdc0.  
28 Short C., Mulinge W. & Witwer M. 2012. Analysis of incentives and disincentives for maize in Kenya. 
Technical notes series, MAFAP, UN Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. http://www.fa o.org/3/a -
at554e.pdf  
29 AquaFish Innovation Lab. (2 Feb 2011). “ With U.S. help, Kenya aims to boost economy via fish farming”. 
Oregon State University.  https://aquafishcrsp.oregonstate.edu/us -help -kenya -aims -boost -economy -fish-
farming  
30 Karina, Francis, and Alex Wambua Mwaniki. “Irrigation Agriculture in Kenya : Impact of the economic 
stimulus programme & long term prospects for food security in an era of climate change.” Heinrich Boll 
Stiftung: Nairobi, Kenya, March 2011. 
https://ke.boell.org/sites/default/files/irrigation_agriculture_in_kenya_ -
_impact_of_esp_and_food_security.pdf  
31 Ibid.  
32 Government of Canada. (2020). “Canada’s COVID -19 Economic Response Plan”. 
https://www.canada.ca/en/department -finance/economic- response -plan.html  
33 “Bangladeshi Gov't Attaches More Importance to Agriculture Sector -  Bangladesh.” ReliefWeb. April 20, 2009. 
https://reliefweb.int/report/bangladesh/bangladeshi -govt -attaches -more -importance -agriculture -sector.  
34 “Bangladeshi Gov't Attaches More Im portance to Agriculture Sector -  Bangladesh.” ReliefWeb. April 20, 2009. 
https://reliefweb.int/report/bangladesh/bangladeshi -govt -attaches -more -importance -agriculture -sector.  
35 “Bangladesh: Seeking Better Employment Conditions for Better Socioeconomic Outcomes.” Studies on Growth 
with Equity: Bangladesh: Seeking better employment conditions for better socioeconomic outcomes. UN 
International Labo r Organization, November 18, 2013. https://www.ilo.org/global/research/studies -on-
growth -with -equity/WCMS_229105/lang --en/index.htm.  
36 Maetz, Materne, Mariana Aguirre, Sunae Kim, Yasaman, Matinroshan, Guendalina Pangrazio, and 
Valentina Pernechele. “Food a nd agricultural policy trends after the 2008 food security crisis: renewed 
attention to agricultural development.” UN Food and Agriculture Organization. 2011. 
http://www.fao.org /docs/up/easypol/932/policy -trends_125en.pdf  
37 “Policy Responses to COVID19.” IMF. https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf -and-covid19/Policy -Responses -to 
COVID -19. 
38 Ibid.   
39 UN Women. (1995). “Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action”. 
https://beijing20.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/csw/pfa_e_final_web.pdf  
40 United Nations. (2015). “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. 
https://sustainabledevelop ment.un.org/content/documents/21252030%20Agenda%20for%20Sustainable%
20Development%20web.pdf  
41 United Nations. (9 Apr 2020). “Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID -19 on Women.” 
https://www.unwomen.org/ -/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publicatio ns/2020/policy -
brief -the-impact -of-covid -19-on-women -en.pdf?la=en&vs=1406  
42 UN Women. (2020). “COVID -19 and Ending Violence Against Women and Girls.” 
https://www.unwomen.org/ -/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/issue -
brief -covid -19-and-ending -violence -against -women -and-girls-en.pdf?la=e n&vs=5006  
43 AquaFish Innovation Lab. (2 Feb 2011). “ With U.S. help, Kenya aims to boost economy via fish farming”. 
Oregon State University.  https://aquafishc rsp.oregonstate.edu/us -help -kenya -aims -boost -economy -fish-
farming  
44 South Africa National Treasury. (2009). “2009 Budget Review: Chapter 1”. 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20budget/2009/review/chap1.pdf  
45 https://data.undp.org/gendertrack er/ 
46 European Commission. (28 May 2020). “The impact of sex and gender in the current COVID -19 pandemic”. 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/impact -sex-and-gender -current -covid -19-pandemic -2020 -may -28_en  
47 European Council. (21 July 2020). “ Special meeting of the European Council (17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 July 2020) –  
Conclusions”. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/45109/210720 -euco -final -conclusions -en.pdf  
48 Government of Canada. (2020). “Canada’s COVID -19 Economic Response Plan”. 
https://www.canada.ca/en/department -finance/economic- response -plan.html  