 
  
 Report No: AUS0002066  
. 
  
 
Accelerating Practical Digital Development  
in the Solomon Islands  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 October 2020  
. 
 Digital Development Department  
East Asia and Pacific Region  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized 
ii 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 © 2017 The World Bank  
1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433  
Telephone: 202 -473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org   
 
Some rights reserved  
 
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank  does not guarantee the accuracy of the 
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not  imply any judgment 
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territ ory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.  
 
Rights and Permissions  
 
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this wor k may be reproduced, 
in whole or in part, for no ncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.  
 
Attribution —Please cite the work as follows: “World Bank. 2021. Accelerating Digital Development in the Solomon Islands. © World Bank.”  
 
All queries on rights and licenses, includin g subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street 
NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202 -522-2625; e -mail: pubrights@worldbank.org .  
 
iii 
 Contents  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                1 
I. NOTE FOR THE READER - A FRAMEWORK FOR DIGI TAL DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT                       1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  1 
B.  Description of Framework Components  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 2 
1. Prevailing Factors  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 2 
2. Enablers  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  2 
3. Digital Economy Strategic Outcomes  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 3 
4. Digital Government Elements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  3 
5. Strategic Digital Government Outcomes  ................................ ................................ ...............................  4 
II. REALIZING VALUE FROM A DIGITAL ECONOMY IN THE SOLOMON ISLANDS         5 
A. Best practices from beyond the borders: how countries drive growth from the digital economy  ...........  5 
B. Digital economy maturity and development opportunities in the Solomon Islands  .............................. 10 
1. Digital Transformation of Industries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...13 
2. E-Commerce and Logistics  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 16 
a. Sector Specific Focus: Tourism  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 21 
b. Sector Specific Focus: Agriculture  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 23 
c. Sector Specific Focus: Fisheries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 25 
3. Trade Logistics and Trade Facilitation  ................................ ................................ ................................ .26 
4. Financial Technologies (FinTech)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 29 
5. ICT Sector  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 31 
6. Digital Entrepreneurs ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 32 
III. DIGITAL GOVERNMENT – DELIVERING PUBLIC VALUE AND STIMULATING DIGITAL ECONOMY DEVELOP MENT 34 
A. Digital Government Strategic Outcomes  ................................ ................................ ................................ .34 
B. Digital Government Program Elements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...36 
1. Strategy and Planning  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 36 
2. Governance an d Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 39 
3. Architecture, Processes, and Standards  ................................ ................................ .............................. 42 
4. Technology Infrastructure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 44 
5. Information Systems and Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 47 
IV. FOUNDATIONAL ENABLERS OF DIGITAL ECONOMY AND DIGITAL GOVERNMENT: STATUS AND ISSUES               50 
A. Legal and Regulatory Environment  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 50 
B. Policy, Planning and Institutional Environment  ................................ ................................ ....................... 54 
C. ICT Infrastructure, Access , and Connectivity  ................................ ................................ ........................... 57 
D. Cybersecurity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 61 
E. Digital Skills and Awareness  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 62 
F. Digital Identification  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 66 
G. Digital Payments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......68 
ANNEX 1 - Digital Government and Digital Economy Prevailing Factors                      73 
ANNEX 2 - Solomon Islands Digital Economy Workshop Report                       79 
ANNEX 3 - List of Institutions Consulted                          80 
 
 
  
iv 
  
 
List of Acronyms  
 
ATS Automated Transfer System  
BMCL  
CBSI   
Bemobile Company Limited  
Central Bank of Solomon Islands  
CSD Central Securities Depository  
DFAT  Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade  
FXBC DATEC  Datec Solomon Island Limited  
MCA  Ministry of Communication & Aviation  
MCILI  Ministry of Commerce, Industry, Labour and Immigration  
MEHRD  Ministry of Education and Human Resources  
MFAET Ministry of Foreign Affairs & External Trade  
MHMS  Ministry of Health and Medical Service  
MoFT  Ministry of Finance and Treasury  
MPS  Ministry of Public Service  
OAG  Office of the Attorney  General  
PMO  Prime Minister’s Office  
SISCC  Solomon Submarine Cable company  
SIVB  Solomon Islands Visitor Bureau  
SP Solomon Post  
STCL  Solomon Telekom Company Limited  
TCSI  Telecommunication s Commission  of the Solomon  Islands  
 
 
  
1 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
There is broad consensus within the Solomon Islands Government (SIG), the Solomon Islands 
business community, and among its development partners regarding the potential contribution 
of digital technologies ( information and communication technologies/ ICT) to the Solomon Islands ’ 
social an d economic development. The recent approval of the National ICT Policy, in close 
alignment with the National Development Strategy, confirms that consensus and provides a clear 
statement of strategic intent with respect to the nationwide deployment and mana gement of ICT.  
 
The SIG, with support from the Government of Australia, has invested US$136 million1 in a 
new submarine cable system connecting Honiara to Sydney  and four islands in the archipelago  to 
Honiara ; the Coral Sea Cable  (CS2)  was declared ready for service on February 1, 2020.  The new 
cable is expected to be a key catalyst and accelerator for the contribution of digital technologies  
to the Solomon Islands’ development  when domestic connectivity beyond the cable landing is 
available . The expectation  is that this investment will deliver faster and cheaper internet services  
over current service and enable for the first time Internet to the large rural population , creating 
new opportunities for the country  with vastly improved acc ess to the internet. The new access 
will further enable businesses across the islands to access global markets and participate in global 
supply chains. It will enable new business models and digitization of current operations. Citizens 
will be able to comp lete government procedures (registrations, licenses, taxes, etc.) from their 
homes or their phones. Healthcare providers will be able to get remote support from specialists 
and order medicines and supplies online. Students will be able to complete online c ourses and 
access the worldwide body of knowledge. Citizens will also have access to a wide range of 
entertainment and social media activities, further expanding their domestic and international 
awareness and quality of life.  
 
But a great deal needs to happen before these opportunities can be realized  for the Solomon 
Islands . High -speed access to the internet from a handful of points across the country is just the 
beginning. Access needs to be distributed out to ‘the last kilometer ’. Digital government s ystems 
need to be developed and implemented . New laws  governing electronic transactions and related 
issues  need to be written and existing laws updated . Processes and operations of both businesses 
and government need to be changed  to accommodate and leverage  the global mesh of 
interconnected digital  processes and resources . People need to develop digital awareness and 
skills.   
 
This endeavor will  require substantial investment. It is also going to require collaboration, 
coordinati on, and the concerted effort of organizations and individuals across the entire 
spectrum.  
 
This report provides an overview of the current situation and a set of recommendations to 
accelerate digital development in the Solomon Islands, based on a review o f available data  and 
consult ations  with key stakeholders . It aims to identify priority policy/regulatory requirements, 
recommend ed actions, and  possible investment /support opportunities. The scope covers:  
 
 
1 SSC presentation to World Bank team, November 2018 .  
2 
 ▪ Digital economy, defined herein as the broad range of business and economic 
activities that arise from ICT and use digitized processes and information as 
factors of production  
▪ Digital government and the delivery of public services  
 
The ‘digital economy’ i n the broader sense include s digital government. However, the 
respective natures of public sector ICT deployment versus the broader use of ICT in an economy 
call for them to be address ed separately while recognizing what is common between them. The 
assessm ent and recommendations are organized according to the framework shown in Figure 1 
on page 2. The framework was developed based on good practice digital economy and digital 
government maturity assessment tools , as well as extensive global experience. Withi n the context 
of the prevailing macroeconomic and political environment, it calls for a focus first on key enabling 
factors for both digital economy and digital government.  
 
This report first describes  the value to be derived from an increasingly digital e conomy in the 
Solomon Islands and examples of how other countries are doing the same. The tourism, 
agriculture, and fisheries sectors are examined in detail. It then presents an assessment of the 
digital government program  elements  and the extent to which they contr ibute to delivering 
effective and efficient , digitally  enhanced government operations and service s. Finally, and most 
importantly, it presents an assessment of the status and issues of the foundational enablers of a 
digital economy.  
 
The outcomes of the assessment indicated that  while continued attention and action are 
required  on digital government pro gram elements, the SIG needs to focus mainly on 
strengthening the enabling environment for both digital government and the digital economy. 
Recent developments suggest good  progress, (i.e. the National ICT Policy, the submarine cables , 
cybersecurity commit tee and planning ), but several of the enablers require investment, effort, 
and action.   
 
Table  ES1 summarizes the key findings of the assessment and outlines the recommended 
actions . The key stakeholders with responsibility for implementing the recommendations are also 
shown.  In addition to the findings and recommendations for the overall enabling environment, 
the SIG has an opportunity to build on the strong work being done by the IC T Support Unit (ICTSU) 
in the Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MoFT)  and strengthen key elements of the digital 
government development program. The findings and recommendations for that dimension are 
shown in Table ES2. 
 
Additional recommended efforts hav e been described in the “Perspectives for Future 
Growth/Enhancement” sections throughout the report . They should be supported and 
encouraged. The Office of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has proposed the establishment of a 
new governance and management str ucture for ICT policy implementation. The National 
Cybersecurity Framework is being developed by the  Royal Solomon Islands Police  (RSIP ) and a 
separate cybersecurity working group has been established by the Ministry of Communications 
and Aviation ( MCA ). The national payments system bill has been developed by the Central Bank 
with WB technical support and is pending before parliament. The SIG, with its membership in the 
Better than Cash Alliance (BTCA) has pledged  to convert 80 percent of its payments to digital 
channels by 2020. While there is no unique national digital ID, there is a biometric voter 
registration system that issues voter ID cards and a functioning civil registration system.  
3 
 Discussions around inte gration of these systems is ongoing. There are operational applications 
and systems in agencies across the government that are supporting operations and service 
delivery. These agencies already receive technical support and funding from development 
partner s for regular upgrades and enhancements to the systems. As mentioned in the 
recommendations, the focus of any new assistance should be on establishing standards for 
architecture, procurement, and horizontal process and data integration.  
 
The results of thi s assessment, and the breadth of the resulting recommendations , are further 
evidence of the degree of effort needed to accelerate the establish ment of  a digital economy and 
a digital government in the Solomon Islands —beyond simply the provision of faster, cheaper 
internet access. However, this assessment also expose s an already -substantial level of 
sophistication, continuing progress on key areas of focus, and a strong political will to invest 
additional resources and effort. The Prime Minister signaled his  strong support in the Solomon 
Islands Digital Economy Workshop held in early November 2019 (see Annex 2). The arrival of the 
submarine cable, together with the recommended actions from the workshop and those provided 
herein, will no doubt accelerate the r ealization of the vision of “A peaceful, united and progressive 
Solomon Islands communicating and informed by technologies open to all” .2 
 
The global COVID -19 pandemic has further underscored the importance of accelerating digital 
development, particularl y in the Pacific Islands region. Since March 2020 this region has been 
particularly isolated by travel restrictions, and severe disruptions across all economic sectors. The 
issues described in this report remain highly relevant, particularly with regard to  the urgency of 
improving digital infrastructure (connectivity), enabling digital payments, boosting digital skills, 
and enacting legislation to protect digital transactions and safeguard privacy.  
 
 
  
 
2 Solomon Islands National ICT Policy   
4 
 TABLE 1 – ESTABLISHING FOUNDATIONAL DIGITAL ECONOMY ENABLERS  
 
Enabler  Key Findings  Action  Key 
Stakeholders  
Regulatory 
Environment  There are currently no laws in place to support a digital 
economy. Key gaps include an e -transaction law, a 
cybercrime law, and data privacy and protection laws .  1. Prepare a new legal and regulatory framework for 
digital economy development, in particular on: digital 
transactions and electronic signatures, cybersecurity, 
data protection and data privacy . CBSI, MCA, 
MCILI, MoFT, 
MoJLA  
Policy, 
Planning & 
Institution al 
Environment  The National ICT Policy provides an overall strategy 
and set of high -level objectives for ICT development 
but does not include a realistic, actionable plan for 
achieving the object ives. Responsibility for 
implementation of the strategy is assigned to the 
MCA, but in practice i nstitutional ownership for the 
digital agenda is fragmented among a variety of public 
sector entities due to its broad scope. This poses 
coordination challenge s and contention regarding 
program ownership . Most development projects 
involving sector transformation do not involve aspects 
of digital transformation or e -commerce, constituting 
lost opportunities to integrate these digital economy 
aspects in high poten tial sectors.  2. Based on the current National ICT Policy, develop a 
National ICT Strategy & Plan consisting of detailed, 
time -bound, sequenced , and costed implementation 
plans for each of the policy objectives . 
3. Rationalize and define the focus, scope, and specific 
responsibilities of each institution involved in the 
implementation of the strategy, including any 
advisory functions provided by development 
partners.  
4. Ensure , with development partner support,  that 
sector development initiatives involving value c hain 
transformation and market -side dimensions integrate 
aspects of digital transformation and e -commerce 
respectively.  PMO, MCA, 
MoFT, MPS, 
TCSI, ICTSU  
ICT 
Infrastructure, 
Access & 
Connectivity  Telecommunications sector liberalization has reduced 
mobile voice rates and increased penetration, but 
broadband costs remain high. Sole reliance on satellite 
internet is unsustainable. Impending submarine cable 
landings can revolutionize internet -led growth, but 
last-mile connectivity, as well as fair -play management 
of the wholesale market will be critical success factors.   5. Establish the legal, commercial, institutional, and 
operational environment for managing the new 
submarine cables’ operations and wholesale 
bandwidth sales .  
6. Develop, in collaboration w ith the operators, a viable 
approach for funding and deploying the broadband 
network domestically and providing last -mile access 
to rural and remote communities in the provinces . PMO, MCA, 
MoFT, MPS, 
TCSI, ICTSU, 
SISCC, BMCL, 
STCL, SATSOL  
Cybersecurity  Cybersecurity capabilities are currently very low 
posing significant risks. The National Cybersecurity 7. Develop a national cybersecurity strategy cover ing 
required elements of  standards (with the National MCA, Royal 
Solomon  
5 
 Enabler  Key Findings  Action  Key 
Stakeholders  
Framework is being developed by the RSIP and a 
separate cybersecurity working group has been 
established by the MCA . Cybersecurity Framework), education, operational 
monitoring, risk management, security culture, 
security risk mitigation, and a comprehensive risk 
assessme nt/ audit program.  Islands Police  
Digital skills 
and 
awareness  
 Overall digital awareness within the economy and 
society is very low , which inhibits demand for digital 
products and services. ICT skills development at the 
tertiary level is weak and certificate -level training is 
non-existent . Government support and options for 
digital business entrepreneurship development are 
also limited , inhibiting the growth of a viable I CT 
support value chain as well as ICT startups.  8. Conduct a comprehensive review of the IT and digital 
skills environment from both demand and supply 
perspectives and identify required curriculum 
changes at all levels as  well as potential avenues for 
professional certification . 
9. Institute a preferred suppliers program for software 
firms (similar to the existing program for hardware 
firms) as a means to develop a local market  or 
competent firms.  
10. Design and launch a digital economy awareness 
program to be delivered across a variety of channels 
to citizens and businesses .  
11. Strengthen overall coordination for digital economy 
skills development issues by instituting a coherent 
feedback loop between policymakers, skills  
providers, and the private sector.  
12. Support the development of certificate -level course 
providers/individual consultants in IT through train -
the-trainer programs.  MERHD, MCILI, 
Universities  
Digital Identity  In the absence of a national ID system, a biomet ric 
based voter registry and driving license system, as well 
as a civil registration system , function as identification 
mechanisms . However , their coverage is not universal, 
lending importance to deliberati ng on a national ID 
system.  13. Undertake an ID4D Diagnostic study to identify 
strengths and weaknesses of the current identity 
systems in place, and make recommendations 
regarding a future nati onal ID system.  
 MOJLA, S I 
Electoral 
Commission,  
IRD, MPNS, 
PMO   
6 
 Enabler  Key Findings  Action  Key 
Stakeholders  
Digital 
Payments  Overall the payments system ecosystem is moderately 
well developed for mobile  banking/mobile  money and 
is immature for card -based systems. Cash on delivery 
is the predominant payment mechanism currently in 
the country. Debit cards exist but are not used widely. 
The National Payments Systems Bill is currently 
pending before parliament for deliberat ion, and the 
delays on passage are inhibiting deployment of 
payments and fintech  solutions.  A positive step has 
been in the form of a regulatory nod for a shared 
money agent network which may assist with liquidity 
issues and agent training and standardizat ion.  14. Deliberate upon the pending payments systems bill in 
parliament and pass into legislation.  
15. Pending passage of the new NationalP ayments 
Systems Bill, develop  a switching network that will 
allow  automated clearing operations to allow inter -
bank transfers through the switching network, rather 
than manually as is currently the case.  The CBSI is 
currently implementing an Automated Transfer 
System (ATS) and a Central Securities Depository 
(CSD) to allow the digital clearing and settlement of 
payment and securities —to be completed by end 
2021  
16. Review proposals for enabling regulated non -banks 
including mobile network operators ( MNO )s to issue 
mobile wallets, and issue regulations if feasible. The 
Payments Systems bill includes this provision,  with 
regulations to be issued after approval.  CBSI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
7 
 TABLE 2 – STRENGTHENING THE  DIGITAL GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM  
 
Element  Key F indings  Action  Key 
Stakeholders  
Strategy & Planning  The National ICT Policy includes high -level objectives for “e-
government” and other public services (i.e. law 
enforcement, health, education). However, as mentioned 
above, it does not include specific activities, timelines, or 
costs. The draft SIG ICT Stra tegy for the period 2018 -2022 
represents the beginnings of an overall e -government 
strategy,  but was developed by ICTSU without broad 
stakeholder consultation. Nor does it yet include the 
detailed analysis and planning content needed to serve as 
the roadmap for the Solomon Islands ’ digital government 
development.  17. Building on the ICTSU’s ICT 
Strategy, develop the Solomon 
Islands National Digital 
Government Strategic Plan 
(DGSP), in collaboration with the 
broader government stakeholder 
community . MCA. ICTSU, 
PMO  
Governance & 
Management  Although the ICTSU has a mandate for whole -of-
government ICT deployment and support, the ICT Policy 
assigns that responsibility to the MCA.  This apparent 
contradiction needs to be resolved, however , there is 
currently no top -level governance structure, nor a 
government CIO. The ICTSU has included an outline 
governance structure for government ICT in its draft ICT 
Strategy but that has yet to be approved.  
No single agency has been mandated for shepherding 
progress in the area of overall digital economy , leading to 
some contention of ownership on ICT -plus areas such as e -
trade/e -commerce. This is preventing the development of a 
coherent policy c onsensus.  18. Design and establish an agreed 
governance and management 
structure, within the overall 
national ICT institutional structure, 
to lead, manage, and support the 
development of Solomon Islands ’ 
digital government , as well as the 
broader digital econo my. MCA. ICTSU, 
PMO   
8 
 Element  Key F indings  Action  Key 
Stakeholders  
Architecture, 
Processes, and 
Standards  The SIG business applications have been developed and are 
operating in the absence of an overall enterprise 
architecture, interoperability framework, data sharing 
policy, or data standards. There are no government -wide 
ICT procurement guidelines in place. This situation creates 
integration, sustainability, and efficiency issues, increasing 
the SIG overall risk profile.  19. Develop, in order of priority:  
a. Government Enterprise 
Architecture  
b. Government Interoperability 
Framework  
c. Information Systems and Data 
Sharing Policy  
d. Standardized IT Procurement 
Policy  MCA. ICTSU, 
MoFT, PMO  
Government ICT 
Infrastructure  
 The government network , SIG-Connect, is based on a 
combination of fiber access and WiMAX access connecting 
Honiara -based government entities in a private network, 
with an Internet Gateway provided by Telekom and a 
second connection through SatSol. Connectivity in rural and 
remote areas is still a problem. Most of the agency 
applications are now hosted within a FlexPOD (data center 
platform) environment. There are also several applications 
hosted offshore today in New Zealand and Australia. Most 
public -facing websites are hosted offshore. A new FlexPOD 
has recently been commissi oned in a new data center at the 
ICTSU’s new facility. Migration of the applications and 
operations from the old data center is nearing completion.  20. Develop a National Data Center 
Consolidation and Communications 
Plan, which would include:  
a. Cloud Computing  
b. Disaster Recovery and 
Continuity of Operations  
c. Secure Government Network  MCA. ICTSU  
  
1 
 I. A FRAMEWORK FOR DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT  
 
A. Introduction  
 
1. The purpose of th is report is to identify  ways to leverage anticipated improvements in 
connectivity (broadband internet access) for digital government and digital economy 
development  in Solomon Islands . Assess ment of  the current state and providing  
recommendations  must be done in an organized and structured manner. Although there are 
several  frameworks available for use, both from commercial sources and international 
organizations, a tailored  framework for the current  digital development assessment was 
defined and applied.   
 
2. For governments, Gartner’s stages in digital government evolution, the UN e -government 
survey and readiness index, university -developed frameworks from WASEDA and INSEAD, and 
others  are available . The World Economic Forum  (WEF)  has a Networked Readiness Index as 
an indicator of digital maturity , as well as a model for global digital adoption . The World Bank 
itself is currently working on an overall digital economy maturity framework . The currently 
available frameworks were reviewed and considered in the Solomon Islands context . For this 
analysis  both digital economy  (the broad range of business and economic activities that arise 
from digital technologies  and use digitized processes and information as factors of 
production ) and digital government  (the application of digital technologies to improve and 
develop new ways o f delivering of public services ) are being assessed at a  reasonably granular 
level. As such, it was decided that a specific framework should be defined including  key 
elements of both dimensions. The framework is shown in Figure 1 below, followed by brief 
descriptions of each element .  
 
3. The logic of the framework is as follows: Within the context of the prevailing factors, the 
government must ensure the enablers are in place to support the private sector to achieve 
the digital economy strategic outcomes, and  must effectively define and manage digital 
government program elements to achieve the digital government strategic outcomes.  
  
2 
   
 
Figure 1: Digital Development Assessment Framework  
 
 
B.  Description of Framework Components  
 
1. Prevailing Factors  
 
4. The ‘Prevailing Factors’ are the overall macroeconomic, political, and business climate within 
which the digital economy and/or government operates. These represent topics that impact 
and are impacted by digital transformation, but that are driven by facto rs beyond the control 
of the digital program planning and policy  making . 
 
2. Enablers  
 
a) Legal and Regulatory Environment  – A robust  regulatory framework that forms the 
fundamental legal basis of transactions taking place within a country’s digital economy , 
as well as protection of the interests of the parties to those transactions . 
 
b) Policy, Planning & Institution al Environment  – A fully articulated and  approved policy 
framework for national ICT /digital  development and deployment, supported by a 
detailed, feasible action plan to implement the policies, and distributed across a 
rationalized institutional structure with clear assignment o f responsibilities, capabilities, 
and accountability.  
 
3 
  
c) Digital  Infrastructure, Access & Connectivity  – A resilient voice and data communications 
network that provides high -speed broadband availability (through both mobile and fixed -
line internet),  and supporting solutions, data centers, compute and storage resources, 
and operational support systems.  
 
d) Cybersecurity  – A combination of principles, policies, procedures, and technology 
infrastructure that ensures the security and integrity of the country’s and the 
government’s systems, data, and critical infrastructure.  
 
e) Digital Skills & Awareness  – A broad awareness and capability within both the public and 
private sectors to develop and participate in a digital economy and to innovate, create , 
deliver, and access both private and public services across digital channels.  
 
f) Digital ID  – The capability to securely an d correctly identify and authenticate individuals 
and organizations across digital channels through a unique identifier issued by a d uly 
authorized entity or entities.  
 
g) Digital Payments  – A national system for secure digital financial transactions that enables 
payments between any two parties and intermediary institutions across digital channels.  
 
3. Digital Economy Strategic Outcomes  
 
5. The strategic outcomes of a mature  digital economy are innovative and thriving  ICT-based 
business and economic activities , and the ubiquitous use of digital technologies to achieve 
business outcomes. For this assessment, the following specific areas have been defined:  
  
a) E-commerce & Logist ics 
b) Digital transformation of industries  
c) Financial technologies ( FinTech ) 
d) ICT sector  
e) Digital Entrepreneurs  
 
6. Although there are way s to encourage or accelerate the emergence of these elements, they 
are driven primarily by private sector investment and initiative, and not through a centrally 
planned and managed effort. As such, there are no ‘program elements’ as exist s for digital 
government.  
 
4. Digital Government Elements  
 
a) Strategy & Planning  – A comprehensive, coherent strategy for developing and deploying 
digital technologies within the government, supported by a feasible, funded program of 
projects and activities with achievable goals and objectives, measurable outcomes and 
results, and realistic timelines.  
  
4 
 b) Governance & Management  – A formal, statutory governance and management 
structure, within the overall national ICT institutional structure, to lead, manage, and 
support the development of the country’s digital government.  
 
c) Architecture, Processes, and Standards  – An integrated set of  technical and operational 
standards that ensure the interoperability and integration of government data and 
processes and an effective return on ICT spend, with which all ICT investment and 
development must comply.  
 
d) Government ICT Infrastructure  – Robust,  resilient government -owned  and outsourced 
data and voice communication networks, data centers, and operating systems supporting 
government operations, applications, and data . 
 
e) Information System s & Data  – An integrated architecture of business solutions, 
platforms, databases , and data portals providing effective support for digitalized 
government operations and for delivery of public services across digital channels.  
 
5. Strategic Digital Government Outcomes  
 
7. The strategic outcome of a digital government program is a government enabled by new 
digital technologies, creating new ways of delivering services and involving citizens, 
enterprises, and other stakeholders in solving problems and creating public value —and as a 
government based on an ICT platform that supports integrating and sharing government and 
external data, applications, and operations, and enables seamless delivery of services to the 
public.  
 
8. The following section details the assessment of each of t hese elements for the Solomon 
Islands. For each element the assessment includes a description of the current situation and 
recent developments , and perspectives for future growth or enhancement. Where relevant, 
specific recommendations are made as part of those perspectives.    
5 
 II. REALIZING VALUE FROM A DIGITAL ECONOMY IN THE SOLOMON ISLANDS  
 
A. Best Practices from Beyond the Borders: How Countries Drive Growth from  the Digital 
Economy  
 
1. No silver bullet exists for building the digital economy; indeed, the diversity of technical and 
thematic areas in the digital economy necessitate s a multipronged approach aligned with the 
country’s context, as well as the capacity of its institutions and private sector to absorb the 
various technologies.  
 
2. However, patterns emerge in terms of best practices and frameworks implemented by 
countries th at can be studied and incorporated as necessary in the case of Solomon Islands. 
The following is a list of broad steps that countries have deliberated on and incorporated to 
incrementally develop the national digital economy.  
 
3. Upgrade policies and regulati on, and ensure strong institutional support : A wide range of 
policy instruments that foster development of the overall digital economy at the national level 
include strategies in (but not limited to) the following areas: ICT, broadband, e -commerce, 
investm ent, skills and innovation, and SME strategies. Digital economy is increasingly being 
featured as part of the umbrella national development strategy, which typically guides the 
overall direction of the country. ICT and the digital economy are increasingly recognized as 
tightly coupled areas. In recognition of the ICT -plus nature of the digital economy, Thailand 
has established a Ministry of Digital Economy and Society, and developed an associated plan 
called National Digital Economy and Society Development Plan, focusing on leveraging ICT for 
improved business competitiveness, equal opportunities, improved human capital, and e -
government.  
 
Institutional coordination and ownership is also important. Typically , a single ministry is 
tasked with the mandate of I CT and the overall digital economy, although there is no existing 
one-size-fits-all strategy. The key is to ensure that all relevant ministries and agencies are 
informed and involved in policy making, but there should be no confusion regarding  where 
the a ccountability and lead responsibility  lie. As noted below, steering committees and 
taskforce type mechanisms should be utilized to ensure a broad range of public and private 
institutions are involved in overall policymaking.  
 
4. Integrate ‘digitalization’ asp ect in sector development projects: A key method of ensuring 
diffusion of technology is to ensure that existing sector development projects (driven by the 
government or donors) pinpoint processes within the sector value chain which can benefit 
from digital ization, and identify suitable technologies that could be brought to bear. The 
strategic plan of action/roadmap that follows from the initial due diligence, as well as the 
implementation of various activities , should result in the integration of these tech nologies.  
 
5. Establish taskforces and feedback mechanisms: The digital economy is a fast moving target 
for policymakers who often struggle to understand the developments and requirements 
within the overall ecosystem. An effect ive tool has been the formulatio n of established 
taskforces and public -private consultative groups through which policymakers, regulators,  
6 
 skills providers, private  sector and other key stakeholders can maintain a dialogue on the 
evolving needs of the ecosystem. This is essential for mit igating skills -mismatch issues as well 
as understanding fast -changing technology. A good example is the system of “5G Strategy 
Promotion Committees" established in South Korea, which are public -private consultative 
groups with telecom and industry leaders from automotive, healthcare, education, and other 
sectors, to study the implications and thereafter develop effective policies for 5G. Singapore 
created a  Future Economy Council (FEC) which discusses issues at the intersection of 
technology, skills , and private -sector needs from a future -needs perspective. Costa Rica has 
established an Internet Advisory Board comprised of member s of various economic sectors in 
addition to the public sector and regulators, to determine the path forward for internet access 
and use in the country. This is a common theme across many countries.  
 
6. Shore up telecommunications infrastructure including where necessary via collaboration with 
global private sector leaders through PPP: No progress on digital economy issues can be made 
without reliable, affordable , and relatively fast internet broadband access, either fixed or 
mobile. A key priority therefore for countries has been to find ways to speed up submarine 
cable or terrestial cable access (with redundancy, if possible). Cable lan dings should then be 
accompanied by the deployment of a fair -play market structure expected to bring in investors 
(operators), introduce value added services (through ISPs and other service providers), and 
lead to deployment of last -mile connectivity. Mixe d results have been observed globally, but 
this is the aspired end -result.  
 
 To resolve entrenched infrastructure challenges in terms of last -mile connectivity, 
governments have also started collaborating on country -wide infrastructure development 
projects with Fortune 100 firms active in the overall digital economy sphere. Submarine cables 
and associated deployments are of course common. Google (with associated partners such as 
c-squared) has designed and implemented  shared metro fiber infrastructure in African cities 
such as Kampala and Accra, with another project active in Monrovia. Another example lies in 
the  ‘What -3-words’ tool , which is being tested by postal systems (with advice from the 
Universal Postal Union/ UPU) in the Pacific to navigate around the physical addressing 
problem in these countries.  
 
7. Universal access policies and related funds : One of the major problems facing small islands 
developing states is the level of digital exclusion from lack of access  to mobile/internet 
coverage. Telecommunications coverage is the base requirement for the digital economy. 
Universal access funds are designed to take in a percentage of operator gross profits and fund 
telecommunications projects. There is typically broad agreement between regulators and 
telecommunications operators that some level of cooperation between operators should 
exist to increase coverage and reduce digital exclusion, an especially challenging proposition 
in island states. However, there is less co nsensus on what type and levels of contributions 
these operators should make. Forced contribution of operator profits into a universal access 
fund can reduce investor profitability and constrain further investments. Some regulators, 
including in SI, prefer  to observe the market dynamics to assess what shape a middle -ground 
model could take. Success stories include that of Columbia, while Universal Service Funds 
(USF)s in Brazil and the Philippines have been notable underperformers. Key challenges  
7 
 involve po or due  diligence in terms of setting the levies rate, political manipulation and lack 
of transparency, poorly conceived underlying regulatory framework, and improper 
disbursement. The Global System for Mobile Communications Association ( GSMA ) and the 
Inter national Telecommunications Union ( ITU) estimate that almost half of global USFs are 
under -performing.  
 
As an alternate to USF, the GSMA advises promoting private network sharing and public -
private partnerships, or introducing service obligations into new  spectrum licen se awards. 
Governments should consider incentives that facilitate market -based solutions and help by 
stimulating demand, developing the supporting infrastructure and reducing the private cost 
of coverage by easing the operators’ burden with respect to taxation and spectrum fees .3 
Countries should still consider developing universal access strategies to develop a coherent 
vision and strategic goals that will guide implementation.  
 
8. Identify anchor sectors and firms to test and scale successful technologies: It is challenging to 
depl oy innovative technologies regardless of the demonstrated potential in other countries if 
sectors and enterprises do not have the absorptive capacity to effective ly utilize the 
technology. For instance, 3D printing and conventional packaging technologies c an greatly 
enhance the value addition of agricultural products (for example). However, if the domestic 
market cannot afford the premium and the companies do not possess the supply -side 
capacities to effectively penetrate international markets, investment i n this technology will 
yield inadequate results. Success stories have typically involved identifying the sectors with 
high readiness levels , selecting lead firms within the sectors , and testing out the technologies 
with them over a sustained period. If the y are successful, other high potential firms may 
follow their example. This can ensure absorption and uptake of the technology over the long 
term.  
 
An important concept is that of subcontract exchanges aimed at facilitating market access for 
small ICT fir ms. The model involves lead firms bidding for medium to large projects 
subcontract specific components to the smaller firms (thus allowing the smaller firms to 
become suppliers to the larger firm). Sector associations are often involved in implementing 
this to train and vet the suppliers.  
 
9. Anchor new technology introductions in key developmental concerns facing the country: 
Climate change, health , and education are three key areas where governments are typically 
keen to introduce innovation and solutions. In the case of SI, all of these areas are prime 
candidates for introducing  new technologies ranging from drone -based mapping to 
electronic medic al records digitized software systems.  
 
10. Foster entrepreneurship via incubators and accelerators : In countries such as SI, where there 
is a near -complete lack of ICT support firms (apart from hardware) and generally a strong 
startup environment, firms in pr oductive sectors such as agriculture and tourism face 
significant challenges in sourcing services such as website design, cloud hosting etc. In these 
 
3 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/country/global/universal -service -funds -effective -way-achieve -universal -access/   
8 
 cases, structured support through train -the-trainer programs can help to build a base of 
competent softwar e service providers, which can grow over time. The World Bank has a well -
established model for fostering digital incubation, accelerators, and facilitating early stage 
funding, which include mLab and NaiLab, incubators that have fostered a vibrant digital 
entrepreneurship ecosystem in Kenya, along with the pioneering community organization, 
iHub. mLab has imparted skills training to 5,000+ developers and entrepreneurs. Its resident 
startups have introduced 140+ mobile applications to the market. Another exa mple lies in 
Nepal where since 2010, through a mobile hub supported by the World Bank Group in Nepal, 
skilled mobile app developers have formed a strong local community that has created a dozen 
successful startups focusing on local and commercial use  cases . The innovation labs 
developed by UNICEF in many developing countries are also excellent examples of spurring 
grassroots technological innovation.  
 
11. Enterprise training and incentives: A related aspect is training enterprises on developing in -
house compete ncies or at least sensitivities towards various aspects of digitalization, through 
coaching and training and making self -teach material  available , regardless of the sector. The 
coaching can range from basic data -entry skills to training on complex tools , to usage of 
existing online tools such as email and dropbox to market research and in -market business 
development; the overall  goal is to ensure that enterprises have access to coaching on 
aspects of digitization when they need it. In some countries, initi atives have focused on 
training trainers who go on to offer paid coaching services to enterprises, thus resulting in a 
sustainable model. Sector associations are typically a very good base for anchoring training 
courses, because this can become a source of  revenue for them, thus improving their own 
sustainability.  
 
Incentives are also key. Incentives to invest in research and development for firms may be 
associated with increased adoption of software and online tools that can increase 
productivity. A variet y of SME support schemes in several developing countries , such as India 
and Mauritius , can be leveraged by companies to increase their understanding and 
procurement/utilization of technology within their business. Countries also deploy support 
infrastructu re in terms of TVET, tailored SME financing incentives, industrial extension 
programs, technology transfer initiatives, technology -oriented business services, research 
institutions, and knowledge and expertise exchanges.   
 
12. Governmen t as the market: The go vernment often has to serve as a market for the ICT sector, 
especially in a context such as SI, where local demand for such products is very low. Low -value 
contracts can be specifically reserved for SMEs and awarded via a competitive bidding 
process, or a preferred suppliers program can be created through which bidding for important 
government projects is open only to a group of vetted suppliers. This can spur activity within 
the ICT software and support sector until such time that a domestic market emerges . In many 
countries, an e -procurement platform is developed featuring set -asides/competitive bidding 
for low -value projects which are contended only by SMES.  
  
9 
 Australia’s ICT procurement strategy is a good example as it  has consistently employed good 
principles , such as : encourag ing competition; be ing innovative; enabl ing SMEs to compete; 
focused outcomes; open standards and cloud first; minimiz ing cybersecurity risk; and not 
duplicat ing platforms that have been built by  other agencies.  
 
13. Utilize open -source technologies where applicable : To ensure promulgation of technologies 
in a cost -effective manner, governments are increasingly turning to open -source 
technologies , which allow applications to be developed on a free pla tform and are as such 
universally available. For instance, eHealth Nigeria leverages electronic and mobile health 
systems developed on OpenMRS (Open Medical Record System), a collaborative open -source 
project aimed at developing software to support efficie nt health care in Nigeria and other 
developing countries.  
 
14. Strengthen ICT education at all levels of the school system, in addition to the broader 
population:  
a. The Chilean ‘enlaces program’ is a good case study for connecting ICT with 
national education at all levels, involving students, parents , and other 
stakeholders throughout the primary and secondary schooling system. The model 
has now been replicated across other countries. Another example is the CanCode 
program in Canada aimed at supporti ng coding and digital skills development for 
Canadian youth from kindergarten to grade 12 (K -12).  
b. The Uruguay Digital 2020 program is a highly ambitious program to expand the 
overall population’s adoption of digital skills and technologies. The multi -
comp onent model involves provision of laptops with internet to low -income 
retirees, training rural populations on ICT and digital skills, and imparting 
programming skills to students while upgrading university curricula throughout 
the country.  
c. Sri Lanka has es tablished Telecentres (nanasalas) with country -wide coverage to 
serve farmers, students, MSMEs , and other stakeholders with access to internet 
or other services. These centers act as multi -service ICT centers providing a range 
of services and training clas ses. Distance and e -learning centers are also part of 
the model.  
 
 
15. Build and leverage e -government:  
a. Estonia is a leader in designing and implementing “’Government as a Service ” 
programs and digital public services , including the provision of electronic 
identities (e -IDs), which enable citizens to access many state services online, such 
as paying bills, filing taxes , and accessing medical records. The country has also 
opened its digital infrastructure to foreigners through its e -residency program.  
b. Banglades h serves as a best in class example of how a national digital backbone 
was created in the form of a national end -to-end e -government network. Through  
10 
 a system of Union Digital Centers  (UDCs)4, not only e -government services can be 
provisioned, but custome rs/companies are also able to offer their products on an 
e-commerce aggregator called Ek -shop , which brings together all e -commerce 
platforms and logistical services providers. This has effectively served to enhance 
urban -rural e -commerce, as well as reduc e the urban -rural digital and 
government services divide.  
c. Aadhaar, India’s biometric digital identity scheme, is widely used by the private 
sector as well, including verification firms in business services, banks, and 
telecommunications companies. Aadhaar  also provides authentication for the 
Unified Payments Interface (UPI), created by the National Payment Corporation 
of India.5 
 
16. Leverage expanding mobile penetration rates for commerce, and social good via m -apps:  
d. The PFIP program is leading the way for financial inclusion including via mobile 
applications in the Pacific countries, especially relevant for Pacific Island States.  
e. In Guat emala, through Tulasalud , community facilitators focusing on maternal 
and child health use cell phones to carry out consultations, send information 
related to the cases they attend to , receive continuous training, and help in the 
promotion of communit y health through distance -learning sessions.  
f. M-Pesa is a recognized best in class case study as a money transfer service using 
cheap mobile phones and an extensive agent network. It is used in bill payments 
(including airtime top -ups) and person -to-person  (P2P) domestic remittances, 
among many other use cases. The model has been replicated in many countries, 
and holds special significance for Pacific Island countries.  
 
B. Digital Economy Maturity and Development Opportunities in the Solomon Islands  
 
17. A number of use  cases for the digital economy have been identified for Solomon Islands, 
which can be further assessed and implemented once the telecommunications infrastructure 
and supporting business environment are upgraded to a reasonable degree of maturi ty. This 
section delineates the opportunities and segments them along the digital economy strategic 
outcomes defined earlier.  
 
18. The following table reviews key elements of the  digital economy ecosystem  and provides an 
assessment of the potential for each c omponent in the context of SI’s current political, 
economic, socio -economic , and technological base.  
 
 
 
 
 
4 One-stop shop centers spread throughout the country, providing last -mile cover age throughout the hinterland for e -government 
services, manned by entrepreneurs (1 man  and 1 woman).  
5 https://uidai.gov.in/   
11 
 Table 1: Potential for development of SI's Digital Economy components  
 Digital 
economy 
segment  Current activity  Development 
timeframe  Comments for future growth  
   ST MT LT  
1 Hardware 
manufacturing  Does not exist.  The 
manufacturing sector, 
small scale or otherwise is 
extremely small in SI, and 
most of the consumer and 
capital equipment goods 
are imported.     Long term perspective for growth is there but it 
is unlikely (based on the current development 
agenda outlook) that SI will make significant 
investments in hardware manufacturing.  
2 Information 
services  Limited , due to the high 
costs of internet access 
and slow speeds, as well 
as limited demand.     Expected to ramp up as business activity (digital 
and non -digital) ramps up.  
3 Software and 
IT consulting  Select hardware firms  
(deployment and support) 
but no IT firms /software 
consultants . Most 
software professionals are 
internationals from 
Southeast  Asia and other 
regional locations.     This will grow as a function of demand -pull 
from economic sectors such as tourism, 
however , in all likelihood, the government 
would n eed to play a strong part initially 
functioning as a market to facilitate 
momentum. The preferred suppliers program 
(currently only focusing on hardware) could be 
extended to include software. Expected high 
engagement of this model once other sectors 
such as e-commerce start picking up. Initial 
activity will remain limited to software support 
to the government or companies in various 
sectors, rather than independent software 
development.  
4 Telecommunic
ations  Relatively well developed     The telecommunications sector has made 
remarkable progress in terms of expanding 3G 
services, however , the key prerequisite for 
further expansion would be the arrival of the 
submarine cable and associated regulatory and 
market structure deployments which are 
expected to increase coverage and speeds , and 
reduce latency and costs. This will spur activity 
for consumers and firms alike.  
5 fintech  Limited to mobile banking 
at the current time     Related to the telecommunications and digital 
services areas, mobile -based fintech  holds great 
potential for SI given its geography and 
disperse population, problems in movement of 
cash etc. Close partnerships with Australian 
banks who can deploy proven fintech  solutions 
are an advantage. Growth will depend on the 
passage o f the payments systems bill pending 
before parliament.  
5 Digital services  Mostly government 
related     E-government initiatives are in the process of 
implementation, and are extremely  important 
due to : a) the highly dispersed population and a 
geographically fragmented topography that 
make s physical G2X services challenging , and b ) 
consumers and firms become more confident 
via use of online services, making adoption of 
future services more viable.   
12 
  Digital 
economy 
segment  Current activity  Development 
timeframe  Comments for future growth  
   ST MT LT  
6 Platform 
economy  Limited , due to the high 
costs of internet access 
and slow speeds, as well 
as limited demand.     High potential for this segment once overall 
internet access and quality improves . 
Particularly high potential for use of ‘websites 
of website s model’ in e -commerce applications, 
given that companies would not be able to 
develop e -commerce applications on their own, 
and the IT support supply chain is still weak.  
7 Sharing 
economy  Limited     NA 
8 Gig economy  Limited , due to the high 
costs of internet access 
and slow speeds, as well 
as limited demand.     The gig economy will pick up swiftly once 
internet quality improves and consumer 
internet activity increases, which will drive lead 
firms to establish online activity. Local content 
will also r ise further spurring consumer activity. 
In the absence of established software 
development companies (and other supporting 
actors), independent professionals will likely 
pick up the slack and cater to the demand.  
9 e-commerce  Limited , due to weak 
capabili ties of SMEs 
overall, as well as slow 
speeds and high costs of 
internet access.     Tourism and cocoa are two areas with high 
potential for e -commerce growth. Initial e -
commerce activity will start out with 
food/grocery delivery and courier type services. 
Other sectors with potential include semi -
processed/processed items in the agricultural 
and fishe ries sectors , as well as  wood  products 
(such as handicrafts and furniture parts).  
10 Industry 4.0  Does not exist  currently.     Long -term potential may be there, but would 
require significant scale -up in terms of 
economic activities in productive sectors, so 
that investments in new technologies can be 
justified. Government/development partner led 
activity can also commence in the climate 
change, fisheries, logging, and disaster 
response areas through  piloting of drone 
technologies. Monitoring technologies within 
the mining sector may also constitute an 
application.  
11 Precision 
agriculture  Does not exist  currently.     Potential to deploy crop monitoring systems, 
RFID, irrigation technologies etc, once lead 
firms in the sector are established through 
which such technologies can be piloted/  
anchored.  
12 Algorithmic 
economy  Does not exist  currently.     Long -term potential, but challenging to predict 
growth pattern due to the low base of overall 
current activity in the digital economy.  
Source: Author s’ Assessment ; ST, MT, LT = short -term, medium -term, long -term  
 
 
19. In addition to the strategic outcomes, three sectors ( agriculture, fisheries , and tourism) are 
discussed from both perspectives of e -commerce and digital  transformation, the latter 
primarily focusing on inflow/import of digital technologies for efficiency gains and 
diversification.  
  
13 
 20. An important observation is that the current low base of the private sector overall will 
necessitate a high degree of ‘hand -holding’ (financial, technical , or otherwise) over the short -
medium term. Firms -SMEs and larger firms alike  - are not well placed for procuring (via digital 
technology import) or adopting new technologies or frameworks organically, although there 
is room for such technology to flow in through joint  ventures and related investment activity.  
 
Box 1: Where are the digital economy opportunities?  
1. Among the priority sectors identified via Solomon Islands’ national development agenda, tourism and 
agriculture (in particular cocoa) are well positioned for e -commerce growth. In terms of the broader digital 
transformation agenda, the value proposition for mining and fishery -processing  (both enclave sectors with 
limited SME participation) is unclear and potentially lower than agriculture and tourism.  
2. Comprehensive value chain analysis of the agriculture, tour ism, and fisheries value chain is required to pinpoint 
entry  points for digitalization.  
3. Health, education , and environmental protection and climate change are three cross -functional areas which 
have high potential for digital transformation. Proven technol ogies exist which can be imported to Solomon 
Islands for these thematic areas as well as for the agriculture and tourism sectors. However, these firms likely 
do not possess the absorptive capacity for integrating new technologies and sustainability models.  Their 
existing operating efficiencies and support structures (such as ICT support) are extremely weak.  
4. The cocoa and tourism sectors possess the relatively highest potential for  joint venture ( JV) activity which could 
bring in new technologies.  
5. Except within the tourism and cocoa sectors, there are many  lead firms that can function as anchors for any 
development initiative.  
6. It is likely that the government would need to serve as the premier testbe d for new technologies, by absorbing 
them in development activities or within the day -to-day workflow of public sector agencies.  
 
 
1. Digital Transformation of Industries  
The business case 
 
21. The medium -long term  business case for digital transformation, both industry -led and 
government -led, is strong. The challenges that Solomon Islands’ geography imparts to 
business supply chains serves to strengthen the business case for testing technologies and 
integrating dig ital transformation. The implementation of the government’s ambitious pledge 
to digitize 80  percent  of its payments by 2020 may offer lessons and also have a knock -on 
effect on the private sector in terms of digitizing workflows. The country is in urgent n eed of 
technological support to mitigate climate  change, and disaster -related risks., and improve 
response quality and coverage of education, health,  and G2X services.  
 
Box 2: Describing digital transformation  
While digital transformation is the usual umbrella term used for interventions related to the digital economy, it may 
be useful to consider activity levels along digitization and digitalization as well, given the nascent state of maturity 
of the overall di gital economy in SI. Digitization  refers to the conversion of analog information to digital (such as 
storing information in a database or an online document instead of paper), reflecting a relatively basic degree of 
complexity. One level up in terms of com plexity is digitalization , which refers to mapping to manual processes to a 
digital workflow, a more sophisticated and complex set of operations than digitization. Digital transformation  refers 
to the overall impact of a wide range of digitalization activities on a particular supp ly chain/value chain. These terms 
are used interchangeably here.  
 
  
14 
 22. Digital transformation for Solomon Islands would necessarily involve the ‘import’ of digital 
technologies for realizing efficiency gains in individual company supply chains and sector 
value chains, among applications in health, education, climate change and other development 
sectors.  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
23. Digitalization efforts are still at an early stage in the Solomon Islands private sector . There are 
no lead firms t hat can currently serve as case studies for integrating digitalization within their 
supply chains. Companies have not made these investments, partly due to the considerable 
challenges with internet speed and reliability, and partly because the value propos ition is not 
readily understood by the private sector. Government and development support for the 
digital economy is only just emerging. Deployed technology solutions for functional areas 
including climate change are also missing.  
 
24. The absorptive capacity  of the market and businesses to adopt complex digital transformation 
initiatives is weak. However , there is significant potential for companies to start with the base 
form of digital  transformation – to undertake small -scale digitization and digitalization of their 
processes.  
 
Short/medium term priorities  
 
25. Digital transformation in the SI private sector will likely be in the medium -long term, and will 
require the following:  
  
a) Successful case studies/experiences by lead firms that can be emulated by other 
companies. A comprehensive coaching and mentoring program is recommended which 
can involve companies that have a high degree of readiness and willingness to integrate 
digital t echnologies across their supply chains. Apart from the benefits to the firms, this 
can have a demonstration effect on other companies as well.  
 
b) Parallel growth of the national ICT ecosystem , including improvements in bandwidth, and 
existence of a reliable IT hardware and software supplier base for assisting the private 
sector in deploying IT solutions.  
 
c) Strong advocacy by private sector associations such as  the Solomon Islands Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry  (SICCI ) in favor of digital transformation.  
 
d) Continued push by the government to develop the legal and regulatory framework for e -
transactions and develop digital government applications with which the private sector 
can interface to conduct its business -government activities , such as online registratio ns, 
filing of official documentation, and tax payments etc.  
 
e) Development partners engaged in any sector should review opportunities for digital 
transformation as part of a value chain enhancement exercise.  
  
15 
 26. The following table offers selected and proven te chnologies that can be ‘imported’ to 
Solomon Islands. The scope of this review is on the priority sectors ( agriculture, tourism, 
fisheries), and cross -functional areas (climate change, e -health, e -education) . 
 
Table 2: Select technologies and their application in various sectors  
S.No.  Problem 
space  Description  
1 Logistics – 
physical 
addressing  ‘What three words’ geo -mapping software interpolating GPS coordinates onto simplified 
three -word addresses. Ongoing pilot by UPU in nine  Pacific Island countries (in collaboration 
with national postal systems) to deploy the system and raise demand -side (postal service 
users) awareness. In aid of resolving lack of physical addressing especially in  development 
countries and in the challenging geographical context of Pacific Island economies . This 
constrains movement of post/goods, data collection (surveys), as well as provision of citizen 
services.  
https ://what3words.com/about/   
2 Agriculture  Sensors and IoT apparatus in fields with image recognition technology to help with remote 
crop monitoring and relaying essential data to farmers.  
3 Agriculture  Drone -based technology for crop monitoring. Multiple use cases include soil quality, spraying, 
drought prediction, assisting with seeds planting , and yield mapping/projections and harvest 
documentation.  
4 Agriculture  Utilizing RFID for farm -to-store food tracking . 
5 Agriculture  Establishing and co nnecting network of stakeholders across the value chain, fostering linkages 
between farmers, associations, middlemen, and buyers.  
6 Agriculture  (Evolving) I oT-connected technologies for driving communication between devices in the firm 
(eg. sensor -sensor,  sensor -drone) etc.  
7 Agriculture  Bluenumber Digital ID, involved in enhancing traceability, and transpar ency within palm oil 
supply chains and assisting government organizations and companies to improve farmers’ 
practice in palm oil industries.  
https://www.bluenumber.com/ en 
8 Agriculture  Mlouma: virtual platform accessible via website or phone in Senegal provides farmers and 
investors real time information on prices, location , and availability of produce .  
9 Health  Drone -based transport of medicines, vaccines, and blood between remote population centers 
and central laboratory locations. Active in Rwanda and Ghana. https://flyzipline.com/impact/   
10 Health  Neopenda: I oT and mo bile wearable technology to monitor the vital signs of critically ill 
infants (in Uganda) in low -resource areas (high patients/clinicians ratio, electricity deprived 
areas) https://www.neopenda.com/   
11 Health  Airtel 321 in Malawi provides maternal health and child nutrition information over mobile 
phone in the local language . 
12 Health  SMS -based health registration systems (Tanzania +multiple countries) . 
13 Health  Electronic Health Records (EHR) systems are increasingly being used to digitize individual 
patient records and digitalize the overall workflow, for efficiency gains and data security.  
14 Health  Mobile health applications are widely prevalent now in many countries for providing medical 
advice to case workers as well as individuals. Maternal and child health is an important 
application.  
15 Education  Dot Learn: Video -based e -learning platform optimized for low -speed connections, as low as 
2G and small scree ns, which allow five -hour video downloads for the cost of a text message 
in Ghana and Nigeria.  https://innovation.mit.edu/pathway -post/dot -learn/   
16 Tourism  Digital platforms for accommod ation exchanges: Booking.com  (226 countries),  Airbnb (191 
countries), Home Away (190 countries), Tripadvisor rentals (200 countries), Tujia (China),  
9flats  (140 countries), homestay.com (160 countries), OYO rooms (India),  Onefinestay (US, 
EU, Australia), and Xiaozhu  (China) .6 
  
 
6 List from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/161471537537641836/Tourism -and-the-Sharing -Economy -Policy -Potential -
of-Sustaina ble-Peer -to-Peer -Accommodation   
16 
 S.No.  Problem 
space  Description  
17 Fisheries  RFID -based smart boxes/crates allow for complete traceability. For example, French fishing 
ports are fitting such devices along the value chain from boat to market.  
18 Fisheries  Drone -based mapping of coastal resources , including fish stock assessments, providing 
cheaper services than oceanographic vessels. Deployed by multiple countries.  
19 Fisheries  USAID Oceans promotes a transparent and financially sustainable electronic Catch 
Documentation and Traceabilit y system to help ensure that fisheries resources from 
Southeast Asia are legally caught and properly labeled.  
20 Logging  Drone -based technology for mapping timber resources, as a means of preventing over -
logging.  
21 Gig 
economy  ‘Trade in tasks’ model involving freelance networks such as upworks and fiverr, which allow 
a fluid supply of talent and opportunities to connect. This may help a market develop in 
Solomon Islands for ICT talent.  
22 Packaging  Conventional packaging techn ologies will be extremely important once production activity in 
individual sectors starts picking up, given that packaging adds overall value and , in certain 
premium markets, also constitutes a mandatory entry requirement.  3D printing can also have 
applica tions in the long term.  
Source: Desk research across multiple sources  
 
 
2. E-Commerce and Logistics  
 
The business case  
 
27. SIG is actively seeking to drive development in productive sectors such as agriculture, 
tourism , and fisheries to position them as a ballast against uncertainty in the logging and 
mining sectors, and e -commerce can be an essential growth driver, especially for reaching 
international clients. While the domestic market will be key in the short -medium t erm, SI’s 
small population  (~600,000) with low purchasing capacity has implications on how much 
the domestic markets can sustain growth. Without trade, the ceiling for the productive 
sectors will be low. However, international market penetration would mos t certainly require 
online presence for individual companies, in addition to an overall sophistication in terms of 
communicating and dealing with potential clients online. Order placement and related 
functionalities will also become essential.  
 
28. E-commerce  offers a route for diversifying the economic focus on productive sectors. This is 
because market  development cannot follow a SIG or donor -led hand -holding approach 
sustainably in the long run. Companies have to find and build their own relationships with 
international buyers/suppliers and over the long term, the survivability of export 
relationships will improve or decline based on how competitive firms are.  
 
29. Within the informal domestic economy, entrepreneurs are making ready use of technology 
at their d isposal to inform buyers via online platforms and drive sales (albeit offline). This 
bodes well for eventual e -commerce adoption. Facebook , along with other social media 
platforms , is playing an important role in bridging the buyer -seller gap, and activity  is 
ramping up at a rapid pace. There are a number of buy/sell Facebook groups with 1 ,000-plus 
members including overseas diaspora populations who use the groups to advertise, meet, 
negotiate , and sell a wide range of products, including land and property.  The key advantage 
is fast turnaround time. While the bulk of the products are second -hand goods, there is 
some retail activity as well. Challenges with such platforms, such as the Honiara buy and sell  
17 
 group on Facebook, is that they do not offer protectio n in the form of ratings or 
creditworthiness checks, nor do they easily support tax documentation and accounting audit 
– but this has not played any significant role in constraining growth.  
 
30. Pending successful implementation of the coral sea cable project , it is anticipated that 
improvements in internet bandwidth will be accompanied by related cost reductions and 
subsequently greater online activity from companies and consumers alike , which will bode 
well for e -commerce. Subsequent activity is expected in the following areas: 1) Increased 
usage of mobile -internet by consumers and a gradual shift from feature  phones to 
smartphones ; 2) increased local content traffic along a broad range of areas ; and 3) 
increased digital entrepreneurship activity levels, including demand for website 
programmers and other IT professionals. Part of this growth may include increased website -
driven business activity in the food/grocery delivery or tourism nic he areas , such as in the 
case of Bulk  Shop (http://www.bulksolomons.com). Classifieds -based websites may also 
take root.  
 
31. A strong business case exists for small -scale e -commerce operations to start, based on real 
business needs in the capital and beyond.  For instance, the challenging road -traffic 
conditions may make it appealing for consumers to order groceries and other necessary 
items online. Indeed, delivery services will likely emerge as an early candidate, following 
trends in other countries.  
 
32. E-com merce growth in SI will likely start small, with lead  firms emerging in areas such as food 
delivery, courier services, and employment/job websites , among other forms of classifieds. 
The growth curve will not be steep, but rather gradual. As activity increa ses and the operating 
space becomes crowded, it is likely leaders will move to other areas and diversify operations, 
leaving follower firms to take their place. Lead firms will emerge either organically or through 
supported means (i.e. via structure incuba tion programs) to inspire a second wave of 
entrepreneurship activity. Activity levels in the short -medium term will likely remain focused 
on the domestic market, and be cash -on-delivery oriented.  
 
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
33. The current extent of e -commerce is quite limited in Solomon Islands. Apart from the 
accommodation sector, there is virtually no pure e -commerce involving the online promotion, 
online order  placement, and online payment within order -fulfillment process flows. Even 
within the accommodation sector, the bulk of booking activity primarily takes place through 
third -party computer reservation systems and global distribution systems , such as Galileo, 
supporting consumer websites such as booking.com or hotels.com.   
 
34. In other develop ing country contexts, micro and small/medium enterprises (MSMEs) are able 
to reach a middle ground between offline commerce and pure -online commerce by 
developing an online presence through websites allowing consumers to order online while 
accepting payments through cash on delivery. In Solomon Islands, the private sector has been 
slow to develop online presence in general (in particular due to the internet speed and cost 
chall enges), instead relying on the social media route. This is not nec essarily all bad, as 
younger generations with greater access to technology and connectivity will continue to  
18 
 evolve in their use of electronic media and resources in a different way to  the current business 
environment.  
 
35. As noted earlier, a high degree of activity has been occurring in the informal sector , leveraging 
the social media route for implementing use cases such as online classifieds, informing buyers 
of local market times. A compelling example is of community -based fish markets, which can 
only be set up once the fishing fleet returns to the shore, sometimes after several days at sea. 
Facebook has served as the medium of choice for announcing times and locations of such 
markets.  
 
36. Several reasons can be attributed to the slow pace of e -commerce businesses growth:  
 
First,  the mainstay/traditional sectors of the economy – logging, mining, commercial 
fisheries – are not readily applicable in their primary format for e -business entrepreneurship. 
Productive sectors such as  tourism and agriculture - where scope for e -business 
entrepreneurship is much higher  -are just now emerging as priority sectors.  
 
Second,  the risk/rewards profile for entrepreneurs to venture into the digital businesses 
space is limited, especially given  that the social media driven buyer -seller interfacing is so 
popular.  
 
Third , the remoteness of Solomon Islands has an impact on business ideas , reaching them 
slightly later than other developing countries. This is why , for instance, promising business 
ideas such as online food delivery services have not taken root.  
 
Fourth , even if entrepreneurs attempt to develop an online presence, finding website 
developers to assist them will be a tricky proposition. For instance, during the recent eT 
Readiness Asses sment exercise (February -August 2018) undertaken by UNCTAD, anecdotal 
evidence was collected indicating that there are only 8 -10 reasonably well -run IT companies 
operating in Honiara, and at least 8 were involved in the hardware space (as official provider s 
to the government). No software development firms could be identified, and it was indicated 
that for most software development work, externally sourced expertise is used, from 
countries such as Fiji and the Philippines.  
 
Finally, the usual suspects impa cting the broader MSME base , including access to financ e, 
have also constrained e -business entrepreneurship development.  
 
Short/medium term priorities  
 
37. Ensure implementation of submarine cable landing, and associated market and regulatory 
structure, which should result in decreased costs as well as enhanced internet speeds and 
access: The key prerequisite for e -commerce development is improved internet co nnectivity 
accompanied by low latency, reduced costs, and enhanced provision of value added services 
by ISPs, which will lead to growth of user activity and increased generation and adoption of 
local content. Without these elements, it will be quite challe nging for any form of e -
commerce activity to take root.  
  
19 
 38. Mentor and incubate firms with e -commerce potential: A first tier of promising firms with 
relatively high readiness levels would need to be supported through a structured program. 
There are select f ew companies such as Bulk  Shop (bulksolomons.com) that could be 
targeted and supported to develop an e -commerce operation (initially focusing on online 
order placement, logistics/order fulfillment, payment via cash, and graduating later to 
online payments via mobile money or cards). In other countries, early services have included 
food delivery or courier services. Additionally, firms in the agriculture and tourism sectors 
could be targeted.  
 
39. Integrate e -commerce in the national development agenda: It is es sential that any sector 
development strategies, plans, activities in tourism and a griculture, and which involve a 
market -side component, also include a focus on e -commerce capability development. The 
European investment fund’s Tier 1 project on Tourism and  Strongim Bisnis’s initiative , 
focusing on market systems development for tourism, cocoa , and coconut (while also 
placing emphasis on building an enabling business environment, youth and disabilities 
inclusion, and female entrepreneurship development) is o ne such area. The agriculture and 
tourism project commissioned by EIF is another. Neither of these projects currently have an 
associated e -commerce component.  
 
40. Increase supply of affordable smartphones: It is anticipated that mobile phone -based 
activity will dominate e -commerce. This is due to the very low level of fixed line and fixed 
broadband penetration, as well as the anticipated rise of smartphones in the c ountry 
estimated by GSMA to rise to 54 percent (of overall mobile subscribers) in 2020 from 24 
percent in 2014. The availability of affordable smartphones will help drive online activity, as 
amply demonstrated in the context of Southeast  Asia.  
 
41. Support dev elopment of local content: Prior to the adoption of online activity, consumers 
would need to feel comfortable navigating online, and local content in the form of news etc. 
in local languages in addition to English will go a long way in supporting this.  
 
42. Prepare the skills -development infrastructure for emerging needs stemming from the digital 
economy: While the skills base for e -commerce and the broader digital economy is weak, 
this supply chain will not be strengthened until market  demand requires it. The base of 
private sector activity within the digital economy is currently too low in SI for skills  providers 
to be able to outlay investments in curricula updates. Nevertheless, it may be prudent to 
start establishing frameworks for regular feedback between policymakers, skills  providers 
and the private sector, so that skills -mismatch issues can be mitigated at a later time.  
 
43. Pay attention to the development of certificate -level course providers in ICT that are more 
adept, flexible , and dynamic than universities to cater to the needs of the private sector : In 
many ways, these providers serve as a barometer for assessing private sector needs. Given 
that there are no certificate -level course providers in the country, this could eventua lly 
become an opportunity area for international course providers, or local companies who 
would like to enter the space with a development partner and SIG support.  
 
44. Develop t he overall Digital Financial Services  (DFS) ecosystem : DFS will eventually be 
esse ntial to the e -commerce ecosystem. Cash movement is in any case challenging between 
the various islands, and mobile money’s business case is very strong. While cash on delivery  
20 
 will remain the primary choice of payment in the short term,  digital transfers,  including  
mobile money /mobile wallets, payments cards and internet -based solutions, e.g. apps,  
could function as a suitable alternative for consumers.  
 
45. Close regulatory gap s: preparing a new legal and regulatory framework for digital economy 
development  will be particularly important for : digital transactions and electronic 
signatures, cybersecurity, data protection , and data privacy. While this will gain relevance in 
the medium term, once suitable levels of online activity are ongoing, the gap will have 
increasing ly important implications in terms of a lack of legal basis for executing or seeking 
legal recourse related to electronic transactions. The pending passage of the payment 
systems bill in parliament is another area of urgency.  
 
Box 3: Exploring the link between formalization and digitization  
 
The common theme running through the above factors is that markets are key. If businesses sense market 
opportunities, and the market/buyer requirements demand or at least encourage formalization, then this will help 
make the case for informal businesses to  become formal. This is true regardless of digitization, however digitalization 
helps bring markets closer to the businesses, so there is at least a link.  
 
The link between digitization and increased formalization in the economy is not a straightforward on e and depends 
on a host of factors. The relationship between adoption of digitization and tendency for formalization may be hard 
to prove empirically, but a case can be made for linkages.   
 
Additionally, it is likely that in the case of Solomon Islands, d irect efforts to improve formalization , such as simplifying 
registration processes , will not be enough. Given the strong community -based linkages, associations and community 
groups will need to be consulted to create a model for formalization that does not  impart too much burden on 
businesses.  
 
If digitization is to play a part, it is likely that the transition from informal to formal business will be a blurred one 
rather than an abrupt shift. Businesses that are benefiting from the e-commerce model are experiencing efficiency, 
communications -based improvements in a way that is somewhat levelling the difference between them and formal 
businesses. This exposure and experience will impart confidence to at least a subset of firms to expand and diversify, 
and when they see their current informal state  as a barrier to scale, the conviction to transition to the formal sector 
will arise.    
 
Ultimately, actors will assess the incentives vs. the obligations for operating within the formal sector but digitization 
will at least have an indirect role in promo ting formalization.  
 
 
 
a. Sector Specific Focus: Tourism  
 
The business case  
 
46. The tourism sector offers one of the strongest value -propositions towards digital 
business transformation in Solomon Islands. The country  offers important natur al 
(water -based and forest), cultural , and historical (especially WW2 -specific) tourism 
assets. The c urrent target markets largely comprise Australia/NZ, US A, Fiji, PNG, China, 
and other visitors classified as originating from Asia. According to official statistics ,7 
‘holiday and vacation’ are the main purposes of visiting Solomon Islands, followed by 
 
7 http://www.statistics.gov.sb/statistics/visitor -arrivals#purpose -of-visit  
21 
 ‘visit friends and relatives’. The ‘ business and conference’ category was especially 
important for Australian visitors, possibly due to activity in the extractive sectors (logging 
and mining), and official travel for development assistance.  SI's successful b id to host the 
2023 Pacific Games is expected to drive tourism within the region.  
 
The potential for this sector is in line with trends observed in other developing countries , 
indicating that countries with natural potential for tourism are typically early adopters 
of e -commerce, and stand to benefit significant ly from digitizing their value chain 
operations.   
 
47. Inclusion within the primary development agenda of the government,  driven by a long -
term vision of reducing the dependency of the country on extractive sector receipts .The 
sector’s importance is highlighted by a long -standing government mission that tourism 
will replace logging receipts in the medium -long term, thus redu cing the unsustainable 
dependency on the country’s valuable timber reserves. This is a lofty goal considering 
that logging receipts are more than five times higher than t ourism sector receipts. 
However, the government’s focus over the past decade has been shifting towards 
increasing support to the Solomon Islands Visitor Bureau ( SIVB ), and development 
partners (particularly the EIF and DFAT) have also launched tourism -specific initiatives, 
lending traction to the overall developmental effort.  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
48. In recent years, the value of increasing the country's tourism presence on the internet 
has led to concerted efforts by SIVB  with support from develop ment  partners. Staff 
capacity and online presence have grown, and sector sta keholders are generally willing 
to collaborate in aid of sector growth.  
 
49. Despite the potential, the sector is currently under -performing, accounting for only 4.5 
percent of the GDP in 2017, while the indirect impact was 10.5  percent  of GDP, 
comprising capital investments, government spending in support of the tourism sector, 
and supply chain effects involving tourism sector purchases from other economic 
sectors. Travel and tourism accounted for 6 ,500 jobs in 2017 or 3.5  percent  of to tal 
employment, from hotels, travel agents, airlines , and other passenger transportation 
services. Future growth as projected by WTTC is relatively low. As such, these projections 
are based on current and past  performance and bely the potential of digitiza tion.  
 
50. Sector operators are relatively less integrated in online activities than their peers in the 
region. Most of the major hotels provide bookings through third -party platforms such as 
Booking.com, and have some online presence, however the bulk of oth er tourism 
operators do not have an online presence other than on social media, which inhibit s 
demand -side awareness.  
 
51. Hotel firms such as the Heritage Park are leading the way. It is anticipated that the 
tourism sector will see a rise in website -driven activity in the near future , aimed at 
building an online presence for operators. A wave effect is thereafter anticipated , 
where by the models employed by lead firms including hotels, tour guide firms , and 
others is replicated by new firms.   
22 
  
52. The tour ism sector growth is expected to benefit the agricultural sector in particular , 
which already has strong linkages with tourism sector operators. Farmers and farmer 
groups are actively involved in supply ing food (such as fresh fruit and fish) to hotels, tour 
agencies , and food outlets. Enhanced tourism activity (possibly spurred on by e -
commerce) will benefit these linked sectors as well.  
 
53. DFAT's Strongim Bisnis and the EIF's Tier 2 project are the two main  development 
initiatives aimed at the tourism sector. Both initiatives place a strong focus on markets 
development, which has scope for digitization.  
 
Short/medium term priorities  
 
54. Facilitating joint product development (among sector stakeholders led by SIVB) for 
tourism offerings involving stakeholders across the value chain - such as hotels (and 
other accommodation providers), tour guides, independent operators (such as fishing  
tours), craftsmen, museums, food outlets, training providers, website designe rs and 
content managers among others) - which can be booked online, and facilitated in an 
efficient manner.  
 
55. Facilitating website development for tourism operators to be able to promote their 
offerings online, especially for international markets.  
 
56. Digital connectivity will be critical , considering that the island chain country is comprised 
of almost 1 ,000 islands , of which 300 are inhabited. The importance of the submarine 
cable and ensuring last -mile connectivity is amplified in this context . 
 
57. Other critical areas of importance include developing standards and enforcement 
capacity, and addressing critical infrastr ucture , particularly in transportation, road  
network, and accommodations, in Honiara as well as in the hinterland.  
 
b. Sector Specific Focus: Agriculture  
 
The business case  
 
58. Certain agricultural sectors –in particular coconut  and cocoa - have been the focus of  
policy and development partners ’ attention in recent years. Both sectors present strong 
possibilities (with high and growing international demand) for future export in addition 
to developing mutually benefical linkages with the tourism sector. Cashew nuts  is the 
third sector with identified global demand that SI can cater to.  
 
59. To a smaller extent , taro, cassava , and kava have also been identified as agricultural 
products with export potential on a smaller scale . Cassava is one of the products being 
suppor ted by the EIF’s Tier 1 project.  
 
60. There is consensus that these sectors can accommodate MSME involvement with 
potential for developing e -commerce businesses aimed at exports. However, the tough  
23 
 entry requirements in premium markets means that significant work in improving 
supply -side conditions (including quality management) will need to take place so that 
exporters can meet stringent criteria for quality in high value markets such as Australia, 
New Zealand, and Europe. This is important given that the vol umes from SI will always 
be relatively low, and do not justify a thrust towards low -value, high -volume markets , 
such as in Southeast Asia.  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
61. The cocoa sector supports 22 percent  or 20-25,000 rural households in SI. It is an 
important cash crop for the country, and in recent years, export earnings have surpassed 
expectations. 75  percent  of export returns are retained by producers , of which 50  
percent  are women. While the majority of the crop is exported to the bulk -grind markets 
in Asia, SI has managed to penetrate the premium solar -dried cocoa export market with 
support from Australia/NZ supported Pacific Horticultural and Agricultural Market 
Access (PHAMA) Program. Cocoa is also one of the priority sectors of the ongoing 
Strongim Bisnis initaitive. Overall, this sector has received the most attention within the 
broad agriculture category. From an e -commerce perspective as well, there is high 
potentia l for this sector.  
 
62. Some cocoa -related SI SMEs have been able to make inroads into the international 
market, in particular Makira Gold ( https://makiragold.com/ ), which is able to sell in 
Australia directly  (through s tock maintained in Brisbane), and in Europe via a cocoa 
distributer.  
 
 
63. The coconut sector supports 44  percent  or 40,000 rural households and one of its 
derived products, copra ( oilcake of coconut), accounts for 2.6  percent  of SI’s total 
exports. SI is one of the world’s top exporters of copra, however, there is limited value 
addition capability in the country for developing and exporting high value copra 
products. Strong im Bisnis is working to address this challenge among others through the 
value chain. Thi s product requires special expertise in terms of processing , due to its 
volatility as well as poisoning if not dried properly, and therefore requires significant 
training and capacity development at a standardized level before the product can be 
shipped.  
 
64. Palm oil  is the largest agricultural export from SI, however , due to operations by 
concessionaires, there are concerns related to habitat preservation that constrain this 
particular value chain. Palm oil is primarily exported by Guadalcanal Plains Palm Oil  
(GPPOL), majority -owned by New Britain Palm Oil (owned by Malaysia’s Sime Darby). 
There are no other operators (SME or otherwise), although these may emerge in the 
medium term. For the time being however, this remains an enclave sector, with a single 
big operator with a heavy dependence on smallholder farmers.  
 
 
 
  
24 
 Short/medium term priorities  
 
65. The following table indicates the product -market combinations with high potential. In 
itself, the data offers purely quantitative potential and qualitative filters need to be 
applied to identify realistic markets.  
 
Table 3: Top prospective markets for future diversification – all products  (except palm oil) have high M/SME 
potential  
Products  Current 
exports (US$)  World 
Import (US$)  Top 
current/prospectiv
e markets offering 
further 
penetration/ 
diversi fication 
opportunities  World Imports 
of markets  Applied 
Tariff 
(%) 
Palm oil (+ 
fractions) (HS 
1511)  26.3 million  11.1  UK 316.8 Million  0 
7 Netherlands  1.8 Billion  0 
4.5 Switzerland  29 million  0 
Cocoa beans, 
whole or broken, 
raw or roasted (HS 
1801 ) 15.2 Million  20.9 Billion  Malaysia  791 Million  0 
Indonesia  529 Milliom  5 
Singapore  113 Million  0 
Cashew nuts, in 
shell/shelled  
HS 080131/32  3/1 Million 
(2015)  3 Billion /4.7 
Billion  India  $1.1 Billion   30 
 Vietnam  $725.9 Million 
(shelled)  5 
Oilcake of coconut 
or copra (HS 
230650)  694K  181.7 Million  Korea  90.1 Million  0 
China  14.5 Million  5 
India  19.3 Million  15 
Cassava (HS 
071410)  22K 1.6 Billion  No data available. Regional markets are 
likely candidates.  
Taro (HS 071440)  NA 161 million  No data available. Regional markets are 
likely candidates.  
Kava (HS code NA)  NA NA  
Source: ITC Trademap  
 
66. Sector development strategies should be undertaken for priority sectors identified as 
having high export potential such as the ones noted previously, and the market -side 
component of the strategy should also include an e -commerce dimension in the form of 
support to MSMEs for developing online presence/helping existing businesses expand 
into the digital dimension.  
 
67. Existing companies (especially in cocoa) which have managed to make some inroads in 
international markets could serve as anchors of market -led development projects aimed 
at developing capacities throughout the value chain, and having an e -commerce 
dimension.  
 
68. Existing farm management technologies involving multimodal crop monitoring systems 
(sensors, RFID  tags,  etc.) could be ‘importe d’ into the country for piloting their 
applicability in SI.  
 
69.  The cocoa sector in particular offers high potential and readiness for joint  ventures with 
international companies through which latest technology and best practices can be  
25 
 sourced. A n additiona l advantage of selecting the cocoa sector as an anchor is the 
relatively high organization and competencies of the sector’s associations, lending 
greater impact to development interventions and increasing probability that the supply 
chain will be sustainab le (in terms of consistent and on -time supply).  
 
70. The packaging sector is another area where the digital economy could play a part. 
Packaging not only adds value in terms of brand value and diversity of options, but is 
significantly important for meeting qu ality standards in premium markets. In line with 
trends observed in other PMCs, the packaging sector is quite weak in Solomon Islands 
and is largely imported. A capable packaging sector supply chain needs to be nurtured in 
Solomon Islands, which can provid e affordable, high quality , and environmentally 
friendly packaging to other sectors.  
 
c. Sector Specific Focus: Fisheries  
 
The business case  
 
71. Solomon Islands lies in a region where more than 60  percent  of global tuna is caught, 
imparting significant potential  for economic and socio -economic growth if managed 
sustainabl y. The current income comes from the major commercial processing center at 
the Soltuna base in Noro, as well as the commercial licensing fees for foreign vessels to 
fish in Solomon Islands’s EEZs . Most of the canned tuna processed at the Soltuna plant 
heads to Europe, although fuel prices in Solomon Islands and poor/expensive electricity 
and water supply result in a high cost operational structure , reflected in the cost  of the 
tuna .  
 
72. A high degree of negotiations (separately and with Pacific Island nations as a group) are 
taking place with high value markets , such as the EU (in the form of EPAs) , at the trade 
policy level to open markets for Solomon Islands tuna.  
 
Current situation and r ecent developments  
 
73. There are very few SMEs involved in the processing part of the value chain, where 
potentially opportunities could be foreseen for e -commerce and/or digital 
transformation initiatives, in the long term. Only one tuna  processing plant exi sts in the 
country (Soltuna), so it is not possible to gauge the overall potential for the sector 
currently.  
 
74. One example of digitization that does exist involves the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine 
Resources (MFMR) using tablets to collect information fr om fish markets and fishing 
vessels (on  site) and electronically transfer the information to the Ministry’s Integrated 
Fisheries Information Management System (IFIMS).  
 
Short/medium term priorities  
 
75. The key priority would be to expand the sector participat ion of SMEs, especially on the 
processing side. The supplier development model could possibly be applied to the  
26 
 fisheries sector in Solomon Islands, where identified suppliers to the Soltuna plant or 
other big companies (that may emerge soon) could be deve loped and nurtured to the 
point that they can spin off as exporters. If there are cost incentives that can be adapted 
so that the large suppliers benefit financially or technically from their participation in this 
initiative, they may be willing to engage.   
 
76. The policy push on increasing value addition in the sector means that there may be a role 
for M/SMEs interested in the processing area, something that could have a high export 
or local market value as well.  
 
 
3. Trade Logistics and Trade Facilitation   
 
77. The trade logistics and trade  facilitation areas are very important from an e -commerce 
perspective. Given Solomon Islands’ rather challenging geography, transportation from and 
within the country  is a significantly challenging proposition. Smooth physical flow of traded 
goods also requires efficiency and transparency in paperwork and administrative procedures, 
and this is where the need to align the trade facilitation area to internationally accepted 
standards is importan t. 
 
Current situation and recent dev elopments  
 
TRADE LOGISTICS  
 
78. Solomon Islands’ geography makes trade logistics extremely difficult . The country’s coastline 
stretches for 1 ,000 miles and includes almost 1 ,000 islands , of which 300 are inhabited , 
resulting in significant challenges for movement of goods and people. Intra -island 
transportation exists but requires upgrading. Due to the pressure of inward migration in 
Honiara, the transportation infrastructure in the city has suffered.  
 
79. Transportati on from Solomon Islands regionally and internationally is primarily through the 
air route due to the large distances involved, although the marine transport area has been 
explored (as yet largely undeveloped) for connecting Solomon Islands to other Pacific  Island 
States. The National Trade Policy Framework document identified a number of challenges 
with the existing transportation infrastructure .8 
 
80. Significant physical addressing challenges mak e last-mile delivery of packages slow and 
unreliable. This is u nsustainable for e -commerce growth. Anecdotal evidence points to long 
lead times for packages ordered from e -commerce websites to arrive in the country due to 
the lack of a recognized postcode system , as well as a national street -addressing system. In 
fact, for retailers such as Amazon, inbound international orders cannot even be placed 
without a postcode. This gap has also affected the ability of the Post Office to efficiently sort 
and plan distribution. To address this challenge, two initiatives are ongoi ng: 
 
a) The national postal authority (Solomon Post) is leading an innovative pilot that utilizes GPS 
coordinates transposed on a three -word  addressing system called What Three Words (W3W) 
 
8 Government of Solomon Islands, National Trade Policy Framework, 2016   
27 
 to effectively provide citizens/businesses with an address at which they can be located by a 
delivery service provider such as the post office, courier service etc. The supply -side system 
is ready, but the key challenge is spurring consumer adoption of the system.  Indeed, 
according to Solomon Post, there were only 20 subscr ibers to this system in November 2018.  
 
b) Every ministry is using its own system of segmenting the country into addressable elements. 
However, MCA and Solomon Post have taken the lead in developing a postcode matrix and 
other ministries and agencies are curr ently reviewing it  for possible adoption . 
 
a. A tripartite agreement exists between Solomon Post – Customs – Quarantine as a 
mechanism to gain consensus on mutually important issues, includ ing trade. Trade 
facilitation is a key area of discussion, and discussions are ongoing to add the Ports 
authority and Solomon Airways to the group.   
 
b. Solomon Post recently migrated to the IPS.POST System (in mid -2016) which is a 
single platform used by posta l authorities for providing track and trace capability 
where inward and outward dispatches are bar -coded and can be tracked and 
traced. This capability is essential for facilitating efficiency gains and transparency 
in postal delivery services and has a st rong e -commerce relevance as well.  
 
c. The UPU is actively providing support to Solomon Post (including the W3W pilot 
and the IPS.Post system) and has played a part in Solomon Post emerging as a 
relatively forward seeking actor that recognizes the necessity of the digital 
economy for the country. Driven by a strong leadership, UPU is seeking to diversify 
its own business model to include digital wallet (Ezi Pei) services as well as 
transforming its network of postal offices to sell value added goods and servi ces.   
 
d. The key challenge s for delivery services providers (according to DHL , which controls 
90 percent  of the market for overseas packages ) are very long customs delays , short 
working hours of staff and manual transactions.  
 
TRADE FACILITATION  
 
81. Solomon Islands is a member of the WTO as well a signatory to the TFA. A key area of reform 
has been automation of customs procedures, reduction in processing times , and improved 
transparency and efficiency of traded goods. The ASYCUDA system was deployed in Solomon 
Islands in 2015 and has been credited with collecting more than SBD 1 billion.  A new Customs 
Declaration System (CDS) is in the process of being deployed with support from UPU, WCO , 
and UNCTAD/ASYCUDA.  These systems will be fully integrated with  the ATS enabling the 
government to make and receive payments digitally in a safer and more efficient way.  
 
82. The de minimis  value of two Solomon Island dollars currently in place is inordinately low and 
imparts burden on both customs and importers. There is a need to discuss this in line with 
other trade facilitation areas of reforms.  
 
83. In recent years, non -payment of dues to i nternational technical agencies such as the UPU 
(now resolved) and WCO (not resolved) has become as an important issue. It has emerged 
that both the private sector and SICED agree to increase this value to reach international  
28 
 benchmarks, and there is no si gnificant contention or opposition regarding the raise from 
SBD20 to SBD100. However, the main issue is not monetary but rather raising awareness at 
key ministries , such as Finance , of the value of making these investments.  
 
Perspectives for future growth /enhancement  
 
84. To develop physical connectivity between SI’s populated islands, inter -island transportation 
is essential for the movement of people, cargo, and cash (essential for maintaining efficacy of 
the banking network in the hinterland). The current s ystem of transportation needs a 
comprehensive review and overhaul.  
 
85. Support needs to be provided to the W3W national addressing system. For this system to 
work, both the supply side (postal offices, delivery services) and the demand side (consumers) 
will need to start using the system for Solomon Post (and other delivery s ervices) to be able 
to deliver packages. Building this awareness at national level will be crucial to ensuring the 
success of th e system.  
 
86. Solomon Post’s role in fostering inter -agency communication, working with international 
partners such as the UPU, and innovative approach as pertains to new product development 
(Ezi Pei, revitalization of the post office network through new service offerings) will be an 
important ingredient in the trade logistics area. The organization has an open -minded 
leadership wi th an eye for innovation and testing new ideas through pilots, and its reputation 
as an honest broker could be important to gain consensus along various fronts in an otherwise 
fragmented institutional structure.  
 
87. At the same time, the review and adoption o f a postcode matrix , developed by Solomon Post 
and MCA, and a national system of street -addressing , will be essential for last -mile delivery.  
 
88. A multimodal analysis of developing Solomon Islands’ air and marine -based connectivity with 
international markets  will be essential given the country’s remote location in the Pacific.  
 
89. The promising work that has started in the area of TFA implementation must continue in order 
to align Solomon Islands with the Trade Facilitation regimes in other countries and streaml ine 
trade.  
 
90. There is an important need to review the de minimis  regime in the country through a public -
private sector consultation.  
 
91. International support through development partners such as the UPU and WCO is essential, 
and as such, the membership brings  forth access to international best practices, trainings etc. 
It will thus be important to ensure that these international memberships continue.  
 
92. Inter -agency collaboration will be key and to this effect, the tripartite group established by 
Solomon Post, c ustoms, and quarantine must continue, with further expansion of Solomon 
Airlines and the Port Authority, if possible.  
 
93. The new CDS is yet another milestone in terms of streamlining trade facilitation procedures 
in SI, and the ongoing deployment and training will need to be completed successfully.   
29 
  
94. UNESCAP’s Paperless Trade surveys offer important e -government based recommendations 
that will assist in developing the digital economy, by driving efficiency in trade facilitation 
areas. In the ‘paperless trade’ performance area, the survey highlights several e -government 
initiatives that have been planned but not yet implemented, including E -Single window, E -
Application and Issuance of import and export permit, E -Air Cargo Manifests, E -Preferential 
Certifi cate of Origin, E -Payment of duties and E -Application for Customs refunds.  
 
4. Financial Technologies ( fintech ) 
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
95. Fintech  is an emerging area of discussion and activity in Solomon Islands, as well as the 
broader Pacific Islands states. Efforts have ramped up in recent years to plug in fintech  with 
the country’s wide -ranging strategy on financial inclusion. The government is currently 
updating its guidance note on mobile money usage and is expected to include broader use  
cases where fintech  solutions can be leveraged.  
 
96. The current evolution in the sector is limited to mobile wallets and mobile banking solutions 
that have been deployed by banks. More sophisticated solutions such as micro -loans are not 
yet operational due to regulatory gaps and also because banks and other  providers seek to 
develop a better understanding of the profitability of introducing fintech  solut ions in Solomon 
Islands.  
 
97. PFIP’s micro pension project is notable in developing digital payment channels and last -mile 
distribution partnerships aimed at re aching remote and underserved areas and populations. 
Private commercial banks, investment funds, microfinance institutions, savings groups, post 
offices, and fintech  service providers as well as the respective Central Banks and Governments 
are all partners  in this initiative where PFIP/UNCDF technical and grant support is leveraging 
both private  and public sector.9 
 
98. Fintech  is a necessity for Solomon Islands given the logistical challenges that the country’s 
remote location and significant geographical disparity presents. In its basic form, fintech  will 
allow consumers to access financial services with reduced physical depen dence on travel to 
Honiara or provincial capitals. Additionally, the government has recently included a climate 
change resiliency aspect to its financial inclusion strategy. i.e. it recognizes the vulnerabilities 
of the country from climate change and woul d like to utilize financial solutions to help 
communities cope with natural disasters using mobile -based savings, credit, and insurance 
products. This serves as a further use -case for fintech  solutions. The current iteration of the 
National Financial Inclu sion Strategy (NFIS II) already places a central focus on mobile money. 
The NFIS notes the following key thrusts for fintech : 
 
a) Permit adequately regulated non -banks, including MNOs, to issue mobile wallets.  
 
b) Implement interoperability across mobile platfor ms for customers, including a fully 
interoperable payment system.  
 
9 See http://www.uncdf.org/article/2609/uncdfexpertschat -with -krishnan -narasimhan -rethinking -pension -inclusion -in-the-pacific   
30 
  
c) Promote digital payment channels in all government transactions , including by SOEs.  
 
d) Promote digital payments among large private sector employers and associations 
reaching smaller employer s, and in business -to-business payments.  
 
99. From a technical perspective, the technology and tools exist given that advanced commercial 
banks are already present in the country. They are , however,  waiting for the go -ahead from 
CBSI to deploy products in the local market.  
 
100. Several learning events have been undertaken on fintech issues over the last two years.  These 
include:  
 
▪ A regional workshop of senior officials from central banks, money -lending firms and 
commercial banks in Samoa in November 2018, co -hosted by the Central Bank of 
Samoa, ADB , and the IMF. The workshop  covered areas including fintech solutions for 
financial inclusion, cutting -edge fintech for cross -border remittance transfe rs, crypto 
assets and their regulation, and p rospects of Central Bank digital currencies.   
▪ A World Bank Group and Toronto Center workshop in Samoa September 2019 on 
Enhancing the Safety and Efficiency of the National Payments System: The Role of the 
Overse er. 
▪ A World Bank Group learning event in PNG in February 2020 on training the various 
Payment Systems Departments of the central banks in the region.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/enhancement  
 
101. The following recommendations apply for promoting growth in the fintech  sector.  
 
a) Conduct joint exploration of ideas through the national financial inclusion taskforce in 
collaboration with financial institutions on how the fintech  solutions providers can b est 
leverage the improved connectivity from the undersea cable. Additionally, consider the 
adopt ion of  a regulatory sandbox approach to balance innovation and oversight in the 
nascent fintech  sector.  
 
b) Provide support to the Central Bank in covering importa nt regulatory gaps that currently  
constrain growth of fintech  solutions. These include the passage of the e -payment law 
which , when passed , will drive inflow of fintech  solutions by commercial banks and non -
bank financial actors.  
 
c) To improve adoption, imp lement strategies for enhancing demand -side trust in fintech  
solutions, especially in unbanked rural areas where consumers may be hesitant to create 
digital identities due to security concerns. On the supply side, know your customer ( KYC) 
requirements should be streamlined to ensure essential consumer information i s 
recorded with the minimum burden possible on the consumer.  
 
d) Identify key areas of excellence where promising fintech  activity is occurring , such as Ezi 
Pei wallet system (which may be in early stages of deployment but is backed by a reliable 
partner in t he form of Solomon Post). In parallel, encourage development partners and  
31 
 initiatives such as Strongem Bisnis  to integrate fintech  activities across their sector 
development activities.  
 
 
5. ICT Sector  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
102. The ICT sector in Solomon Islands is currently at a very low level of maturity. There are very 
limited/no software development firms operating and most of the existing IT firms are 
oriented towards provision of hardware and IT software support for the government t hrough 
a preferred supplier development program. The government does not procure any software 
support services as the bulk of their requirements are fulfilled by ICTSU. Without the 
government as a viable market, and in the absence of any e -commerce/digital -based activity, 
the software sector has not evolved. There are currently no incubators or provisions to assist 
startups. Given the challenges with internet speed and reliability, segments such as cloud  
computing, website development, and local content (online) development have not grown. 
Even if they did, the demand would not be sufficient given that data costs are still high and 
out of the reach of ordinary Solomon Islanders.  
 
103. Even in the hardware secto r, there are only a handful of companies in the entire country that 
sell computers and related equipment. Market leaders , such as IBM and Microsoft , use their 
Australian offices to cater to the demand for products in Solomon Islands.   
 
Perspectives for fu ture growth/enhancement  
 
104. The current low base of the ICT sector is not necessarily an indicator of future growth 
potential because the underlying root -cause of the weak ICT sector – internet costs, speed , 
and reliability – may change in the short -medium te rm pending the arrival of the submarine 
cable and last -mile connectivity. The increased competition is expected to depress data costs 
which may spur consumer -side activity. Charting an anticipated sequence to the growth 
trajectory of the sector is not easy , however , there is potential that once the consumer 
demand for online local content and services picks up, the supply side can evolve swiftly to 
cater to this demand and the lead firms will be followed by others. Cloud -based products may 
also see increase d demand as a result. The ICT sector is expected to benefit from the expected 
drive towards digital transformation – as individual sectors start their drive towards 
incorporating aspects of digitization in to their value chains, there will be an increased d emand 
for ICT support services. This overall growth trajectory will need to be accompanied by a sea -
change in the ICT skills infrastructure especially at the certificate -level IT skills providers 
(which are typically more agile and adaptive to the changing  requirements of the market).  
 
105. Develop a preferred suppliers development program for the software development sector to 
provide software support services to the government (possibly contracted and managed by 
ICTSU).  
 
106. A dedicated medium -term roadmap for the  ICT sector is required. This can be in the form of 
the seven -year master -plan that is derived by MCA from the 2016 ICT development strategy.  
  
32 
 107. Develop incubation facilities and programs for fostering incubation of ICT firms.  
 
108. Develop apprenticeship programs for ICT students to receive structured on -the-job training 
at local ICT firms (when there is a reasonable sample size of such firms available ). 
 
109. Develop a feedback loop in the form of a trilateral discussion forum where ICT sector f irms, 
relevant public sector bodies, and academia can develop a common understanding on 
challenges such as skills -mismatch etc.  
 
110. Foster strong linkages between IT suppliers and sectors that have a high degree of readiness 
to absorb ICT products such as hotels and resort s. Link local companies to hotel supply chains, 
creating e -commerce applications for local communities to advertise  and sell tourist -related 
services and making greater use of digital technologies such as online marketing and 
smartphone apps.  
 
 
6. Digital Entrepreneurs  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
111. Digital entrepreneurship is a nascent sector in Solomon Isl ands, primarily constrained by the 
overall weak entrepreneurship climate and the same internet connectivity challenges that 
have stemmed other segments of the digital economy. In absolute terms, there is little to no 
activity currently in terms of digital entrepreneurship in the country. This includes e -
commerce shops to freelancers (with an online presence) to any kind of entrepreneurship 
activity conducted online.  
 
112. As in the case of other segments in the digital economy, the current state is not a reliabl e 
predictor of the short -medium term projects, because the expected infrastructural 
improvements in the overall digital economy ecosystem may lead to a quick ramp -up of digital 
entrepreneurship activity whether it be news websites , online freelancing work , or e -
commerce startups. There are some essential prerequisites for enabling growth as noted 
below.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/enhancement  
 
113. Emergence of lead  firms and digital businesses entrepreneurship development is a must. 
There are currently no lead firms in terms of digital startups. These firms are important given 
that they follow a path for a second wave of businesses to follow. In this regard, 
entrepreneurship development for digital businesses will be essential to break through the 
current inertia of inactivity. Technical/financial support to existing businesses who wish to 
transform to online operations, or a hybrid online/brick -and-mortar ope rations model , could 
help spur activity.  
 
114. Brief courses aimed at coaching entrepreneurs on the fundamentals of digital  
entrepreneurship could also be a useful activity if on a regular basis and anchored in a reputed 
institution. Trainers could be certified , allowing them to forge consulting/coaching 
relationships with firms.   
33 
  
115. Business incubation has also not yet found roots in Solomon Islands. There is a near -complete 
lack of incubator/accelerator activity that would involve a financing aspect for selected  firms. 
Support programs are required in this regard to drive  startup activity.  
III. DIGITAL GOVERNMENT – DELIVERING PUBLIC VALUE AND STIMULATING DIGITAL 
ECONOMY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
A. Digital Government Strategic Outcomes  
 
116. Digital transformation in government can gener ate value in several ways. In addition to 
driving greater efficiency and effectiveness in government operations, it can facilitate and 
improve interactions between citizens and government , and  the delivery of public services. 
All of which serves to increas e public perception of, and trust in , the government. Beyond 
these forms of direct value, digital transformation in government also stimulates innovation 
and drives demand from the broader ICT ecosystem for solutions, products , and services.  
 
117. Digital tran sformation in the SIG has begun to derive value across these categories. It is, 
however, still in the early stages. The UN E -Government Development Index10 is used by many 
countries to measure their progress relative to neighbors and/or competitors. Figure  2 shows 
Solomon Islands score and ranking against Oceania countries. Solomon Islands is ahead of 
only Papua New Guinea in the region. It is last among the ‘Least Developed Countries’ in the 
region.  
 
 
 
10 https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en -us/Reports/UN -E-Government -Survey -2018  
 
Figure 2: 2018 E -Government Development Index for Oceania Countries   
34 
  
118. The UN E -Government Development Index is based on three measurements: Online Services 
Index, Human Capital Index, and Telecommunications Index, each with its own set of data 
points that are used to derive the index value. As such, it i s a snapshot of a static point in time. 
To both assess the level of maturity at a point in time and provide guidance for an evolution 
towards a target state, a broader model is needed. The Gartner Digital Government Maturity 
Model11 is widely used for that  purpose. The model defines characteristics at five stages 
across seven dimensions. Each stage represents the progression from basic e-government 
through to what is labeled ‘Smart Government’. Figure 3 shows the characteristics for each 
dimension at each s tage. Based on the rapid assessment, the SIG can be described as being in 
the initial E -Government stage across all dimensions. The applications in production are 
largely government operations -centric, designed for compliance with finance/resource 
manageme nt requirements or reporting requirements. New development and/or upgrades 
to the current systems are performed or procured by SIG or its development partners. Little 
information and very few services are online. There is virtually no process or data integ ration 
across agencies or domains. No open data platform exists for exploitation outside of the 
government and very little advanced analytics are performed within government. There are 
no plans in place to move towards a more open or data -centric profile. Current efforts are 
focused on stabilizing the shared government infrastructure and data centers and on 
supporting the applications in production.  
 
 
Figure 3: Gartner Digital Government Maturity Model  
 
119. The assessment and recommendations that follow highlight opportunities to strengthen the 
SIG’s digital government program elements. From that foundation, the SIG can begin to 
progress towards a more data - and citizen -centric approach and derive even greate r value 
from its investment and effort.  
 
11 Gartner, Inc. Introducing the Gartner Digital Government Maturity Model 2.0  
 
35 
  
 
 
B. Digital Government Program Elements  
 
 
1. Strategy and Planning  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
120. As discussed above, the National ICT Policy represents the official statement of overall 
strategic intent or goals, stated as ‘Objectives’. These include specific attention to digital 
government, although in the policy it is referred to as "e -government” .12 Objective 3, ICT for 
Good Governance, is directly focused on the deployment of ICT in the public sector:  
 
Utilize ICT at all levels of government to promote good governance and facilitate 
the efficient administration of government and delivery of public services 
throughout Solomon Islands  
 
121. Three of the ICT Strategies under Objective 3 are aimed at establishing and strengthening the 
institutions responsible for leading the ICT Policy implementation and digital government 
development. A fourth strategy simp ly calls for ICT to be ‘integrated into the work of the 
government’. The final strategy calls for the development of a National e -Government 
Strategy.  
 
122. While there is a clear imperative for government leadership and involvement in the 
achievement of all t he objectives in the ICT Policy, two of the objectives and one ICT Strategy 
within a third objective relate directly to the delivery of key public services: health, education, 
and law enforcement.  
 
123. Within Objective 4, ICT for Peace and Unity, one of the four ICT Strategies is to:  
 
Utilize ICT in support of effective policing and enforcement  
 
124. Objective 5, ICT for Health, calls for the government to:   
 
Improve healthcare and health service delivery throughout Solomon Islands by 
innovative use of ICTs a nd promote healthy ICT working conditions and practices  
 
125. Objective 6, ICT for Learning,  
 
Improve the availability and quality of education throughout Solomon Islands by 
innovative use of ICT and develop ICT know -how in the workforce and public 
generally  
 
 
12 For the purposes of this report, the e -Government goals and objectives will be interpreted to be focused on establishing e -
Government, and ultimately digital government, capabil ities as reflected in the Gartner maturity model.   
36 
 126. The ICT Strategies and Actions under each of these objectives are further elaboration of 
strategic intent and high -level desired outcomes. They address the application of ICT to the 
delivery of the services, building capacity within the service delivery a gencies, and 
collection/dissemination of domain -related information. They include very little in the way of 
specific activities or timelines. Because these all represent key public service domains, it is 
expected that each would be addressed as part of any  national e -government or digital 
government planning.  
 
127. As mentioned above, the ICT Policy also calls for the development of a national e -government 
strategy. The ICTSU is in the process of developing and publishing an ICT Strategy for 201 9-
2023 (“the Str ategy”). A draft copy of the strategy was reviewed as part of this assessment. 
While the strategy focuses primarily on the activities of the ICTSU, it is as close to an overall 
e-government strategy as is available, particularly since the ICTSU has a SIG -wide support 
mandate.  
 
128. The Strategy’s vision and mission statements are written specifically for the ICTSU:  
 
ICTSU Vision: Empowered SIG services to Solomon Islanders through ICTSU’s 
effective design and deliver y of ICT  
 
ICTSU Mission: To deliver innovativ e, sustainable, and secure ICT solutions, in an 
environment that fosters talent and focus es on standards, taking pride in the role 
of ICTSU in enabling SIG to provide improved services to the public and private 
sectors  
 
129. The four goals defined in the Strategy, however, would be appropriate goals for an overall e -
government or digital government strategy and plan:  
 
Goal 1:  Increase efficiency of SIG ICT services through strengthened ICT leadership 
and workforce  
Goal 2:  Modern, sustainable, and secure  SIG ICT infrastructure and systems  
Goal 3:  Digitized government services to SIG and citizens  
Goal 4:  An information driven government fully leveraging existing data  
 
130. Each goal includes a set of objectives and activities intended to achieve the goal. The  Strategy 
also includes a brief section on the implementation approach, covering the following topics:  
 
a) Leadership & Accountability  
b) Governance Structure s 
c) Governance Layer  
d) Management Layer  
e) Skills & Capacity  
f) Stakeholder Engagement  
g) Resources  
h) Funding  
i) Human Res ources  
j) Consensus & Buy -in 
k) Communication   
37 
 l) Tactical Work Plans  
 
131. It is evident from a review of the Strategy that considerable effort was made to define the 
goals and the objectives and activities to support each goal. These require further review and 
strengthening to confirm priority and focus, identify interdependencies, and ensure 
appropriate categorization/classification. The implementation approach, however, is 
extremely brief and needs extensive elaboration in order to serve as an actionable plan going 
forward.  
 
132. This strategy has also been developed in the absence of the broad stakeholder participation 
and engagement that is most often required for successful implementation. It will be 
important for the SIG to develop a broad consensus around the s trategy.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
133. The work being done by the ICTSU on a broad SIG ICT Strategy for the period 201 9-2023 is 
commendable and is a good foundation upon which to build. But it does not yet include the 
detailed analysis and planning content needed to serve as the roadmap for the Solomon 
Islands’ digital government development. The SIG needs to build on what the ICTSU has 
produced to develop the Solomon Islands National Digital Government Strategic Plan (DGSP). 
As a supporting strategy subordinate to the National Development Strategy and National ICT 
Policy, the DGSP will focus on building the information systems architecture (enterprise 
architecture), information sharing/shared services strategy, interoperability framework, open 
data, and business and citizen services plan. A clear example of good practice in this area is 
the Government of Canada Information Techn ology Strategic Plan 2016 -2020 (see Figure 4):  
 
 
Figure 4: Government of Canada IT Strategic Plan Framework13 
 
 
13 Treasury Board Secretariat, Government of Canada  
 
38 
 134. The plan was later updated to the Strategic Plan for Information Management and 
Information Technology for the period 2017 to 2021, and again t o the Digital Operations 
Strategic Plan: 2018 -2022. In addition to regular review and updating, the program areas 
defined in the framework are further elaborated into detailed work packages in the 
responsible agency plans along with milestone dates and per formance measures. Most 
importantly, the required resources are allocated in agency operational budgets.  
 
135. The government may choose to request support of international organizations or 
governments to assist developing the strategy and supporting standards , frameworks, and 
policies. The knowledge and skills needed to develop and implement an effective digital 
government strategy will require additional professional training in governance, risk, service 
delivery, enterprise architecture, and cybersecurity. T his is also needed to ensure the Digital 
Government Strategic Plan and supporting frameworks and policies are continuously 
reviewed, updated, and changed based on government, business, and technology triggers 
which may either render obsolete or require cha nges to existing directives.  
 
 
2. Governance and Management  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
136. Until the adoption of the National ICT Policy, and even now as the implementation 
arrangements are being decided, centralized governance and management of ICT within the 
SIG has been carried out by the ICT Support Unit within the MoFT .14 The Australian -led 
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) established the ICTSU initially to 
support the development and establishment of the Solomon Islands Government (SIG) 
Connect Network – a WiMAX Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) that was deemed necessary  
to facilitate government communications and improved governance in the post -conflict 
environment. Since that time, the mandate of the ICTSU has been extended to overall whole -
of-government ICT deployment and support. ICTSU is recognized for discharging it s mandate 
involving significant scale with a fair degree of efficiency, especially in terms of connecting 
government offices in Honiara with the main inhabited islands across the country.  
 
137. Three of the five ICT Strategies under the ICT for Good Governance objective are focused on 
institutions. The first calls for the establishment of national -level Solomon Islands 
Government (SIG) ICT Policy Committee. This topic has been addressed above. The second 
calls for further strengthening of the ICTSU. The third calls for strengthening the 
Communications Department of the MCA and assigning to it the responsibility for ICT 
development across all ministries. It also calls for relocating the ICTSU from the MoFT to the 
MCA. To date, little progres s has been made on strengthening the Communications 
Department. Given the solid performance of the ICTSU within the current structure and 
processes, the intention to shift management responsibility for government -wide ICT 
deployment and support to the Comm unications Department and moving the ICTSU to the 
MCA as a purely ‘technical’ support group has not been very well -received. The situation has 
created a somewhat contentious climate impacting cooperation on key issues related to the 
 
14 ICTSU was established in 2011, mandated by a cabinet decision to enable provision of whole -of-government ICT services. The 
three core functions are ICT s trategic advice and innovation, ICT business process and management, and ICT operational support.    
39 
 ICT infrastructure and e-government areas. Shortfalls exist in developing and publishing 
standards, strategies, and policies to guide information systems and ICT design and 
implementation.  
 
138. Notwithstanding the changes mandated by the ICT Policy, the ICTSU has included an outline  
governance structure for government ICT in its draft ICT Strategy (see Figure 5 below15). 
 
 
 
 
 
139. The Strategy stipulates that the Permanent Secretary of the MoFT and the Permanent 
Secretary of the MCA co -Chair the E -Government and Data Sharing Committee, and that 
representatives from all the other ministries are members. The ICT Governance Leadership 
Level would be chaired by the Director of the ICTSU. Although additional detail needs to be 
defined, the outline structure indicates careful consideration of the SIG’s ICT governance 
requirements.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
140. It has alread y been mentioned above that further effort needs to be made to rationalize the 
institutional environment for National ICT Policy implementation. Like the program planning 
process, the distinction between the national ICT agenda and the digital government a genda 
applies to the institutional context as well. The institutional structure and capabilities needed 
 
15 Draft Solomon Islands Five -Year ICT Strategic Plan  
Figure 5: ICT Governance Structure from ICTSU's ICT Strategy   
40 
 to ensure effective governance and management of ICT within the SIG are key elements of 
the national ICT institutional landscape but are not the same th ing. 
 
141. During the Solomon Islands Digital Economy Workshop  in November 2019 , the Office of the 
Prime Minister presented elements of a proposed institutional framework led by the Solomon 
Islands Digital Transformation Authority. The ICTSU is proposed to lead the implementation 
of ICT within the SIG and report to the authority. While the conceptual basis of t he structure 
proposed in the ICTSU’s Strategy is consistent with the framew ork proposed by the OPMC , 
the two need to be reconciled . 
 
142. International practice indicates that top -level governance structures are required to achieve 
both national ICT objectives and digital government objectives, and that these need to be 
separate and d istinct from one another. Further, international experience suggests that 
dedicated digital government program management organizations, independent of line 
ministries, are needed to oversee programs across government. An excellent example of an 
effective governance and management structure is Singapore’s Smart Nation and Digital 
Government Group ( see Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 6: Singapore Smart Nation and Digital Government Group  
 
143. There is a need for a collaborative process between the relevant government agencies to 
design and establish an agreed governance and management structure, within the overall 
national ICT institutional structure, to lead, manage, and support the development of 
Solomon Islands’ digital government. This should ideally be done as part of the development 
and adoption of the DGSP.  
 
144. It is also noted that the SIG has no CIO position. The CIO would be valuable in preparing the 
requirements and managing the development of an architectural framework for government 
information syst ems.  
 
41 
  
145. Again, like the program planning process, a good starting point would be the work already 
done by the ICTSU  as part of its strategic planning process , cited above. The design of the 
dedicated digital government program management organization should  build on ICTSU’s 
success. Undisputedly, ICTSU has played an essential part in implementing a whole -of-
government approach to connecting government agencies while ensuring that the 
requirements analysis for the individual agencies follow s a bottom -up appro ach. 
Notwithstanding the contention surrounding the ‘placement’ of ICTSU, it has proven to be an 
efficient leader in terms of deploying e -government systems. That success should be 
considered as part of any institutional design initiative.  
 
 
3. Architecture, Processes, and Standards  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
146. The ICTSU, ministries, and agencies (through external assistance programs) have developed 
and are operating a number of fairly sophisticated business applications that are providing 
substantial value. However, they have been developed in the absence of an overall enterprise 
architecture, interoperability framework, data  sharing policy, or data standards. Moreover, 
there are no government -wide ICT procurement guidelines in place. This situation creates 
integration, sustainability, and efficiency issues, incr easing the SIG ’s overall risk profile.  
 
147. A Government Enterprise Architecture (GEA) is normally an objective or requirement within 
the National ICT Plan or National ICT Policy. The GEA should provide a government -wide, or 
holistic , view of how information s ystems are structured, interact, and comply with standards 
and processes.   
 
148. ICT Objective 3 within the ICT Policy establishes the requirement “Utilize ICT at all levels of 
government to promote good governance and facilitate the efficient administration o f 
government and delivery of public services throughout Solomon Islands.” Specific tasks within 
Objective 3 include reinforcing and further defining the ICT administration and governance 
structure of ICT within the government, specifically reorganizing the  ICTSU within MCA, 
centralization of ICT within MCA, and developing a National e -Government Strategy.  
 
149. Fulfilling, or making progress on achieving the requirements of Objective 3 will provide the 
government with a set of achievable tasks needed to develop a strong digital government 
capability. As strategy is assumed an iterative process, task achievement will establish a 
continuous improvement in information systems, governance, and capability maturity. When 
combined with other external factors, su ch as the availability of qualified human resources, 
improvements technology, emerging technology triggers, and improved ICT infrastructure, 
the strategy will be updated or adapted to the current conditions, allowing creation of new 
goals and objectives as  appropriate.  
 
150. Standards and processes are necessary for achieving GEA or digital government strategic goals 
and objectives. Standards and frameworks establish a common set of principles and processes 
for achieving information systems ’ security, efficiency , and integrity. Developing standards is 
a complex task, however , there are many international standards available for reference or  
42 
 adoption for most government systems. MCA will have the opportunity to either adopt or 
consider international standards and best  practices for development in support of the e -
Government Framework.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
151. With the rapid pace of technological change, the technical, functional, and commercial 
complexity of government applications is likely to  increase as technology triggers and political 
changes occur. In order to manage that complexity, it will be important for the SIG to establish 
and enforce compliance with a range of architecture, technology, and procurement 
standards. This includes ensuri ng international organizations comply with the national 
standards or allow open systems interfaces and interconnections to support data sharing and 
applications integration.  
 
152. In addition to publishing and adopting national ICT standards, frameworks, and po licies, it is 
also important to ensure a continuing professional and technical education process is 
implemented across government, in ICT operations, end user, and management (decision -
maker) positions. This will enhance the government’s ability to remain agile and improve the 
value ICT investments contribute to government operations.  
 
153. The following structure is recommended for the government in order of priority.  
a) Government Enterprise Architecture  
b) Government Interoperability Framework  
c) Information Systems a nd Data Sharing Policy  
d) Standardized IT Procurement Policy  
 
154. While the documents recommended appear to be overwhelming for a small government with 
limited professional ICT resources, most items are readily available using examples in use by 
other governments around the world. Those may include Government Enterprise 
Architecture Frameworks such as the New Zealand Government Enterprise Architecture 
Framework (NZ -GEA), Australian series of Interoperability Frameworks, US Government 
Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF), California Enterprise Architecture 
Fram ework (CEAF), or the generic international standard ISO 42010. The Solomon Islands 
Government, and MCA, can take those examples and adapt policies or frameworks suitable 
for implementation. Figure 7 provides a common architectural model for designing 
gover nment information systems.   
43 
 
Performance Reference Model  (PRM)
- Cross -Agency and Intra -Agency Goals and Objectives
- Uniquely tailored performance objectives
Business Reference Model  (BRM)
- Cross -Agency and Intra -Agency shared services
- Agencies, customers, partners, providers
Data Reference Model  (DRM)
- Business -focused data standardization
- Cross -agency information exchanges
Application Reference Model  (ARM)
- Software providing functionality
- Enterprise service bus
Infrastructure Reference Model  (IRM)
- Hardware providing functionality
- Hosting, data centers, cloud, virtuialization  Goals
  Measurement Area
  Measurement Category
  Mission Sector
  Business Function
  Service
  Domain
  Subject
  Topic
  System
  Application Component
  Interface
  Platform
  Network
  Facility  Platform
  Network
  FacilityInformation Systems 
Architecture Reference Model
Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework v2 
Figure 7: Enterprise Architecture main components  
 
 
4. Technology Infrastructure  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
GOVERNMENT NETWORK  
 
155. SIG-Connect is a government access network based on a combination of fiber access and 
WiMAX access creating  an independent network connecting Honiara -based government 
entities in a private network, with an Internet Gateway provided by Telekom (110mbps), with 
a second connection through SatSol (90mbps). Within Honiara, ICTSU indicated that SIG -
Connect has 105 co nnected nodes, with 6 ,000 users and 4 ,000 end devices. There are 10 sites 
connected to the SIG -Connect environment outside Honiara.  
 
156. While m ost of the agency applications are now hosted within the FlexPOD (data center 
platform) environment, SIG -Connect pr ovides an essential link between end users and the 
hosting environment. However, there are also several applications hosted offshore in New  
44 
 Zealand (Data Torque – specializing in customs, revenue, and transport systems) and Australia 
(Orion). Most public -facing websites are hosted offshore.  
 
157. Connectivity in rural and remote areas is still a problem. For example, the Ministry of 
Education identifies more than 600 schools without power, telecommunications, or any level 
of access to the Education Management In formation System. Another example is the Ministry 
of Health. Although nine provincial health centers are connected to SIG -Connect, most rural 
centers are not, and any record keeping is manual. The number of records that have typically 
been entered into into the health management system is on average one month. Accuracy 
can also suffer due to the manual process of record creation and transfer.  
 
 
DATA CENTER  
 
The World Bank team  visited two data center facilities  on its initial mission in November 2018 . 
The first was a room under construction in the new ICTSU building, and the second an existing 
server room in the old ICTSU building. Since that time, the new server room has been 
completed and a new FlexPOD unit was procured through DFAT funding. At the time of 
writing, most of the SIG applications and data hosted in the old environment have been 
migrated to the new one. The FlexPOD is backed up in a container -based server room with a 
5-hour Recovery Time Objective (RTO) for critical systems recovery. Informat ion on recovery 
point objectives (frequency of backups) was not available during the mission. The old FlexPOD 
environment will eventually be moved to the new data center facilities and configured as a 
training and development environment.  
 
158. It is strongly r ecommended the new server room undergo a Level 5 commissioning test. That 
is a full systems integration test checking backup generator power, electrical power 
distribution (including uninterruptible power supply (UPS)), building management (alarms 
and stat us, monitoring), and potentially FlexPOD operational integrity.   
 
159. Six agencies continue to host their own servers within their own LAN/building, notably 
Parliament and the Electoral Commission. There is no plan or schedule to migrate those 
environments to  FlexPOD or the ICTSU data center. Our Telekom also indicated availability of 
data center capacity in their main central office, adequate for up to five cabinets. Three IT 
equipment cabinets are currently available.  Note that FlexPOD is only using one cabinet at 
the ICTSU server room. Our Telekom could potentially be considered an option as either a 
short -term or long -term disaster recovery resource.  
 
160. FlexPOD is a proprietary virtualization platform developed by Cisco Systems and NetApp. As 
the SIG contin ues to develop the National ICT Policy and Digital Government Strategy, data 
integration and standardization will drive information systems architecture and underlying 
technologies ’ modernization.  
  
45 
 Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
161. The government requires additional SIG -Connect capacity and footprint extension to other 
unconnected island population centers to support government. In addition, the government 
needs to work with communications companies and TCSI to further develop citize n access to 
communications resources and internet access to unserved segments of the population. This 
will require incentives and subsidy, as the cost of providing commercia l resources in small 
population centers is prohibitive based on normal subscriber r evenues.  
 
162. A feasibility study should be conducted to consider data center options. Those options will 
include continued operation  of the new data center in the ICTSU building, or consideration of 
outsourcing and partnership with private industry. As planne d submarine fiber optic cable 
systems become operational, backup and disaster recovery alternatives outside of Honiara 
are possible – potentially including external cloud hosting in Australia. The data center 
industry has produced several standards, includ ing American ANSI Standards BICSI 002 -2014, 
TIA-942B, and European CENELEC standards within the CENELEC 50600 series. Supplemental 
operations sustainability guidance is provided by the Uptime Institute, which focuses on 
power and environmental issues. Figu re 8 depicts a standard data center layout providing 
both operational functionality and security. Note that data center layouts and design are not 
prescriptive, but rather built to provide guidance for organizations, including government, 
based on security , operational requirements, policies, continuity plans, and operational scale.  
                                                                                   
IDF IDF IDF IDF
Hot Aisle (Contained)
Hot Aisle (Contained)CRAC CRAC CRAC
CRAC CRAC CRACUPS Room -1 UPS Room -2Switchgear and 
Distribution Panels
Entrance - 1
Entrance - 2
Fire 
Suppression IT and Facility 
Spares StorageNetwork
Management
CenterManager s
OfficeSmall Meeting 
RoomReceptionReception and
Waiting Area
Data Center Staff 
Working AreaReceiving and Temporary Storage
Security
Control Point and Management Office
Facility Management 
Staff OfficesData Center
IT RoomIDFCarrier
POPMDF
Secure Cages
 – If Necessary**FutureLoading Dock4.5M x 4M = 22.5 SQM 4.5M x 4M = 22.5 SQM 4.5M x 4M = 22.5 SQM
6M x 5M – 30SQM6M x 5M – 30SQM
3M x 5M – 15SQM
5M x 10M = 50SQM 3.5M x 10M = 35SQM2M x 3M = 6SQM
3.5M x 5M = 17.5SQMWC
  
Figure 8: Data Center layout example  
  
163. All the above actions should be part of an overall National Data Center Consolidation and 
Communications Plan, which would include:  
  
46 
 a) Cloud Computing  
b) Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations  
c) Secure Government Network  
 
 
 
5. Information Systems and Data  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
164. There is substantial use, and ongoing development of , ICT systems, tools, and capabilities 
across the SIG. The Ministries of Finance, Public Services, Justice, Home Affairs, Health, and 
Education all operate syste ms in support of their operations, data management, and 
reporting. These agencies and their systems receive support from the ICTSU, which also hosts 
the applications and data in a consolidated data center. The ICTSU also provides an email 
system and a cent ral point of access to the internet for government ministries.  
 
165. The e -government footprint in Solomon Islands is growing amid recognition that such 
initiatives will help speed up the various regulatory and infrastructure -related components of 
the digital economy ecosystem, in addition to encouraging consumer adoption of online 
transactions. For a country with 600,000 citizens, along with a remote geography with 
dispersed population, Solomon Islands has made significant achievements  on digitizing it s 
internal workflow as well as the services provided to citizens and businesses.  
 
a) An online tax payment system is planned . 
b) Automated transfer system (ATS) and Central Securities Depository (CSD) are being 
implemented in the financial sector.  
c) A centralize d Accounting, Financial Management and HR system deployed by ICTSU has 
been cited as one of the most efficient tools against corruption that can be implemented.  
An upgrade to this system, including online authorization for spending units , is currently 
in process . 
d) The Biometric Voter Registration System launched prior to the 2014 election was 
responsible for registering 80  percent  of the voting population through biometric 
registration and informing the electorate on relevant matters including candidates and  
polling station locations.  
e) The Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development (MEHRD) utilizes the 
Solomon Islands Education Management Information System (SIEMIS) to record essential 
data on schools , and us es the data for refining policies and imp roving service delivery.  
f) The Ministry of Health and Medical Services (MHMS) uses a tool called m Supply for 
managing pharmaceutical inventories. The national referral hospital uses a radiology 
system for sharing x -ray reports with doctors and is also workin g on deploying an 
integrated patient information system that will maintain a link with hospitals across 
provinces.  
g) The Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources (MFMR) uses tablets to collect 
information from fish markets and fishing vessels (on  site) and  electronically transfer the 
information to the Ministry’s Integrated Fisheries Information Management System 
(IFIMS) . 
  
47 
 166. While the above initiatives are in varying levels of deployment and delivering  public value to 
varying degrees, the diversity of initiatives indicate s the government’s vision of digitizing its 
operations.  The ICTSU has also recently proposed the establishment of Rural Digital Service 
Infrastructure Hubs in the provinces to act as one -stop shops for digital government services.  
 
167. A Customs Declaration System (CDS) is being deployed with support from UPU, WCO  and 
UNCTAD/ASYCUDA. The system will allow exporters to apply for exports ’ pre-shipment 
clearance, which is essential for e -commerce firms that need to ensure efficient order 
facilitation and timely delivery to international clients. Similarly, importers w ill benefit from 
efficient processing of their imported goods. The system is expected to be scaled up to 
interface with ASYCUDA and other WCO systems in place. The system also allows for 
interoperability and cooperation between the three key institutions c onstituting Solomon 
Post, Customs , and Biosecurity (quarantine). CDS t rainings are expected to start for all these 
institutions.  
 
168. Other agencies, such as the Ministry of Justice, have some minimal data sharing with other 
agencies.  This is a manual process , rather than an automated integration of data sources. In 
some cases, agencies that need to access justice -related data are provided remote access with 
individual user accounts.  
 
169. There is very little data analytics capability. Those systems with an analyt ics capability 
normally us e reporting or analytics provided with the system, rather than developing custom 
reporting locally.   
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
170. With the exception of transitioning most ministries to ICTSU’s FlexPOD environment,  most 
ministries and agencies continue to use single purpose applications within their agency. Very 
little consideration, if any, has been given to develop ing a “whole -of-government” 
information systems environment, standards (including cybersecurity), or potential 
interconnection of data systems to support integration of processes or decision support.  
 
171. A National Enterprise Architecture Framework (GEAF) and supporting guid ance to include 
data sharing (interoperability), common applications, and disaster management/continuity of 
operations will improve the integrity of reporting and reduce the cost of information systems.  
 
172. Many of the information systems used in the SIG are provided by international organizations 
and are specific to the agency being supported. To ensure those applications or systems do 
not inhibit data sharing and systems integration, all new projects should go through a review 
process via an ICT Architectura l Review Board, overseen by the National ICT Committee.  
 
173. The Architectural Review Board (ARB), when implemented, will strive to ensure all systems 
under consideration will comply with the basic principles of:  
a) Architectural compliance  
b) Standards – where defined  
c) Interoperability  
d) Portability  
e) Security   
48 
 f) Disaster Recovery and Continuity of Operations , and  
g) Open data  
174. The intent of this direction is to ensure any information system that either collects 
information/data, or produces an output used by citizens or ot her government agencies , is 
not locked into a proprietary, non -interoperable system.  
 
175. The expected outcome of the adoption of an ARB process is better positioning for future 
integration of information systems as each system improves systems maturity.  
 
176. Agencies with a need -to-know, or data collected that is considered open, may provide 
valuable reporting and decision support resources through implementation of data analytics, 
including predictive analytics.  
 
177. This will also open non -controlled data to citize ns and private industry for further 
development as both commercial and public information.  
 
   
49 
 IV. FOUNDATIONAL ENABLERS OF DIGITAL ECONOMY AND DIGITAL GOVERNMENT: 
STATUS AND ISSUES  
 
178. As mentioned earlier, there are key enablers that must be in place to derive a ny value from 
the measures suggested above  and to achieve the digital economy  and digital government  
strategic objectives : 
 
a) Legal and Regulatory Environment  
b) Policy, Planning & Institution al Environment   
c) ICT Infrastructure, Access & Connectivity  
d) Cybersecurity  
e) Digital Skills & Awareness  
f) Digital ID  
g) Digital Payments  
 
This section provides an assessment of the maturity of each of the enablers , as well as 
recommendations for accelerating their establishment . 
 
 
 
A. Legal and Regulatory Environment  
 
179. Digital economy and digital government development require supporting laws and 
regulations covering e -transactions, consumer protection, cybersecurity, data protection , and 
data privacy. Such legislation is largely no n-existent in Solomon Islands and is an important 
gap that needs to be addressed to build trust in online transactions.   
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
180. There is currently no data protection or privacy -related legislation in the Solomon Islands.  
 
181. Article 9, Chapter II of the Constitution of Solomon Islands16 provides a broad constitutional 
right to privacy regarding a person’s property. It states that “except with his own consent, no 
person shall be sub jected to the search of his person or his property or the entry by others on 
his premises.” It may be implied that personal data lies within the definition of personal 
property.  
 
182. The only legislat ion that specifically addresses data privacy is the Telecomm unications Act 
2009.   Section 72 of the Telecommunications Act 200917 states that a service provider must:  
 
a. obtain consumer’s consent in order to collect, use, maintain , or disclose 
information about a user;  
b. apply appropriate security safeguards for the collection, use , and maintenance of 
client information;  
 
16 Constitution of Solomon Islands  
17 Telecommunications Act 2009   
50 
 c. ensure the accuracy of the information it discloses or retains concerning a 
consumer;  
d. permit a consumer to correct or remove incorrect information; and  
e. disclose to consumers the purpose of requesting or collecting any user information 
and must not use the information for undisclosed purposes.  
 
183. A service provider is permitted to disclose name, address , and telephone number in a printed 
or electronic telephone directory . This does appear to require conse nt from the customer. 
Section 73 requires that service providers take all reasonable steps to ensure the 
confidentiality of consumer communications.  
 
184. The National ICT Policy recognizes the need for data privacy legislation to prevent misuse of 
ICT in the c ountry. In the next legislative steps, it proposes that the government should18:  
 
i. enact data security and data privacy laws; and  
ii. update the Consumer Protection Act to protect online transactions, especially the 
privacy of purchaser’s information.  
 
185. However, there is no mention of developing data privacy laws in the country’s National 
Development Strategy 2016 -2035 .19   
 
186. There is currently no existing or in -process e -transaction law. This is a major gap in terms of 
legal recognition for electronic com munications, electronic signatures, and electronically 
formed contracts. This also has a ripple effect on consumer protection, as there is no point in 
consumer protection for digital transactions without having a legally recognized contract 
through which t he transaction has taken place.  
 
187. There is an existing consumer protection law dated 1996, but it is not tailored to e -
transactions. As an interim measure, the National ICT Policy advocates for an approach where 
existing safeguards of the Consumer Protectio n Act are applied to online transactions, and 
where Solomon Islands suppliers who invite consumers to enter into online transactions must 
disclose certain minimum required information. The policy further recommends the 
development of a code of practice by online vendors to encourage consumer confidence, 
especially important in the tourism sector. The following areas are essential to review (as 
noted in the ICT policy):  
 
a) Correct information on the identity of the vendor, nature of the goods and s ervices, 
terms and conditions , and pricing  
b) Consumers access to affordable, effective , and timely means for resolving disputes 
with vendors  
c) Spam and advertising  
 
188. There is no cybersecurity legislation in place right now, although some activities related to 
training police officers (cybercrime related) have taken place. The Telecommunications Act 
(2009) and the Criminal Procedure Code contain some provisions on cybercrime.   
 
18 National ICT Policy  
19 Solomon Islands Government, National Development Strategy (2016 -2035) (2016)   
51 
  
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
189. The Solomon Islands requires a robust leg al and regulatory environment to leverage the 
opportunities of digital transformation, whil e protecting against the downside risks. If 
executed correctly, this will create an environment that fosters home -grown innovation and 
attracts inbound investment. T he key areas that require attention are set out below.  
 
a. Data privacy protection, through the establishment of a national cross -sectoral law 
that adopts best international practice, and a data protection authority. This will 
need to take into account a potential national/digital ID, as well as being sufficiently  
flexible to enable future development.  
b. Financial sector laws and regulations, to ensure their coverage adequately reflects 
the types of expected payment, stored value, credit, insurance and investment 
services, as well as open API standards to foster inno vation and minimi ze systemic 
weakness and arbitrage opportunities.  Whil e the Financial Institutions Act 1998, 
Companies Act 2009 , and Exchange Control Act 1976 are already in place, the 
regime should be updated, especially to provide stronger coverage of payment and 
credit -related products and services, as well as virtual assets.  
c. Cybercrime laws, to reflect international safeguard standards, especially in 
anticipation of the completion of the Coral Sea Cable System.  
d. Electronic record, transaction and signa ture legal recognition, to ensure that 
contracts can be executed, information provided, and evidence potentially 
submitted in proceedings, in electronic format. Currently, the Secured Transactions 
Act 2008 is in place, which recogni zes security agreements in electronic forms and 
allows electronic filings of notices of security interests. In addition, section 91 of the 
Evidence Act 2009 allows “evidence that was produced wholly or partly by a 
machine, device, or technical process”, which implies that electro nic forms of 
contracts may be admissible in proceedings.  However, more comprehensive laws 
need to be enforced. Fiji has referred to the United Nations Convention on the Use 
of Electronic Communications in International Contracts in enacting its Electronic  
Transactions Act 2008, and Solomon Islands may consider taking a similar approach.  
e. Consumer protection legislation, including competition/anti -trust requirements. 
The Solomon Islands National ICT Policy has recogni zed correctly that a 
comprehensive consum er protection legal framework needs to be in place to 
address issues relating to online transactions, such as fraudulent vendor identity, 
misleading terms and conditions, consumer data privacy, and channels for 
dispute/complaint resolution.  
f. AML/CFT rules , to ensure that the latest recommendations of APG and FATF are 
adopted.  These are especially important to ensure that the Solomon Islands and 
its institutions are able to maintain their international links, particularly in relation 
to correspondent banking , payments , and other arrangements. Solomon Islands 
may also refer to regional experiments in low -cost eKYC/digital ID systems, as well  
52 
 as the FATF draft Guidance on Digital Identity, to consider adopting appropriate 
digital ID systems for AML/CFT practice s. 
190. A number of regulatory initiatives are already under  way to prepare for a stronger digital 
economy, including a Payment Systems Bill and guidelines for mobile money operators. These 
guidelines will be replaced by a regulation issued by the CBSI after th e approval of the bill  
Certain laws also already cater to recognizing electronic contracts, such as the Secured 
Transactions Act 2008. The Telecommunications Act 2009 also contains multiple provisions 
relevant to digital arrangements, including customer co nfidentiality obligations.  
 
191. However, it will be important to review existing legislation to ensure:  
 
a. a harmonised set of "digital" principles are formed;  
b. laws are consistent and properly reflect actual/emerging risks;  
c. unintended barriers, such as laws or  regulatory rules that relate to paper -based 
systems, are removed such as through ensuring legislation is technology -neutral 
where applicable;  
d. thematic legislation such as labor standards are considered for “digital readiness”, 
given the likelihood of a ch ange in commerce and labor 
opportunities/vulnerabilities; and  
e. innovative initiatives such as digital identity and even blockchain transactions are 
appropriately addressed, including in taxation legislation.  
 
192. Drafting new and reviewing existing laws will re quire a combination of legislative drafting, 
regulator formation/bolstering and multi -stakeholder consultation. It may be beneficial, but 
is not essential, to accede to any international treaties for this purpose. In any event, 
international engagement sho uld not delay the implementation of appropriate laws and 
regulatory standards.  
 
193. The drafting process will require extensive inter -ministerial coordination, as each area of 
legislation has multiple stakeholders. For example, e -commerce legislation could be 
sponsored by MoFT, the Ministry of Commerce, MCA, or even the Office of the Atto rney  
General AG). During the early stages of consideration of the bills the work can be undertaken 
by a committee, working group, or central authority. But at later stages (perhaps 
consultation) , and for shepherding the legislation through parliament, there will need to be a 
single responsible ministry. That leads to the second issue, which is one of institutional 
coordination during the drafting and consultation stages. For example, a Cyber Worki ng 
Group (consisting of MCA, AG, MoFT, CBSI, TCSI , and PMO) is in the planning stage. An Issues 
Paper on the formation of the CWG will soon be considered by Cabinet. The specific 
responsibilities on cybersecurity and cybercrime , as well as the remit of the  CWG over areas 
beyond cybercrime/cybersecurity (i.e., data protection and e -commerce), will need to be 
clarified (and perhaps its membership expanded to reflect stakeholder interest in these 
areas).  
 
194. Relevant government contracts should also be drafted o r reviewed, to the extent necessary. 
In particular, a review of contracts relating to existing network -related arrangements is  
53 
 recommended.  Further contracts must also be consistent with the planned roll -out of the 
network and seek to avoid potential pitf alls such as inappropriate IP arrangements and/or 
vendor lock -in. 
 
195. Finally, it will be important to move towards ensuring that the law and administration of 
justice itself takes advantage of technology solutions. This includes making available legal 
inform ation in a readily accessible format online, as well as moving towards online tools that 
assist with contract creation and dispute resolution.   
 
 
B. Policy , Planning , and Institutional Environment  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
Policy Framework  
 
196. The National Development Strategy (2016 -2035)  establishes a long -term vision for the 
sustainable development for Solomon Islands (aligned with the SDGs) and achieving the long -
term vision of improving the social and economic livelihoods of all Solomon Islanders. It 
proposes a whole -of-government approach to ensure coherence within public sector entities 
in support of national economic and socio -economic development. The focus on diversifying 
the economy away from dependence on the timber and min ing sectors is strong, and the 
strategy proposes the development of productive sectors including tourism, agriculture, 
fisheries, forestry, energy , and related sectors. E -commerce is not noted specifically as a focus 
area in the strategy , but instead the strategy discusses leveraging the benefits of ICT through 
the following stated goals compiled across sector development plans such as education and 
health.  
 
197. The National ICT Policy  is closely aligned with the NDS and focuses on leveraging ICT towards 
the fu lfillment of national goals as stated in the NDS . The ICT Policy was approved, endorsed , 
and adopted by the national government in 2017 and has the following vision: ‘A peaceful, 
united , and progressive Solomon Islands communicating and informed by technol ogies open 
to all’. Its mission is “To make information and communication technologies available, 
affordable , and accessible to all in Solomon Islands; to enable equal participation by all in the 
social, cultural, economic , and political life of Solomon Is lands.”   
 
198. The ICT Policy outlines nine objectives, with ‘ICT Strategies’ and ‘Actions’ defined for each 
one. The nine objectives are:  
 
a) Accessible ICT  
b) Legal Environment for ICT  
c) ICT for Good Governance  
d) ICT for Peace and Unity  
e) ICT for Health  
f) ICT for Learning  
g) ICT for Business  
h) ICT for the Environment  
i) ICT for Equity   
54 
  
199. Specifically relating to ICT for Business, the policy aims to ‘promote the availability, 
affordability, and use of ICT to support economic growth, private sector development, and 
employment creation in Solomon Islands’ . Similar to  the NDS, the policy does not address e -
commerce directly, but does note the importance of establishing regulations in areas such as 
consumer protection and cybercrime that will assist in e -commerce growth.  
 
200. Despite the absence of a defined overall ICT pro gram, there are ongoing activities that will 
ultimately contribute to the achievement of the nine ICT Policy objectives. Several line 
ministries are operating and continue to develop domain -specific information systems, often 
with the support and involveme nt of the ICTSU. The ICTSU has recently moved into new 
facilities and is developing and upgrading centralized services (data center, email services, 
shared document storage, etc.). The two telecom operators continue to offer voice and data 
product options.  
 
201. The National Trade Policy Framework  provides the trade policy perspective and reiterates 
the focus of the NDS  on productive sectors, particularly tourism, agriculture, and fisheries. It 
also notes the long -term potential of the forestry products sector. It delineates the market 
access strategy that the country has set for the private sector with the ultimate aim of 
developing a conducive business environment for Solomon Island businesses seeking to 
expand into the domestic as well as international markets .  
 
Institutional Environment for Policy Implementation  
 
202. The ICT Policy stipulates that the responsibility for implementation of the entire policy be 
vested with the MCA and support for the implementation be provided by the MCA 
Department of Communications , the TCSI , and the ICTSU in the MoFT. In practice, the 
institutional ownership for the digital agenda is fragmented among a variety of public sector 
entities due to its broad scope. This poses coordination challenges as well as contention 
regarding owners hip (as has emerged with the case of the MCA recently vis -à-vis the ICTSU, 
and the e -commerce ‘role’ ownership). Table 4 shows the institutional landscape for ICT Policy 
implementation.  
 
Table 4: ICT-related policies and institutions  
COMPONENT  INSTITUTIONS  
POLICY MAKING AND COORDINATION  MCA, MFAET, SBSI, MoFT, MCILI, ITSSI, SICED, 
Solomon Islands Postal Corporation,  
 
Working Groups :  
Working group on MSME, Digital Finance 
Working Group, Cyber Working Group, NTDC  
ICT INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES  TCSI, MCA, MCILI, MoFT/ICTSU, MoID  
TRADE LOGISTICS AND TRADE FACILITATION  MFAET, SICED, Solomon Islands Postal 
Corporation, MCILI, SIPA,  
ACCESS TO FINANCING  CBSI, MoFT, MCILI  
PAYMENT SOLUTIONS  CBSI, MoFT, MCILI  
LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS  CBSI, MCA, MCILI, MoFT, MoJLA  
E-COMMERCE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT  MEHRD, Ministry of Women, Youth and 
Children, Universities   
55 
 COMPONENT  INSTITUTIONS  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT  MFAET, MCILI  
Source: Adapted/modified based on UNCTAD’s eTrade Ready Assessment for Solomon I slands (2018)  
 
 
203. Three working groups formed through inter -agency partnership and involving relatively 
robust consultations with the private sector are active – these include the MSME working 
group, a Cyber Working Group, and the Digital Finance Working Gro up headed by the Central 
Bank. The National Trade Development Council (NTDC) , which functions as an umbrella group 
deliberating on trade -based issues , is another coordination platform, however , there is lack 
of clarity on how active this council is. A gap in the structure is a National Trade Facilitation 
Committee that would cover the trade facilitation and trade logistics part of the e -commerce 
segment.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
204. The ICT Policy provides a high -level statement of overall strategic intent, goals, and desired 
outcomes. This needs to be followed up with a detailed implementation roadmap. The policy 
includes what it refers to as ‘Objectives’, ‘ICT Strategies ’, and ‘Actions’. However, the content 
of those categories does  not follow a consistent hierarchy from a high level to increasing levels 
of detail or specificity. In particular, the items listed as actions are not specific. For example, 
under Objective 2, which focuses on the legal environment for ICT, there is an ICT Strategy to: 
“Ensure regulatory, law enforcement , and judicial personnel have the skills and resources 
required to administer and enforce ICT laws effectively.” The Action under that Strategy is to 
“Build National capacity to ensure regulation, civil law , and laws against cybercrimes can be 
effectively administered and enforced”. Essentially this is a re -statement of the Strategy. It is 
not a clear action to be taken by a specific organization or individual. An additional challenge 
is that the policy only provides a very general timing and sequencing of the strategies. Each 
strategy is simply classified as either short, medium, or long term.  
 
205. For the National ICT Policy to be effectively impleme nted and for the nine objectives to be 
met, a detailed, time -bound and costed implementation plan needs to be developed for each 
of the objectives. The development of the plan should be led and coordinated by the agency 
tasked with implementing the entire policy. However, given the breadth and variety of sectors 
involved, active and sustained engagement of other ministries and agencies will be required. 
Under Objective 3, which focuses on ICT for good governance, the policy calls for the 
development of a Na tional e -Government Strategy. While such a strategy and plan are indeed 
required, they should not be confused with the overall ICT Policy implementation plan. A 
national e -government plan would be a subset of the overall plan.  
 
206. Similarly, the institutional environment for policy implementation needs to be further 
clarified and rationalized. Under Objective 3, the ICT Policy calls for the establishment of a SIG 
ICT Policy Committee. Good international practice suggests that national -level steeri ng 
committees for ICT development are appropriate fora for overseeing the implementation of 
national -level policies. The policy further calls for the strengthening of the Communications 
Department of the MCA, and assigns to it overall responsibility for National ICT Policy 
implementation, as well as responsibility for ICT development across all ministries. Little  
56 
 progress has been made on either the establishment of the SIG ICT Policy Committee or on 
strengthening the Communications Department. Despite agre ement around the objectives of 
the policy, there is an absence of consensus on institutional roles and responsibilities. The 
OPMC is currently working on a proposed institutional framework with a Solomon Islands 
Digital Transformation Authority overseeing the ICT agenda and reporting to the Cabinet. 
Under this framework the MCA would be responsible for the National ICT Policy 
implementation and the ICTSU would be responsible for SIG ICT implementation and 
operation. Additional effort is required on defining  the focus, scope, and specific 
responsibilities of each institution involved in the implementation of the policy, including any 
advisory functions provided by development partners.   
 
 
C. Digital  Infrastructure , Access , and Connectivity  
 
Current situation an d recent developments  
 
207. Affordable, reliable, and widely available high -speed internet is a critical success factor for 
digital economy and digital government development in Solomon Islands. Table 5 illustrates 
improvements in basic mobile phone coverage si nce the government liberalized the market 
in 2010. However, broadband internet access compares unfavorably with regional neighbors, 
with fixed broadband at less than 1.0 percent of households , and mobile broadband coverage 
(3G and limited 4G) at less than 20 percent of the population. In Tonga and Samoa, for 
example, 4G mobile broadband coverage is greater than 95  percent of the population for 
each . Affordability is also an issue. According to ITU data (see Figure 2) the Sol omon Islands 
has some of the Pacific region’s least affordable mobile broadband services. Low mobile 
broadband utilization, combined with a very low penetration rate of fixed -line internet (0.2 
percent of the population), has translated into Solomon Island s having one of the lowest 
internet user percentages across Pacific Island countries. However recent and ongoing 
expansion of the 4G networks and availability of the Coral Sea Cable System (CS2) with 
domestic extension will improve availability and prices and progressive user adoption. The 
issue for Solomon Islands is to assist the necessary middle Km and BTS upgrades and user 
access to low cost terminals (phones and tablets).  
 
Table 5 Solomon Islands digital connectivity indicators  
Indicator  Units  Data  
Population  Q12020 (‘000)  686,900  
..of which rural  % 77 
GNI per Capita  Q3 2019 (USD - PPP)  2,350  
2G/3G/4G -Q1 2020 % in mix  43/53/4  
Smartphone penetration -Q1 2020 % 40 
Mobile connections Q1 2020  % population penetration  70.5  
# Cellular subscriptions . Q1 2020  Total number('000) of cellular connections  484 
...of which Prepaid  Percentage of total cellular subscriptions  94 
Unique subscribers  (SIMS / unique user =1.4)  Number ('000) unique subscribers  345 
Cellular subscriber penetration (unique)  Unique Subscribers/population  50.2 % 
SIM penetration  % cellular connections of overall population  70.5  
Percentage of individuals using the internet  Subscribers per 100 inhabitants  (TCSI AR 2019)  18.92 
Active mobile -broadband subscrip tions  per 100 population  (TCSI AR 2019)  18.8  
Active mobile -broadband subscriptions  % total cellular subscriptions  (TCSI AR 2019)  27.0   
57 
 Indicator  Units  Data  
Fixed Broadband subscriptions  Q1 2020  per 100 inhabitants  0.17  
Fixed Internet access -HH Q4 2019  per 100 Household s (TCSI AR 2019)  0.98  
International internet bandwidth  (CS2)  Gbps sold to operators (TCS1)  3.0 
Secure servers  per million people  (WB database 2018)  42.9 
Mobile operators  Number of operators  2 
Smartphones  Q1 2020 (% of all connections)  39.6  
Feature Phones  Q1 2020 (% of all connections)  3.7 
Basic / GSM Phones  Q1 2020 (% of all connections)  43.5  
Number of active mobile money accounts per 1000 
adults  Number per 1000 adults  55 
Value of mobile money transactions during the 
reference year (% of GDP)  %  2.3 
Knowledge Economy projected contribution to GDP 
(2040, BAU)  constant 2015$ Millions  177.5  
Knowledge Economy projected % to GDP (2040, BAU)  % 11.62  
Knowledge Economy projected contribution to GDP 
growth (2040, BAU)  % 15.4 1 
Projected employment generated by Knowledge 
Economy (2040, BAU)  persons  11,977  
Knowledge Economy projected contribution to 
government revenue (2040, BAU)  constant 2015$ Millions  49.7  
ICT projected contribution to government revenue 
(2040, BAU)  constant 2015$ Millions  49.7  
Facebook members (Q4 2019)  ‘000 members  88 
Active social media users (overall/mobile)  % of population  14/12  
Sources: multiple sources (national and international)  
 
208. There are two main service providers – Solomon Telecom (‘Ou r Telekom’) (owned by the 
Investment Corporation of the Solomon Islands and Solomon Islands National Provident Fund) 
and Bemobile (owned by the Government of Papua New Guinea  and managed by Vodafone 
Fiji). Both are expanding services (with some 160 base station towers) and new promotional 
offerings, and the consumer base is steadily  expanding. Performances on availability of 
service, quality of service, and kinds of service have generally improved. There are also other 
operators including Satsol  (satellite services) , and several internet service providers (ISPs) that 
operate based on a class licensing regime.  
 
209. International connectivity has since February 2020  migrated from satellite  to the CS2 , but this 
transfer of services is subject to existing satellite contracts. As the transfer progresses, 
services will improve in performance (lower latency, consistent quality, and lower prices. The 
satellite capacity provided by the current mainstay satel lite systems (O3B and Kacifica -1) will 
continue to remain essential for capacity backup and reach into villages where microwave 
linked to the domestic cable is not practicable . Upon transfer and relegation of satellite to 
‘backup on demand’ and service to most remote localities,  the CS2 is expected to contribute 
strongly to expanded  internet usage among consumers. With higher user adoption, 
businesses will have increased  incentive to promote transition to e -commerce to serve  
demand from consumers. Consumers  will look forward to a better browsing experience and 
likely adoption of streaming services .   
 
 
 
 
 
  
58 
  
 
 
Figure 9:  Access to and prices of mobile broadband services, Solomon Islands (ITU, 2018)  
 
 
 
 
 
210. The Coral Sea Cable System (CS2) was 67% funded by the Government of Australia under a 
DFAT grant, with additional investment from the Investment Corporation of the Solomon 
Islands (ICSI) and the Solomon Islands National Provident Fund (SINPF). It connects Sydney 
to Honiara and Port Moresby. A domestic cab le extension brings optical fiber capacity to 
three other points: Taro, Noro, and Auki. The cable has a total capacity of 20 Terabit/s of 
bandwidth of which about 3Gbps has been sold to operators. CS2 is managed by the 
Solomon Island Submarine Cable Compan y Limited (SISCC).  
 
211. The CS2 is expected  to boost internet speeds and uptime and greatly reduce latency. This will 
also support  ISPs offering value -added services on the back of the lower costs of the high -
speed network.  A component of the domestic network  capability will be  on local content 
development (development of a reliable internet exchange will also assist promoting local 
content development). This includes the development of better media studios and more 
accessible and easier to access local news d istribution.  
 020406080100120
Fiji Samoa Vanuatu Tonga Marshall
IslPalau Kiribati Tuvalu FSM Solomon
IslandsMobile Subscriptions: 2G, 3G and 4G, end -2018 (% population)
(Source: GSMA)
4G (%) 3G (%) 2G (%)
05101520
Fiji Kiribati FSM Samoa Solomon Is Tonga VanuatuMobile -broadband, prepaid handset -based 
(500 MB) 
% GNI per capita 
59 
 212. However, the impact on service uptake by individuals and businesses, including for e -
commerce and e -government , will depend very much on user end facilities (high speed 
connection, devices such as laptop, tablet or phone, and the means of pow ering them) and 
pricing. The wholesale price  - which impacts downstream retail pricing —will be a critical 
factor in terms of the expansion and utilization of such services. This in turn depends on the 
business model for the S ISCC. Equally with this is the rollout of a reliable, high capacity 
microwave network to deliver broad band service to 4G base stations which provide the final 
link to the users.  
 
213. The SISCC  business model is presently being finalized and preliminary pricing is in place for 
operators to access the capacity of the SISCC , and as data consumption increases, wholesale 
prices will decline. T he middle (backhaul) and last-kilometer  connectivity together with the 
user end facilities are yet to be addressed . Across all these matters, r egulatory issues will be 
important, in particular open access and fair and non -discriminatory pricing and infrastructure 
sharing. While the regulatory regime allows for addressing these matters it presently does 
not drive them.  
 
214. Other undersea cable proje cts that are proposed are to connect Port Vila, (Vanuatu ) to 
Honiara  and separately to connect Honiara (via Taro) to Arawa (Bougainville) . Dataco of PNG 
has also proposed a cable from Arawa directly to Guadalcanal (Naro). Business viability and 
financing s tatus of these  cable s is yet to be determined .   
 
215. The geographical nature of Solomon Islands creates particular challenges for domestic 
backbone roll -out. The country is made up of 992 islands, of which more than 300 are 
inhabited, with 76 percent of the p opulation living in rural areas.20 Our Telekom has been 
investing in its terrestrial backbone in Honiara  and has included terrestrial  optical fiber linking 
Base Stations and the network center . In addition, Solpower ( the Solomon Islands electricity 
provi der) has plans to expand its fiber network as part of its major IT upgrade, which will tie 
in with the expansion of the SIG Network  (linking centers around Honiara) , possibly linking to 
the SISCC , and providing network resilience for Honiara.  
 
216. Outside Honi ara, backbone networks are increasingly microwave networks linked to the cable 
landing stations of the domestic submarine cable network. In Malaita, backhaul (middle Km) 
is already a microwave loop linking to the Auki cable landing and a microwave network is 
extending from the Noro cable landing station to serve the Western Province of New Georgia, 
Gizo and Munda. While there will be a place for satellite for some localities, a large fraction 
of the population will be readily services by the combination of cable landings and microwave 
middle Km. The regulator (TCSI) believes has noted that  may be opportunities for small -scale 
broadband service provider operations in the provinces, possibly through PPPs, and possibly 
involving Solpower.   
 
Perspectives for fut ure growth/enhancement  
 
217. An Interim Licence was issued to the Solomon Islands Submarine Cable Company (SISCC) in  
January 2020  and regulatory action is required to complete SISCC becom ing fully operational, 
including determination of the access regime (technical and legal matters) for licensed 
 
20 World Bank Data 2018   
60 
 operators to S ISCC capacity. Interim commercial terms are presently in place but these  need 
to be clarified as soon as possible. The Domestic cable access arrangements are special 
conditions to encourage adoption of the domestic cable and assist the sector during the 
COVID crisis. However these also need to be settled for the long term use of the service.  
 
218. Additional regulatory measures  to incentivize development of the middle Km, access network 
and user facilities will also be needed . For the middle Km these  includ e passive infrastructure , 
site and site facilities sharing. Although a universal access policy has been considered it would 
be complex to administer, and global experience has been mixed  some support is required 
for end users to achieve the required end user facilities acquisition that will lead to 
widespread broadband Internet access and use . It is unclear whether or how such a targeted 
industry tax or some new innovative measure  could provide the necessary stimulus to outer 
islands’ investment, or whether PPP models , cross sector (e.g. SolPower)  and other regulatory 
incentives would be more effective.  
 
D. Cybersecurity  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
219. Cybersecurity  represents a significant challenge. Currently there is no cybersecurity 
awareness training, nor is there a formal security audit or monitoring process. As part of an 
overall National Security Framewo rk, the Royal Solomon Islands Police (RSIP) are developing 
and publishing a National Cybersecurity Framework, as well as investigating cyber crime. 
Concurrently, the MCA is establishing a national cybersecurity working group made up of a 
broad cross -section  of government and private sector stakeholders (see further discussion 
below). A core element of the working group’s brief is to organize the development of 
legislation related to cybersecurity, cybercrime, and data security and privacy. It will be 
importa nt to ensure the working group’s efforts are coordinated with those of the RSIP. ICTSU 
is considering providing internal security awareness training through an e -learning vendor 
such as Udemy, which provides lower cost enterprise accounts, and a very large  selection of 
courseware. Other options, such as formal residence training is also being considered for 
select staff.  
 
220. The following chart depicts a cybersecurity maturity assessment following the CMMI model, 
as published by the US Department of Homeland S ecurity. In this maturity scale, the World 
Bank team places the Solomon Islands at Level 1 – Initial. The five-year target is to bring the 
SIG and private industry, civilians, and education to Level 3. This achievement would greatly 
reinforce the Solomon Islands overall cybersecurity risk profile.   
61 
  
  Figure 10: Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
221. Discussions with government agencies indicated that cybersecurity is at a very low maturity 
level. Cybersecurity must not only be administered within the operational environment, but 
also become an essential part of the culture of government, business, and all citizen users of 
ICT.  Cybersecurity education a nd skills development is needed at the earliest feasible levels 
in public education, and continuing throughout academic training, professional careers, and 
individual use of technology.  
 
222. The National Cybersecurity Framework is a good start and will address the major components 
of a cybersecurity program (confidentiality, integrity, and availability of ICT resources). 
However, to address the need for greater skills, awareness, and implement ation of 
cybersecurity programs a National Cybersecurity Strategy with targeted goals and specific 
enabling objectives is needed to ensure cybersecurity is a top priority for Solomon Islands as 
ICT and Information Systems continue to diffuse into all aspec ts of government, business, and 
citizens ’ activities.  
 
223. The Cybersecurity Strategy or Strategic Plan should cover standards (with the National 
Cybersecurity Framework), education, operational monitoring, risk management, security 
culture, security risk miti gation, and a comprehensive risk assessment/audit program. While 
development of new standards would be a daunting task, there are many existing ISO security 
standards available which could be adopted, and government security programs that could 
 
• Minimal cyber security 
awareness
• Minimal cyber security 
information sharing and 
communications
• Minimal cyber security 
assessments and policy / 
procedure evaluations
• Minimal inclusion of 
cyber security into 
Continuity of Operations 
Plans (COOP) • Leadership aware of 
cyber threats, issues, and 
imperatives for cyber 
security and community 
cooperative cyber 
security training
• Informal info sharing in 
community; working 
groups established; ad -
hoc analysis; little fusion 
or metrics; professional 
organizations established 
or engaged
• No formal assessments, 
but aware of the 
requirement; initial 
evaluation if policies & 
procedures
• Aware of need to 
integrate cyber security 
into the National COOP• Leaders promote 
organization security 
awareness; formal 
community cooperative 
training
• Formal local information 
sharing/cyber analysis.  
Initial cyber -physical 
fusion; informal external 
information sharing/
cyber analysis and 
metrics gathering
• Autonomous tabletop 
cyber exercises with 
assessments of info 
sharing, policies, 
procedures, and fusion; 
routine audit program; 
mentor external ATS on 
policies and procedures, 
auditing, and training
• Include cyber in COOP; 
formal cyber incident 
response/recovery• Leaders and organization 
promote awareness; 
citizens aware of cyber 
security issues
• Formal information 
sharing/analysis, 
internal, and external to 
community; formal local 
fusion and metrics, initial 
external efforts
• Autonomous cyber 
exercises with 
assessments of formal 
information sharing/local 
fusion; exercise is 
involved life play/metrics 
assessments
• Integrates cyber in 
COOP; mentor externals 
on COOP integration; 
formal blended incident 
response and recovery• Awareness a business 
imperative
• Fully integrated fusion/
analysis center, combining 
all source physical and cyber 
info; create and disseminate 
near real world picture
• Accomplish full -scale 
blended exercises and assess 
complete fusion capability; 
involved/mentor other 
communities/entities
• Continued to integrate cyber 
in COOP; mentor externals 
on COOP integration; formal 
blended incident response 
and recoveryLEVEL 1
InitialLEVEL 5
OptimizedLEVEL 4
ManagedLEVEL 3
DefinedLEVEL 2
Repeatable
Ad Hoc - Chaotic IntuitiveQuantitative /
QualitativeQuantitative OptimizingCyber Security Capability Maturity Model
Systematically Improve Government Cyber Security Capabilities 
62 
 also be use d as reference or adopted to accelerate the Solomon Islands Cybersecurity 
program.   
 
 
 
E. Digital Skills and Awareness  
 
224. Digital skills and awareness are a critical element of a country’s ability to derive value from 
digital transformation. Aspects of this el ement include:  
 
▪ Overall awareness and capability of both the public and private sectors to participate 
in a digital economy and deliver and receive public services across digital channels.  
 
Figure 11: The types of skills needed in a modern economy21 
 
 
▪ The depth and breadth of the digital  skills base, involving website design and 
maintenance, content development, API connectivity (e.g. for digital financial 
services), mobile apps development etc.  
 
▪ The adaptability of the skills -providers base comprising  universities and technical 
institutes (as well as on occasion TVET providers) relating to the needs of the private 
sector vis -à-vis digital skills. In a digital economy, a greater and greater percentage of 
jobs will include the use of computers and ICT sk ills will be a prerequisite for getting 
those jobs ( see Figure 11).22 
 
▪ The presence of training courses related to digital businesses entrepreneurship and 
management . 
 
21 World Development Report 2016  
22 World Development Report 2016 – Based on World Bank STEP household surveys  
 
63 
  
 
Figure 12:   Digital Skills indicators  
 
▪ The level of coordination between various support institutions spanning 
policymakers, skills providers, and the private sector .  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
225. Overall digital awareness and capability among Solomon Islanders, in both the public and 
private sectors , is generall y quite low. The relatively low broadband and smartphone 
penetration suggests limited use or awareness of digital services or products. To the extent 
that the average citizen receives services across digital channels, it is most likely through social 
media  and, on a smaller scale, through services provided by the SIG. From education to taxes 
to school fees, some SIG systems have been deployed and more are planned. As described 
below, the private sector has been slow to roll out digital services. The general ly low levels of 
awareness result in low demand for those services.  
 
226. The depth and breadth of the IT skills base is one of the weakest links in the entire digital 
economy ecosystem. The main policy focus has been on developing ICT skills in primary and 
secondary schools and leveraging e -learning models for children. At the tertiary level, the ICT 
skills base is remarkably weak. Higher -level education is provided by Solomon Islands National 
University (SINU), Open College of University of Papua New Guinea  (UPNG) (distance 
learning), and University of South Pacific (USP), and only USP provides a bachelor’s degree. 
No masters level ICT degrees are offered in the country. All agencies interviewed, including 
commercial telecommunications carriers, indicated di fficulty in attracting and retaining 
qualified and motivated technical staff. Nearly all technical and professional training is 
conducted offshore. Although there are several adult education programs available in 
vocational skills such as automotive repair , construction, and refrigeration, little formal 
education is available in disciplines related to information systems, technology, or IS/ICT 
governance.  
 
227. A common outcome of this situation is either complete or partial outsourcing of SIG agency 
systems or applications. Much of the outsourcing goes  directly to ICTSU, both in the form of 
 
64 
 hosting as well as applications support. To meet the requirement, the ICTSU has been steadily 
consolidating technical staff from among the agencies. Other systems, including complete 
commercial outsourcing of data and applications, are hosted by offshore companies.  
 
228. There are no certificate -level ICT training providers in Solomon Islands. This gap is important 
because it is essential that training providers have the knowledge and experience needed to 
be responsive and adaptive to the needs of the market. Locally -based providers can better 
and more rapidly respond to feedback from the private sector, policymakers etc.  
 
229. Although management courses exist, there are currently no training courses aimed at digital 
business entrepreneurship, governance, risk management, or other professional skills. 
Business incubation and mentorship opportunities for businesses involved in the digital 
economy, especially youth and women -based enterprises, are weak. This gap is 
understandable given that the overall digital economy has not yet significantly evolved.  
 
230. Coordination is weak among the various support institutions spanning policymakers, skills 
providers, and the private sector.  There is currently no forum that meets regularly to discuss 
skills alignment and human capacity issues related to the digital economy.  
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
231. Inter -agency coordination for skills development issues must be strengthene d, and there 
must be a coherent feedback loop established between policymakers, skills  providers, and 
the private sector. The MEHRD should establish a mechanism for regular consultation among 
government agencies, tertiary education institutions, and the pr ivate sector.  
 
232. The ICT sector will need some incentives to develop. The domestic market for software firms 
is virtually non -existent. The SIG could, for example, create market demand in the form of 
preferred supplier programs (just like in the case of hard ware firms) and other means. 
Through a system of structured incubation and mentoring, an enabling environment for 
fostering growth of digital business startups could be developed.  
 
233. At the university level there is a need to review curricula and course off erings, and explore 
ways of adapting them to the digital economy. This may include the development of master’s 
level IT courses, integrating digital business management principles within existing 
management courses, and fostering the development of IT and professional training 
institutes.  
  
65 
 234. In the short -medium term, certificate and professional certification level training providers 
will be very important for SI’s digital economy. Trainees will not want to invest in three to 
four -year degree programs 
when they are unsure of 
getting jobs in the market 
(which could be the reason 
that master’s level courses 
have not yet emerged). 
However, a six- month - or 
year -long program with a 
structure placement 
assistance program could be 
more palatable. Ind ustry 
standard and accepted 
certifications in 
cybersecurity, audit, 
governance, service delivery, and technical skills are needed to bring both credibility and 
confidence to domestic and foreign investors.  Figure 13 (above) shows the number of TOGAF 
(Enter prise Architecture) certified individual s in the Asia/Australia  region. Currently, the 
Solomon Islands has no registered enterprise architects. Figure 14 shows the number of ISACA 
professional certifications in  the Oceania region, with the majority of cert ifications located in 
Singapore, Australia, and New Zealand.  
 
235. One recommendation from the private sector is to continue the use of international SMEs 
with specialized skills in both operational and training/mentoring positions. This will help to 
accelerate the  adoption and deployments of technologies, while training Solomon Islanders 
to take over critical technology -related roles. An important aspect of this issue is the need to 
develop information management capabilities within the agencies. There is a need for 
individuals that understand both the information require ments of their respective domains, 
as well as basic digital and technical literacy , so that they can effectively communicate those 
 
66 
 requirements  to ICTSU or other ICT service providers.  
 
Figure 14: ISACA professional certifications by region  
 
236. A broad -based digital literacy and ICT awareness program needs to be launched. Policymakers 
will need to understand the various policy implications of the digital economy; legislators will 
need to understand the various policy , societal , and economy -wide imp lications of the digital 
economy envisioned for the Solomon Islands; and the general populace will need 
opportunities to strengthen literacy and to be made aware of the various advantages and 
disadvantages (including risks and “good” cyber -practices and “c yber -hygiene”) of access to 
broadband -based internet services and applications.  
 
 
F. Digital Identification  
 
237. A digital ID system (e.g. a national ID system) supports the effective an d efficient delivery of 
public and private sector services and the introducti on of platforms to enable digital 
government and digital economy. By allowing people to reliably authenticate their identity in 
face -to-face and online interactions, digital ID can make services more accessible and enable 
such services to move to the inter net, which is important for populations on outer and remote 
islands. For example, a robust digital ID system can simplify and streamline the customer 
onboarding process for banks and other financial service providers, shifting from the need for 
multiple do cuments to verify identity and address to, potentially, a single number for 
authentication (e.g. PIN code, One Time Password through SMS, or biometrics). Such 
streamlining can also make it possible for agents equipped with mobile or other point -of-sale 
(POS) devices to open accounts on the spot (including in remote areas), rather than requiring 
 
67 
 customers to visit bank branches. Similarly, by establishing uniqueness of individuals, a digital 
ID system will facilitate interoperability and linkages, in appropr iate circumstance, of data on 
the same individual across information systems, which will support e -government and could 
help reduce leakages (e.g. eliminating ghost civil servants, ghost social assistance beneficiaries 
etc.).  
 
238. To maximize the benefits and mitigate the risks, it is critical that digital ID systems are 
implemented in line with international best practices. The Principles on Identification for 
Sustainable Development (see box below) offer a useful guiding framework around the pillars 
of inclus ion, design , and governance. For example, digital ID systems should be linked with 
civil registration systems that continuously capture births and deaths as they occur, which will 
ensure accuracy and improve the efficiency of the digital ID system. Likewise, there sho uld be 
a comprehensive legal regime for data protection and privacy, which provides safeguards for 
how personal data is collected, used , and shared. Costs can be reduced by not depending on 
a physical card for authentication but instead leverage a database  (subject to the availability 
of connectivity), and vendor and technology neutrality can be achieved by adopting 
international standards. Finally, people – as data subjects – should have oversight and control 
over their data.  
 
Box 4: Principles on identifi cation for sustainable development: Towards the digital age  
23 
 
Inclusion: Universal coverage and accessibility  
1. Ensuring universal coverage for individuals from birth to death, free from 
discrimination.  
2. Removing barriers to access and usage and disparities in the availability of 
information and technology.  
 
Design: Robust, secure, responsive and sustainable  
3. Establishing a robust —unique, secure, and accurate —identity.  
4. Creating a platform that is interoperable and responsive to the needs of 
various  users.  
5. Using open standards and ensuring vendor and technology neutrality.  
6. Protecting user privacy and control through system design.  
7. Planning for financial and operational sustainability without compromising 
accessibility.  
 
Governance: Building trust by protecting privacy and user rights  
8. Safeguarding data privacy, security, and user rights through a 
comprehensive legal and regulatory framework.  
9. Establishing clear institutional mandates and accountability.  
10. Enforcing legal and trust frameworks though indepe ndent oversight and 
adjudication of grievances.  
 
 
 
 
23 The Principles were developed by more than 24 interna tional organizations in 2017, including the World Bank Group, the Asian 
Development Bank, UNICEF, UNDP, UNHCR.   
68 
 Current situation and recent developments  
 
239. The Solomon Islands does not currently have a national ID system to serve as a foundational 
ID (for general identification purposes). However, it does have a biometric -based voter 
registry that also issues voter ID cards, which are used (on face value) as evidence of identity 
for most transactions (along with driving licenses). Th e voter registry and driving license 
system – as functional ID systems – are limit ed to adults who are registered as voters or 
drivers, and are not designed to provide authentication services, such as to banks for 
customer due diligence during account opening.  
 
240. The Solomon Islands does have electronic civil registration system managed b y the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, which has been supported by UNICEF. While the system is advanced, there 
are coverage gaps among the existing population, owing largely to the limited number of 
locations where people can register ( only at the Ministry of Hom e Affairs in Honiara and the 
two largest hospitals). This system offers a strong basis on which a population registry could 
be compiled.    
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
241. There is a compelling case for a national ID system in the Solomon Isla nds that is worth 
exploring, particularly with early use cases around financial inclusion, social protection , and 
e-government, and for further support to strengthen coverage. Such a system should be 
linked to the civil registration system and associated w ith parallel efforts to expand coverage 
of civil registration, which will be important for the integrity of any future national ID system. 
The government may wish to consider carrying out an ID4D Diagnostic24 to identify strengths 
and weaknesses of the cur rent identity landscape and to make recommendations regarding 
a future national ID system.  
 
 
G. Digital Payments  
 
 
242. Online payment systems are a key enabling element for e -commerce and more broadly for a 
digital economy. Making or receiving payments across digital channels is rapidly replacing 
physical means (cash and checks) ( see Figure 15 below25).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 More information on ID4D Diagnostics is available at https://id4d.worldbank.or g/Diagnostic -Guidelines  
25 Payments Cards & Mobile - Global usage statistics from 2018  
 
69 
 Figure 15: Digital payments vs. physical payments  
 
 
243. Between 2014 and 2017, the share of adult account holders in developing countries using 
digital payments rose by 12 percentage points ( see Figure 1626).  
 
 
 
Figure 16: Using digital payments  
 
244. This is despite pervasive regulatory, technical, and awareness challenges. In the developing 
country context, a non -linear evolution from cash to mobile  money to card -based 
transactions is observed, and interventions are required at multiple levels to develop the 
demand and supply sides.  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
245. Solomon Islands has a largely cash -based economy27 and lacks significant payments and 
fintech  regulation. The finance sector is small. Due to the simple nature of the market, there 
is no current law in relation to P2P lending, crowdfunding , or virtual assets.   
 
246. Only around 35  percent  of the popu lation have active bank accounts28 and the financial 
market is described by the Central Bank as unde rdeveloped .29 The government has 
emphasized its commitment to digitize 80  percent  of payments by 2020 as part of its National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy a nd through a commitment to the United Nations Capital 
Development Funds “Better than Cash Alliance”.   
 
 
26 World Bank Global Findex Database  
27 APG Mutual Evaluation Review (2019)  
28 According to the 2018 CBSI Annual Report, “By end of 2018, total active users of financial acc ounts reached 233,972. According to 
Solomon Island government statistics the population is 680,806. The 35  percent  is arrived at using these figures.  
29 2018 CBSI Annual Report  
 
70 
 247. The national payments system bill developed by the Central Bank with the technical support 
of the WB is pending before parliament. The bill delineates t he technical and legal basis for 
facilitating online payments in the country and will have widespread implications on a range 
of payments -related developments. E -government services involving government payments 
to/from citizens and business -to-business tr ansfers are planned but not yet implemented 
since the legal basis does not currently exist. Similarly, banks have not yet rolled out online 
payment systems but will be readily able to do so since most of the major banks are Australian 
entities and already possess active and proven products.  
 
248. Under the Draft Bill, digital payment systems will be regulated as a form of “payment system”. 
A payment system operator or a provider of payment services must be licensed and 
supervised by the Central Bank. “Payment se rvices” includes the issue or acquisition of 
payment instruments, effecting remittances , and any other service relating to the transfer of 
money, including “electronic money”. It excludes the provision of solely online or 
telecommunications services or net work access. Financial institutions already licensed under 
the FI Act will not need to apply for a license for the purpose of providing payment services 
but will need one to operate  payment systems.    
 
249. While mobile banking solutions exist, the main functi onality is used for online banking and 
mobile top -ups. Since the deployment of the first mobile money solution in 2013, mobile 
money accounts  have  increased dramatically. Consumer trust and willingness to adopt mobile 
money solutions has not been a signifi cant issue . It is expected that consumers will adapt well 
to mobile payments as and when functionalities emerge.   
 
250. All three major banks in the country have mobile banking/mobile money solutions: ANZ (Go 
money), BSP (Branchless Banking), and POB (POB Purs e). The expansion of mobile banking 
has greatly contributed towards financial inclusion as well. Consider that since the launch of 
ANZ’s goMoney application in 2013, the application has experienced a sharp rise in adoption. 
In less than two years, the serv ice attracted 24,500 customers, 15,500 of whom had never 
previously held a bank account. The appeal for consumers is primarily also due to the 
convenience of not having to travel to limited physical bank branches, as well as the safety 
dimension of carryin g cash across large distances.  
 
251. In July 2019 the Central Bank issued a practice guidance note on mobile money services with 
the objective of establishing a procedure for those wishing to provide mobile money services. 
The overall payments system ecosystem is moderately well developed for mobile  
banking/mobile  money but is immature for card -based systems. Cash on delivery is the 
predominant payment mechanism in the country ; debit cards exist but are not widely  used .  
 
252. Person to person transfers  constitute the third most important functionality of mobile 
banking solutions, the other two being checking account balances and topping up mobile 
phone credit balances. The usage profile is high -volume, low -value remittances , and while 
currently only 5  percent  of total remittances are through mobile banking, this may scale up 
quickly. According to the IMF30, the business case is strengthened primarily due to two factors:  
 
 
30 IMF Country Report No. 18/57, Solomon Islands: 2017 Article IV Consultation -Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the 
Executive Director for Solomon Islands, IMF, 2018 .  
71 
 a) The steep growth in the number of active mobile money/mobile banking agents 
(traili ng Fiji but ahead of other countries such as Tonga, Samoa , and Timor -Leste)  
 
b) The h igh number of mobile money/banking transactions relative to population, and 
the steady growth in the value of mobile banking transactions (as percent age of GDP, 
between 2013  and 2016).   
 
253. Remittances have strong applications for e -commerce as well. Once lead e -commerce firms 
start emerging, this payment mechanism can be leveraged to reduce the dependency on cash.  
 
254. A key challenge that is impacting mobile banking/mobile money solutions is the money agent 
network. Given the remoteness of Solomon Islands’ communities, the banking agent ’s 
liquidity, safety , and expansion is a pervasive challenge. Standardization of quality in terms of 
agent training is also a challenge, although t he Central Bank has issued a practice note for 
standardizing agent selection and training.  The Payments System Bill addresses the issue of 
agents and the CBSI will issue detailed regulations once the bill is approved.  
 
255. The government’s decision to join t he Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA), and related 
commitment to convert 80  percent  of its payments to digital channels by 2020 , is promising 
for the development and adoption of payment systems in the country. However, this again 
will require an expedited re view and passage of the national payments bill as well as 
deployment of payment solutions. Consumer awareness to spur adoption will also be 
required.  
 
256. Integration of Solomon Islands’ financial system with those of New Zealand and Australia, and 
the due di ligence that the government has invested in the AML/CFT space , have resulted in 
continued strong compliance with AML/CFT regulations, leading to relatively low challenges 
in forging correspondent banking relationships.  
 
 
Perspectives for future growth/ enhancement  
 
257. The government’s decision to join the BTCA and , through it , pledging to convert 80 percent 
of its payments to digital channels by 2020, is a significant boost to the digital finance 
ecosystem and e -government. This is a lofty and challenging goal and will require significant 
ramp -up on the ICT infrastructure side as well as the digital payments area. The government’s 
commitment under the BTCA should be supported by developing and promoting digital 
payment channels in all government P2G and G2P transactions (including with government 
salaries, tax payments, public u tility bills, etc.).  
 
258. The national Payment Systems bill (delayed passage and pending before parliament) is an 
essential component that will lay out the legal basis for electronic payments in the country .. 
The passage of the Payments System Bill is an immed iate and urgent requirement, which will 
allow the banks to introduce online  payment solutions.  
 
259. In parallel, the CBSI is working on the implementation of critical systems for the digital clearing 
and settlement of payments and securities. The new infrastructures will be active by the end 
of 2021 and will allow full interoperability of banks and other  payment service providers, plus  
72 
 a new set of services for the trading of securities. The reform will offer the opportunity to the 
government to progressively shift from paper -based instruments to digital tools to perform 
and receive payments. The WB has a ssisted several developing countries in this regard and 
has been supporting the CBSI in the ongoing reform . 
 
260. The liquidity, network scaling, and standardization of training challenges for money agents is 
a choke point for adoption of mobile money solutions . This is especially exacerbated due to 
the geography of the country and its dispersed communities. Solutions including 
development of independent, non -exclusive agents that can serve all providers should be 
explored, as well as greater collaboration betwe en Solomon Post, MNOs (Our Telekom and 
Bemobile), and the banks (ANZ, BSP, and POB) to pool resources and share agents. Innovative 
solutions such as large grocery stores serving as clearance points for smaller agents could also 
be explored. Ongoing discuss ions to explore the possibility, and issuing regulations enabling 
regulated non -banks including MNOs to issue mobile wallets , should be supported.  
 
261. Revision of regulatory and supervisory frameworks related to AML/CFT and tax transparency, 
especially consi dering recommendations from recent FATF reviews in country, will be 
essential to maintain/scal e up critical correspondent banking relationships as well as to 
remain in compliance with international requirements.  
 
   
73 
  
 
ANNEX 1 - Digital Government and Digita l Economy Prevailing Factors  
 
The Annex provides a brief overview of the prevailing macroeconomic and political context in 
which digital development will occur in the Solomon Islands . 
 
1. Macro economic and Political Environment  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
262. A driving factor behind the 1998 -2003 civil conflict was the concentration of economic 
opportunities and economic development in Honiara versus other provinces, including but 
not limited to the second largest province of Malaita. Given  the diversity in ethnic makeup in 
different provinces, a pervasive perception that Honiara is favored in national development 
over the larger part of the country continues to foster discontent. This perception is ever -
present and civil unrest still flares  up occasionally.  
 
263. Solomon Islands’ geography impart s significant challenges to developing the infrastructure 
and fostering economic development outside the capital. There are 300 inhabited islands with 
a widely dispersed population, posing problems for c onnectivity, governance , and commerce. 
The high rate of inward migration in search of jobs and better living prospects has also put 
pressure on Honiara’s infrastructure. This has prompted the government to set forth a range 
of initiatives aimed at developi ng services and opportunities in the hinterland. These include:  
 
a) The development and implementation of the National Financial Inclusion Strategies (NFIS 
I and II - ongoing). NFIS II builds on the success of NFIS I and is aimed at achieving the 
following mi ssion by 2020: 300,000 adults will be active users of formal or semi -formal 
financial accounts (including accounts at MFIs and savings clubs), and 90  percent  of the 
population will have a financial service access point within one hour of ordinary travel 
from their home. Development partners have aligned their interventions in support of 
this goal. The UN Capital Development Fund/UNDP’s PFIP program has wide -ranging 
activities aimed at encouraging the development and adoption of financial services by 
consume rs. 
 
b) The government has fast -tracked its e -government interventions (discussed further in this 
report) as a means to provide access to government services in the provinces.  
 
c) The use of ICT to increas e access to education in provinces has also been recognized as 
an important requirement, and supporting initiatives are ongoing. Health services is 
another area where online solutions have been implemented.  
 
264. These and other initiatives have a common thread – that of digitization. Solomon Islands has 
started embracing digitization to overcome and bridge the physical gap between Honiara and 
the rest of the country with some promising results. In these formats at least, digitization has 
played an important role  in bringing connectivity and service delivery outside Honiara. These 
efforts highlight the contribution of digitization to peace -building.   
74 
  
 
Perspectives for future growth /enhancement  
 
265. One area that has remained challenging to overcome is how to generate economic activities 
in the hinterland that would have the most direct impact on peace -building. This is an area 
requiring much due diligence and fact -finding on the ground, but would certainly involve 
development of the country’s core non -extractive sectors including:  
 
a) The smallholder agriculture base (especially cocoa, coconut/ copra, and o il palm among 
others) as an anchor for improving productivity, feeder services to other industries,  and 
developing ag ri-entrepreneurs among others   
b) The t ourism sector  
c) The f isheries sector , given the country’s valuable fishing stocks, especially tuna 
 
266. Digitization could help develop these sectors in the following ways:  
 
a) Improving connectivity, communic ation , and ultimately collaboration between various 
sector stakeholders  
b) Employing internationally proven technologies for efficiency gains in agriculture, 
manufacturing , and other segments, ultimately resulting in higher quality goods with 
decreased operat ing costs  
c) Fostering local markets development (even if through social media platforms) so that 
sellers do not have Honiara and provincial capitals only as key markets.  
d) Connecting and forging relationships with buyers in international markets, which 
admitt edly will take time to materialize, but will still be sped up via anticipated increases 
in bandwidth and speed , and decreasing costs and latency (post submarine cable arrival)  
 
2. Trade Policy and Performance  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
TRADE POLICY  
 
267. Of the three main policies that have a bearing on the digital economy - National Development 
Strategy, National ICT Strategy , and National Trade Strategy – it is the National Trade Strategy 
that has arguably consolidated a policy focus on the overall trade potential in the country. It 
identified key priority sectors, many of which have a strong e -commerce potential, such as 
agriculture, fisheries, and tourism. In doing so, the strategy has considered those sector’s 
productive capacities, FDI requirements , and market access negotiated by policymakers. This 
framework sets a valuable vision for trade -related growth. Together the thr ee instruments 
serve to build a serviceable vision for aspects related to e -business, ICT sector development, 
and trade competitiveness, although there is no policy document that addresses the long -
term digital economy strategy for the country.  
 
268. Although n ot a policy document, the recent e -trade readiness assessment conducted by 
UNCTAD for Solomon Islands can also serve as a valuable analytical stepping stone to a long -
term strategy for the digital economy. The multi -dimensional review of the e -commerce  
75 
 ecosystem also provides key recommendations that can serve as starting points for 
development interventions for the ecosystem.  
 
TRADE (AND ECONOMIC)  PERFORMANCE  
 
269. High concentration and reliance on logging has resulted in unsustainable treatment of its 
fores ts, and exposed the economy to external shocks arising from wood prices. This is 
exacerbated by weak economic activity in productive sectors. A similar situation may happen 
with mining in the future as the sector benefits from upcoming projects coming onli ne, 
requiring careful consideration.  
 
270. According to the IMF, infrastructure spending, fisheries , and agriculture are expected to 
keep growth rates buoyant in the short term, despite an anticipated decrease in logging 
production. Sectoral growth is projecte d for fisheries, tourism, and agriculture, which are 
also priority areas noted in the National Development Strategy.  
 
271. The smallholder sector is relatively well organized and can offer an anchor role for 
development for sectors such as cocoa, coconut , and o ther agri-based sectors. The agriculture 
sector has exhibited solid growth in the past decade.  
 
272. The high degree of informality (79 percent of the employable population) is a cause for 
concern given that a high proportion of formal sector jobs are supplied by the g overnment 
and the l ogging sector.  
 
273. Entrepreneurship development in the M/SME sector is e xtremely weak, and for services 
sectors such as IT or nascent sectors such as e -commerce, the ecosystem does not adequately 
provide support. This has a direct tie -in with innovation in the country.  
 
274. Strong growth in international reserves (rising from appr oximately US$100 million in 2007, to 
more than US$500 million in 2013 based on IMF figures) function as a buffer for external 
shocks such as a downturn in exports.  
 
275. Solomon Islands imports far more products (2 ,905) than it exports (304) and the 
corresponding import base (101 countries) is almost double the export base (54 countries).  
 
Table 6: Trade partners  
Rank  Partner  Number of HS6 
Products exported  Export value (USD 
‘000) / %  Top exports  
1 China  12 273,318 / 62.5%  Wood/ Raw material/ 
Intermediate goods  
2 Italy  4 30,510 / 7%  Intermediate goods / raw 
material/ consumer goods  
3 UK 4 19,309 / 4.4%  Vegetable/ Intermediate goods / 
raw material  
4 India  2 17,242 / 4%  Wood  
5 Philippines  7 16,203 / 3.7%  Raw material/ vegetable /wood  
Rank  Partner  Number of HS6 
Products imported  Imported value (USD 
‘000) / %  Top Imports   
76 
 1 Australia  2100  92,484 / 20.4%  Consumer goods/ capital goods/ 
machinery and electronics  
2 Singapore  764 70,486.5 / 15.5%  Consumer goods/fuel/capital 
goods  
3 China  2001  67,393 / 14.6%  Consumer goods / capital goods/ 
metals  
4 Malaysia  1449  47,707 / 10.5%  Capital goods/ consumer goods/ 
machinery and electronics  
5 Japan  540 30,383 / 6.7%  Transportation/ capital goods/ 
machinery and el ectronics  
Source: WITS  
 
 
276. Exports in 2016 amounted to US $ 437 million , of which more than US $ 300 million originated 
from wood products. Other relatively (compared to wood exports) minor exports stemmed 
from crude palm oil, dried cod, and whole cocoa beans. The value addition component in the 
export basket is low and the bulk of the products are c ommodity -based in raw form.   
 
277.  The import basket is diverse and comprises  petroleum oils, rice and automobiles as the top 
three imports. Total imports in 2016 amounted to US $ 453.8 million. Solomon Islands imports 
a broad range of consumer  items and exhibits strong import dependency and related import 
cost given the average distance from suppliers.  
 
278. Solomon Islands’s trade deficit is largely driven by a natural dependence on imports to fulfill 
its consumption needs for consumers and private sector alike. The 2015 enterprise survey 
notes that 86 percent of manufacturing firms use material inputs and/or supplies of foreign 
origin, much higher than the EAP average (17 percent) an d the lower middle -income average 
(35.8 percent). Small firms are especially dependent with 100  percent  of small firms reporting 
imports of inputs. This naturally has led to a high trade deficit but has a larger impact on the 
competitiveness of Solomon Isl ands goods in international markets. The high costs of 
importing high -volume inputs contributes to a high cost structure, which has to be passed on 
to consumers. An example lies in the EU fisheries market , where Solomon Islands products 
have lost degrees o f competitiveness to Thai and other products owing to higher cost 
products.  
 
Perspectives for future growth /enhancement  
 
279. Improvements in the ICT infrastructure , and especially broadband , offer significant 
opportunities for existing value chains to add elements of digitization where needed to 
benefit from efficiency gains. This addition of the ‘e -‘ aspect is currently less prominent in 
developing country contexts but is gaining ground.   
 
280. In Solomon Islands, digitization in areas of trade facilitation is already occurring through 
ASYCUDA, and the imminent deployment of the CDS. Solomon Post’s pilot projects regarding 
a GIS -based addressing system is another innovation. A review of the plann ed e -government 
initiatives in the country is an indication of the significant impetus that the government is 
placing on streamlining its services through digital means, and this can be replicated in 
principle within key value chains as well.  
  
77 
 281. Apart from t hese examples, little  value chain digitization is occurring in the country. One of 
the contributing reasons is that the focus on productive sectors away from logging and mining 
has just started. This remains an interesting and essential area of further res earch. The 
National Trade Policy Framework echoes this sentiment:  
 
‘Even if there is no immediate increase in direct services exports, the benefits to the economy 
through ease of doing business and the attraction of FDI may have secondary trade -related 
effects. ICT in archipelago states can address the effects of economic fragmentation, allowing 
the central authorities to communicate quickly and effectively with the outer islands and for 
outlying areas to be included in overall economic growth. Communicati ons technology can 
reduce the need for international and domestic travel and freight. Access to international 
scholarship is necessary for the development of greater domestic research capacity, and 
Solomon Islands’ small population precludes the creation o f high -quality traditional libraries. 
Cheaper and more advanced international communications technology also enables stronger 
connections – including economic links – between resident and overseas communities. ICT 
can also fuel the development of the finan cial sector through technologies such as mobile 
payments. Finally, a good ICT infrastructure is critical for attracting FDI, particularly outside 
the tourism sector, which will be important in the coming years.’  
 
3. Access to Financing  
 
282. Access to financing is frequently a key challenge in LDCs, and especially when the financing 
requirements, both operational as well as capital, are for a sector that is relatively unknown 
to the commercial sector. There are also significant and pervasive d emand and supply -side 
challenges which are hard to overcome.  
 
Current situation and recent developments  
 
283. The access to financing area is one of the weakest links for Solomon Islands within the digital 
economy ecosystem. The country has some of the highest  interest rate spreads in the region, 
as well as a lending environment where commercial banks and loan -seekers have not formed 
a level of trust owing to a number of factors.   
 
284. Financial inclusion is a priority for the government. Two broad strategies aime d at developing 
the financial infrastructure (NFIS  I) and developing the demand -side financial literacy (NFIS II) 
have been developed to achieve  financial inclusion. NFIS II is currently active.   
 
285. The commercial banking sector has largely been unable to cater to lending requirements for 
the broader M/SME sector. The reasons are varied, some in common with other developing 
economies and some that are unique to Solomon Islands :  
 
a) The weak growth of th e productive sectors such as agribusinesses and services, and 
consequent M/SME segment originating from these sectors has meant that 
commercial banks have not been sensitized to the requirements or the potential for 
growth in these sectors. This is especia lly true for e-commerce, IT , and other areas 
that are currently in the nascent state in the maturity curve.   
78 
 b) Financial literacy is a significant challenge as well as a current focus area for the 
government under the NFIS II, aimed at developing trust and i ncreasing adoption 
among the consumer base for financial products.  
c) Weak capability of MSMEs to demonstrate creditworthiness through paperwork, 
financial statements, and sound business plans.  
d) A weak culture of repayment, stemming from over -reliance on infor mal networks and 
an overall lack of formalization in the M/SME segment.  
e) Lack of options for utilizing movable assets as acceptable collateral.  
 
286. Digital economy/e -businesses/e -commerce are all new concepts to Solomon Islands, and 
even the ICT sector (for so ftware) has not exhibited any significant levels of growth. In this 
environment, level of startup activity is significantly weak, and the banking sector is not well 
attuned to the potential or the requirement for such firms.  
 
Perspectives for future growth /enhancement  
 
287. An important need exists to foster meaningful discussions with regulated lenders and sector 
associations representing sectors anticipated to be early adopters of e -commerce, such as 
agri-business and tourism, as a means of fostering trust dev elopment and product 
development.  
 
288. Digital financial services (mainly through mobile phones) would need to include a loan -
seeking component to cater for dispersed populations given that there is an inordinately low 
number of brick -and-mortar banking facil ities in the hinterland/islands. Exploring how the 
network of cash agents across the country could be harnessed would also be important.  
 
289. As part of projects and activities planned for reaching the stated goals of NFIS II, digital 
economy dimensions should  be included, for instance aimed at building financial literacy for 
consumers.  
   
79 
 ANNEX 2 - Solomon Islands Digital Economy Workshop Report  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
80 
  
ANNEX 3 - List of Institutions Consulted  
 
Ministry of Communications and Aviation  
Ministry of Finance and Treasury (including ICT Support Unit)  
Central Bank of the Solomon Islands  
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade  
Ministry of Commerce, Industry, Labour and Immigration  
Ministry of Justice and Legal Affairs  
Ministry of Education and Human Resourc es Development  
Ministry of Health and Medical Service  
Ministry of Public Service  
Office of the Attorney General  
Telecommunications Commission of the Solomon Islands  
Solomon Islands Submarine Cable Company  
Solomon Post  
Solomon Islands Visitors’ Bureau  
Our T elekom  
Bemobile  
BJS 
DHL 
Eworld Technology  
FXBC Datec Solomon Islands  
Chamber of Commerce  
SolFish  
ANZ Bank  
TIASI  
 
 
= 