This Jobs Solutions Note identifies approaches for practitioners and policymakers to proactively adapt policies 
and development programs to accelerated technological change. Based on curated knowledge and emerging evidence for a specific topic and relevant to jobs, the Jobs Solutions Notes are not intended to be exhaustive; they provide key lessons, solutions and approaches synthesized from the experiences of the World Bank Group and partners. This Note draws from World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work  and Protecting All: 
Risk-Sharing for a Diverse and Diversifying World of Work.
MOTIVATION: WHAT IS THE PROBLEM? 
People fear the advent of a jobless economy. “They’re always polite, they always upsell, they never take a vacation, they never show up late, there’s never a slip-and-fall, or an age, sex or race discrimination case,” Andrew Puzder, chief executive of Hardee’s restaurant chain with headquarters in Tennessee, says of swapping employees for machines.
1 Such statements give workers good 
reason to fear the advent of a jobless economy: tasks traditionally performed by humans are increasingly performed using robots and artificial intelligence. Indeed, the number of robots operating worldwide is rising rapidly: by 2020, there will be 3 million new 
industrial robots  in operation, more than doubling 
the operational stock over the seven years spanning 2014–2020.
2 
The fast pace of change exacerbates job insecurity. The declining cost of machines threatens 
low-skill jobs in routine tasks—occupations most susceptible to automation  and offshoring .
3 
Automation also threatens some relatively complex jobs, such as assessing legal documents. Decline in industrial employment in many high-income economies over the past two decades is well known. The United States, Singapore, and Spain are among ADAPTING JOBS POLICIES AND 
PROGRAMS IN THE FACE OF ACCELERATED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGEJOBS NOTES 
Issue No. 8
KEY MESSAGES
 ¬Rapidly changing technologies are disrupting labor 
markets, posing significant risks to those with insufficient and inadequate skills. 
 ¬Improving access to digital infrastructure and affordable broadband will enable people to find jobs, innovate, and compete. 
 ¬Developing countries with high informal employment need policies to increase worker productivity and skills. Increasing dialogue and collaboration to match labor skills with those demanded by employers will help workers adapt. ¬Ineffective labor regulations raise labor costs, while current social protection models leave too many of the most vulnerable behind.
 ¬The World Bank Group (WBG) is investing widely in human capital to increase labor skills, while promoting reforms to increase digital access and social assistance, including for informal workers. 
 ¬Expanding this agenda requires more research and data on labor market functioning, human capital, and the specific policies and regulations needed to help countries and workers adapt to technological changes.
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized2
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020countries where the share of industrial employment 
dropped 10 percent or more since 1991. Foxconn Technology Group, the world’s largest electronics assembler based in Taiwan, cut its workforce by 30 percent when it adopted robots for production; workers decreased from 1.3 million in 2012 to 873,467 by the end of 2016.
4 
Meanwhile, technological progress also provides opportunities. Digital technology improves aggregate 
efficiency by reducing or eliminating “frictions” and intermediation costs between economic actors. It decreases transaction costs, including in remote markets lacking transport infrastructure. Firms that embrace technology grow and can compete better in global markets. More importantly, digital platforms reshape labor demand, directly or indirectly, and create jobs. 
How governments prepare, shape policies, 
and intervene will largely determine how technological change affects jobs. In approaching 
this challenge, some features of the current wave of technological progress are especially salient: (a) disruption of the production process, (b) changing demand for skills, and (c) terms of work.
• Technology is disrupting production processes. 
Technology decreases the costs of doing business, complementing investments in infrastructure, free trade agreements, and other liberalization efforts to reduce trade barriers, which expands global 
value chains5 and changes the geography of jobs .6 
New business models—digital platform firms —
can evolve rapidly from local start-ups to global behemoths, often with few employees and tangible assets.
7 Digital platforms can enable clusters of 
businesses to form in underdeveloped rural areas. Online work platforms eliminate many geographical barriers previously associated with certain types of work and tasks. Bangladesh contributes 15 percent to the global labor pool online through 650,000 freelance workers. Indiez , founded in 2016 in 
India, brings a remote, distributed community of talent—mainly from India, Southeast Asia, and Eastern Europe—to work in teams remotely on tech projects for clients anywhere.
• Technology is reshaping work skills, implying 
adjustment costs for workers. While returns 
to routine, job-specific skills are declining, the premium for skills that cannot be replaced by robots is increasing; these include cognitive skills such as critical thinking, as well as socio-behavioral skills such as managing and recognizing emotions that enhance teamwork. Earnings are higher for those having a combination of skills as opposed to just one skill. The evolving world of work demands adaptable skills that enable workers to transfer them more easily from one task to another. Since 2001, the share of employment in occupations intensive in non-routine cognitive and socio-behavioral skills has increased from 19 to 23 percent in emerging economies, and from 33 to 41 percent in advanced economies. 
• Digital technology is changing the terms 
of work. Rather than “standard” long-term 
contracts, digital technologies are giving rise to more short-term work, often via online work platforms. These “gigs” make certain kinds of work more accessible and flexible. That said, despite the hype, the gig economy is slow to take over traditional occupations. The largest three global gig platforms— Freelancer  of Australia, Upwork  
in the United States and Zhubajie in China—have 
60 million total users; only 0.3–0.5 percent of the active labor force participate in the gig economy globally.
8 The majority of workers regard gig work 
as a supplement to more stable income. Data show that about 10 percent of registered users on global freelancing platforms are active and that this figure is growing fast. Most of these workers concentrate 
Photo credit:  John Hogg / World Bank3
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020in a few countries: India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, 
United States, Philippines, and the United Kingdom. 
Persistent informality continues to pose the greatest challenge for emerging economies. Informality has remained remarkably high across regions over the past two decades in spite of improvements in business regulatory environments and the changing nature of work. About two-thirds of the labor force in emerging economies is informal with no social protection and little access to technology. Women make up a disproportionate percentage of workers in the informal sector. In South Asia, over 80 per cent 
of women in non-agricultural jobs are in informal employment ; in sub-Saharan Africa, 74 per cent; and in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, 54 per cent.
9 While 
platforms make certain kinds of work more accessible and flexible, they also raise concerns about income instability and lack of social insurance. This means that many digital economy jobs facilitated and created may increase the large share of informal workers in developing countries without social protection. 
Technology access is necessary for people and 
businesses in the digital era, but developing countries lag. Evidence on automation suggests 
that these technologies have contributed to higher productivity  and larger scale production.
10 Yet, 
although cities and towns may have online access, rural or remote communities—where four-fifths of the poor live
11—are drastically underserved . Mobile 
phone access alone is also not enough; broadband technologies push down transaction costs even further in remote markets that lack transport infrastructure. Regulatory and market failures often hinder provision of affordable and reliable internet and broadband access to these areas.
Innovation will continue to accelerate, but 
developing countries will need to take rapid action to compete in the economy of the future. Technological progress—even that involving labor-saving technologies—provides opportunities to create new jobs, increase productivity, and deliver public services. To harness the benefits of technology and make the most of these opportunities, governments need to invest in people, while adopting policies that alleviate disruptions. The most significant investments people, firms, and governments can make are those that enhance human capital. Digital technology also reinforces the need for developing countries to rethink social protection and labor regulations. Here too technology can help by expanding options for government service delivery, while improving citizens’ ability of to hold governments accountable.
WHAT ARE WE DOING? 
World Bank Portfolio
Human Capital 
The World Bank (WB) is committed to improving 
human capital outcomes at all stages of the human development cycle. For children, 
the WB helps provide nutrition, early childhood education, and social insurance. For adults, it helps workers participate in labor markets through skills development, expanding social insurance, and investing in digital infrastructure and services. This is achieved through lending, analytical work, and partnerships with donors and the private sector.
World Bank human capital projects are often 
multi-sectoral. For example, The Marshall Islands—
Multisectoral Early Childhood Development Project includes three components to address a range of challenges: (a) the early childhood education component aims to improve children’s cognitive and socio-emotional development to prepare them for on-time transition to primary school, (b) the nutrition component aims to decrease infant mortality through facility-based care for pregnant women and newborns, and (c) the social insurance component provides cash transfers to families with young children (age 0–59 months) in selected areas to modify care practices and promote uptake of best practices in early childhood development.
Governments have a vital role to play in building 
human capital. Governments should provide health, 
education, and financing, and regulate accreditation and quality control of private providers. Yet governments often fail to deliver. Good measurement of education and health outcomes raises human capital locally, nationally, and globally, and is essential for research and analysis to inform policies to improve human capital. With this goal in mind, in 2018 the World Bank launched the Human Capital Project  (HCP) 
to raise awareness and increase interventions to build 4
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020human capital. A program of advocacy, measurement, 
and analytical work, the HCP has three components: (a) a cross-country metric—the Human Capital Index (HCI), (b) a measurement and research program to inform policies, and (c) a program to support country strategies to accelerate investment in human capital. 
The Human Capital Index  quantifies the 
contribution of health and education to the 
productivity of the next generation of workers. Countries can use the HCI to assess how much income they forego because of human capital gaps, and how much faster they can turn reverse these losses. Globally, the HCI finds that nearly 60 percent of children born today will, at best, be half as productive as they could be with complete education and full health. The medium-term program of data and analytical work aims to improve measurement of a wide range of human capital outcomes, better understand human capital formation, and link it to country policies. The World Bank Group (WBG) supports governments, together with development partners, to identify national human capital priorities and implement policies to address barriers. As of June 2019, 63 countries had joined the HCP—nearly a third of WBG members.
World Bank investments reflect the changing 
nature of skills employers need with the rapid onset of automation and access to digital infrastructure. The World Bank portfolio addressing 
skills and technical and vocational education and training (TVET) comprises 114 projects valued at US$13 billion, in the following sectors: Tertiary Education sector, Workforce Development and Vocational Education, and Adult and Continuing Education. The new generation of skills projects address market demand for skills, with curriculum designed in consultation with employers to facilitate smooth transition of trainees to employment. The Niger Skills Development for Growth Project , for 
instance, provided employer approved training in agribusiness and entrepreneurship, as well as start-up funds to young graduates. 
Technology Access
The World Bank’s recently established Digital Development Global Practice (GP) underscores the importance of digital infrastructure and networks. The GP provides knowledge and 
finance to help countries participate in the digital revolution. World Bank lending operations in the ICT Infrastructure and Services sector totals 179 projects valued at US$20 billion.
12 These include 
projects to increase geographic reach of broadband, reduce communication service costs, and develop e-government solutions. For example, The West Africa 
Regional Communications Infrastructure Project  in the 
Islamic Republic of Mauritania and the Republic of Togo increased access to telephone services from 72 to 87.4 phones per 100 people in two years. Digital development projects also address sector specific problems. For example, the e-Gabon Project  supports 
the National Health Information Service (NHIS) in Gabon to transmit health information electronically, thus reducing administrative burdens and medical errors.
The WBG supports developing countries through 
financing and technical assistance to expand digital access and incorporate digital technology into government services. For example, in Niger’s 
BOX 1. CODING BOOTCAMPS FOR WOMEN’S DIGITAL EMPLOYMENT  
Rapidly expanding global connectivity and cloud-based technologies have opened new digital 
employment opportunities. This has enormous potential to allow women to work from home on flexible schedules, thereby overcoming employment constraints related to child and family care, mobility, and legal, regulatory, and social restrictions. 
This activity focuses on delivering coding “bootcamps” training for women in Nairobi (Kenya) Medellin 
(Colombia), and Peshawar (Pakistan). Program design took into account specific women’s needs and constraints, including “wrap-around” services such as fostering business networks to increase and sustain women’s participation in the technology sector. The program’s methodology will be revised as needed, including adjusting content. In addition, randomized control trials (RCTs) in Medellin and Nairobi will test youth employment and wage outcomes compared to women-centered coding bootcamps. 5
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020Smart Villages program the WB supports digitizing 
payments for people living in rural areas, including farmers and civil servants. The Uganda Digital 
Acceleration Program  aims to improve access to 
high-speed internet, increase efficiency of digital government services, and strengthen the enabling environment for digital technology adoption. The 
E-Society and Innovation for Competitiveness Project in Armenia addressed constraints to competitive e-Society and enterprise innovation. The program enhanced penetration of digitization in businesses, grew the technology-enabled services sector, and created 12,685 jobs.
At the current incremental pace of economic 
and social advancement, too many of Africa’s expanding youth population will fall short of their potential. Digital technologies can disrupt this trajectory by unlocking new paths for rapid economic growth, innovation, job creation, and access to services that would have been unimaginable a decade ago. Several WB initiatives deepen the benefits of digital technologies and overcome the risks of digital exclusion. The Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) 
Moonshot , for example, aims to digitally connect every 
individual, business, and government in Africa by 2030. Goals include improving digital infrastructure, equipping the workforce with digital skills, expanding the use of digital platforms, increasing access to digital financial services, and encouraging digital entrepreneurship. 
The Jobs Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) also 
finances projects related to leveraging new technologies. For example, the Digital Jobs for Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa  (Box 2) project aims to create digital economy jobs, especially for Pakistani youth. The Malawi Resilient Productive Landscapes  project aims to 
increase resilience-enhancing landscape management in watersheds and strengthen water management capacity. The Agricultural Productivity Program for 
Southern Africa in Angola and Lesotho aims to increase 
availability of improved agricultural technologies in the South African Development Community. The Climate 
Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement  
project in Chad supports institutions to improve sustainable agriculture and climate resilience by strengthening institutional capacities for research and development and climate adaptation.
World Bank Analytical Work
Recent key World Bank studies focus on how technology advances are changing work in developing countries. It is critical that workers 
prepare to embrace technology, digital literacy, and connectedness. This challenge is most acute in developing countries. The World Development 
Report (WDR) 2019: The Changing Nature of Work emphasizes the need for a new social contract to protect workers, address high informality, harness technology, and prepare countries for the future. The recently published WB Protecting All: Risk Sharing for 
a Diverse and Diversifying World of Work  analyzes 
these issues in more detail. 
The IDA 19 paper on Jobs and Economic 
Transformation  identified digital economy as 
one of the emerging priority areas for creation 
of more and better jobs. Core investment in 
digital infrastructure and platforms is a powerful jobs stimulus and facilitates labor market inclusion, 
BOX 2. DIGITAL JOBS FOR KHYBER PAKHTUNKHWA (KP) 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan has a population of 20 million. A significant youth “bulge” 
persists with roughly half the population being under age 30. The province is emerging as a nascent digital economy with rapidly expanding mobile and internet connections presenting a unique opportunity to accelerate development through faster growth, more jobs, and better services. 
Building on the Jobs MDTF Digital Jobs Pilot, the project aims to promote inclusion of women and youth 
in the digital economy. The project will leverage Pakistan’s growing role in the global Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industry to create jobs through BPO-ready spaces. It will also promote digital entrepreneurship and freelancing though an online platform to match jobs with trained youth. The project will also expand a network of publicly available, gender-inclusive co-working spaces to promote women’s inclusion in the digital economy. 6
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020especially for youth. It is also an enabling sector 
that supports wider economic growth and indirect job creation. Two of the nine policy commitments in IDA 19 relate to digital jobs: (a) 30 percent broadband penetration in at least 20 IDA countries by 2023, and (b) 50 percent of entrepreneurship 
projects with digital financial services and  /  or digital 
entrepreneurship element. Client countries also understand the importance of digital economy as reflected by its inclusion in upcoming Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs).The Benin CPF  for 
FY 2019–23 states that digital economy could be transformative given its strategic location within West Africa and access to existing submarine cable networks. Improved digital access can increase crop yields and sales volumes, and reduce post-harvest losses. Similarly, the Armenia CPF  for FY 19–23 
states that the government aims to improve farm productivity and strengthen resilience to climate and market risks through use of digital platforms. 
Several Jobs MDTF-financed activities have also 
focused on advancing knowledge on the impacts of technologies on labor markets and potential policy interventions. Robots, Tasks and Trade  
explores the effects of robotization on trade patterns and wages. The study finds that robotization makes firms more competitive in rich economies, which in turn increases demand for products from developing economies. Does Automation in Rich Countries 
Hurt Developing Ones? Evidence from the U.S. and Mexico finds that although increased use of robots in the United States decreased Mexican exports to the U.S., it does not find effects on labor markets. From Ghana to America: The Skill Content of Jobs and Economic Development measures the skill content of jobs in developing economies. It finds that developing countries have more jobs intensive in skills facing automation risks—such as routine manual work—while developed countries have jobs more intensive on skills that benefit from greater technology, such as non-routine cognitive skills. 
The Jobs Group has also undertaken analytical 
work in the digital economy. The Solutions for 
Youth Employment Partnership (S4YE)  recent report 
Digital Jobs for Youth  identifies main challenges 
for employment programs through 19 case studies, and proposes strategies to mitigate them such as scoping the job market relevance of skills, partnering with government agencies to improve credibility, and better targeting the programs for women (providing childcare and meal stipends, among other things).
WHAT WORKS?
The future of work is hard to predict:  The WDR 
2019  documents the wild variations in predictions for 
automation. Illustrations below of what works are based on the best evidence we have, understanding that new ideas and better solutions may emerge. Thus, the forward-looking nature of this topic merits viewing the examples below with some caveats given the forces of change in motion.
Adapting to the changing nature of work requires 
investments and reforms in critical areas:
a. Lifelong learning to build and maintain human capital as conditions change. 
b. Social protection to protect people no matter how they work or on what terms. 
c. Labor markets flexibility to encourage worker skills acquisition and reduce ineffective and burdensome labor costs to firms.
d. Bridge gender gaps by providing women with the same opportunities to acquire skills and access technology and finance, while removing gender-specific legal barriers.
1. Invest in lifelong learning alongside 
formal schooling
In the digital era, technology advances demand 
rapid uptake of new skills. In the past, shifts in skill 
Photo credit:  Peter Kapuscinski / World Bank7
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020requirements took centuries to manifest (Figure 1). 
Today, labor markets value the ability to quickly adapt to changes. Demand for advanced cognitive
13 and 
socio-emotional skills14 are increasing across low to 
high-income countries, while demand for narrow 
job-specific skills is waning. Yet, technological change makes it hard to anticipate which job-specific skills will thrive and which will become obsolete. Strong skill-foundations are important for developing in-de -
mand skills and adaptability. However, schools in many low and middle-income countries are failing to teach foundational skills . Important skills re-adjustments 
happen increasingly outside compulsory education and formal jobs through early childhood, tertiary edu-cation, on-the-job learning, and adult learning outside the workplace.
1.1. Invest in learning in early childhood.  The 
most effective way to acquire skills demanded by 
the changing nature of work  is to start early. Early 
investments in nutrition, health, social protection, and education lay strong foundations for acquisition of cognitive and socio-behavioral skills. They also make future skills acquisition more resilient to uncertainty. Returns to early investments are the highest of those made over the lifespan: a dollar invested in quality early childhood programs yielded a return of US$6–$17 in Sierra Leone .15 In Jamaica , early childhood 
stimulation for infants and toddlers increased their future earnings by 25 percent—equivalent to that of adults raised in wealthier households.
16 In Guatemala , 
an early childhood development nutrition program for poor families significantly increased wages for these children in adulthood.
17 By contrast, poor early 
childhood development programs are associated with disappointing results in children’s language development, cognitive skills, and sociability. A study of preschools in a Nairobi  slum shows that, 
despite high participation rates, the curriculum and pedagogical approach were not age-appropriate; three to six-year-olds were forced to follow inappropriate academic oriented instruction and even sit for exams.
18
Despite their efficiency in producing important skills, early childhood investments are underprovided. Some 250 million children under age 5 are at risk of not reaching their developmental potential in low and middle-income countries despite availability of effective early childhood development solutions. Cash transfers to support early childhood development for poor children have succeeded in various contexts. Such programs reduced stunting in Mexico, fostered 
language development in Ecuador , and improved Source: 2019 WDRFigure 1
The increasing rate of technology diffusion
Papermaking was 
invented in 105 and was used as the main writing medium in the 3rd century.
105
PapermakingTIMETECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION
1040
Movable Type 
Printing1784
Mechanical Loom1989
World Wide 
Web1870
Production 
Line2004
Digital WalletMovable type printing was introduced in 1040; it became widespread in China in the 17th century.The mechanical loom was invented in 1784; it displaced almost all hand weavers in the U.K. by 1860.The production line appeared in 1870; it became a part of Henry Ford’s mass production of cars in the U.S. around 1914.The ﬁrst start-up for business process outsourcing (BPO) in India appeared in 2002; around 2.8 million people were employed in the BPO industry by 2012.
WeChat Pay was introduced in China in 2013; its mobile payment users reached 600 million and total transactions surpassed US$8 trillion in 2017.8
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020children’s socioemotional skills in Niger .19 Integrated 
approaches that combine health, nutrition, and 
learning stimulation investments can be highly effective. Chile’s Crece Contigo program integrates health, education, welfare and protection services—a child’s first contact with the system occurs while still in the womb.
20 Community-based playgroups have 
also generated sustained outcomes at low cost. In Tonga , playgroups significantly improved children’s 
early grade reading skills.
21 
1.2 Establish lifelong tertiary education. Integrated, technology-driven economies increasingly value tertiary education, defined as any education beyond high school, including trade schools and college. As technology increases demand for lifelong learning, tertiary education with a wide array of course offerings and flexible delivery models, from general to vocational, can meet this growing demand. One path to flexibility is through “bridging” arrangements, such as those the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Tanzania have piloted, allowing vocational students to continue studies at universities. Tertiary education systems should deliver a minimum of transferable, high-order cognitive skills, the best inoculation against job uncertainty. Incorporating more general education in tertiary programs and innovating on pedagogy are effective. For example, an additional year of general education added in 2012 to undergraduate programs in Hong Kong focused on problem-solving and critical thinking. The Faculty of Architecture and Environmental Design at the College of Science and Technology, University of Rwanda  promoted strategies that include 
open-ended assessment, feedback opportunities, and a progressive curriculum balancing academics with student support. The approaches improved students’ critical thinking skills.
22 
1.3 Increase support for on-the-job learning for informal workers. Most people work in the informal 
sector in developing countries, often starting at a very young age with limited formal education; learning on-the-job in the informal sector is crucial. The WBG is increasing support to informal apprenticeship systems and other training opportunities. In Senegal , for example, a new WBG US$53 million 
project aims to strengthen the apprenticeship system and improve youth employability in selected trades through providing capital grants to upgrade technology for informal workshops; strengthening the pedagogical and technical skills of master crafts-persons or companions; strengthening the literacy, socio-emotional, and business skills of apprentices; and providing financial assistance to enable youth entrepreneurship. The WBG is expanding similar initiatives in Africa, Latin America, and South Asia. In South Africa, the WBG is partnering with the Youth Employment Service ( YES), a local public-
private partnership, to support small and medium enterprises, which have many informal workers, to provide on-the-job training to vulnerable youth through one-year internships.
1.4 Make adult learning programs more effective. 
Workers are caught in the crosshairs of ongoing disruptions in demand for skills. As economies adjust, adult learning can supply people not in schools or jobs with new or updated skills. However, many programs are not effective due to designs that do not reflect biological, emotional, or socioeconomic conditions of adult learners. Adult learning can be improved in three ways: (a) better evaluate the specific constraints adults face, (b) customize pedagogies for the adult brain, and (c) create flexible delivery models compatible with adult lifestyles.
a. Better evaluation. Data collection before 
program design can identify constraints for the target population. For example, administrative data under India’s massive National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act program  offers 
powerful insights about local labor markets. 
b. Customize pedagogies for adults. There is 
tremendous scope to tailor programs for adults using insights from neuroscience and behavioral 
Photo credit:  Khasar Sandag / World Bank9
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020economics. Motivational tools such as financial 
rewards, work experience, or frequent feedback can boost adult learning. Incorporating socio-emotional skills in training design has also shown promise. In Togo , teaching informal 
business owners “personal initiative”—a mindset of self-starting behavior, innovation, and goal-setting—boosted firms’ profits by 30 percent two years after the program, which was much more effective than traditional business training.
23 
c. Flexible delivery models. Adult learning 
programs need to be flexible so adults can learn at their convenience. In a voucher program for vocational training in Kenya , nearly 50 percent 
of women cited proximity to a training center as a determining factor.
24 Given competing 
demands on adults’ time, training programs with short-modules and delivered through mobile applications are promising. Delivering training programs via mobile phones can also shield adult learners from stigmatization. Moreover, studies show that adult learning programs are more successful when linked to employment opportunities, such as apprenticeships or internships. In Colombia ’s Jóvenes en Acción 
(Youth in Action) program, which combines classroom instruction with on-the-job training at private companies, formal employment and earnings rose in the short term and has been sustained in the long run.
25 
2. Expand social protection beyond the 
formal sector
The changing nature of work and uncertain 
labor markets call for strengthened social protection. Most social protection systems in rich 
countries are based on mandatory contributions and payroll (labor) taxes on formal wages. The changing nature of work, including diverse and fluid forms of employment—that is, the “gig” economy and part-time work—challenges this model. While these arrangements have served many countries well, the model remains mostly aspirational in developing countries due to persistently high informality, and it has seldomly been adopted at scale. As a result, in the poorest quintile of countries, only 18 percent of people are covered by social assistance and 2 percent by social insurance.
26 Given the endemic nature of informality, 
which accounts for around 80 percent of work in developing countries, most people would be better-off with a social protection system that does not depend on formal employment. Three main components of social protection systems can help manage labor market challenges: (a) a guaranteed social minimum (with social assistance at its core), (b) social insurance, and (c) improved labor market regulation (Figure 2). 
2.1 Establish a social minimum. Expanding social 
assistance will help manage labor market risks 
and increase support, irrespective of how a person works. Social assistance works on many levels. Cash transfer recipients spend on items such as food, health care, education, and other goods associated with improvements in human capital. A systematic 
review of 56 cash transfer programs  found significant 
advances in school enrollment, test scores, cognitive development, food security, and use of health facilities.
27 In Mexico, the Prospera conditional cash 
transfer program improved motor skills, cognitive development, and receptive language of children from age 24 to 68 months. In Kenya , secondary school 
enrollment increased by seven percent for children in the Orphans and Vulnerable Children program. Gains are usually largest for the poorest, rural dwellers, girls, and ethnic minorities. Cash transfers reduce stress and depression, increase mental bandwidth, and foster more involved parenting. Social assistance programs increasingly reinforce livelihood effects by raising awareness on nutritional risks, fostering financial inclusion, training entrepreneurs, and providing asset transfers (See Box 3).
Photo credit:  Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank10
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 20202.2 Enhance social insurance. Social assistance 
could include more informal sector workers (Box 4). In 
Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Pakistan—together making up about one-third of the world’s population—coverage of social insurance languishes in the single digits, with virtually no increase over recent decades. A reformed system must help low-income workers access risk management tools. A comprehensive package of protection  would contain: 
• Guaranteed minimum insurance with subsidized 
coverage against impoverishing losses, to complement social assistance by covering losses too large to address through transfers. 
• A mandated savings and insurance plan to 
“smooth” consumption. Initially, the mandate can apply only to formal workers to attract greater compliance. Market-based “nudges” or purely voluntary savings would allow people to contribute more, if desired.
28 
2.3 Strengthening labor market programs to raise productivity and earnings, especially in the informal sector. The WBG is helping address 
constraints inhibiting informal workers from accessing better jobs or enhancing productivity. Many labor market programs have shown mixed results. To improve future programs, studies and evaluations have tried to understand why some programs are successful and others are not. Evidence shows that “productive inclusion” programs for poor and vulnerable youth have mixed effects. Certain interventions, such as wage subsidies, have been more effective in peri-urban contexts with large industrial parks, while safety net programs, including transfer of assets such as livestock, are more BOX 3. SUPPORTING EXPANSION OF SAFETY NETS TO HELP INFORMAL WORKERS MANAGE RISKS
The Egypt Strengthening Social Safety Project (ESSSP) Takaful and Karama cash transfer program has 
reached 2.26 million households and 9.46 million individuals, and is now being expanded to cover 3 
million households, or about 12.6 million people, with proposed additional financing  (AF). The program 
has reduced poverty among beneficiaries by 12 percentage points. Karama supports poor families with elderly and disabled people, while Takaful supports poor families with children and is conditional on households’ health and education investments. Takaful covers poor families with adult members who are able to work but are either not working or working informally. In response to concerns about dependency on cash transfers and lack of economic inclusion, the World Bank will also support pilot interventions under the proposed AF to improve access to and quality of employment among Takaful beneficiaries, focusing on youth and women.Source: 2019 WDRFigure 2
Social protection and regulation can help manage labor market challenges and changing nature of work
Guaranteed 
social minimumMandated social insurance“Nudged,” incentivized, and 
voluntary insuranceLabor market regulation11
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020successful in rural areas. Interventions facilitating 
transition out of very low–productivity activities are among the most difficult, and often require traditional labor measures, such as training and subsidies, combined with demand-side interventions. The World Bank Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities 
Project  (KYEOP) addresses multiple constraints to 
employment, including interventions to improve skills, foster productivity of informal workers, and support self-employment using methods such as competitions to identify promising job-creation initiatives. 
Increasingly, safety nets are combined with 
programs and policies to increase informal worker productivity. The WBG engagement in 
Ethiopia is a case in point. Building on the success of the Ethiopia Urban Productive Safety Net Project, the WBG is discussing an Urban Safety Nets and Jobs Project to expand and solidify gains to urban safety nets, but also to increase support to improve youth economic opportunities. The program increases access to wage internships, mentoring, and coaching to support transition out of informal employment or into more productive informal employment. In addition, the new project will harness digital technologies to improve job search, including in the informal sector.
2.4 Make labor regulation more flexible to 
facilitate job changes. The International Labor 
Organization  (ILO) core labor standards represent 
vital bulwarks to safeguard hard-won advances in human well-being. However, burdensome regulations should also be reconsidered especially when they raise labor costs. Reducing labor costs by reforming expensive and ineffective labor regulations also reduce 
incentives to substitute workers  with robots.
29 Lower 
labor costs help firms adapt to the changing nature of work, while encouraging greater formal employment, especially for new entrants into the labor market and low-skill workers. A proper balance between labor market flexibility and adequate protections is needed. Complementary support for learning new skills, as well as new arrangements for strengthening the voice of workers, remain important. 
2.5 Enhanced social assistance and insurance 
can reduce the need for labor regulations. Some 
regulations in place to manage job market risks burden firms, for example, severance pay obligations. As people have better protection through enhanced social assistance and insurance systems, labor regulation could, where appropriate, be more flexible. For example, unemployment benefits could supplant severance pay. The WBG is working with several governments on labor market reforms. In Indonesia, the government is considering improving worker protection to reduce the formal-informal divide, while lowering labor costs to incentivize formal job creation. Recommendations focus on revising rigid labor 
regulations  with policies that balance between worker 
protections and business flexibility. For example, the proposal includes overhauling the expensive severance pay system in favor of an unemployment benefit program open to informal workers. Proposed reforms BOX 4. SOME COUNTRIES ARE ALREADY IMPROVING SOCIAL PROTECTION
China is significantly extended its rural pension scheme. Currently, about 360 million rural and urban 
informal workers contribute to the scheme, and about 150 million older people are receiving payments. 
Similarly, the Government of Costa Rica covers part of pension contribution for the self-employed. Thailand does the same for informal workers who choose to join a special pension scheme. Subsidies 
could be offered to everyone or just to the poor, or they could be gradually reduced as income grows. In addition to providing an almost universal old-age pension, Thailand pays part of the social insurance premium for working-age people in the informal sector. 
Building on recent extension of pension coverage to the informal sector in Benin, the Disruptive 
Technologies for Development (DT4D)  Secretariat of the WBG has provided additional funding to develop 
a regional, flexible, digital-pension benefits platform to enhance social protection for precarious, 
informal workers. As opposed to savings tied to standard employment contracts, participants in the scheme can contribute to their pension through individual accounts using mobile money. 12
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020also include shifting burden for paid maternity leave 
from employers to the social security system.
3. Bridge Gender Gaps
3.1 Level the playing field by enabling women to benefit from technological change through better access to technology, skill acquisition, and financing. Women’s access to digital technologies 
remain low. The internet access gender gap in developing countries is about 25 percent. Women in low and middle-income countries are, on average, 10 percent less likely to own a mobile phone than men. Labor market success and technological adaptability depends on whether women have the right education and skill development before entering the labor market. Education is not just important for labor market outcomes but for agency  as well, 
which includes control over resources, condoning wife beating, and child marriage.
30 Prioritizing 
capacity building through investments in lifelong learning is important, especially for women in places where educations levels are low. Improving access to technology and skill acquisition for women is also necessary for them to attain less automatable jobs. 
3.2 Legal frameworks and informal institutions 
shape whether women transition to high-skilled jobs that complement automated systems. Discriminatory laws and provision of care services will determine whether women face additional barriers to enter the labor market or transition into better jobs, and also whether they are able to balance family and work. Social norms shape beliefs of the role of women and can sometimes impede women from accessing formal, well-paying jobs. More recent evidence has shown that removing legal barriers faced by women can help them access high paying jobs and managerial positions. These wide-ranging barriers include travel and mobility restrictions, restrictive inheritance laws, less access to finance, and unequal pay.
31 
3.3 Technology can be leveraged to close gender gaps too. Virtual learning provides opportunities 
for women to acquire skills. Online jobs can help women to overcome mobility restrictions, especially in countries where such constraints are pronounced. IFC’s report on Driving Toward Equality: Women, Ride-Hailing, and the Sharing Economy  sheds light on 
how ride-hailing can improve women’s mobility and labor force participation.WHAT’S NEXT?
Better data and research on developing countries. There is still a large knowledge gap 
regarding specific barriers to technology adoption and policies to maximize technology potential. Research has progressed about bottlenecks and their negative effects on technology adoption, but there is a wide gap between the amount of knowledge on these issues in developed and developing countries. Furthermore, evidence about labor market disruptions linked to technology and automation in developing economies remains limited. This knowledge gap must be addressed to design better, evidence-based, and forward-looking policies. 
Human capital. The World Bank Human Capital 
Project  (HCP) will continue efforts to boost human 
capital outcomes globally. HCP countries are focusing on national plans that prioritize human capital, acting on national and international agreements. The WBG launched its Africa Human Capital Plan  in 
April 2019 to respond to the tremendous challenges and opportunities for human capital development in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The Plan sets ambitious targets for the region by 2023, including innovative human capital interventions to foster policy change, women’s empowerment, demographic change, and mobilization of a network of Africa Human Capital Champions. The WBG is developing similar visions for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and South Asia regions. Efforts are underway to gather more 
Photo credit:  Stephan Gladieu / World Bank13
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020disaggregated subnational and gender data to better 
inform policies, but continuous investment in these data efforts is needed. For example, subnational geographic disaggregation of HCI data has been completed for Angola, Chad, Indonesia, Mali, Niger, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Romania, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, and Turkey. Disaggregation by socioeconomic status is ongoing for a large group of countries.
Skills. Promising work on skill content of jobs in 
developing economies is underway, such as in Ghana ,
32 
where a study maps out the nature of skills—cognitive, 
manual, routine, among others—to determine how susceptible these jobs are to automation. Studies limited to a handful of developing economies have to be scaled-up to understand global automation risks. Furthermore, the importance of socio-emotional skills in work necessitates understanding the prevalence of such skills globally. The Programme for the 
International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC)  assesses adult skills for OECD  economies. 
The World Bank’s Skills towards Employment and 
Productivity (STEP)  survey has made progress in a 
handful of developing economies to capture soft skills, but with mixed success. New data initiatives are needed, along with cheaper innovative alternatives to current expensive and time-consuming surveys.
The digital agenda. Closing the digital infrastructure 
gap and increasing affordable broadband access is 
an immediate regulatory priority. The WB Digital 
Moonshot initiative is based on five principles:
a. Taking a comprehensive ecosystem approach.
b. Increasing the scale of ambitions to be transformative , beyond incremental “islands” 
of success.
c. Creating an inclusive  digital economy for everyone.
d. Aiming for local, homegrown  content and 
solutions.
e. Encouraging collaboration  across different actors.
Five foundations that need to be in place are: digital infrastructure, digital platforms, digital financial services, digital entrepreneurship, and digital skills. Digital infrastructure entails greater connectivity; however, good regulatory frameworks and business environments are also needed for digital financial services and digital entrepreneurship to thrive. A digitally-savvy workforce is needed to build robust digital economies and competitive markets. Further research is needed on how to improve regulatory frameworks given new digital challenges.
Labor supply and demand. Encouraging dialogue 
and collaboration between labor supply and labor 
demand (firms) may allow workers to adapt faster to technology. With 90 percent of employment in the private sector, skills need to be relevant and demanded by firms. Educators rarely, however, take part in private sector activities and vice versa. Tertiary education and the private sector can come together through “knowledge hubs” to drive new capabilities, innovation, and high-tech entrepreneurship.
A healthy innovation ecosystem  connecting 
supply and demand also requires an enabling 
environment. Governments can create environments 
where innovation clusters flourish by providing local infrastructure, allocating more budget to research and development, connecting high quality researchers with innovative private sector firms, and relaxing rigid labor market regulations. These methods have been successful in developed economies: in the United States at Stanford University, University of California, Berkeley (Silicon Valley), Harvard, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Boston’s Route 128); and in the United Kingdom at the University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, and University College London (“golden triangle”). Similar endeavors are emerging in middle-income economies. Peking University is building a research cluster for precision medicine, health big data, and intelligence medicine (Clinical Medicine Plus X). The University of Malaya has eight interdisciplinary research clusters covering sustainability science and biotechnology. In Mexico, the Research and Technology Innovation Park has seven university-led research centers on research and development in biotechnology, nanotechnology, and robotics.
33 
Labor regulations. Governments must avoid 
extremes when crafting labor regulations. The World 
Development Report 2013: Jobs advocated for a broad “plateau” between extreme “cliffs” of too little and too much regulatory intervention. This Note fully espouses the powerful “plateau” metaphor to guide policies and labor market regulations. However, it is currently not possible to provide actionable policy guidance. More empirical analysis is needed to identify features and inflection points—that is, precisely what regulations and policies represent “too little” and what is “too much.”14
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020Gender. Technology and more flexible work 
arrangements can help integrate excluded groups. For 
example, internet access may help women overcome safety and security barriers and facilitate women’s labor force participation. Furthermore, some evidence shows that automation is less likely to occur in 
woman-dominated sectors.
34 Research on the effects 
of technological advancement on women can point to tangible policies. Furthermore, obtaining gender-disaggregated data should be a priority for data collection initiatives to support research on gender-specific barriers preventing women from thriving in an era of technological change.
Social protection. Technology can improve 
social protection delivery, even in fragile contexts. 
In Lebanon, for instance, electronic smartcards provide 125,000 Syrian refugee households with food vouchers. Some programs are already using technology-based data, although evidence on their effectiveness comes only from a handful of ongoing programs. In Mexico, geospatial mapping identifies the most vulnerable in cities. In Côte d’Ivoire, mobile phone data is used to construct poverty maps. In Benin, GPS-based data locates households lacking addresses in urban settlements. “Government to Person” (G2P) payments, ranging from salaries to cash transfers, are increasingly digital, reducing payment costs, delays, and waste, while increasing program efficiency. Technology is also improving personal identification (ID) systems, the first step in delivering social protection and payments. In SSA, the share of the Rwandan population with national IDs is 90 percent, but less than 10 percent in Nigeria. Oman’s worker protection scheme monitoring wage payments has reduced worker payment delays. In Ghana’s Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) scheme, digitization of paper-based transactions and use of biometric machines reduced wage payment time from four months to one week. In the Indian state of Chhattisgarh, the Public Distribution System used electronic devices for food assistance, helping reduce “leakage” from 52 percent in 2005 to 9 percent in 2012. 
These examples are largely anecdotal, so more 
rigorous evaluations are needed related to the use of technology to implement social protection programs.15
Adapting Jobs Policies and Programs in the Face of Accelerated Technological Change  APRIL 2020KEY REFERENCES
A full bibliography of underlying evidence can be found at www.Jobsanddevelopment.org. 
Acemoglu, D., and Restrepo, P . (2017). Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets . SSRN Electronic Journal. 
Artuc, E., Christiaensen, L., and Winkler, H. (2019). Does Automation in Rich Countries Hurt Developing Ones? Evidence from 
the U.S. and Mexico. World Bank Policy Research working paper no. WPS 8741. 
Baldwin, R., and Venables, A. J. (2013). Spiders and snakes: Offshoring and agglomeration in the global economy . Journal of 
International Economics, 90(2), 245–254. 
IFC. Driving Toward Equality: Women, Ride-Hailing, and the Sharing Economy . 2018. Washington, DC.
Lo Bello, S., Sanchez-Puerta, L., and Winkler, H. (2019). From Ghana to America The Skill Content of Jobs and Economic 
Development. World Bank Policy Research working paper no. WPS 8758. 
World Bank. (2016). Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016: Taking on Inequality . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. (2017). World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education’s Promise . In World Development Report. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. (2018). World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work . In World Development Report. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. (2019). Protecting All: Risk-Sharing for a Diverse and Diversifying World of Work . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
ENDNOTES
1 Kate Taylor. Business Insider , March 2016.
2 International Federation of Robotics .
3 Acemoglu and Restrepo 2017. Artuc, Christiaensen, and Winkler 2019. Giuntella and Wang 2019.
4 Chan, Jennifer. 2017
5 2020 WDR
6 Baldwin and Venables 2013
7 2019 WDR
8 2019 WDR
9 UN Women, Progress of the World’s Women 2015–2016
10 Artuc, Bastos, and Rijkers 2018
11 World Bank 2016
12 Standard Reports, Operations Portal. Data accessed on 11/25/2019.
13 Krueger and Kumar 2004
14 Deming 2017; Cunningham and Villasenor 2016
15 Rosas and Sabarwal 2016
16 Baird, McIntosh, and Özler 2016
17 Hoddinott et al. 2008
18 Bidwell and Watine 2014
19 Fernald and Hidrobo 2011; Fernald et al. 2008; World Bank 2017
20 Araujo et al. 2015
21 Macdonald et al. 2017
22 Schendel 2013
23 Campos et al. 2017This Jobs Note was prepared by Federica Saliola, Asif Mohamed Islam, with input from Hernan Winker. We are grateful for comments from 
three peer reviewers—Christian Bodewig, Bob Rijkers, and Siddhartha Raja. Comments and suggestions were also provided by Kathleen 
Beegle, Davida Connon, Vismay Parikh, Indhira Santos, Siv Tokle, Ian Walker, Michael Weber, and Yucheng Zheng. 
This Note was prepared as part of the Knowledge Program for Jobs: From Jobs Analytics to Support for Jobs Operations (P170399; 
Siv Tokle, Task Team Leader). It was edited by Aldo Morri. The production and publication of this report has been made possible through a grant from the World Bank’s Jobs Umbrella Multidonor 
Trust Fund (MDTF)
, which is supported by the Department for International Development  /  UK AID , the Governments of Norway, Germany, 
Austria, the Austrian Development Agency, Italy, and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. All Jobs Group’s publications are available for free and can be accessed through the World Bank or the Jobs and Development Partnership 
website. Please send all queries or feedback to Jobs Group.  Join the conversation on Twitter: @WBG_Jobs #Jobs4Dev .
24 Hicks et al. 2011
25 Attanasio et al. 2017
26 The corresponding rates increase to 77 and 28 percent in upper-middle-income settings.
27 Bastagli et al. 2016
28 World Bank 2019, Protecting All.
29 Kuddo et al. 2015
30 Klugman et al. 2014
31  Hyland, Djankov, and Goldberg, 2019; Islam and Amin 2019; Hallward-Driemeier and Gajigo 2015.
32 Lo Bello et al., 2019
33 World Bank 2019 WDR.
34 Blog. Maruo and Young 2018