Application of digital technologies
in health insurance for social
good of bottom of pyramid
customers in India
Bishwajit Nayak
School of Business Management,
Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies University, Mumbai, India
Som Sekhar Bhattacharyya
Department of Strategic Management, National Institute of Industrial Engineering,
M u m b a i ,I n d i a ,a n d
Bala Krishnamoorthy
School of Business Management,
Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies University, Mumbai, India
Abstract
Purpose –Social health insurance framework of any country is the national identifier of the country ’s policy
for taking care of its population which cannot access or afford quality healthcare. The purpose of this
paper is to highlight the strategic imperatives of digital technology for the inclusive social health models for
the BoP customers.Design/methodology/approach –A qualitative exploratory study using in-depth personal interviews with
53 Indian health insurance CXOs was conducted with a semi-structured questionnaire. Using MaxQDA
software, the interview transcripts were analyzed by means of thematic content analysis technique andpatterns identified based on the expert opinions.
Findings –A framework for the strategic imperatives of digital technology in social health insurance
emerged from the study highlighting three key themes for technology implementation in the social health
insurance sector –analytics for risk management, cost optimization for operations and enhancement of
customer experience. The study results provide key insights about how insurers can enhance the coverage ofBoP population by leveraging technology.
Social implications –The framework would help health insurers and policymakers to select
strategic choices related to technology that would enable creation of inclusive health insurance models forBoP customers.
Originality/value –The absence of specific studies highlighting the strategic digital imperatives in social
health insurance creates a unique value proposition for this framework which can help health insurers in
developing a convergence in their risk management and customer delight objectives and assist the
government in the formulation of a sustainable social health insurance framework.
Keywords Bottom of pyramid, Risk management, Digital technology, Social policy,
Social health insurance
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
Digital technologies today are a key aspect of healthcare management for individuals and
organizations (Van Velthoven and Cordon, 2019). Individuals have access to a diverse range
of mobile health applications that empower them to monitor and control their health status
(Lupton, 2014). This complements the efforts of the health insurance sector to manage the
health risk of individuals by incentivizing a healthy lifestyle (Owens and Cribb, 2019).
Digital technologies also help in reducing the disparities in the healthcare status of
individuals and improve the quality of life (Nayak et al., 2019a).International Journal of Sociology
and Social Policy
Vol. 39 No. 9/10, 2019
pp. 752-772
© Emerald Publishing Limited
0144-333X
DOI 10.1108/IJSSP-05-2019-0095Received 10 May 2019
Revised 16 August 2019Accepted 17 August 2019The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com /0144-333X.htm
752IJSSP
39,9/10Increasing costs in healthcare directly affect the delivery of health for the population at
the bottom of pyramid (BoP) (Goyal et al., 2015). Health insurance can soften the impact of
high healthcare costs on the BoP population by providing adequate risk coverage to reduce
the out-of-pocket expenditure (Azmat, 2013). Public policy needs to address the uptake of
insurance at different economic levels of society so that healthcare costs do not have an
impoverishing effect on the population (Tung and Bennett, 2014).
Despite improvements in the accessibility of healthcare services in India, it has not led to
any improvement in the health status due to the lack of health insurance penetration to the
BoP (Balarajan et al. , 2011). Digital technology can integrate the entire social benefit
ecosystem for the BoP population by bringing together social health insurance benefits
along with the education subsidy, fertilizer subsidy and public distribution system
(Prinja et al., 2012).
The pace of adoption of technology has been faster in the healthcare delivery market
(Dey et al., 2017) than in social health insurance. The health insurance sector has now started
investing in smarter technology and collaborates with all stakeholders to create a wider
digital footprint and to lower acquisition and operational cost.
The importance of technology in social health insurance has been highlighted in studies
on the insurance industry in India (Gupta, 2007); yet the current state of low penetration of
health insurance and the consequential effect on the BoP population makes it necessary for
evolving a framework to highlight the strategic imperatives of technology in social health
insurance ( Jaiswal, 2008). In this study, the strategic imperatives have been formulated
through a detailed interaction with 53 senior health insurance professionals across
government and private firms and the regulator. The results of the interviews indicate that
digital technology is inevitable for the social health insurance industry and must be an
integral part of its technology policy. The rest of the paper is organized in the following
manner –the context of the study and associated research has been discussed in the
literature review followed by the research gaps and objectives. Subsequently the research
methodology and results are presented in detail followed by the conclusion.
2. Review of literature
Insurance firms are slowly transforming themselves into technology companies in the
insurance business (Molteni, 2017). Insurance is a difficult product to sell owing to thefinancial complexity, low financial literacy and lack of awareness among the consumers of
the need for such a product (Parekh, 2010). Added to this is the complexity of social
inclusion of the lowest strata of society in an affordable and accessible health insurance
framework ( Jaiswal, 2008). Financial services in India are provided by banks and insurance
companies and the solvency of these entities is critical for the funding of the healthcare
sector (Planning Commission, Government of India, 2009). The challenge in India is to avoid
both over- and under-inclusiveness in any healthcare financing model (Berman et al., 2010).
The government priority has been to infuse funds for the primary healthcare infrastructure
and allow the private sector to deal with the expensive curative care (Rao and Mant, 2012).
The bifurcation of responsibilities between the public and private sector is still not clear and
thus leads to extra availability of funds for health to a certain class and less or no
availability for those who actually need it (Costa and Diwan, 2007). The need to have focus
areas for utilization of excess funds is thus essential for social health models.
2.1 Social health insurance in India
Social health insurance in India existed in an informal manner since 2007 in the form of
Employees State Insurance Scheme, Central Government Health Scheme and the recent
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) along with several versions of state government
healthcare schemes (Prinja et al. , 2019). However, these schemes have met with limited753Health
insurance for
social goodsuccess in providing quality healthcare to the masses and health expenditure still remains
as a leading cause of pushing the BoP population below the poverty line (Sangar et al., 2019).
About 300m people in India live on less than $2 per day (purchasing power parity) (Raj
and Aithal, 2018) forming the BoP population category for the country. It is this large BoP
population that promises a huge potential market for social health insurance but at the same
time does not have proper access to quality healthcare services ( Černauskas et al. ,2018).
About 15 per cent of the 1.3bn population in India has a health insurance coverage and out-
of-pocket health expenditure is high at 69 per cent of total healthcare expenditure
(Chatterjee et al., 2018). Indian consumers in the BoP category spend about 3 per cent of their
household expenditure on healthcare and 76 per cent of this amount is for medicines (Angeli
et al. , 2018). It is necessary to provide a healthcare framework that can address the
healthcare needs and health financing needs of the BoP category supported by technological
innovations (Matsumoto, 2018).
There is little evidence that the large-scale social health insurance programmes have
contributed to decrease in the out-of-pocket expenditure in healthcare (Azam, 2018). The
health insurance market in India is divided between two ecosystems of the Indian
population –Bharat and India. “Bharat ”represents the rural population that is large enough
to attract any marketeer but does not have the affordability to buy health insurance. On the
other hand, “India ”represents the class that is able to afford high-quality healthcare and
also purchase health insurance (Banerjee, 2011). Thus, even though the infrastructure for
healthcare delivery is available, there is a gap between affordability and accessibility to the
same (Esposito et al. , 2012). Technology has played a key role in resolving the disparities
between these two divergent societies of the country ( “Bharat ”and “India ”) with respect to
education and mobile connectivity (Hussain et al., 2019) and agriculture (Banerjee, 2011).
The RSBY is the flagship social health insurance programme of the Government of India
and has contributed to social inclusion across all states. The RSBY scheme has set the
example of using technology as a tool to spearhead the penetration of social health insurance
to the lowest strata of society (Ecks, 2018). It has been successful in opening up the private
sector healthcare delivery to the BoP population and instil a sense of confidence across society
(Khan et al., 2015). The availability of mobile phone technology and data connectivity at the
rural level has made it possible for healthcare delivery through telemedicine and remotephysician access (DeSouza et al., 2014). Electronic health records (EHRs) can be maintained
and accessed across geographies which makes it simpler for the government to track the
health status of individuals as well as measure the success of public health interventions
(Koppar and Sridhar, 2009). It is essential that the social health insurance framework in India
is ready to cope with the technological advancements being made by the healthcare market
and develop products and processes that can support the changes.
2.2 Digitizing social health insurance implementation
The need for technology in healthcare is critical due to the increasing disease burden and
accessibility issues for quality healthcare. Using technology, the delivery of healthcare can
be made equitable across large geographies (Patel et al., 2012). In the social health insurance
market, that is now hinged on the use of technology in all aspects of insurance, it is
important to have a product innovation strategy and technology policy that support each
other ( Jacob, 2017).
The social health insurance sector faces the challenges of handling enormous amount of
data that is being generated through digital technologies in healthcare and use it
appropriately (Cappiello, 2018). Insurers are encouraging the use of wearable technologies in
healthcare to provide focussed healthcare interventions to their customers (Marashi and
Hamidi, 2018). Using mobile health devices, insurers can track progress of serious illnesses
and improve quality of life for patients (Fortino et al., 2019).754IJSSP
39,9/10The implementation plan for digital technologies in the social health sector is associated
with the issues of data security related to sharing and storage of medical information of
individuals (Haluza and Jungwirth, 2018). With the advent of powerful techniques to access
granular-level data stored in data warehouses, policy makers are concerned about secure
methods to access and utilize data related to individual medical information (Bates et al. ,
2018). A technological framework to address data security is essential for a successful
digitally enabled social healthcare model.
2.3 Digital imperatives for social policy
There have been several studies in the area of digi tal technologies in healthcare and some studies
have focussed on social health insurance in Indi a. There is a dearth of studies emphasizing on
the importance of technology applications in health insurance for social inclusivity in India.
Table I provides a summary of the studies an d their contribution in the research area.
Digital technology has contributed to universal access in the area of media
(Sourbati, 2011) and has also been found to be critical for democratizing health insurance
services (Nayak et al. , 2019b). Technology can also serve as a medium for co creation of
S. No. Authors Methodology Key findings
1 Brinda
et al. (2015)Regression model of data on
sociodemographic characteristics, healthprofiles, health service utilization and out-
of-pocket health expenditure of 2,414
individualsOut-of-pocket expenditure on health was
prevalent amongst the higher age groupsthus making them more vulnerable to falling
below the poverty line
2 Adebayo
et al. (2015)Literature review of articles published in
databases like PubMed, Scopus, ERIC,PsychINFO, Africa-Wide Information,Academic Search Premier, BusinessSource PremierLack of funds, poor quality of care and lack
of trust are major reasons for low coveragein community-based health insuranceschemes
3 Ahlin et al.
(2016)Preliminary fieldwork in South India Identified the need for ethnographic studies
in health insurance to understand reasonsfor low penetration
4 Dror et al.
(2016)Household surveys, and the Management
Information System of community-basedhealth insurance schemesIncreased awareness of health insurance
could result in reduced financial risks andbetter access to healthcare
5 Dang et al.
(2016)Conceptual Paper Technology assessment in healthcare is
essential to plan future investments in healthcare, in developing markets such as India
6 Karan et al.
(2017)Survey of household using National
Sample Survey Organization dataSocial insurance schemes like RSBY have
not contributed to reduction in poverty; nosignificant impact of social insurance onincidence rate of catastrophic illnesses
7 Elshaug
et al. (2017)Literature review Effective use of technology can lead to cost
reduction in the healthcare sector byplugging leakages
8 Dabak
et al. (2018)Survey of participants in a Health
Technology Assessment WorkshopConstrains of data for health policy making
emerged as a key concern with technologybeing highlighted as a possible solution
9 Fox and
Connolly(2018)Mixed methods –survey and interviews The digital divide in the society based on age
and economic status needs to be removed forbetter social inclusion
10 Baker et al.
(2018)Literature Review Technology needs to be utilized scientifically
to tackle issues of social isolation andincrease social participation of older people
Table I.
Summary of research
done in the area of
technology application
in social health
insurance755Health
insurance for
social goodvalue in the healthcare system by involving all stakeholders (Agrawal et al. , 2015).
The application of technology in healthcare needs to be replicated in the social health
insurance market to utilize the synergies between healthcare and health insurance sectors
for the benefit of the customers.
The implementation of digital technology reduces the human touch in healthcare
through more interactions between electr onic devices and the patient and lesser direct
exchanges between the patient and the doctor (Verghese et al. , 2018). Machine learning
and artificial intelligence algorithms are built upon the data used to train the mathematical
model; hence any bias inherent in the data is expected to creep into the resultant
algorithms (Char et al. , 2018). Moreover, human decisions also carry an element of bias
that reflects in the different methods that doctors may apply to treat the same ailment in
different patients. Technology initiatives i n social healthcare need to consider that such
biases are addressed at the design phase so t hat customized interventions for patients
have a sound clinical logic (Miller and Brow n, 2018). With large amounts of data being
collected under social health schemes, a sy stematic framework t o have minimal bias in
models for clinical decision making is essential for successful implementation of
technology initiatives (Yu and Kohane, 2019).
3. Research gaps and objectives
Little research has been done on the scope of d igital technologies in social health and
its potential to collaborate between vari ous stakeholders in the healthcare market
(Bacigalupe, 2011). A digitally engaged individual can participate in a better way for
self-monitoring and self-care which eases t he dilemma of policymakers to find ways of
influencing the adoption of digital interventions (Lupton, 2013). The need for social
health insurance has been a po litically sensitive issue in developed insurance markets
like the USA (Rivlin and Reischauer, 2016) as well as in India ( fe Bureau, 2014). The
announcement of the Universal Health Scheme in India as a part of the Union
Budget for 2018 –2019 (Saraswathy, 2018) also un derscores the emphasis that the
government lays on social health insurance. The Universal Health Scheme
(Ayushman Bharat) is a new form of the earlier RSBY scheme launched by the Indian
Government with a higher financial benefit a nd a revamped technology infrastructure
that links the health insurers and healthcare providers for faster clinical data
exchange and facilitates storage of high-quality data for better analytics. With the
changing nature of demographic indicators and associated disease patterns, it is
necessary that more research is carried out in the area of technology in social health
policy (Goodall et al., 2010). Research in the area of social health policy has not focussed on
how access to high-quality healthcare and fi nancial health protection can be bundled into
a single business model (Dye et al. , 2013). Technology can address this gap by linking
t h eb u s i n e s sm o d e l so fh e a l t h c a r ep r o v i d e r s and healthcare financers through seamless
sharing of clinical data (West et al. , 2014). The health insurance sector needs to
recognize the BoP section as a business opport unity and develop sustainable business
models using technology inter ventions (Prahalad, 2005). Government policymakers would
immensely benefit from research in areas tha t can connect the information revolution to
the social health insurance market to esta blish a policy framework for social health
insurance (Middleton, 2005).
Based on gaps identified in the literature review, the following research questions arise:
RQ1. What are the strategic imperatives of digital technology in the social health
insurance sector in India for the BoP customers?
RQ2. What are the implications of digital technology adoption by the social health
insurance sector in India to bring maximum benefit to BoP customers?756IJSSP
39,9/104. Research methodology
4.1 Approach for the study
A qualitative expert interview technique was adopted for the study (Rubin and Rubin, 2011).
To understand the strategic imperatives of digital technology in social health insurance, in-
depth semi-structured interviews were conducted with 53 senior management executives
with “Chief ”title (CXOs) and regulator. The expert interview technique was considered
suitable for the study as the aim was to explore the technology essentials for social health
insurance and develop a framework that can be utilized by health insurance sector to obtain
the maximum impact through digital initiatives (Elo and Kyngäs, 2008).
4.2 Sampling and data collection plan
The participants for the interviews were selected using both purposive and convenience
sampling depending on their availability and accessibility (Kilian et al. , 2018). The Indian
health insurance market has 4 public sector firms and 29 private sector firms. The private
sector firms have adopted technology at a faster pace (Khare et al. , 2012) and hence their
representation in the interview sample was higher. Within the private sector, greater emphasis
was laid on interviewing representatives from the pure health insurance firms that focus only
on health insurance business. A representative from the regulator was also a part of the study
as the inclusion of digital technology in the insurance market would need the consent of the
regulator. The profile of the senior management professionals is provided in Table II.
In the interview process, achieving thematic saturation is essential to ensure that the
findings are complete and there is minimal scope of any additional or new aspects emerging
(Guest et al. , 2006). After 48 interviews were completed with the experts, no new theme
emerged that was significantly different from what was captured in the previous interviews.
Few additional interviews were conducted to ensure that there is actual thematic saturation
and no further interviews were deemed necessary after 53 interviews. Due to the intensive
competition in the health insurance industry, the participants were assured of completeconfidentiality.
4.3 Interview procedure
The interviews were conducted using open-ended questions that were part of a
semi-structured interview guide (Roulston, 2011). The questionnaire used for the interviews
is provided in the Appendix. The experts were asked to share their thoughts on the
evolution of the health insurance market in India and how it has contributed to the social
health insurance for the masses. The experts were asked to provide examples on how
the health insurance firms have been able to increase the accessibility and affordability of
health insurance and whether that has improved social inclusivity. The regulator was asked
about the provisions in the regulatory framework that encouraged insurers to adopt
high-end technology to make insurance delivery easier and faster.
The interviews lasted between 45 and 75 min with the exception of two interviews with
public sector CXOs that were of more than 3 h duration. Considering the nature of the study,
Experience of the expert
(years)Private sector
insurersPure health
insurersPublic sector
firms Regulator Total
10–15 12 7 0 0 19
16–20 7 5 4 1 17
20–25 6 2 6 0 14
W25 1 1 1 0 3
Total 26 15 11 1 53Table II.
Industry type of
experts interviewed757Health
insurance for
social goodthe experts were allowed to express their views on the study area in detail so that newer
themes could emerge for analysis. All interviews were recorded using a voice recording
device with prior consent.
4.4 Coding process
MaxQDA software for qualitative analysis was used to analyze the interview transcripts.
MaxQDA has been used for qualitative studies in health insurance (Liu et al., 2012; Ward,
Sanders, Leng and Pollock, 2014; Ward, Marsolo and Froehle, 2014), role of technology in social
inclusion (Biniok et al., 2016) and healthcare research (Luxford et al.,2 0 1 1 ) .T oa r r i v ea tc o m m o n
themes from the interviews, a two-cycle coding process was followed (Schreier, 2012).
Transcripts were made from the interview rec ordings and text codes were made to represent
the views of the experts. However, the views that emphasized important aspects or events were
written exactly the way they were expressed by th e experts. Holistic codes were developed from
the interview transcripts and then further cleaned through pattern coding (Miles et al., 1994).
Two of the authors worked separately and developed the themes that emerged from the
interview transcripts. The authors compared the holistic codes developed by them
independently and agreement was established on all the codes except for one. The
transcripts were reviewed together by the authors to resolve this disagreement. Post
complete agreement on the holistic codes, the authors developed the pattern codes jointly to
classify the patterns indicated by the data and the intra-coder reliability was 94 per cent and
inter-coder reliability was 92 per cent (Holsti, 1969; Urbina, 1981). This was within the
acceptable limits. The coding process was reviewed after one month and the reliability
levels were within reasonable limits.
A total of 997 segments were coded in the 53 interview transcripts. Codes were assigned
based on the theme of the discussions and 125 holistic codes emerged from the coded
segments. Based on the highest frequency of occurrence of the codes in the coded segments,
nine holistic codes were selected which further converged into three pattern codes for
analysis and interpretation. The three pattern codes individually accounted for more than
60 per cent of the coded segments. The coding sheet is shown in Table III. The pattern codes
were then analyzed and are discussed in the next section.
Data coding for interview transcripts
Interview transcript extracts Holistic codeNo. of
coded
segments% of coded
segments for
holistic code Pattern code% of coded
segments for
pattern code
Lifestyle of customers Wearable
Technology139 13.94 Business
Analytics65.20
Capturing critical data from claims Claims Data 286 28.69
Transparency in transactions Fraud
Indicators225 22.57
Cost of claim servicing Inhouse Claim
Servicing101 10.13 Cost
Optimization64.29
Acquisition cost for rural areas Sales Strategy 307 30.79
Negotiation with hospitals Provider
NetworkStrategy233 23.37
Faster turnaround time for
servicesDigital Services 161 16.15 Customer
Experience61.18
Consistent approach in decision
makingProcess
standardization141 14.14
Empathy in customer approach Customer First 308 30.89 Table III.
Data coding sheet758IJSSP
39,9/104.5 Analysis of data
Common factors and trends in qualitative data can be found by using thematic content
analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006), which also helps in explication of deeper patterns in the
data. This study in the area of social health insurance was supported by using thematic
content analysis as the principal analytical method. Researchers have used content analysis in
the area of healthcare to obtain deeper insights for intricate research problems (Hsieh and
Shannon, 2005). Content analysis helps in identifying broad themes and labels from qualitative
data and then facilitates relating them with theory (Krippendorff, 1980). The qualitative and
quantitative methods of content analysis were used as such a combination assists inseparating the themes and identifying intensity of the relationships (Barringer et al., 2005).
The level of agreement amongst the experts was used as the basis of identifying themes
and establishing the relational intensity. The types of words used by experts were used as the
indicators of the strength of the relationships that helped in formulating the framework of
strategic imperatives of digital technologies in social health insurance. Use of words like “very
much ”,“very strong ”,“completely present ”and “highly likely ”indicated strong importance of
the factors. Similarly, use of words like “not at all ”,“not likely ”and “completely absent ”
indicated little importance of the factors. Use of words like “slightly ”,“to some extent ”and
“seen sometimes ”indicated moderate importance of the factors. The level of agreement was
calculated for the identified themes after aggregation of the expert opinions. The theme was
considered as strong when more than 60 per cent experts agreed on the importance of a theme,
whereas it was considered as weak if less than 30 per cent experts had consensus on the
importance of a theme. For consensus in the range of more than 30 per cent and less than 60
per cent, the theme was considered as moderately important.
Figure 1 depicts the code map for the thematic relationships for the holistic and pattern
codes. The intensity of the relationships is denoted by the thickness of the lines and the size
of the bubbles denotes the number of coded segments. Intersection of relationship lines
indicates the co-occurrence of multiple codes in the same coded segment.
5. Discussions of results and implications for the BoP sector
The expert interviews clearly indicated that health insurers must adopt digital technology
interventions to benefit the BoP population and ensure better healthcare access for them.
The emphasis on specific areas of technology intervention and the associated implications
of adoption of digital technology are discussed below based on the holistic and pattern codes
shown in Table III.
Consistent approach in decision making
Negotiation with hospitalsCapturing critical
claims data
Cost of claim
servicingInhouse Claims ServicingCustomer
Experience
Process Standardization
Claims Data
Cost
Optimization Business
Analytics
Wearable Technology
Fraud IndicatorsSales StrategyProvider Network StrategyDigital ServicesCustomer FirstFaster turnaround time for services
Empathy in customer approach
Lifestyle of customers
Transparency in transactions
Acquisition cost for rural areasFigure 1.
Code map for thematic
relationships
of holistic and
pattern codes759Health
insurance for
social good5.1 Analytics for risk management
Risk management is a key strategic imperative linked to the sustainability of social health
insurance. Implementation of advanced analytical platforms can enable scientific pricing of
risk. Investment in the social sector has been almost $1.6bn in the period 2000 –2014 out of
which only 11 per cent was in the healthcare sector (Khan, 2014). A significant part of this
investment is from technology startups that see a potential in the social sector and
especially healthcare. The CXO of a private health insurance firm made the following
interesting remark on the technology-based risk management aspect of social health
insurance: “India has seen many versions of social healthcare on paper since 1970s and most
of them failed due to the less focus on technology. The RSBY scheme launched on a
technology platform and linked to biometrics has shown that any social healthcare initiative
can be driven only by adopting the latest technology ”. Analytics in risk management is
driven by the following technology applications.
5.1.1 Wearable technology applications . Wearable technology is the most critical factor for
increasing the penetration of health insurance amongst the masses. It interlinks thetechnology of healthcare providers and health insurers to create a common database of
beneficiaries who can gain accessibility to better quality of healthcare services ( Jacob, 2016).
The head of information technology for a private general insurer was very passionate on thehuge potential that wearable technology promises for the BoP population as evidenced in his
comments: “Wearable technology is a boon for the underprivileged masses. It is now our
responsibility to make this available to the lowest strata of society so that every individual inthe BoP category is a part of the universal healthcare network ”. A significant implication of
wearable technology adoption by all sections of the society is that the economic boundaries in
society with respect to healthcare availability are expected to be eliminated. This potentialtransformation is reflected in the remarks of an underwriter with a pure health insurer: “In
India, wearable technology is considered as a luxury device owned by the rich as a lifestyle
symbol. Here is an opportunity to bust that myth and use it to integrate our underserved
masses with the mainstream and give them a healthcare system that respects them as an
individual ”. Wearable devices can reduce the burden of disease for the healthcare system and
also create a knowledge bank for clinical decision models (Nayak and Bhattacharyya, 2019).
5.1.2 Leveraging claims data . The emergence of big data analytics along with artificial
intelligence provides an opportunity for policymakers to collect individual-level data andutilize these for policy formulation at the national level (Ward, Sanders, Leng and Pollock,
2014; Ward, Marsolo and Froehle, 2014). Social health schemes need to pool the risk of
individuals with differing lifestyles and economic status to ensure that the overall risk of thehealth plan is managed without any adverse implications. The regulator emphasized that
scaling up the social health coverage across India needs a long-term vision involving all
stakeholders and remarked that: “Any social health program needs to involve all stakeholders
like the government, regulator, insurance firms and healthcare providers. The data that is
captured on the digital platforms across stakeholders needs to be consistent so thatmeaningful interpretations can be drawn using business analytics tools ”.F o s s( 2 0 1 1 )
advocated that every individual is unique; the uniqueness of the health status of every
individual is important to be captured for any clinical modelling based on business analytics.The significant increase in the number of health insurance claims due to the increase in
penetration demands an efficient administrative system that delivers best services to the
customers and at the same time must be capable of capturing critical information contained inthe claim documents. This can be done through digitalization of the transactions between the
patient and the healthcare system at every touchpoint thus reducing the dependence on
manual interventions. A senior claim professional remarked that: “The healthcare system
must take advantage of the mobile phone revolution in India and leverage it to digitize the760IJSSP
39,9/10patient experiences and remove paper from the system; interlinking of systems and
generating knowledge management systems is possible only if meaningful data is captured in
as y s t e m a t i cm a n n e r ”. A key implication emerging from digitized claim transactions is that
using the demographic and clinical parameters captured in claims, sophisticated algorithms
can be designed for clinical decision models for the BoP population.
5.1.3 Transparency in transactions to prevent frauds . Privacy of clinical data and
security of the data exchanges is a primary concern in technology interventions (Haluza and
Jungwirth, 2018). The enormous amount of clinical information available to caregiversand health insurers empowers them to implement targeted wellness plans for the BoP sector
(Prinja et al., 2012). However, utmost care needs to be exercised to ensure that such data are
utilized only for creating benefit plans and not disclosed or shared without the consent of thepatient. This apprehension was shared by the insurance regulator also as apparent from
this observation: “While we support all innovations in the health insurance sector, we are
concerned about how the personal data of individuals are stored and used. The social sectorwould benefit a lot by using such data for creating wellness plans but there is greater harm
if this data is leaked to other parties ”. It is essential for both providers and insurers to
proactively communicate the intent of collecting data to the individual and also explicitlydisclose how and where the data are stored. The absence of adequate industry regulations in
the healthcare sector is a concern of how data are handled by providers and hence
self-regulation needs to be exercised to a great extent to protect customer data. For insurers,product regulations can determine the level of innovation that the industry can generate and
sustain. The head of information security for a public sector insurer conveys this succinctly:
“As an industry, we need to tell customers what we are going to do with their data. This will
encourage them to provide accurate information to us that we can then use for the
customer ’s benefit. If we lack transparency, what we will collect from the customer will not
benefit any stakeholder ”. The crucial implication arising out of securing clinical and
transactional data is a culture of collecting information and sharing the benefits back with
the society which will create an environment of trust amongst insurers, caregivers and theBoP population (Kabir and Carayannis, 2013).
5.2 Cost optimization for operations
A vital strategic imperative of digital technology is to gain efficiency in operations and
efficacy of services can be achieved by reducing complexity in processes and rationalization
of costs. Technology has created a significant impact on reducing costs in the agriculture
sector thus creating a great social impact (Khosla, 2016). Technology can strengthen risk
and delivery management while lowering acquisition cost for the social health insurance
sector. To ensure that low-income groups have easy access to healthcare and insurance, it is
essential that costs related to administration of social health insurance plans are minimized
to the maximum extent possible (Finkelstein et al., 2019). One of the senior executives from
the sales division of a public health insurer commented that: “Social health insurance is all
about cross subsidizing and balancing the costs between the affluent class and the
economically weaker sections of society. If technology can bring down the cost of business
acquisition and claim administration, the savings can be passed on to reduce the cost of
insurance for the people who cannot afford it ”. Cost optimization in operations can be
achieved by focussing on the following aspects.
5.2.1 Saving costs through inhouse claim servicing . The benefits of reduction in
administrative costs through inhouse processing of claims on superior digital platforms can
be passed on to customers in the form of lower purchase cost or higher insurance benefits(Nayak et al. , 2018). Porter and Kramer (2019) have suggested that with a nominal
incremental cost, technology can transform business processes to generate higher cost761Health
insurance for
social goodsavings, better utilization of resources, higher process efficiency and improved quality of
outcomes. The finance head of a public sector firm that holds a significant market share in
social health insurance in India emphasized that: “Social health insurance has to be a
business proposition and not a part of corporate social responsibility. The moment firms
adopt a technology framework for social health, the business model would be automaticallysustainable and not drain the other profitable lines of business ”. The recent trend in the
insurance industry has been to reduce utilization of third-party administrators for claim
processing. Insurers have realized that savings generated through outsourcing of criticalservices like claims and customer service are negligible compared to the loss of reputation.
The main implication of digitizing claim services is the transformation of the strategic
orientation of the firm to focus on the need to develop technology-enabled business processthat reduces cost and also empowers the customer. The claims director of a private insurer
was confident of the potential benefits of digital technologies and mentioned that: “Hiring
external agencies for processing your claims is similar to placing your customers insomeone else ’s care. You must take care of your customers; use technology to simplify your
processes and the cost benefit will flow in the long term ”. The servicing of claims includes
activities like capturing relevant data and detecting unnatural trends that may otherwise beignored by an external party which does not benefit from these data.
5.2.2 Sales strategy for rural areas . Health insurers and healthcare providers have
preferred to operate in urban areas due to the high cost of acquiring and servicing customers
in the rural areas. Majority of the BoP population in India resides in the rural areas.
Social inclusion can be achieved only if healthcare services reach the lowest section of societyenabled by technology and digital applications (Nayak et al., 2019a). The Chief Distribution
Officer of a large private insurer supported the need for rural expansion and commented: “The
acquisition cost being high in rural areas is notional; insurers have tried to apply the samedistribution model everywhere; that does not work. In the rural areas, you need more
technology driven services using the common service centres that have internet connectivity ”.
The social health programmes of the government have also led to a rapid development ofhealth infrastructure in rural India and reduced the burden on urban health centres. An
important implication of adopting digital technology in the sales process is that health
insurers can move into rural areas leveraging this infrastructure and offer services along with
the hospitals thus sharing the costs incurred for expansion. The chief of provider networks for
a pure health insurer emphasized on the need for collaboration between hospitals and insurersand mentioned that: “The healthcare and health insurance industry need to move together for
the benefit of the social sector. Technology and business set up costs can be shared by using
common infrastructure for storage and processing of data ”. The government thrust on social
sector development through the JAM strategy ( Jan Dhan bank accounts with zero balance
requirement for the below poverty line population, Aadhar unique identification number for
citizens to avail subsidy on government schemes and Mobile phone network in rural areas)can be an advantage for the healthcare sector to expand in rural areas.
5.2.3 Provider network strategy for rural areas . The expansion in rural areas for health
insurers needs to be supported by a quality hospital network. The primary health system
which is the first line of service delivery for the BoP population has received extensive
funding under the Universal Health Scheme for having skilled manpower, implementtechnology solutions and procure modern equipment to provide quality services (Dhaka
et al. , 2018). The insurance regulator responded cautiously to the rapid expansion of
healthcare facilities with the following remark: “It is good to have a wide network of
hospitals to cater to the needs of the poorer section of society but at the same time
the quality of the services needs to be monitored as there is no specific regulation for the
healthcare sector ”. Health insurers must implement strict quality guidelines for762IJSSP
39,9/10empanelment of hospitals and negotiate prices that can support a health insurance product
for the BoP sector. The insurance regulator has mandated that any hospital on the network
of hospitals must be accredited by the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and also
registered with the regulator. The Chief Technology Officer of a large public sector insurer
commented that: “While the private sector is investing a lot in technology linkages with
hospitals, we are dependent on the government for funding our technology initiatives. Our
strategic priorities for the social sector need to be technology driven ”. The standardization
of prices for essential pharmaceuticals as well as consumables for major surgical proceduresby the government has helped in reducing the cost of health insurance for the BoP category.
A decisive implication of a digital provider network strategy is that the health insurers are
also striving to drive a standard pricing with the hospitals to ensure optimum utilization ofthe financial benefit available to individuals under social sector schemes.
5.3 Enhancement of customer experience
Finally, all business outcomes are linked to customer satisfaction which is a significant
strategic imperative for health insurance firms. Health insurance being linked directly to the
personal well-being of individuals providing a delightful experience to customers is critical.
Technology can bring together information from different social domains linked to an
individual –employment information, medical information and financial information to
create a platform where the individual can take integrated decisions to manage his/her
lifestyle (Sheth et al., 2018). Moreover, the interlinking of transactions between individuals
and organizations creates a knowledge database that can be used for greater social good
(Lantos and Simon, 2018). The Chief Customer Officer of a private sector insurer noted that:
“Firms assume that only the corporate clients are the ones who value customer service and
hence pay a higher premium. But when you please a customer in a social health plan, the
word of mouth publicity spreads faster amongst the community and this gives the real
competitive edge to your business ”. Goodman (2009) has pointed that word-of-mouth
publicity can create significant strategic impact for a business.
5.3.1 Digital services for reducing service timelines . Customer experience is not limited to
processing claims faster or answering queries instantly; it involves using technology to keep
customers informed of what they need to do to remain healthy and reduce their healthexpenditure. The regulator summed up the importance of customer service by saying that:
“Insurance cannot survive without a satisfied customer and we ensure that insurers adhere
to what they promise. Digital platforms are inevitable today if insurers want to maintain
service levels ”. The claim processing speed can be significantly improved if insurers move
to a paperless process where documents are accepted in the soft format. This will enable
easier storage and exchange of data between providers and insurers and also facilitate
accessibility of medical documents at any location at any time. A beneficial implication of
digital customer service processes is that the BoP population moving from the primaryhealth facilities in the rural areas to the district specialty centres will find it easier to obtain
treatment as the doctors can access past clinical history from the data warehouse (Bates
et al., 2018). A Senior Claims Professional associated with a pure health insurer commented:
“Clinical data exchanges will become a common feature where hospitals will store medical
documents of individuals encrypted with unique identification numbers. The patient can
authorize the doctors and insurers to access this information for advanced medical opinionwhen required ”. An immediate implication for the BoP sector is the usage of telemedicine
facility where doctors can provide remote medical opinion without the patient travelling to
super speciality centres in the cities. Further, even treatment can be administered by trainedmedical personnel in rural areas following advice of super specialists thus reducing the
response time to emergencies and processing of associated insurance claims.763Health
insurance for
social good5.3.2 Process standardization for consistent decision making . Health insurance is
generally perceived as a complex product in the market and customers are wary of the
processes involved in dealing with insurance firms (Cebul et al. , 2011). For the BoP
population, the speed of settlement of claims and resolution of grievances is key to reinforce
their confidence in the health insurance ecosystem. The Chief Risk Officer of a private sector
insurer put forth his views as: “For the poorer sections of the society, the money spent on
buying health insurance is a significant proportion of their household income. If they do not
get the right services when they need them, they would opt out of the insurance coverage ”.
The standardization of processes within the healthcare ecosystem is required to have aconsistency in dealing with claim events and automate decision-making processes. A
significant implication of standardized digital processes is that implementation of machine
learning can transform the social health model by automation of less human dependentrepetitive processes. It can predict crisis situations and help the insurer for being better
prepared for the same (Shrestha et al., 2018). The Head of Underwriting of a private sector
insurer expressed his concern stating: “Insurers are more concerned about the outcomes of
their claims matching their budget plans rather than improving the process leading to the
outcomes. If the processes are kept simple, the outcomes would automatically be less
complicated and benefit both the firm and the customer ”. Real-time integration with
the hospital information systems and EHRs would help insurers in fast tracking services to
the individual customer as well as monitor the provider behaviour (Bolton et al. , 2018).
With the telecom, banking, entertainment and food industry encouraging participatory
product making, the insurers can create an ownership at the BoP by adopting such models.
5.3.3 Customer first approach through empathy . Across the world, more than 50 per cent
of the insurance customers are digitally active and conduct online research for informed
decisions (Naujoks et al., 2017). A digital customer outreach would include creation of EHRs,
remote health opinions for critical illnesses, mobile applications for real-time updates and
allow customers to create customized health plans. This would lead to increased insurance
coverage through digital customer engagement. The Chief Product Officer of a privatesector insurer aptly remarked that: “The insurers make products considering regulatory
directions, promoter requirements and profitability requirements. Seldom, do we ask the
customers what they need in the product. We make something that we think they need andthis attitude needs to change ”. Artificial intelligence can add value to the life of customers by
providing them with digital avenues of self-servicing. Utilization of chatbots and Internet of
Things (IoT) technology can revolutionize customer experience. A useful implication of IoTadoption is that it enables creation of customized solutions for the customer along with
emergency assistance services (Fernandez-Luque and Imran, 2018).
The strategic themes identified through the expert interviews provide a framework for
priority areas of digital adoption in health insurance for the BoP sector. Table IV tabulates the
strategic imperatives of digital technology and t he associated implications of digital technology
Focus area Strategic imperatives of digital technology Implications of digital technology adoption
Business
analyticsWearable technologies to track customer behaviour;
customized health interventionsImproved disease outcomes; reduced
disease burden; better quality of life
Cost ofoperationsAutomated transactions; digital customer
touchpoints; inhouse claims processingReduction in administrative cost; better
utilization of resources; lesser processdeviations
Customer
experienceChatbots for customer interactions; customized
customer communication; assisted treatment plansIncreased insurance coverage; higher
customer retention; increased firm
trustworthinessTable IV.
Areas of prioritization
for technology
interventions for
BoP social healthinsurance model764IJSSP
39,9/10adoption by the social health insurance sector in India. The emphasis on utilizing big data for
strengthening the distribution of health products in the rural areas provides insurers an
opportunity to utilize granular data from the entire insurance value chain to provide an
enhanced customer experience and scientific risk management. Integration of the insurer ’s
digital interface with the data from sensors, wearables and medical tracking devices (like smartwatches, health bands, wearable cameras and cardiac monitors) used by customers can create
better customer segmentation. It also helps the insurer to make social health programmes
customized according to the economic status and demographic indicators. Using digitaltechnology applications, the underwriting and claim process of the insurer can be modelled to
eliminate human intervention. Using blockchain technology, healthcare providers can alleviate
the concerns related to security of data exchange across provider platforms (Rahmadika andRhee, 2018). Healthcare data can be stored in the cloud allowing more flexibility to access and
utilization of the data using secure blockchain techniques (Esposito et al., 2018).
Health insurance is the most sensitive line of business in the insurance sector as the
service directly affects the well-being of the customer. While other mature markets have
moved ahead in offering exemplary services to customers through the use of technology and
product innovation, India still remains a laggard (Margan, 2017). Schumpeter (1934) has
articulated that technology and innovation are critical for economic transformation.
Developing inclusive healthcare business models using technology as the backbone will bekey to health insurance coverage for BoP.
6. Conclusion
The adoption of technology in social health insurance is associated with the cost of
digitalization. In countries like Thailand, the public health expenditure is the same as India;
however, the coverage of universal healthcare is much more than what is available in India
(Sundararaman, 2018). The utilization of technological resources in conjunction with data
analytics, cloud computing, telecommunications and wireless technologies can address the
issue of improving quality and access to healthcare without any significant cost escalation
(Sajanlal, 2019). This will improve the adoption of digital technologies and increase the scale
of implementation of social health interventions. The Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of India (IRDAI) is encouraging innovations in the area of
wearables and portable devices that can immensely contribute to social health policy
through improved risk management and reduced disease burden.
The key priority areas identified for health insurers to plan their technology investments
with a focus on the BoP sector are as follows:
(1) First, healthcare and health insurance industry need to adopt a collaborative
approach to social inclusivity and plan their technology initiatives on a common
platform as they serve a common beneficiary. This will also enable creation of
bundled products which integrate clinical care and care financing for the BoP
customer under a single roof.
(2) Capacity building in rural areas using digital applications in training of medical
personnel, upgradation of primary health infrastructure and enablement of internet
connectivity would complement the efforts of health insurers to expand their
business to cover BoP sector.
(3) Policymakers must focus on encouraging health insurers to expand beyond their
traditional expertise on hospitalization products in urban areas and consider low
cost products for rural areas with a digitally enabled distribution network.
(4) Finally, since social inclusivity involves multiple areas like financial inclusion,
literacy initiatives, social empowerment and skill programmes, health insurance765Health
insurance for
social goodtechnology solutions for the BoP sector needs to be promoted as an enabler to these
areas of social inclusion.
With a proper implementation roadmap, technology can redefine the social healthcare
landscape for India (Sajanlal, 2019). The social hea lth insurance sector would benefit if all firms
endeavour to demystify products, ease pain poi nts, assure data privacy and simplify processes
through use of technology. The absence of specific studies in the area of technology applications
for social health insurance creates a unique value proposition for this framework being used by
the health insurance sector and policy makers to devise social inclusion strategies.
This study is limited to the Indian health insurance environment that has moved from a
non-regulated environment to a strictly regulated one in 2001. The regulator has laid down
strict norms on the operational framework of insurance firms with special regulations for
social health insurance sector. Hence, this framework would be applicable within the regulated
framework established by IRDAI. Health insurance being directly related to the welfare of the
population, there is special interest from the government and foreign investors in this
segment. The adoption of digital technologies will not only improve the current healthcare
scenario for the BoP population but will also impact the future generations by making
predictions and treatment of critical illnesses faster and more accurate.
References
Adebayo, E.F., Uthman, O.A., Wiysonge, C.S., Stern, E.A., Lamont, K.T. and Ataguba, J.E. (2015), “A
systematic review of factors that affect uptake of community-based health insurance in low-income
and middle-income countries ”,BMC Health Services Research , Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 543(1)-543(13).
Agrawal, A.K., Kaushik, A.K. and Rahman, Z. (2015), “Co-creation of social value through integration of
stakeholders ”,Procedia –Social and Behavioral Sciences , Vol. 189, pp. 442-448.
Ahlin, T., Nichter, M. and Pillai, G. (2016), “Health insurance in India: what do we know and why is
ethnographic research needed ”,Anthropology & Medicine , Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 102-124.
Angeli, F., Ishwardat, S.T., Jaiswal, A.K. and Capaldo, A. (2018), “Socio-cultural sustainability of
private healthcare providers in an Indian slum setting: a bottom-of-the-pyramid perspective ”,
Sustainability , Vol. 10 No. 12, pp. 4702(1)-4702(27).
Azam, M. (2018), “Does social health insurance reduce financial burden? Panel data evidence from
India ”,World Development , Vol. 102, pp. 1-17.
Azmat, F. (2013), “Sustainable development in developing countries: the role of social entrepreneurs ”,
International Journal of Public Administration , Vol. 36 No. 5, pp. 293-304.
Bacigalupe, G. (2011), “Is there a role for social technologies in collaborative healthcare? ”,Families,
Systems, & Health , Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Baker, S., Warburton, J., Waycott, J., Batchelor, F., Hoang, T., Dow, B., Ozanne, E. and Vetere, F. (2018),
“Combatting social isolation and increasing social participation of older adults through the use
of technology: a systematic review of existing evidence ”,Australasian Journal on Ageing , Vol. 37
No. 3, pp. 184-193.
Balarajan, Y., Selvaraj, S. and Subramanian, S.V. (2011), “Health care and equity in India ”,The Lancet ,
Vol. 377 No. 9764, pp. 505-515.
Banerjee, A. (2011), “The ICT in agriculture: bridging Bharat with India ”,Global Media Journal: Indian
Edition , Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 1-16.
Barringer, B.R., Jones, F.F. and Neubaum, D.O. (2005), “A quantitative content analysis of the
characteristics of rapid-growth firms and their founders ”,Journal of Business Venturing , Vol. 20
No. 5, pp. 663-687.
Bates, D.W., Heitmueller, A., Kakad, M. and Saria, S. (2018), “Why policymakers should care about ‘big
data ’in healthcare ”,Health Policy and Technology , Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 211-216.766IJSSP
39,9/10Berman, P., Ahuja, R. and Bhandari, L. (2010), “The impoverishing effect of healthcare payments
in India: new methodology and findings ”,Economic & Political Weekly , Vol. 45 No. 16,
pp. 65-71.
Biniok, P., Menke, I. and Selke, S. (2016), “Social inclusion of elderly people in rural areas by social and
technological mechanisms ”, in Domínguez-Rué, E. and Nierling, L. (Eds), Ageing and Technology ,
Perspectives from the Social Sciences, transcript Verlag, Bielefeld, pp. 93-117.
Bolton, R.N., McColl-Kennedy, J.R., Cheung, L., Gallan, A., Orsingher, C., Witell, L. and Zaki, M. (2018),
“Customer experience challenges: bringing together digital, physical and social realms ”,Journal
of Service Management , Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 776-808.
Braun, V. and Clarke, V. (2006), “Using thematic analysis in psychology ”,Qualitative Research in
Psychology , Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 77-101.
Brinda, E.M., Kowal, P., Attermann, J. and Enemark, U. (2015), “Health service use, out-of-pocket
payments and catastrophic health expenditure among older people in India: the WHO Study onglobal AGEing and adult health (SAGE) ”,Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health , Vol. 69
No. 5, pp. 489-494.
Cappiello, A. (2018), “Survey on the digitised insurance distribution in Europe and USA ”,i nC a p p i e l l o ,A .
(Ed.), Technology and the Insurance Industry ,P a l g r a v eP i v o t ,C h a m ,p p .9 9 - 1 1 5 .
Cebul, R.D., Rebitzer, J.B., Taylor, L.J. and Votruba, M.E. (2011), “Unhealthy insurance markets: search
frictions and the cost and quality of health insurance ”,American Economic Review , Vol. 101
No. 5, pp. 1842-1871.
Černauskas, V., Angeli, F., Jaiswal, A.K. and Pavlova, M. (2018), “Underlying determinants of health
provider choice in urban slums: results from a discrete choice experiment in Ahmedabad, India ”,
BMC Health Services Research , Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 473(1)-473(11).
Char, D.S., Shah, N.H. and Magnus, D. (2018), “Implementing machine learning in health care-addressing
ethical challenges ”,The New England Journal of Medicine , Vol. 378 No. 11, pp. 981-983.
Chatterjee, C., Joshi, R., Sood, N. and Boregowda, P. (2018), “Government health insurance and spatial
peer effects: new evidence from India ”,Social Science and Medicine , Vol. 196, pp. 131-141.
Costa, A.D. and Diwan, V. (2007), “Where is the public health sector? ”,Health Policy , Vol. 84 Nos 2-3,
pp. 269-276.
Dabak, S.V., Pilasant, S., Mehndiratta, A., Downey, L.E., Cluzeau, F., Chalkidou, K., Luz, A.C.G.,
Youngkong, S. and Teerawattananon, Y. (2018), “Budgeting for a billion: applying health
technology assessment (HTA) for universal health coverage in India ”,Health Research Policy
and Systems , Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 115(1)-115(7).
Dang, A., Likhar, N. and Alok, U. (2016), “Importance of economic evaluation in health care: An Indian
perspective ”,Value in Health Regional Issues , Vol. 9, pp. 78-83.
DeSouza, S.I., Rashmi, M.R., Vasanthi, A.P., Joseph, S.M. and Rodrigues, R. (2014), “Mobile phones:
the next step towards healthcare delivery in rural India? ”,PLoS One , Vol. 9 No. 8,
pp. e104895(1)-e104895(9).
Dey, N., Ashour, A.S. and Bhatt, C. (2017), “Internet of Things driven connected healthcare ”, in Dey, N.,
Ashour, A.S. and Bhatt, C. (Eds), Internet of Things and Big Data Technologies for Next
Generation Healthcare , Springer, Cham, pp. 3-12.
Dhaka, R., Verma, R., Agrawal, G. and Kumar, G. (2018), “Ayushman Bharat Yojana: a memorable
health initiative for Indians ”,International Journal of Community Medicine and Public Health ,
Vol. 5 No. 8, pp. 3152-3153.
Dror, D.M., Chakraborty, A., Majumdar, A., Panda, P. and Koren, R. (2016), “Impact of community-
based health insurance in rural India on self-medication & financial protection of the insured ”,
The Indian Journal of Medical Research , Vol. 143 No. 6, pp. 809-820.
Dye, C., Reeder, J.C. and Terry, R.F. (2013), “Research for universal health coverage ”,Science
Translational Medicine , Vol. 5 No. 199, pp. 199ed13(1)-199ed13(3).767Health
insurance for
social goodEcks, S. (2018), “When the government changes, the card will also change: questioning identity in
biometric smartcards for national health insurance (RSBY) in India ”,Anthropologica , Vol. 60
No. 1, pp. 190-200.
Elo, S. and Kyngäs, H. (2008), “The qualitative content analysis process ”,Journal of Advanced Nursing ,
Vol. 62 No. 1, pp. 107-115.
Elshaug, A.G., Rosenthal, M.B., Lavis, J.N., Brownlee, S., Schmidt, H., Nagpal, S., Littlejohns, P.,
Srivastava, D., Tunis, S. and Saini, V. (2017), “Levers for addressing medical underuse and
overuse: achieving high-value health care ”,The Lancet , Vol. 390 No. 10090, pp. 191-202.
Esposito, C., De Santis, A., Tortora, G., Chang, H. and Choo, K.K.R. (2018), “Blockchain: a panacea for
healthcare cloud-based data security and privacy? ”,IEEE Cloud Computing , Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 31-37.
Esposito, M., Kapoor, A. and Goyal, S. (2012), “Enabling healthcare services for the rural and semi-
urban segments in India: when shared value meets the bottom of the pyramid ”,Corporate
Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society , Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 514-533.
fe Bureau (2014), “Narendra Modi govt plans US-style universal healthcare scheme ”, available at: www.
financialexpress.com/archive/narendra-modi-govt-plans-us-style-universal-healthcare-scheme/1265248/9 (accessed 30 July 2018).
Fernandez-Luque, L. and Imran, M. (2018), “Humanitarian health computing using artificial intelligence
and social media: a narrative literature review ”,International Journal of Medical Informatics ,
Vol. 114, pp. 136-142.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N. and Shepard, M. (2019), “Subsidizing health insurance for low-income
adults: evidence from Massachusetts ”,American Economic Review , Vol. 109 No. 4, pp. 1530-1567.
Fortino, G., Ghasemzadeh, H., Gravina, R., Liu, P.X., Poon, C.C.Y. and Wang, Z. (2019), “Advances in
multi-sensor fusion for body sensor networks: algorithms, architectures, and applications ”,
Information Fusion , Vol. 45, pp. 150-152.
Foss, N. (2011), “Why micro-foundations for resource-based theory are needed and what they may look
like”,Journal of Management , Vol. 37 No. 5, pp. 1413-1428.
Fox, G. and Connolly, R. (2018), “Mobile health technology adoption across generations: Narrowing the
digital divide ”,Information Systems Journal , Vol. 28 No. 6, pp. 995-1019.
Goodall, K., Ward, P. and Newman, L. (2010), “Use of information and communication technology to
provide health information: what do older migrants know, and what do they need to know? ”,
Quality in Primary Care , Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 27-32.
Goodman, J. (2009), Strategic Customer Service, AMACOM, American Management Association ,
New York, NY.
Goyal, S., Sergi, B.S. and Jaiswal, M. (2015), “How to design and implement social business models for
base-of-the-pyramid (BoP) markets? ”,The European Journal of Development Research , Vol. 27
No. 5, pp. 850-867.
Guest, G., Bunce, A. and Johnson, L. (2006), “How many interviews are enough? An experiment with
data saturation and variability ”,Field Methods , Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 59-82.
Gupta, H. (2007), “The role of insurance in health care management in India ”,International Journal of
Health Care Quality Assurance , Vol. 20 No. 5, pp. 379-391.
Haluza, D. and Jungwirth, D. (2018), “ICT and the future of healthcare: aspects of pervasive health
monitoring ”,Informatics for Health and Social Care , Vol. 43 No. 1, pp. 1-11.
Holsti, O.R. (1969), Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities , Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Hsieh, H.F. and Shannon, S.E. (2005), “Three approaches to qualitative content analysis ”,Qualitative
Health Research , Vol. 15 No. 9, pp. 1277-1288.
Hussain, M., Mollik, A.T., Johns, R. and Rahman, M.S. (2019), “M-payment adoption for bottom of
pyramid segment: an empirical investigation ”,International Journal of Bank Marketing , Vol. 37
No. 1, pp. 362-381.
Jacob, A. (2016), “Innovation should transcend boundaries to reach the masses ”,IRDAI Journal , Vol. 14
No. 1, pp. 14-15.768IJSSP
39,9/10Jacob, A. (2017), “Technology to be a game changer in health insurance ”,IRDAI Journal , Vol. 15 No. 1,
pp. 32-34.
Jaiswal, A.K. (2008), “The fortune at the bottom or the middle of the pyramid? ”,Innovations:
Technology, Governance, Globalization , Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 85-100.
Kabir, N. and Carayannis, E. (2013), “Big data, tacit knowledge and organizational competitiveness ”,
Journal of Intelligence Studies in Business , Vol. 3, pp. 54-62.
Karan, A., Yip, W. and Mahal, A. (2017), “Extending health insurance to the poor in India: an impact
evaluation of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana on out of pocket spending for healthcare ”,Social
Science & Medicine , Vol. 181, pp. 83-92.
Khan, M., Bharathi, V. and Londhe, B.R. (2015), “Ranking the critical buying factors of private health
insurance using analytic hierarchy process ”,Indian Journal of Science and Technology ,V o l .8
No. S6, pp. 35-42.
Khan, Z. (2014), “Firms investing in social sector have deployed $1.6 bn in India since 2000 ”, 14 April,
available at: www.livemint.com/Industry/LYKwhmHPyzu4Q9rHBgKsuM/Firms-investing-in-social-sector-have-deployed-16-bn-in-I.html (accessed 1 May 2019).
Khare, A., Dixit, S., Chaudhary, R., Kochhar, P. and Mishra, S. (2012), “Customer behavior toward
online insurance services in India ”,Journal of Database Marketing & Customer Strategy
Management , Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 120-133.
Khosla, V. (2016), “How agritech and healthcare tech are creating social impact ”, 18 May, available at:
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/co mpany/corporate-trends/how-agritech-and-
healthcare-tech-are-creating-social-impact/articleshow/52301197.cms (accessed 28 April 2019).
Kilian, T., Steinmann, S. and Hammes, E. (2018), “Oh my gosh, I got to get out of this place! A
qualitative study of vicarious embarrassment in service encounters ”,Psychology & Marketing ,
Vol. 35 No. 1, pp. 79-95.
Koppar, A.R. and Sridhar, V. (2009), “A workflow solution for electronic health records to improve
healthcare delivery efficiency in rural India ”,2009 International Conference on eHealth,
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, IEEE , pp. 227-232.
Krippendorff, K. (1980), Validity in Content Analysis , Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Lantos, Z. and Simon, J. (2018), “The community health experience model –value generation from
person-centered health transaction network ”,Public Health Reviews , Vol. 39 No. 1, pp. 29(1)-29(19).
Liu, X., Tang, S., Yu, B., Phuong, N.K., Yan, F., Thien, D.D. and Tolhurst, R. (2012), “Can rural health
insurance improve equity in health care utilization? A comparison between China and Vietnam ”,
International Journal for Equity in Health , Vol. 11 No. 1, pp. 10(1)-10(9).
Lupton, D. (2013), “The digitally engaged patient: self-monitoring and self-care in the digital health
era”,Social Theory & Health , Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 256-270.
Lupton, D. (2014), “Health promotion in the digital era: a critical commentary ”,Health Promotion
International , Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 174-183.
Luxford, K., Safran, D.G. and Delbanco, T. (2011), “Promoting patient-centered care: a qualitative study
of facilitators and barriers in healthcare organizations with a reputation for improving thepatient experience ”,International Journal for Quality in Health Care , Vol. 23 No. 5, pp. 510-515.
Marashi, P.S. and Hamidi, H. (2018), “Business challenges of big data application in health
organization ”, in Khajeheian, D., Friedrichsen, M. and Mödinger, W. (Eds), Competitiveness in
Emerging Markets: Contributions to Management Science , Springer, Cham, pp. 569-584.
Margan, S.K. (2017), “Customer engagement based business models –re-inventing customer
engagement in health insurance ”,IRDAI Journal , Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 14-20.
Matsumoto, K. (2018), “Critical factors for success among social enterprises in India ”, The Program for
Research on Development Issues, JICA-RI Working Papers No. 179, Tokyo, pp. 1-61.
Middleton, B. (2005), “Achieving US health information technology adoption: the need for a third
hand ”,Health Affairs , Vol. 24 No. 5, pp. 1269-1272.769Health
insurance for
social goodMiller, D.D. and Brown, E.W. (2018), “Artificial intelligence in medical practice: the question to the
answer? ”,The American Journal of Medicine , Vol. 131 No. 2, pp. 129-133.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., Huberman, M.A. and Huberman, M. (1994), Qualitative Data Analysis: An
Expanded Sourcebook , Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Molteni, M. (2017), “How one startup built better health insurance with the magic of data ”,
available at: www.wired.com/2017/05/one-startup -built-better-health-in surance-magic-data/
( a c c e s s e d1M a y2 0 1 9 ) .
Naujoks, H., Brettel, T., Singh, H., Darnell, D. and Schwedel, A. (2017), “Customer behavior and loyalty
in insurance: global edition 2017 ”, available at: www.bain.com/insights/customer-behavior-
loyalty-in-insurance-global-2017 (accessed 9 April 2019).
Nayak, B. and Bhattacharyya, S.S. (2019), “Integrating digital wisdom and human capital ”,The Journal
for Quality and Participation , Vol. 41 No. 4, pp. 20-23.
Nayak, B., Bhattacharyya, S.S. and Krishnamoorthy, B. (2019a), “Democratizing health insurance
services; accelerating social inclusion through technology policy of health insurance firms ”,
Business Strategy & Development , Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 242-252.
Nayak, B., Bhattacharyya, S.S. and Krishnamoorthy, B. (2019b), “Integrating wearable technology
products and big data analytics in business strategy: a study of health insurance firms ”,Journal
of Systems and Information Technology , Vol. 21 No. 2, pp. 255-275.
Nayak, B., Krishnamoorthy, B., Bhattacharrya, S.S. and Pathak, P. (2018), “Customer preferences for
health insurance product attributes ”,Journal of Services Research , Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 59-76.
Owens, J. and Cribb, A. (2019), “‘My Fitbit Thinks I Can Do Better! ’Do health promoting wearable
technologies support personal autonomy? ”,Philosophy & Technology , Vol. 32 No. 1, pp. 23-38.
Parekh, A. (2010), “Importance of training in insurance ”,IRDA Journal , Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 12-16.
Patel, S., Park, H., Bonato, P., Chan, L. and Rodgers, M. (2012), “A review of wearable sensors and
systems with application in rehabilitation ”,Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation ,
Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 21(1)-21(17).
Planning Commission, Government of India (2009), “A hundred small steps report of the committee on
financial sector reforms ”, Planning Commission, Government of India, New Delhi.
Porter, M.E. and Kramer, M.R. (2019), “Creating shared value ”, in Lenssen, G.G. and Smith, N.C. (Eds),
Managing Sustainable Business , Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 323-346.
Prahalad, C.K. (2005), The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty through Profits ,
Wharton School Publishing, Philadelphia.
Prinja, S., Kaur, M. and Kumar, R. (2012), “Universal health insurance in India: ensuring equity,
efficiency, and quality ”,Indian Journal of Community Medicine: Official Publication of Indian
Association of Preventive & Social Medicine , Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 142-149.
Prinja, S., Bahuguna, P., Gupta, I., Chowdhury, S. and Trivedi, M. (2019), “Role of insurance in
determining utilization of healthcare and financial risk protection in India ”,PLoS One , Vol. 14
No. 2, pp. e0211793(1)-e0211793(16).
Rahmadika, S. and Rhee, K.H. (2018), “Blockchain technology for providing an architecture model of
decentralized personal health information ”,International Journal of Engineering Business
Management , Vol. 10, pp. 1-12.
Raj, K. and Aithal, P.S. (2018), “Sustainable development in India 2.0 with reference to the BOP
perspective ”,International Journal of Applied Engineering and Management Letters , Vol. 2 No. 2,
pp. 87-97.
Rao, M. and Mant, D. (2012), “Strengthening primary healthcare in India: white paper on opportunities
for partnership ”,BMJ, Vol. 344, pp. 1-14.
Rivlin, A.M. and Reischauer, R.D. (2016), “Health policy issues and the 2016 presidential election ”,
6 October, available at: www.brookings.edu/resea rch/health-policy-is sues-and-the-2016-
presidential-election-2/ (accessed 27 July 2018).770IJSSP
39,9/10Roulston, K. (2011), “Working through challenges in doing interview research ”,International Journal of
Qualitative Methods , Vol. 10 No. 4, pp. 348-366.
Rubin, H.J. and Rubin, I.S. (2011), Qualitative Interviewing: The Art of Hearing Data , Sage, Thousand
Oaks, CA.
Sajanlal, S. (2019), “How technology plays a critical role in transforming healthcare in India ”, 18 March,
available at: https://yourstory.com/2019/03/technology-critical-role-transforming-healthcare-india (accessed 27 April 2019).
Sangar, S., Dutt, V. and Thakur, R. (2019), “Analysis of the impoverishment impact of ailments in
India ”,Frontiers in Public Health , Vol. 7, pp. 9(1)-9(5).
Saraswathy, M. (2018), “Budget 2018: India gets closer to universal health scheme, but several
questions remain ”, Money Control, 1 February, available at: www.moneycontrol.com/news/
business/economy/budget-2018-india-gets-close r-to-universal-health-scheme-but-several-
questions-remain-2497689.html (accessed 30 June 2018).
Schreier, M. (2012), Qualitative Content Analysis in Practice , Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development , Vol. 46 (translated by Opie, R.), Harvard
Economic Studies, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Sheth, A.P., Srivastava, B. and Michahelles, F. (2018), “IoT-enhanced human experience ”,IEEE Internet
Computing , Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 4-7.
Shrestha, A., Bergquist, S., Montz, E. and Rose, S. (2018), “Mental health risk adjustment with clinical
categories and machine learning ”,Health Services Research , Vol. 53, pp. 3189-3206.
Sourbati, M. (2011), “The digital switchover as an information society initiative: the role of
public policy in promoting access to digital ICTs ”,Telematics and Informatics , Vol. 28 No. 4,
pp. 295-302.
Sundararaman, T. (2018), “Lessons from Thailand: for universal health coverage, invest in public
systems and human resources ”, 19 February, available at: https://scroll.in/pulse/869170/lessons-
from-thailand-for-universal-health-coverage-i nvest-in-public-system s-and-human-resources
(accessed 1 May 2019).
Tung, E. and Bennett, S. (2014), “Private sector, for-profit health providers in low- and middle-income
countries: can they reach the poor at scale? ”,Globalization and Health , Vol. 10 No. 1,
pp. 52(1)-52(9).
Urbina, S.P. (1981), “Methodological issues in the quantitative analysis of dream content ”,Journal of
Personality Assessment , Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 71-78.
Van Velthoven, M.H. and Cordon, C. (2019), “Sustainable adoption of digital health innovations:
perspectives from a stakeholder workshop ”,Journal of Medical Internet Research
, Vol. 21 No. 3,
pp. e11922(1)-e11922(8).
Verghese, A., Shah, N.H. and Harrington, R.A. (2018), “What this computer needs is a physician:
humanism and artificial intelligence ”,Journal of the American Medical Association , Vol. 319
No. 1, pp. 19-20.
Ward, K., Sanders, D., Leng, H. and Pollock, A.M. (2014), “Assessing equity in the geographical
distribution of community pharmacies in Sou th Africa in preparation for a national
health insurance scheme ”,Bulletin of the World Health Organization , Vol. 92 No. 7,
pp. 482-489.
Ward, M.J., Marsolo, K.A. and Froehle, C.M. (2014), “Applications of business analytics in healthcare ”,
Business Horizons , Vol. 57 No. 5, pp. 571-582.
West, S.L., Johnson, W., Visscher, W., Kluckman, M., Qin, Y. and Larsen, A. (2014), “The challenges of
linking health insurer claims with electronic medical records ”,Health Informatics Journal ,
Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 22-34.
Yu, K.H. and Kohane, I.S. (2019), “Framing the challenges of artificial intelligence in medicine ”,BMJ
Quality & Safety , Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 238-241.771Health
insurance for
social goodAppendix. Expert interview for application of digital technologies in health insurance
for social good of bottom of pyramid customers in India
This questionnaire is a part of a research project titled “Application of digital technologies in health
insurance for social good of bottom of pyramid customers in India ”. The questions are intended to
understand the views of industry experts on the growth of the health insurance sector in India and howit has contributed to social inclusivity and improving healthcare access for the bottom of pyramid(BoP) population. All questions are generic in nature and the responses will be kept confidential.The responses will be discussed in the research report without linking the responses to any specificrespondent or organization.
Name of Respondent:Designation:Organization:Years of Experience in Health Insurance Industry:Date of Interview: ________________________ —Time: _____________________
(1) In your view, how has the health insurance market evolved over the last decade?
(2) How do you think the health insurance growth in India has influenced the healthcare delivery
industry?
(3) How has the increase in health insurance coverage helped the below poverty line population?
(4) Has the BoP population benefitted from the social health programmes implemented in India?
(5) According to you, what are the strategic imperatives of digital technology in the social health
insurance sector in India for the BoP customers?
(6) Do you feel that technology innovations in health insurance sector have helped in improving
access to healthcare for the BoP population?
(7) According to you, what are the critical areas of the healthcare sector where technology and
digitalization can be applied for better social inclusivity?
(8) What could be the possible implications of digital technology adoption by the social health
insurance sector in India to bring maximum benefit to BoP customers?
(9) Are health insurance firms adopting technology to address the healthcare issues of the BoP
sector in India? How are they utilizing it for better social inclusion?
(10) Any other point that you would like to add?
Corresponding author
Bishwajit Nayak can be contacted at: bnayak0107@gmail.com
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com772IJSSP
39,9/10