  
 
Digital Strategy 201 8-2020: 
Doing D evelopment in a 
Digital World  
 
 
January  2018  
1 | Doing development in a digital world  
 Contents  
 
Foreword from the Secretary of State  ................................ ...... 2 
Key Messages  ................................ ................................ .........  4 
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .........  6 
2.  Doing development in a digital world ................................ . 11 
3.  Transforming as a digital department  ................................  17 
4.  Delivery model and principles  ................................ ...........  19 
5.  Conclusion ................................ ................................ ........  21 
 
 
 
 
  
Photo credits : 
Title page and page 21: The GSMA , Mobile for Development Programme  
Page 2  and 15 : DFID – UK Department for International Development  2 | Doing development in a digital world  
 
Foreword from the Secretary of 
State  
Doing development in a digital world  
 
 
In a fast -changing world, technology affords us 
the opportunity to do more as individuals and in 
collaboration with others. Technology gives us 
the power to include, the power to reach, to 
inspire, to communicate, to educate, to 
change. Digital technologie s offer an 
unprecedented opportunity to revolutionise the 
global development system, change lives, 
transform entire economies, stimulate growth 
and, ultimately, end reliance on aid.  
Global Britain has a proud history of digital innovation – from the earli est days of computing 
to the development of the World Wide Web – which is evident in today’s thriving global 
digital economy. In government, we have led the world in transforming our services and 
systems, using digital technology to make them easier, simpl er and cheaper.  
DFID leads the world at open, modern and innovative approaches to development and 
digital technologies are at the heart of our work - using cutting -edge technology to lift millions 
of people out of poverty. For example, UK aid and British business provided critical support 
for the launch of M -PESA in Kenya, which has since driven a mobile money revolution in 93 
countries.  
This is why I am launching DFID’s Digital Strategy for ‘Doing Development in a Digital 
World’, which will build on our rich legacy and support UK efforts to make sure the global aid 
system is ready for the challenges of the 21st century. The new strategy will ensure that our 
approach to development adapts and keeps pace with technological innovation and change. 
We will use  the latest digital technology to push the development system to become more 
effective, transparent and accountable - enabling us to follow the money, the people and the 
outcomes.  
Britain leads the world in humanitarian response; digital technology helps us focus our aid 
where the need is greatest. Satellite data is helping us to trigger digitally- enabled payments 
before the worst effects of drought are felt by those who are most vulnerable, providing life -
saving support.  
The Global Goals are ambitious, a nd rightly so.  We can only achieve them by making best 
use of the latest digital technology. To get the most out of digital technologies, we need to 
ensure that the benefits are accessible to all. Small businesses, rural communities, women 
and minority gr oups – all stand to benefit from the growth and job creation that innovation 3 | Doing development in a digital world  
 and technology brings. We will harness the power of digital technologies to include, putting 
disability at the heart of our agenda.   
We will work openly and collaboratively with others who share our digital vision; for a world 
where digital technology will be accessible to all, and where no one will be left behind.  
 
 
 
Rt Hon Penny Mordaunt MP  
Secretary of State for International Development  
 
 
 
  
4 | Doing development in a digital world  
 Key Messages  
DFID’s Digital Strategy 2018 -2020 sets out a vision and approach for doing  
development in a digital world. Its aim is to establish DFID as a global leader in digital 
technology and development, in order to have a bigger, faster and more cost -effective 
impact on the lives of poor people.   
Digital technologies have the potential to revolutionise the lives of the poor, unlock 
development and prosperity, and accelerate progress towards the Global Goals. The 
rapid expansion of mobile phones and internet access in poor countries offers unique 
opportunities to : 
 stimulate growth, jobs and financial inclusion , 
 cut fraud and empower citizens to hold governments and other institutions to account , 
 provide better response in humanitarian emergencies , 
 improve learning outcomes for children in so me of the poorest countries , 
 increase inclusion by providing access to services previously out of reach to 
marginalised groups such as girls and women, and people with disabilities , 
 enhance traceability and transparency of aid funding throughout the delivery chain , 
 deliver real -time feedback and direct engagement with our beneficiaries and the UK 
public . 
However, significant barriers stand in the way of realising the full development 
potential of digital technologies . Over four billion people around t he world lack access to 
the internet , and risk being left behind in a digital world.  The benefits of the internet are also 
being accompanied by new risks of harmful concentration and monopoly, rising inequality, 
and state and corporate use of digital techn ologies to control rather than empower citizens.  
DFID  will work in an open and collaborative way with others who share our digital 
vision . Together, we will support a transformed global aid system that is well-poised 
to harness the opportunities, and ready to rise to the challenges, of a digital world.  
We will make greater and better use of digital technology to tackle global poverty and 
deliver on the Global Goals. We will:  
 Identify and embed good practic e in using digital solutions in aid programmes.  
 Promote common principles and standards for digital development throug hout the aid 
system, to ensure that more digital products and services reach, empower and improve 
the lives of poor people, particularly those at risk of being left behind.  
 Champion  affordable , secure  access to the i nternet in developing countries, so that the 
benefits of digital technologies are accessible to all . 
We will play our part in delivering on the vision of th e UK Government Transformation 
Strategy  for digital, data and technology  by: 
 Redesign ing service s around the needs of our users. This will  result in more open, 
engaging, and responsive interactions with the UK public, our suppliers and partners, 
and beneficiaries . 5 | Doing development in a digital world  
  Collaborating  across government  through common platforms, technologies and 
systems , in pursuit of the UK g overnment’s policy aims worldwide . 
 Making  better use of data - to inform delivery of the U K Aid Strategy and Global Goals. 
This will  drive better deci sion-making in our programmes and operations, and 
strengthen our accountability, tra nsparency and public engagement.  
Above all, we will champion a view of digital, data and technology as enablers rather 
than an end goal: the goal is in the material benefit s delivered to people , particularly 
those who are most vulnerable and marginalised.   
 
  6 | Doing development in a digital world  
 1.1 Aims and vision  
DFID’s Digital Strategy 2018 -2020 sets out a 
vision and approach for doing  development in 
a digital world.  
Its aim is to establish DFID as a global leader 
in digital technology and development, in 
order to have a bigger, faster and more cost -
effective impact on the lives of poor people.  
The vision is for a future where DFID will be 
harnessing the benefits of digital technology 
at two levels:  
 Doing development in a digital world : 
DFID will be using  digital technology to 
improve the speed, value for money, 
reach and impact of its programme s, 
which will be more flexible and user -
centred . DFID will be playing its part in 
maximising the development benefits of 
digital technology  - realising a world 
where the internet will be more widely 
available, and more digital products and 
services will be scaled and targe ted to 
reach, empowe r and improve the lives of 
poor people , particularly those at risk of 
being left behind .  
 
 Transforming  as a digital  department:  
DFID will have re -designed departmental 
services around the needs of its users . 
This will mean more open and responsive 
communications and transactions with the 
UK public, beneficiaries and partner 
countries, suppliers and civil servants. 
DFID and other international departments 
will be able to work together effectively in 
pursuit of the government’s policy a ims 
worldwide through common platforms, 
technologies and systems. Data will be used routinely to inform delivery of the UK 
Aid Strategy and Global Goals, drive 
better decision -making within DFID, and 
to strengthen DFID’s accountability and 
public engagemen t.   
1.2 Starting points  
Over the past decade, the digital agenda has 
come to affect DFID’s activities and priorities 
in a number of ways.  
Digital technologies are playing an 
increasingly important role in developing 
countries and development practice, 
presenting new opportunities a s well as new 
challenges . Information and communication 
technologies are recognised as key enablers 
for delivering on all of the Global Goals for 
Sustainable Development. Global Goal 9 
strives for universal and affordable acce ss to 
the internet in least developed countries by 
2020 .  
Digital transformation is also a key priority for 
the UK government. The Government 
Transformation Strategy 2017 -2020 outlines a 
cross- government vision for digital, data and 
technology and how they  support 
transformative change.  
Taking the lead from the  Government 
Transformation Strategy, the use of the word 
‘digital’ within this strategy refers to “the tools, 
techniques, technology and approaches of the 
internet age ”. This definition recognises th at 
the way people are working digitally is as 
important as the tools they are using.   
While ambitious in its vision, this strategy is 
not starting from scratch. DFID  already has a  
strong foundation of learning, experience and 
demonstrable achievement in digital 1. Introduction  
 7 | Doing development in a digital world  
 development to date, which will be important 
to build on. Examples of this are highlighted 
throughout the strategy.  
1.3 The o pportunity  
Digital technologies have the potential to 
revolutionise the lives of the poor, unlock 
development and prosperity, and accelerate 
progress towards the Global Goals.   
The rapid expansion of mobile phones and 
internet access in poor countries is impacting 
on development in a wide range of ways : 
 Economic growth: Access to the 
internet has been estimated to have the 
potential to generate over $2.2 trillion in 
additional GDP and more than 140 million 
new jobs in the developing world. The 
World Bank has calculated that there is a 
1.38% growth in GDP for every 10% of 
the population connected1. 
 Financial inclusion: M-Pesa2 - the most 
successful mobile phone based financial 
service in the developing world - allows 
over two -thirds of adults in Kenya to 
deposit, send and receive money through 
a simple text -based menu available on 
even the most basic mobile phone. Since 
its launch in 2007, the cost of sending 
remittances dropped by 90% and through 
enabling citizens to use the service to 
electricity or shopping, the value of M -
Pesa transactions is now equivalent to 
around half of Kenya’s GDP.3 
 Utilities:  Around 1 billion people in the 
world have no access to affordable and 
reliable electricity but around 65%4 have 
access to a mobile phone. M -KOPA Solar 
increases access to electricity for the 
                                                   
1 ‘World Development Report: Digital Dividends ’, World Bank, 
2016  
2 M-Pesa received initial funding from DFID  
3 See http://www.eiu.com/industry/article/1451806929/m -pesa -
out-of-africa -into-romania/2014 -05-13 and 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business -38667475  
4 ‘The Mobile Economy ’, GSMA, 2017  poorest by enabling poor people to buy 
clean energy products in small 
instalments, using mobile banking 
platforms such as M -PESA. To date, M -
KOPA has powered over 400,000 homes 
in East Africa. The programme is now 
being expanded, with the aim of reaching 
one million homes by 2018.5 
 Agriculture : Technology offers 
potent ially lower cost solutions to 
otherwise expensive agricultural 
extension services or hard -to-reach 
healthcare services. The DFID funded 
mAgri programme, led by GSMA,  works 
with mobile phone companies to provide 
farming tips in local languages, weather 
upda tes, market prices information as 
well as nutrition advice. The service  
reached over five million users  in 20176.  
 Health : Using digital technologies to drive 
remote diagnosis and prevention 
education could save up to $188 billion by 
20257.  The Global Tra choma Mapping 
Project8 used android mobile 
smartphones, GPS mapping software and 
cloud technology to carry out a survey in 
collaboration with 60 partners globally. 
One hundred million people were 
identified as being at risk of becoming 
blind through Tracho ma more quickly, 
allowing for earlier intervention and better 
outcomes.  
 Education : The world faces a global 
learning crisis. Currently it is estimated 
that 387million children globally are not 
on track to read by the end of primary 
education. Digital technology has the 
potential to transform learning and help 
tackle global education ch allenges, 
ensuring no one is left behind. A new 
DFID -funded  EdTech Research and 
                                                   
5 www.m -kopa.com ; M-KOPA Solar has been funded by DFID  
6https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/ma
gri/creating -scalable -mobile -solutions  
7  World Economic Forum, 2016  
8 Programme funding  from DFID  8 | Doing development in a digital world  
 Innovation hub  will invest in robust 
researc h to identify what works and 
accelerate adoption of good practice .   
 Governance and accountability:  When 
Nigeria launched its e -ID system, this 
resulted in an annual saving of $1 billion 
through exposing 62,000 ‘ghost workers’ 
in the public sector (a return on 
investment of nearly 20,000% in one 
year)9, and prevented 4 million duplicate 
votes during the 2015 elections10.  In the 
past 6 years, 1 billion digital identities 
have been issued under Aadhaar, India’s 
biometric identification programme, 
expanding public services to poor and 
marginalised populations. Cash transfers 
enabled by this programme are saving 
around $1 billion per year a nd it is 
projected that the benefits of the 
programme will result in a return of over 
52% on investment over 10 years11. 
 Humanitarian response:  Mobile cash 
provides a faster and more secure route 
of getting resources to people in need 
and enables more targeted delivery of 
aid. During the Ebola crisis, the UN 
Development Programme used mobile 
phones to make direct payments to 
response workers, rea ching 60,000 
people at the height of the crisis and 
overcoming the logistical challenge of 
paying field workers in  remote and rural 
locations12. 
Digital technologies can also help increase  
inclusion by giving voice and providing access 
to information, vital  services and economic 
opportunity previously out of reach to 
marginalised groups:   
                                                   
9  A.Gelb and J.Clark, ‘Identification for Development: The 
Biometrics Revolution’, Center for Global Development, 2013  
10 ‘World Development Report: Digital Dividends’, World Bank, 
2016   
11 Andhra Pradesh Smartcard Survey, ‘Implementing a 
Biometric Payment System: The Andhra Pradesh Experience ’, 
2013 
12 UNDP, 2015   Giving v oice:  Digital communications  are 
amplifying the voices of geographically or 
politically remote communities, projecting 
their needs further and more loudly and 
increasing the likelihood of them being 
addressed.  
 Providing access to i nformation  and 
choice : Digital technologies also  enab le 
information to flow in the other direction, 
for example by providing access to 
educational tools and healthcare advice.  
 Supporting f inancial independence : E-
commerce and e -work platforms are 
helping women, girls and people with 
disabilities gain a degre e of financial 
independence, overcoming the social 
norms, mobility or time constraints which 
can confine them to their homes and 
exclude them from economic activities.  
 Widening a ccess to basic services:  
New business models and efficiencies 
being driven by digital technologies are 
allowing the private sector to deliver basic 
services like water and electricity to 
informal settlements and poor rural 
communities for the first time.  
Box 1 . Empowering girls and women*  
 Technology -Enabled Girl Ambassadors  in 
Nigeria are being trained to become qualified 
mobile social researchers. They are using 
mobile technology to collect accurate, rapid 
insights into girls’ lives, particularly in hard to 
reach communities.  
 Project iMlango delivers e -learning 
programmes to girls in rural and remote 
Kenyan primary schools, who otherwise 
struggle to get access to education, through 
high-speed satellite broadband connectivity, 
provision of tailored online educational 
content and electronic attendance monitoring.  
 The Girl Generation Project  is using social 
media to galvanise action to end FGM, driving 
social and behavioural change across Africa . 
*Programmes funded by DFID  9 | Doing development in a digital world  
 1.4 The challenge   
While the opportunities are significant, the 
World Bank’s World Development Report 
2016  points out that ‘digital dividends’ for 
development are not spreading equally or 
rapidly enough.  
Over four billion people around the wo rld lack 
access to the internet. Sixty per cent  of people 
in developing countries do not have ac cess to 
the internet, rising to 85% in least developed 
countries.  The divides in access are similarly 
large among demographic splits in those 
countries, in particular between rural and 
urban populations (10% and 23%), women 
and men (12% and 18%), youth and  people 
aged over 45 (20% and 8%)13.  
Without a focus on access and accessibility, 
there is a risk that the digital revolution could 
further exacerbate existing inequalities by 
making it harder for chronically excluded 
groups of people to access services .  
In addition, the benefits of the internet are 
being accompanied by new risks of harmful 
concentration and monopoly, rising inequality, 
and state and corporate use of digital 
technologies to control rather than empower 
citizens.  
To realise the full develop ment benefits of the 
internet, digital investments need the support 
of what the World Bank terms ‘analogue 
complements’:  
 Regulations  - to support op en 
competition and innovation.  
 Improved skills and inclusion - so that 
people can take full adva ntage of di gital 
opportunities.  
 Accountable institutions  - so that 
governments respond to citizens’ needs 
and demands.  
                                                   
13 ‘World Development Report: Digital Dividends ’, World Bank, 
2016   Digital technologies can, in turn, strengthen 
regulation, skills and accountability , there by 
amplifying  development  outcomes.  
Global i nternet use             [Source: Internet Society 2017]
 
1.5 Responding and 
reforming  
Against this backdrop  of change, challenge 
and opportunity, DFID needs to reform how 
the digital agenda is prioritised and put into 
practice. This is critical in order for us to:  
 Remain at the cutting edge: The world 
is changing rapidly. DFID will need to 
adapt its development practices to keep 
up with the digital transformation agenda 
across government and the global aid 
system . 
 Get value for money:  DFID already 
invests heavily in  development 
programmes that incorporate a digital 
element and needs to ensure it gets the 
best value for money from these.  
 Maximise opportunity:  Digital 
technologies offer the potential to deliver 
bigger, faster, more transformative impact 
for all, includ ing people who have often 
been excluded from development 
benefits. DFID needs to be able to 
harness this fully.  
 Navigate risk : We also need to be able 
to navigate the new risks and threats 
posed to development by operating in an 
increasingly digital world , and ensure that 
no one is left behind .  
10 | Doing development in a digital world  
 This will require a clear  and syst ematic 
approach to the way that DFID engages with 
digital technologies in its development 
activities, and transforms digitally as a 
government department.  
DFID will focus on its users and their needs , 
to design solutions that take advantage of 
digital tools  and technologies, rather  than 
seeing them as an entire solution.  
1.6 Overview  
This digital s trategy addresses two areas  
where work is needed in order to achieve 
DFID’s digital vision and aims.  
The first area (Chapter 2) places focus on 
‘doing development in a digital world’ and is 
directed at using digital technologies in 
support of better development outcomes. The 
second area (Chapter 3) focuses on 
‘transforming as a digital  department’, in line 
with the vis ion of the Government 
Transformation Strategy.  
A well -networked, central hub  (Chapter 4)  will 
ensure  coordinated implementation of the 
digital str ategy.  It will set strategic direction for digital policy 
and programming; build digital capability and 
capacity; inspire transformation through 
visible digital demonstration; and ensure  
impact is maximised through partnerships and 
collaborative working  with those who share 
our digital vision .  
The strategy is  designed to lay the 
foundations for transform ing how we, and our 
partners, approach  deve lopment in a digital 
world. We recognise that  transformation will 
be an ongoing  process . We will remain  
adaptable and responsive in order to keep 
pace with change  – while maintaining a 
continued focus on user need .   
Our aim is to establish DFID 
as a global leader in digital 
technology and development, 
in order to have a bigger, 
faster and more cost -effective 
impact on the lives of poor 
people.  
  
Box 2. The inclusive power of digital technology : Leave No one Behind  
Sehat Kahani  is one example of the inclusive power of digital technology:  in Pakistan, around 
70% of medical school graduates are women. However, socio -cultural expectations and 
pressures around the role of women mean that only 30% even begin practising medicine, and 
many of those that do soon stop. I n total only 13% of licensed female doctors are registered as 
physicians.  Meanwhile, 108 million people (60% of the population) do not have access to quality, 
affordable healthcare. Sehat Kahani is a health solution that provides female healthcare 
professionals with the tools to work  remotely, such as video conferencing, transmission of still 
images, e -health patient portals, remote monitoring of vital signs, and continuing medical 
education. This enables the delivery of high quality healthcare to rural and low income urban 
communitie s via small local healthcare centres, while circumventing socio -cultural barriers that 
restrict women to their homes. Trained community -based nurses, health workers and midwives 
simultaneously assist in physical evaluation of patients .  
Funded by DFID thro ugh SPRING:  www.springaccelerator.org/about -spring/  11 | Doing development in a digital world  
 This area of the strategy is directed at  DFID’s  
use of  digital technologies in support of better 
development outcomes . Focus is placed on :  
 Enabling and leadi ng: supporting an 
environment that maximises the 
development impact of digital  
technologies . 
 Sharing and scaling:  making sure 
proven digital models  are widely  shared 
and replicated , to reach more poor and 
marginalised people in developing 
countries.  
 Systematising and s tandard setting:  
identifying and embedding good practice 
in using  digital solutions in development  
programmes , to deliver better  value for 
money and impact .  
2.1 Enabling and leading  
Aims  
DFID will support affordable access to the 
internet and digital technologies in developing 
countries. We will foster conditions that 
maximise the impact of digital technology on 
reducing poverty and achieving the Global 
Goals.  
Activities   
 Developing strategic digital  
development  partnerships : For 
example,  DFID is aligning with partners 
across UK government and the 
international donor community in support 
of affordable, secure internet access;  
serves as an anchor partner on the Global 
Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data; and  is part of a strategic partnership that aims to harness mobile technology to 
provide life -enhancing services (Box 4 ).  
 Collaborating across government:  
DFID will align clo sely with other 
government departments working on 
international digital issues - such as 
internet access,  digital inclusion and skills, 
the digital economy, data privacy, cyber 
security and internet governance . 
 Building capacity and providing 
technical assistance:  This might incl ude 
offers to ‘match make’ recipient 
governments to learn from each other; or 
transferring UK expertise to developing 
countries, extracting lessons from the 
public and private sector.  
 Advocating  and influencing : DFID will 
play an active role in digital policy 
discussions, domestically and 
internationally.  We will aim to ensure a 
strong focus on inclusion and poverty 
reduction within digital policy.  This will 
help ensure marginalised and excluded 
people and communities have equal 
opportunities, voice and choice to benefit 
from digital technologies.  
Desired outcomes  
 DFID’s leadership role in partnerships will 
influence the creation of better enabling 
environments a nd standards.  
 Programmes will be able to reach 
marginalised people faster to ensure they 
are not left further behind by digital 
transformation.  
 Digital delivery of programmes will provide 
open and transparent data.  2. Doing dev elopment in a digital world  12 | Doing development in a digital world  
 2.2 Sharing  and scaling  
Aims  
DFID will ensure that proven digital models  
are widely shared and replicated , to reach and 
benefit more poor and marginalised people in 
developing countries . 
Activities  
 Encouraging coordination around 
effective solutions:  DFID  will build understanding  and consensus on 
conditions and contextual factors that lead 
to success ful outcomes  in the use of 
digital technologies in development 
programmes . DFID will ensure that 
evidence on what works is shared widely 
within the department, as well as among 
donors and partners, so that it can be 
used to influence and benefit other 
programmes.  
 Helping DFID develop effective and 
sustainable digital programmes : DFID 
staff involved in preparing  business cases 
for programmes with digital elements will 
be able to get  advice and good exam ples 
from DFID’s Digital S pend Panel . They will 
be encouraged to follow the Principles for 
Digital Development  (Box 3 ).  
 Working with DFID country offices and 
sectors to scale and demonstrate high 
potential solutions:  DFID will identify a 
number of  ‘digital trailblazers’ and work 
with DFID staff and partners  to pilot new 
ways of working with digital technologies 
and approaches  (Box 7) . 
Desired outcomes  
 DFID  will identify and develop digital 
solutions with the potential to be scaled 
and replicated so  they can reach the 
greatest number of people who need 
them.  
 Knowledge will be shared between donors 
and across governments to ensure 
lessons are learnt and common 
technology platforms are procured and 
reused.  
 Donors and partner countries will be 
coordinat ed around effective solutions to 
enable replication and scale up of 
successful interventions.  Box 3 . The Principles for Digital Development   
 
The P rinciples for Digital D evelopment  are 
globally  recognised guidelines for international 
development practitioners on how to make the 
most of digitally enabled programmes . 
The nine p rincipl es include : 
1. Design with the User  
2. Understand the Existing Ecosystem  
3. Design for Scale  
4. Build for Sustainability  
5. Be Data Driven  
6. Use Open Standards, Open Data, Open 
Source, and Open Innovation  
7. Reuse and Improve  
8. Address Privacy and Security  
9. Be Collaborative  
DFID’s partners  are putting the Principles for 
Digital Development into practice in a range of 
ways.  Shule Direct  is an online platform that 
provides educational learning content for students 
and teachers in secondary schools . Shule  Direct 
realis ed that over 85% of the users accessing 
their open educational resource were doing so 
over Opera Mini browsers, which are designed for 
mobile phones. With support from the DFID -
funded Human  Development Innovation Fund,  
Shule Direct developed a lear ning and revision 
platform for secondary s chool students in 
Tanzania, which is accessible via all types of 
phones. This enabled them to extend their 
services to rural areas and a wider community.  13 | Doing development in a digital world  
 Box 4 . Doing development in a digital world: Examples of DFID’s existing activities  
 
Enabling and leading:   
 DFID sits on the steering committ ee of the World Economic Forum Internet for All 
Initiative , which was established to facilitate collaboration and alignment between public and 
private sector stakeholders seeking to expand internet access to poor and excluded 
populations. The initiative brings together  a global community of over 50 leading organisations 
from business, government, civil society, academia, donors and international organisations.  
 DFID is an anchor partner of the new Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data . The partnership aims to  exploit the opportunities from the data revolution, by fostering 
the development and application of innovative approaches to filling critical data gaps, and 
engaging a wider set of stakeholders in the private sector and civil society.  
Sharing and scaling:   
 The Mobile for Development Strategic Partnership  harnesses mobile technology to provide 
life-enhancing services including digital identity solutions, humanitarian response, access to 
clean energy and water, and mobile money. DFID partners with the global  association of 
mobile networks (GSMA) to leverage their expertise and market reach in order to catalyse 
innovation that benefits the world’s poorest. In this way we aim to unlock the powerful 
intersection between mobile -enabled service inclusion, financia l inclusion and digital inclusion, 
leading to long term socio -economic impact.   
 LEGEND (Land: Enhancing Governance for Economic Development)  is an open data 
land and resource rights mapping platform that will help safeguard rights and opportunities for 
poor and marginalised people. It will help share knowledge for the design and delivery of new 
country programmes, improve land governance as an essential component for economic 
development, and strengthen land and property rights at scale.   
Systematising and  standard setting:  
 DFID’s Digital Grid has been developed to help identify and share examples of the use of 
digital technologies in programmes so that others can learn from them and understand how 
they are helping to achieve development results. It can be  used to search for digital projects in 
DFID, and filter results by country, sector, tool and problems. Currently in beta testing as an 
internal tool for DFID staff, we would like to enhance it and potentially open it up across 
government and the wider dev elopment community.  
 Standards and quality assurance: DFID already drives high standards in digital 
programming by running a process that requires any digital elements of programmes be 
reviewed at the earliest possible stage by our advisors and approved by our Digital Spend 
Panel. In the past four years, this process has enabled our programme staff to be ‘intelligent 
customers’ of digital solutions and save money by applying our guidance.  DFID requires our 
suppliers and partners to adhere to the Principles for Digital Development. DFID also plays a 
leading part in the International Aid Transparency Initiative, a global open data standard for 
international development and humanitarian data.  14 | Doing development in a digital world  
 2.3 Systematising and 
standard setting  
Aims  
DFID will aim to embed effective use of digital 
technologies in to the way it delivers, monitors 
and evaluates aid and development work , by 
systematising existing knowledge and setting 
standards .  
Activities  
 Consolidating, coordinating and 
sharing knowledge : This will include  
further development and prom otion of the 
Digital Grid (Box 4 ) as a comprehensive, 
online database of digital programmes 
and activity in DFID. This could later 
become an open tool to share experience 
with the wider development community.    
 Raising awarene ss, building capacity 
and quality control:  We will develop  and 
deliver an ambitious new digital curriculum 
that builds staff capability  in a digital world 
(see Box 5 ). We will provide high quality 
advice and guidance, and raise 
awareness through regular 
communications and showcases of digital 
technology in development.  
 Providing tailored knowledge and 
guidelines:  We will collate  and promote  
existing knowledge and understanding of 
how digital tools and technologies have 
been applied successfully to development challenges  in the context of particular 
geographies, groups or sectors .  
Desired outcomes  
 The use of digital tools, techniques and 
technologies will be mainstreamed within 
DFID’s development activities and 
programmes.  
 Staff will be intelligent digital consumers – 
meaning they will  have more capability 
and confidence in commissioning and 
managing programmes that incorporate 
digital technologies.  
 Digital ways of working will be  considered 
by default in DFID. This will support 
programmes that are m ore flexible and  
user centred , and can better address the 
problems they are designed to solve.  
 Good practice will be identified, 
catalogued and shared, enabling DFID to 
achieve better impact and value for 
money.  
DFID will focus on inclusion 
and poverty reduction and will 
ensure marginalised and 
excluded people and 
communities have equal 
opportunities, voice and choice 
to benefit from digital 
technologies.  
Box 5 . Bridging the disability divide through digital technologies  (Source: World Bank 2016)  
Over 1 billion people around the world have disabilities, and 80 percent of them live in developing 
countries. People  with disabilities face barriers to communicate, interact, access information, and 
participate in civic activities. Digital technologies are helping overcome some of these barriers. Voice 
recognition, magnification, and text -to-speech functionality benefit  people with visual, cognitive, 
learning, and mobility disabilities. Text messaging, telephone relay, and video captions reduce 
communication barriers for persons with hearing and speech disabilities. Hands -free navigation and 
gesture -controlled interfaces  assist people with severe mobility impairments in using digital devices.  15 | Doing development in a digital world  
   Box 6 . DFID’s d igital learning offer  
 
A modular digital curriculum will build staff capability to support:  
 Doing d evelopment in a digital world - this focuses on the opportunities and risks presented to 
international development by an increasingly digital world, and the implications for operational 
planning, policy and research, and programme design, delivery, monitoring and evaluation. There is 
a particular focus on guidance for procuring digital solutions in line with the Principles for Digital 
Development. This element of the curriculum will build basic understanding of various digital 
solutions, combined with in -depth modules focusing on particular fu nctions, sectors or groups.  
 Transforming as a digital department  - this will focus on building capability in open internet tools 
and systems; effective use of data management platforms; online safety and security; and digital 
communications and social medi a.  
The digital curriculum will add to DFID’s existing capability offer, which includes:  
 Digital Ninjas  - a rewarding and successful peer network of over 200 digital experts across all 
teams and offices in DFID that support staff in improving their digita l capability.  
 Digital Quiz - digital skills self -assessment tool that measures knowledge and experience and refers 
individuals to resources to learn about new digital tools and techniques; available for open source 
reuse  by anyone.  
16 | Doing development in a digital world  
 This area of the strategy supports  delivery of  
the Gov ernment Transformation Strategy, 
which outlines a cross government vision for 
digital, data and technology.  It aligns with and 
incorporates aspects of DFID’s work in digital  
services, data and technology. This is outlined 
in more detail in DFID’s Data Roadmap and 
Technology Strategy respectively.  
This area of the strategy  includes a focus on : 
 Service design:  re-designing whole 
services to meet user needs  in a modern 
and efficient way.  
 Shared platforms and technology: 
collaborating across government to speed 
up transformation and make it easier to 
build, ite rate, reuse and retire services.  
 Data availability, q uality and use:  with a 
focus on data for development; data for 
decision making within DFID ; and data to 
strengthen DFID’s accountability.  
3.1 Service design   
Aims  
Our service transformation will design and 
deliver services and digital tools based on the 
needs of our users - both civil servants and 
external partners.  
Activities  
 Ongoing digital transformation:  we will 
continue to develop and improve 
corporate servic es so that users find them 
easy to access, simple to understand, 
timely and high quality. To support these 
services, DFID will train and equip service and product managers and ensure 
services continue to meet the Technology 
Code of Practice and the Digital  Service 
Standard .  
 Cloud hosting: we will continue to move 
DFID services to cloud hosted 
environments where appropriate, in line 
with the government’s Cloud First Policy , 
to benefit from assured performance and 
innovation .  
 Cyber security:  we will continu e to 
monitor threats to DFID systems and 
service . We will develop our security 
capability to build the appropriate cyber 
and information safeguards into design 
and delivery of our infrastructure, 
platforms, applications and processes. 
Where aid programmes are implemented 
by partners DFID will require these 
partners to apply the secure ways of 
working promoted by the  Principles for 
Digital Development . 
Desired outcomes  
 We will provide the tools for staff to work, 
communicate and collaborate effectively 
with colleagues across government and 
other partners globally.  
 Users will be at the heart of the design 
and delivery of excellent services which 
will operate flexibly and efficiently.  
 Our joined -up systems will  support 
effective use and management of 
knowledge and information in a cross-
government context.  
 3. Transforming as a digital depar tment  17 | Doing development in a digital world  
 3.2 Shared platforms and 
technology  
Aims  
DFID will support the government’s drive to 
make it easier to build services through 
shared platforms  by collaborating across 
government where there is common interest.  
Activities  
 Cross -government shared platforms: 
DFID will explore the possibility of 
extending its Aid Management Platform 
and supporting m anagement information 
tools to other government departments 
with responsibility for delivering official 
development assistance (ODA). We will 
use government platform services as 
appropriate (GOV.UK, Notify, Registers) 
and will collaborate around future 
services.  
 Common Technology Services 
internationally: DFID is working with    
other government departments with an 
international presence such as the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office  (FCO) , 
British Council and the Department for 
International Trade  (DIT) , as well as with 
the Common Technology Services team 
within the Government Digital Service 
(GDS) . The aim is to design platforms, 
systems and services for flexibility, 
scalability and reuse that are cost -
effective and meet user need. We will 
advocate for a common approach to 
devices, personal identification, 
collaboration, office productivity tools, 
mobile device management, and 
technology designs for property hubs.  
 GOV.UK: we are committed to work ing 
with GDS to overhaul all of DFID's legacy 
content on GO V.UK and make reforms to 
outdated publishing practices so 
government services and information are 
clear, well maintained and easy to find.  
 ECHO2 overseas network:  in 
collaboration with the FCO , British Council Box 7 .  Digital services: Examples of existing activity  
Internal services:  
● Management Information (MI)  tools  provide visibility of key information to all staff within DFID.  
● Aid Management Platform focuses on improving the quality of information and visibility of 
international development programmes through modern digital tools.  
● Vault - DFID’s new electronic  document and records management system.  
● Service Anywhere - DFID’s corporate support system (HR, finance, IT, facilities) is being 
developed into a one -stop knowledge service, providing all the information staff need to know 
about our corporate systems and  processes.  
 
External services:  
● International Development Funding Finder  makes it easier for people to find fun ding for 
international development work.  
● UK Development Tracker  uses International  Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) open data to trace 
the flow of funding from donors to implementing agencies.  
● UK Aid Direc t is a new online grant application portal and learning environment, launc hed in 
2016. It provides comprehensive information for potential applicants, and learning resources such 
as videos and case studies for existing grant holders . 
  18 | Doing development in a digital world  
 and DIT, DFID is modernising the 
overseas comm unications and data 
network to include quicker and easier 
access to all services.  
Desired outcomes  
 Civil servants in all international 
departments will be able to work together 
effectively in pursuit of the government’s 
policy aims worldwide.  
 All government buildings in the UK and 
overseas should be designed around 
property hub principles and could be used 
by staff from any department.  
 Working in overseas offices will be 
significantly easier and more efficient due 
to better connectivity and ne twork 
performance as close as possible to that 
achieved in the UK.  
3.3 Data availability, quality 
and use  
Aims  
DFID will make good use of data to deliver the 
UK Aid Strategy, directly and through strategic 
partnerships. This will require improvements 
in the availability, quality and use of data, in 
ways made possible by better digital 
technology.  
Activitie s 
 Data to underpin the Global Goals:  
DFID will focus on strengthening in -
country data systems to enhance 
transparency and open government. It will 
ensure the international system provides 
effective and coordinated support for 
better quality open data; invest in data 
infrastructure in partner  countries; and 
support the use of innovative techniques 
or technologies to improve data 
production, dissemination and use in 
partner countries.   Data to drive decision -making:  DFID will 
continue to strengthen the quality and 
timeliness of the data that it uses to 
design, monitor and evaluate its 
programmes, as well as its capability to 
use data to inform broader decisions at 
the business unit and corporate level.  
 Data for accountability and public 
engagement:  DFID is committed to the 
timely release of data which is  open and 
accessible by default. DFID will work with 
its implementing partners to improve the 
availability and quality of their data. DFID 
will use the International Aid Transparency 
Initiative (IATI) standard to strengthen the 
traceability of data  on international 
development funding through the delivery 
chain.  
Desired outcomes  
 Increased availability, quality and 
transparency of disaggregated data in 
partner countries, will be used for decision 
making and to hold governments to 
account.  
 DFID will be recognised as a data -driven 
organisation, offering transparency of 
delivery through our supply chain using 
open data from partners. More efficient 
capturing of results data will free time for 
analysis and use.  
 DFID’s open data will provide researchers 
and academics with access to rich 
datasets, allowing them to generate new 
insights to inform and challenge 
development policies and practices.  
Users will be at the heart of 
the design and delivery of 
excellent services which 
operate flexibly and efficientl y.  19 | Doing development in a digital world  
 A well -networked, central hub will ensure  
coordinated and concerted implementation of 
the digital strategy. It will play a key role in 
aligning  digital, data and technology  activities 
undertaken across DFID, in support of 
collaboration, learning and innovation .  
 
The hub will work according to the following 
principles:  
 Leading  throug h setting strategic vision 
and directio n. 
 Empowering  by building capability for all .  
 Inspiring  transformation through visible 
delivery and demonstration . 
 Maximising  impact through open and 
collaborative working . 
Examples of how these four principles  will 
translate into a practical delivery model are 
outlined  below.  
 
4.1. Strategy, policy and 
governance  
Work in this area will involve:  
 Setting strategic direction for how digital 
technologies  and approaches  are 
incorporated into policy, programmes and 
operations.   
 Shaping DFID position on key 
international digital policy issues by 
engaging in policy at a cross- government 
and global, multi -stakeholder level.  
 Developing and implementing a data 
roadmap to set the strategic direction for 
the collection, use and dissemination of 
data.   Aligning technology delivery to DFID’s 
strategic objectives, getting the best out of 
our resources and effectively managing, 
measuring and reporting on risk and 
performance.  
 Supporting and maintaining  secure 
network infrastructure across our locations 
worldwide and ensuring that risks to our 
information and infrastructure are 
identified and managed effectively.  
4.2. Capability and capacity  
Work in this area will involve:  
 Building DFID’s  internal capacity and 
capability to use digital technologies and 
data in ways that unlock better  business 
and development outcomes .  
 Advising on and approving digital spend  
and delivery in projects and programmes 
through DFID’s  Digital Spend Panel .  
 Providing  advice, guidance and best 
practice evidence  at various stages of the 
programme lifecycle.  
 Developing new tools and products to 
support digital knowl edge and capability 
across DFID.  
 Building  specialist digital capability into 
professional competency frameworks . 
This will include e mbedding the Digital, 
Data and Technology (DDaT) profession , 
to provide opportunities for training and 
skills development and career 
progression.  
 
 4. Delivery model and principles  20 | Doing development in a digital world  
 4.3. Delivery and 
demonstration  
Work in this area will involve:  
 Spearheading ambitious new digital 
programmes of work - working with 
‘trailblazing’ country offices and sectors to 
identify, embed, share and  scale good 
practice  (Box 7) . 
 Collaborating across government to 
design or reuse platforms, systems and 
services th at are cost -effective and meet 
user needs.  
 Developing DFID’s  Aid Management 
Platform (AMP) and management 
information tools in ways that better 
respond to user needs.  
 Sharing experience and tools with other 
government departments spending Official 
Develop ment Assistance (ODA) . 
4.4. Engagement and 
collaboration  
Work in this area will involve:  
 Building and demonstrating DFID’s 
leadership in digital development through 
innovative partnerships across DFID, UK 
government and the development 
community .  
 Collaboration with other donors through 
the International Aid Transparency 
Initiative (IATI) to improve the availability 
and use of data both within DFID and in 
developing countries.   
 Engaging widely with staff across DFID to 
communicate the opportunity a nd potential 
of digital approaches,  and build collective ownership for implementation of the digital 
strategy.  
 Ongoing engagement across the 
organisation to ensure strategy and 
delivery remain aligned to corporate 
objectives and user needs. We will do 
more  to help staff get the most out of our 
technology, considering the need to 
support adoption and behavioural change 
at the outset of new initiatives.  
Leadership and direction will be set by DFID’s 
Executive Management level Digital 
Champion and external expertise and 
challenge will be provided by DFID’s Digital 
Advisory Panel of cross- sector experts.  
 
Box 8. Digital Trailblazing  
A series of Digital Trailblazers will 
demonstrate the transformative potential and 
impact of  digital technology for development . 
 
The trailblazers will focus on applied learning  
about the application of digital technologies  
in the context of particular sec tors, themes or 
geographies. They will serve as high -profile 
demonstrators, geared at identifying, 
spreading and scaling innovative practice.  
 
The trailblazers will aim to promote 
knowledge exchange, and build capacity and 
consensus around ‘what works’. They will 
focus on translating evidence into action 
through collaborative working  with DFID staff 
and partners.  
 
The trailblazers will be used to build 
momentum and capacity for wider digital 
transformation with in DFID  and the 
international development  community .  
  21 | Doing development in a digital world  
 5. Conclusion  
This strategy sets out a vision and approach for ‘doing  development in a digital world ’. It seeks to 
establish DFID as a  global leader in using digital solutions in development  programmes,  and 
promoting good practice and common standards for digital development through the aid system . It 
commits DFID to helping realise  a world where the developm ent benefits of digital technology will 
be accessible to all: where the internet will be  more widely available, and more  digital products and 
services will be scaled to reach, empower and improve the lives of poor people, particularly those at 
risk of bein g left behind.  
The strategy is  designed to lay the foundations for transform ing how we, and our partners, approach  
deve lopment in a digital world. It runs until 2020 but transformation will be an ongoing  process. We 
will ensure we are adaptable and responsive to change in order to  keep pace with changing  
technologies and their use.   
We will work in an open and collaborative way with others  who share our digital vision, in pursuit of 
our common objectives. Together, we wi ll support a global aid system that is both ready to rise to  
the challenges - and well -poised to harness the opportunities - of a digital world.  
Above all, we will champion a view of digital, data and technology as enablers rather than an end 
goal: the go al is in the material benefits delivered to people , particularly those who are most 
vulnerable and marginalised.   
  
The Department for International Development: 
leading the UK government’s fight against world poverty. 
Department for International Development 
22 Whitehall 
London 
SW1A 2EG 
UK 
and at: 
Abercrombie House 
Eaglesham Road
East Ki lbride 
G75 8EA 
UK 
Tel: +44 (0)20 7023 0000 
F
ax: +44 (0)20 7023 0016 
Website: www.dfid.gov.uk 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/ukdfid 
Twitter: @DFID_UK 
Email: enquiry@dfid.gov.uk 
Public enquiry point: 0845 3004100 or +44 1355 84 3132 (if you are calling from abroad) 
© Crown copyright 2018 
Copyright in the typographical arrangement and design rests with the Crown. This publication (excluding 
the logo) may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium, provided that it is reproduced 
accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright 
with the title and source of the publication specified.  
Published by the Department for International Development 
 