Volume 5, Issue 9, September – 2020                                    International Journal of  Innovative Science and Research Technology                                                 
                                         ISSN No: -2456 -2165  
 
IJISRT20SEP412                                                                  www.ijisrt.com                    1111  Electronic Commerce: Validity of the Digital 
Contract Based o n Indonesia Legislation Perspective  
 
 
Sunaryo1 
Faculty of Law Lampung University,  
Bandar Lampung, Indonesia 
 Hanifah Nuraini2 
Post Graduated Faculty of Law Lampung  University  
, Bandar Lampung, Indonesia  
 
Abstract :- Technological developments in the economic 
sector, a transaction renewal known as electronic 
commerce. Transactions that occur in e -commerce are 
categorized as digital contracts. The use of digital 
contracts in Indonesia does not escape a number of 
problems, which is legal. Legal issues that appear in this 
digital transaction are related to the element of validity. 
Digital contracts as a new type o f contract cannot be 
equated with conventional contracts, because there are 
different limitations. This condition resulted in the 
implementation of digital contracts being facilitated 
thoroughly by regulations. This paper will examine legal 
issues in the i mplementation of digital contracts and 
understand the legality of digital contracts based on legal 
instruments in Indonesia.  
 
Keywords :- Digital Contract , Validity, and Electronic 
Commerce . 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
The era of globalization marked by the revolution of 
industry 4.0 [1] converts every side of life to digital mode rn.  
The evolution of technology accompanied by a digital system 
have more or less affected the way people live together with 
internet.  The evolution of internet can acceleration human 
activities more optimally.  Therefore, digital mode adaptation 
continu es to be carried through various sectors that affect 
human activities.  The evolution of information technology 
also occurs in the economic sector, one of them is marked by 
the presence of the concept of digital transactions.  
 
Indonesia's involvement in th e world economic forums 
has also a little bit influenced economic policy in Indonesia, 
one of which is the policy about the payment system.  In 
Indonesia, the payment system in general still uses cash as 
means of payment, but actually with the large amount  of 
money circulating in society can trigger an increase inflation.  
Because of this some other countries such as Japan, 
Singapore, Britain and the United States already 
implemented digital transaction [2]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The evolution of digital transactions in Indonesia is 
initiated by the management and  use of digital payment 
instrument products which ar e quite massive and intensive. 
The existence of this digital transaction is based on the 
necessary for more complex transactions, reaching more 
customers and merchants, creating high efficiency, ease and 
practice.  For instance, new types of purchasing relationships 
such as auction between individuals online -have in the need 
for peer -to-peer payment methods that allows individuals to 
e-mail payments to the other party  [3]. 
 
However, on the other side, digital transactions contain 
many problems, especially on the implications of legal issues  
[4].  Those problems come from the practice of contract 
implementation, including its validity from a law perspective.  
Legal issues that appear in d igital transactions are related to 
contract law.  The conventional contract terms in Indonesian 
positive law have not been fully able to reach digital system 
agreement.  
 
Digital transactions include legal relationships between 
parties.  This connection is  formed from a legal contract that 
binds every legal subject in arrange digital transactions.   The 
compatibility of legal contract in a digital agreement cannot 
be equated with a conventional contract.  Because legal 
contracts contain elements based on mo dern technology.  The 
adoption of information technology and internet networks 
within the framework of a legal agreement creates a new 
contract.  A renewal contract is a condition when the terms of 
the conventional contract are combined with elements of 
validity in digital technology  [5].  Every business activity can 
be ascertained from an agreement through a contract.  
Therefore, the renewal of transaction patterns requires 
adjustments within the framework of the national contract 
law system.  
 
In Indonesia, there is no law -level rule that specifically 
regulates contracts in digital transactions.  The enforcement 
of legal rules about the validity ratio of digital transactions 
refers to the provisions in Indonesian Civil Law and other 
electronic transaction provisions . However, thes e two legal 
components have not been able to fully cover the aspects of 
the agreement in a digital legal contract.  This research will 
discuss about the implementation of digital transactions in 
terms of the structure and legal principles.  Comprehensively  
examine about the conceptual digital -based agreement and 
analyze the validity of legal contracts Indonesian law 
perspective.  
 Volume 5, Issue 9, September – 2020                                    International Journal of  Innovative Science and Research Technology                                                 
                                         ISSN No: -2456 -2165  
 
IJISRT20SEP412                                                                  www.ijisrt.com                    1112  II. RESULT  AND  DISCUSSION  
 
A. The concept of e -commerce digital contract  
An agreement is a legal relation that happens because 
of the la w, in the form of an act, event or situation. Legal 
relation has created a rights and duties as a legal 
consequence. The rights and duties in referred to will be 
relate to the fulfilment of the agreement contract. The object 
of the agreement is something t hat is useful, valuable and 
precious to the legal subject. Meanwhile, legal subject are all 
the things that can support their rights and duties or have 
legal authority (rechtsbevoegdheid).  
 
Definition of e -commerce, according to language 
(etymology) is as follows: (E) electronic i s electronic science 
(electric charge), electronic devices, or all things related to 
the world of electronics and technology. Meanwhile, (C) 
commerce is trade, commerce  [6]. Association for Electronic 
Commerce simply defines e-commerce as an electrical 
business mechanism. CommerceNet, an industry consortium 
provides a complete definition of the use of computer 
networks as a means of creating business relationships. Not 
satisfied with this definition CommerceNet append that in e-
commerce there is a process of buying and selling of services 
or products between two parties via the internet or exchange 
and distribution of information between two parties in one 
company using the internet  [7]. 
 
In legislation, article 1 point 2 of The Act  Number  19 
year of 2016 concerning Electronic Information and 
Transactions  (hereinafter written as EIT Act)  defines 
electronic transactions as legal act that are carried out by 
combining computer -based electronic system networks with 
communication systems, which are further facilitated by the 
existence of a global computer netw ork or the internet.  
 
From exposure above, it can be concluded that e -
commerce agreement has the following characteristic:  
 The occurrence of a legal act in the form of transaction 
between two or more parties  
 There is an exchange of goods, services or information;  
 The internet is the main medium in the trading process or 
mechanism  
 
The concept of an agreement in e -commerce basically 
concern legal relations according to civil characteristic. It 
means that the agreement contains the interests of the parti es 
in the  property law. The scope of property law that can be 
interpreted from the object of e -commerce is the exchange of 
goods, services or information in digital form. E -commerce 
legal relations appear as manifestation of freedom of contract 
freedom of contract principle. This principle is also known as 
laissez faire.  Aduru Rajendra said the freedom of contract 
doctrine is an extension of ‘one of the most cherished aspects 
of individual liberty [8]. It is nothing but leaving the parties 
as the best judges of their own bar gains and persuading them 
to subjects to their own obligations. Each agreement that is 
born from the contract implies that the agreement appears 
from the will of parties. This is enhanced by Article 1338 of 
the Indonesian Civil Law which states that all ag reements 
made legally, apply as law for those who make them.  B. The validity of e -commerce according to Indonesian 
legislation  
E-commerce has implications for various sectors, one 
of which has an impact on the legal sector. There are no rules 
that specifically regulate the issue of e -commerce. Regulation 
regarding e -commerce still use Indonesian Civil Law Book 
III, especially arrangements regarding contract issues that 
occur in e -commerce. The contract in e -commerce occurs 
between two parties in whi ch one party promises the other to 
do something. This is in accordance with Article 1313 of the 
Indonesian Civil Law, which states that a contract is an act 
whereby one or more people bind themselves to one or more 
people.  
 
Although it has different charac teristics from 
conventional agreements, the essence of implementing digital 
contracts with conventional contracts is the same, namely to 
bind oneself to one other. Therefore, what is the condition for 
the validity of a contract contained in the Indonesian Civil 
Law can also be used as and qualification for the validity of a 
digital contract. However, based on lex specialis derogat legi 
generali  principle, the regulation of digital contract in Article 
47 paragraph (2) of Government Regulation Number 82 Year 
of 2012 concerning Electronic System and Transactions 
(hereinafter written as EST GR) must be prioritized  [9]. The 
digital contr act validity requirements according to EST GR 
include:  
 The agreement of the parties  
 Capacity each party  
 Certainty of terms  
 Consideration  
 
The terms of the validity of a digital contract basically 
have no difference with the legal requirements of a 
conventi onal contract as regulated in Article 1320 of 
Indonesian Civil Law. It's just that a slightly different 
implementation is possible due to the involvement of digital 
technology. The implementation of these differences can be 
illustrated by the process the c ontract is formed. For example, 
the parties' conventional contracts are usually carried out on 
paper based, whereas in digital contracts, the legal relations 
of the parties are formed from paperless contracts. The 
paperless nature means that digital contra cts are only in the 
form of digital data and are intangible objects. Even though 
digital contracts are a form of legal document that must 
legally have the interests of the parties. The question is 
whether the legality of legal documents must be real and 
tangible? Then what about activities that are carried out 
digitally?  
 
It is important to understand that the legality element of 
a contract can be realized by fulfilling the indicators of the 
validity of the contract. Therefore, the parties must 
understand and fulfill the legal requirements of the digital 
contract, because the legality of a digital contract will have 
an impact on the legal consequences and consequences of 
contract implementation. In addition, the legality of the 
digital contract also serves as a guarantee of legal certainty 
for the parties.  
 Volume 5, Issue 9, September – 2020                                    International Journal of  Innovative Science and Research Technology                                                 
                                         ISSN No: -2456 -2165  
 
IJISRT20SEP412                                                                  www.ijisrt.com                    1113  Is used to format your paper and style the text. All 
margins, column widths, line spaces, and text fonts are 
prescribed; please do not alter them. You may note 
peculiarities. For example, the head margin in this template 
measures proportionately more than is customary. This 
measurement and others are deliberate, using specifications 
that anticipate your paper as one part of the entire 
proceedings, and not as an independent document. Please do 
not revise an y of the current designations.  
 
1. The agreement of the parties  
Agreement means there is a free will between the 
parties regarding the main things desired in the contract. In 
this case, the parties must have a free will (voluntary) to bind 
themselves, in whic h the deal can be stated explicitly or 
tacitly  [10]. The terms of agreement are also known in the 
principle of contract law as consesualism principle. This 
principle can be realized when the transaction process 
reaches an agreement.  
 
There are two main things that customers usually do in 
cyberspace. The first is to see the products or services 
advertised by related companies through their web site 
(online ads). Second, looking for certain data or information 
needed in connection with the e -commerce proce ss to be 
carried out using a shopping cart. If you are interested in the 
products or services offered, customers can carry out trade 
transactions with standard orders, by filling in the order form  
[4]. For example, customers who want to buy products in 
merchant digita l services will be faced with the process of 
selecting the desired product. Then the customer must click 
on the product he wants to continue at the order confirmation 
and payment stage. The order confirmation stage is the stage 
for filling the order form b ased on standard orders set by 
providers. This process is characterized as a form of 
agreement between customers and merchants on the sale and 
purchase digital contract.  
 
Furthermore, to find out when an agreement point 
occurs between buyers and sellers in  e-commerce digital 
transactions, it is necessary to analyze several theories 
through theories such as  [7]: 
 
a. Offer and acceptance theory  
 In principle, this theory justifies that a will 
agreement occurs after an offer from one party is followed 
and is followed by acceptance by the other party in the 
contract. This theory has a weakness when applied to e -
commerce, because there will be a situation where the online 
ordering process suddenly stops. This is due to the power to 
complete the product ordering process under consumer 
control. Thus, if the consumer suddenly stops the orde r 
process, the deal is immediately canceled.  
 
b. Wills theory  
 This theory distinguishes between what is stated and 
what is desired of the party making the promise. Concerning 
what is desired and declaring what is stated does not apply. 
This theory is not app ropriate to apply to e -commerce, 
because it cannot be determined when the agreement occurs, 
because it does not provide legal certainty for the parties.  c. Statement theory  
 This theory is the opposite of wills theory, which 
emphasizes what is stated rather than what is desired. So 
according to this theory, the customer is declared to have 
agreed when he has stated his will by filling in the applicable 
order form. Likewise, what the merchant stated regarding the 
transaction approval process applies. Although it is possible 
for customers to provide incorrect data and merchants 
approve it.  
 
d. Confirmation theory  
According to this theory, an agreement is considered to 
occur when the party making the offer receives a reply to the 
confirmation of the answer from the party receiving the offer. 
In e-commerce the agreement is stated to occur when the 
merchant has received an answer from the customer for the 
confirmation news of the answer he has submitted. This 
includes information provided by customers who meet the 
requirements or are declared valid.  
 
The correct theory to be applied in a digital e -
commerce contract is confirmation theory. This is based on 
the actions of the party statement wills. Article 20 of the EIT 
Act states that an electronic transaction occurs whe n the 
transaction offer sent by the sender is received and approved 
by the recipient. However, such consent must be made by 
means of an electronic acceptance statement (for example by 
sending a confirmation email).  
 
2. Capacity each party  
Basically, a person or legal entity that is mature, 
common sense and not prohibited by law (such as not being 
declared bankrupt by the court) is a capable or legally 
authorized legal subject. Two types of legal subjects have 
certain qualifications, namely:  
 
a. Individual person  
 Adult indicators according to Article 330 of the 
Indonesian Civil Law, are 21 years of age or already / have 
been married. Meanwhile, the common sense element is a 
person who does not experience mental disorders and should 
be consciously able to enter int o an agreement.  
 
b. Legal entity  
 Every legal entity that has the legality of 
implementation can carry out the agreement as long as it is 
not being or has been prohibited by law. According to the 
provisions of Article 1653 of the Civil Code, there are 3 
(three) forms of legal entities seen from the aspect of their 
position, namely legal entities established by the government 
(BUMN, government agencies), legal entities recognized by 
the government (PT, cooperatives et cetera) and legal entities 
with the ai m of certain (foundations, NGOs et cetera).  
 
The element of proficiency in e -commerce is difficult 
to measure, because everyone (without being limited by a 
certain age) can carry out digital transactions. One of the 
weaknesses of e -commerce is the difficul ty in identifying 
parties who carry out digital transactions. Budhiyanto 
identified the parties involved in e -commerce transactions 
consisting of  [11]: Volume 5, Issue 9, September – 2020                                    International Journal of  Innovative Science and Research Technology                                                 
                                         ISSN No: -2456 -2165  
 
IJISRT20SEP412                                                                  www.ijisrt.com                    1114  a. Seller (merchants), namely companies that offer their 
products via the internet or in Article 1 point 18 of the 
EIT Act are referred to as senders. "Sender is a legal 
subject who sends electronic information and/or 
electronic documents". To become a seller / merchant / 
sender, one must register himself as a merchant account at 
a bank, this is so that merchants can receive payments 
from customers in the form of credit cards.  
b. Consumers are people who want to obtain goods and/or  
services through digital purchases or in Article 1 point 19 
of EIT Act as recipients. Recipient is a legal subject wh o 
receives electronic information / electronic documents 
from the sender. Consumers who will shop via the 
internet can have the status of individuals or companies. If 
the consumer is an individual, then what needs to be 
considered is how the payment system  is used, whether 
using a credit card or cash / manual payments possible. 
This is because not all consumers who shop on the 
internet are credit card holders. A credit card holder is 
someone whose name is printed on a credit card issued by 
the issuer based on the agreement that has been made.  
c. Acquirer and Issuer, each of which is a legal entity and 
functions as an intermediary. Acquirer is a collection 
intermediary and payment intermediary. Meanwhile, 
Issuer is a digital payment instrument issuing company.  
d. Certification authorities are the third party that hold the 
right to issue certificates to merchants / sellers, to issuers 
and in some cases to consumers. Certification authorities 
are entities, either individuals or legal entities, that are 
entrusted with examining and evaluating the feasibility of 
administering e -commerce transactions.  
 
3. Certainty of terms  
A certainty relates to the object of a contract, which 
means that the object of the contract must be clear, can be 
determined and calculated the type and  quantity, permitted by 
law and possible for the parties. Transactions in e -commerce 
are basically not much different from conventional 
transactions which rely n a tangible form that can be touched, 
physical distribution and there is a place for transactio ns. In 
e-commerce this also occurs but the product to be traded does 
not appear physically but in the form of information about 
the product, besides that in e -commerce there is a distribution 
of language or instruction codes which will eventually bring 
up information on the product that will be the offer and how 
to make a transaction.  
 
Article 1333 of the Indonesian Civil Law states that a 
contract must have as a principal and item of which the type 
at least is determined. It means that contract must have g oods 
and their quantity and type as the object of contract  [12]. 
Digital contract objects consist by three types, such as goods, 
services and information  [13]. The provision of contract 
object is the duty and responsibility of the merchant as the 
seller, provider as the e -commerce operation and it is also 
possible for other digital transaction instruments which 
essentially have the capacity to provide transaction products.  
 
 
 
 4. Consideration  
Consideration means that the contract must be made 
based on good faith. Article 1335, 1336 an d 1337 of the 
Indonesian Civil Law states that consideration is declared 
prohibited if it is contrary to law, decency and public order. 
Causa is defined as what the parties to the contract want to 
reached. The consideration in Article 1320 of the Indonesia n 
Civil Law are related to the contract clause as an objective to 
be reached by the parties. The act does not care about what 
causes the parties to enter into the contract, but what is 
monitored by Act is the contract clauses.  
 
In digital contract, the formula of contract clause should 
contain the fulfilment of the rights and duties of the parties to 
the object of contract. For example, contract between buyer 
and seller, the goal to be reached is a service for a product or 
servic e that is delivered to the buyer and in return a money is 
given to the seller.  
 
Consideration conditions are intended to limit the 
implementation of the freedom of contract principle in 
transaction. Because the implementation of contract that 
violate the provisions of Act, morality and public order can 
harm the parties and the state e conomy. E -commerce 
operators can experience various risks of loss of they do not 
maintain and regulate the types of transactions on objects that 
are lawful and accountable. Therefore, it is important for 
digital contract players to meet and implement this 
requirement.  
 
Based on the description above, it can be understood 
that the validity of digital contracts in the implementation of 
e-commerce must be implemented based on the terms of the 
validity of the digital contracts. The validity of digital 
contracts  with reference to these four conditions is still 
unable to accommodate the interests of legal guarantees in 
the dispute resolution process. This is because digital 
contracts are in the form of paperless documents. Even 
though it is classified as legally v alid, the power of proof of 
e-commerce transactions is very weak.  
 
Several previous studies have emphasized the 
application of digital signatures to provide legal strength of 
evidence for e -commerce transactions  [14]. However, this 
reduces the essence of e -commerce practicality. The United 
Nations Commission on  International Trade Law 
(UNCITRAL) Model Law on Electronic Commerce which is 
a reference for the making of Laws and Laws on e -commerce 
throughout the world community, states in Article 5 
UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce that 
Information shall not  be denied legal effect, validity or 
enforceability solely on the grounds that it is in the form of a 
data message  [15]. The data message is meant if its 
authenticity has been proven using techniques and 
instrum ents as appropriate. So that contracts in e -commerce 
are made by the parties, with these rules providing legal 
guarantees for the contracts made.  
 
 
 
 Volume 5, Issue 9, September – 2020                                    International Journal of  Innovative Science and Research Technology                                                 
                                         ISSN No: -2456 -2165  
 
IJISRT20SEP412                                                                  www.ijisrt.com                    1115  III. CONCLUSION  
 
Before  One of the evidences of advances in information 
technology that consumers feel the bene fits of in the trade 
sector is electronic commerce (e -commerce). Through e -
commerce, consumers have wider space for transactions, so 
that consumers have the ability to collect and compare the 
goods and / or services they want and consumers become 
more acti ve. In reality, this condition has not yet been 
followed by legal developments that can keep pace with the 
accelerated advancement of information and communication 
technology.  
 
So far, in Indonesia there are two laws regulating e -
commerce activities, namel y The Act Number 19 year of 
2016 concerning Electronic Information and Transactions 
and The Act Number 7 year of 2014 concerning Trade and 
one Government Regulation, namely Government Regulation 
Number 82 Year of 2012 concerning Electronic System and 
Trans actions which are the implementing rules of EIT Act, in 
addition to positive laws that are already related to 
civilization, namely Indonesian Civil Law.  
 
Therefore, efforts to harmonize regulations are needed 
so that e -commerce activities have legal certa inty and 
provide guaranteed protection for every actor of e -commerce 
activity. In fact, considering the unique characteristics of e -
commerce activities, the author also proposes that e -
commerce be made in its own rules, in other words Sui 
Generis.  
 
REFEREN CES  
 
[1]. S. Palinggi and L. R. Allolinggi, “Analisa Deskriptif 
Industri Fintech di Indonesia: Regulasi dan Keamanan 
Jaringan dalam Perspektif Teknologi Digital,” Ekon. 
dan Bisnis , vol. 6, no. 2, p. 177, 2020, doi: 
10.35590/jeb.v6i2.1327.  
[2]. R. Tazkiyyaturrohmah, “TRANSAKSI KEUANGAN 
MODERN,” Muslim Herit. , vol. 3, no. November 
2017, pp. 21 –39, 2018.  
[3]. S. Sumanjeet, “Emergence of payment systems in the 
age of electronic commerce: The state of art,” in 1st 
South Central Asi an Himalayas Regional IEEE/IFIP 
International Conference on Internet, AH -ICI 2009 , 
2009, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 18 –40, doi: 
10.1109/AHICI.2009.5340318.  
[4]. C. M. Indah, “ASPEK PERJANJIAN ELECTRONIC 
COMMERCE DAN IMPLIKASINYA PADA 
HUKUM PEMBUKTIAN DI INDONESIA,” MMH , 
vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 172 –184, 2010.  
[5]. M. Shnikat, A. Alzubi, and M. Aljaber, “THE LEGAL 
FRAMEWORK OF ELECTRONIC CONTRACT IN 
THE JORDANIAN,” Glob. J. Polit. Law Res. , vol. 5, 
no. 5, pp. 46 –62, 2017.  
[6]. S. Santoso, “Sistem Transaksi E -Commerce Dalam 
Perspektif K uh Perdata Dan Hukum Islam,” Ahkam J. 
Huk. Islam , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 217 –246, 2016, doi: 
10.21274/ahkam.2016.4.2.217 -246. [7]. B. H. Mantri, “PERLINDUNGAN HUKUM 
TERHADAP KONSUMEN DALAM TRANSAKSI 
E-COMMERCE,” 2007.  
[8]. M. Mandey, “Implementasi Hukum Perlindungan 
Konsumen Dalam Perjanjian Standar,” Lex Soc. , vol. 
III, no. 10, pp. 156 –162, 2015.  
[9]. W. S. Putri and N. Budiana, “Keabsahan Kontrak 
Elektronik Dalam Transaksi E -Commerce Ditinjau dari 
Hukum Perikatan,” J. Anal. Huk. , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 
300–309, 2018.  
[10]. G. Biondi,  “Analisis Yuridis Keabsahan Kesepakatan 
Melalui Surat Elektronik (e -mail) Berdasarkan Hukum 
Indonesia,” Premise Law J. , vol. 19, pp. 1 –20, 2016.  
[11]. R. Roihanah, “PERLINDUNGAN HAK KONSUMEN 
DALAM TRANSAKSI ELEKTRONIK ( E – 
COMMERCE ),” Justicia Islam. , vol. 8,  no. 2, pp. 97 –
122, 2011, doi: 10.21154/justicia.v8i2.535.  
[12]. W. H. Suseno, “KONTRAK PERDAGANGAN 
MELALUI INTERNET(ELECTRONIC 
COMMERCE) DITINJAU DARI HUKUM 
PERJANJIAN,” 2008.  
[13]. R. USMAN, “Karakteristik Uang Elektronik Dalam 
Sistem Pembayaran,” Yuridika , vol. 32,  no. 1, p. 134, 
2017, doi: 10.20473/ydk.v32i1.4431.  
[14]. E. Hariyanto, “E -COMMERCE DI INDONESIA 
Abstract :,” Al-ahkam , vol. IV, no. 2, pp. 293 –310, 
2009.  
[15]. T. Rahmatullah, “Analisis Permasalahan Hukum E -
Commerce dan Pengaturannya di Indonesia,” J. Huk. 
Media Just icia Nusant. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 10 –23, 2017, 
doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.27189.52967.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  