3
 2
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDExecutive Summary
Overview and Progress-to-date
Introduction
How cross-border data flows are driving digitalisation
The emerging ASEAN approach to cross-border data flow
Building the foundations: the role of regional and international trade agreements 
Cross-Border Data Mechanisms
Making Cross-Border Data Happen: Technical Components
Connectivity 
Data Standards 
Data and system interoperability
Data sandboxes 
Data portability 
Data tracing
Data provenance 
Encryption 
Data registries and data exchange 
 
Cross-Border Data In Practice: Open Banking 
Concluding Thoughts5Contents
Making Cross-Border Data Happen: Policies and Processes
Data internationalism
Privacy and data protection
Cybersecurity 
Intellectual property rights 9
10
10
11
14
16
17
20
22
23
26
31
33
33
34
35
35
35
37
37
37
40
51The UNDP Global Centre for Technology, Innovation, and Sustainable Development 
The UNDP Global Centre for Technology, Innovation and Sustainable Development is a joint initiative by the Government 
of Singapore and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) which aims at identifying and co-creating 
technological solutions for sustainable development. The Centre curates partnerships, identifies solutions and connects 
partners and innovations with UNDP’s Global Policy Network and development partners.
Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent those of the United 
Nations, including UNDP, or the UN Member States.
Acknowledgements 
The UNDP Global Centre would like to thank the individuals and organisations who provided key insights during the 
development of this report. This includes many of the team in the Singapore Personal Data Protection Commission, and 
representatives from the Singapore Smart Nation Initiative, GSMA, OECD, Union Bank of the Philippines; the ICT Unit at 
the ASEAN Secretariat, members of the Data Protection Authority in the Philippines and Vietnam, and representatives 
from the Estonia e-Governance Academy. 
Graphic design and layout editing: Peter Kongmalavong, Frederick Lee 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
UNDP is the leading United Nations organization fighting to end the injustice of poverty, inequality, and climate change. 
Working with our broad network of experts and partners in 170 countries, we help nations to build integrated, lasting 
solutions for people and planet. 
Learn more at undp.org or follow at @UNDP. 
Copyright ©UNDP 2021. All rights reserved. 
One United Nations Plaza, New York, NY10017, USA Executive Summary6 7
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDHow we manage cross-border data is an 
important factor of national, regional, and global 
economic development – including driving 
progress toward achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Yet, in the ASEAN 
region, only a few countries have established 
mechanisms encouraging cross-border data 
flow with the purpose of stimulating innovation 
and economic growth.  
To-date, existing regional and international 
trade agreements have informed the ASEAN 
approach to cross-border data flows, although 
their broad and non-digital focus requires 
underpinning with more specific policies. This 
includes shaping national laws, policies and 
structures – in particular, legislation, regulation, 
and other guidelines – to inform cross-border 
data flows. Of particular importance are privacy 
rights, data protection legislation, intellectual 
property rights, and cybersecurity. Technical interoperability also plays a 
fundamental role in cross-border data flows 
– and in the data life-cycle more broadly. 
Technical interoperability enables sharing 
of data between systems, and making use 
of this data. These systems also require data 
interoperability and interconnectivity to ensure 
that data flows in a seamless manner when 
being provided to those who need it, when they 
need it, where they need it, and in the form in 
which they need it.
On a practical level, data is compiled and stored by 
many organisations at global, national, and local 
levels. Both proprietary and open technologies 
are currently employed in the management of 
data. As such, it can be difficult to distribute or 
share data across various disjointed applications 
and databases. The challenges associated with 
data management can impede cross-border 
datasharing and hinder horizontal data use 
mechanisms such as Artificial Intelligence and 
Internet-of-Things. At a national level, governments and other 
partners should also invest in – and enable – the 
considerable technical foundations needed to 
enable cross-border data. These include extensive 
and high-quality connectivity, developing API 
functionalities, and building foundational national 
infrastructure such as data registries. Wherever 
possible, countries should seek to build on and 
expand international best practice – particularly to 
ensure technology-neutrality and future-proofing.
More broadly, there is a key role for the ASEAN 
community to play in shaping a strong regional 
data governance framework to leverage the 
above potential of cross-border data – and to 
mitigate data-related risks and harm. This includes 
formalising approaches to share responsibility for 
data privacy. International trade with regions such 
as the EU highlight the need for frameworks that 
move beyond the ‘open regionalism’ foundations 
of the ASEAN region.  
All of these efforts must be founded on 
collaboration with all stakeholders in the national, 
and regional, data ecosystem – particularly the 
private sector and broader industry. International 
organisations can also play a key role in supporting 
coordination, building capacity and expertise, and 
driving collaboration and shaping best practice.An increasing number of business models are 
founded on the importance of accessing, holding, 
analysing and utilising data across borders, 
including Open Banking – discussed as a case 
study in this report. Open Banking is based on 
the idea of developing a single, cohesive pool of 
data that spans all products and services. By the 
end of 2020, 40 per cent of Asia Pacific banks 
will have invested in Open Banking management 
platforms. The catalytic potential of cross-border 
data in this use case highlights that all ASEAN 
countries – large and small – should play a role 
in defining, shaping, and iterating the policies, 
regulations, and technical foundations to drive 
cross-border data flows
This focus should include engaging with 
the realities of cross-border data – such as 
introducing ‘open by default’ data policies, 
avoiding data localisation or similarly protectionist 
approaches, and preventing further divergence 
around key priorities such as data privacy. 
Countries should also take a forward-thinking 
approachto regulation, particularly in the context 
of a technology-driven and fast-moving sector. 
The speed of change in the sector may demand a 
more agile, iterative, and experimental approach 
to regulation, legislation, and policymaking. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Figure 1 – Summary of the ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance  (ASEAN)
8
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDOverview and
Progress-to-date
10 11
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDIn the ASEAN region, only a few countries 
have established mechanisms encouraging 
cross-border data flow with the purpose 
of stimulating innovation and economic 
growth. This is likely due to the challenges 
encountered by some countries in capturing 
value from data  - including lower-levels of 
data connectivity , issues with foundational 
digital infrastructure , weaker data collection 
processes and abilities, limited data or digital 
literacy that stifles innovation, and a lack 
of access to high quality or large datasets. 
These aspects can also prevent engagement 
with emerging technology and innovation 
such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and data 
analytics.
In addition, although a growing number of 
countries in the region have laws protecting 
personal data, often there are limited funds, 
tools, abilities and resources to enforce these 
frameworks. More broadly, international data 
collaborations or explorations can sometimes 
be affected by a zero-sum approach to 
geopolitics. In particular, and as a result of some 
countries believing that retaining data within 
their borders creates national opportunities 
for economic growth based on digitalisation, 
countries may adopt protectionist approaches 
to data management, including data localisation. 
All of these factors risk exacerbating existing 
digital inequities between countries. They also 
risk ‘locking-out’ countries from the benefits 
of emerging technologies – and from cross-
border data flows.
How cross-border data flows are driving 
digitalisation also increasingly able to produce, store, and 
analyse data without human intervention. These 
technological advancements rely on access to 
and use of high-quality data that often resides 
in more than one country⁴.
Cross-border data is driving and enabling 
this increased digitalisation, and perhaps 
even accelerating the production of data. 
The scale at which data can be collected and 
processed is driven by access to technology 
that is increasingly international in scope 
– including cloud computing. In order to 
collect more data, and leverage its potential, 
looking internationally is proving important.
All of these developments reaffirm the 
importance and need to shape new models 
of data governance, whilst the crucial role 
of data in driving economic and societal 
development means that it should not be 
constrained by national or other geographic 
borders. This reality demands engagement 
with the requirements of enabling cross-
border data flows. This is a comparatively 
recent challenge. Cross-border data flow 
differs from the traditional exchange of goods 
and other services for a number of reasons: 
As technological transformation progresses, the 
collection and processing of data is accelerating. 
New and emerging technologies such as AI, 
distributed ledgers, drones, and the Internet 
of Things (IoT) are also producing, storing, and 
analysing an unprecedented amount of data. 
Machine-to-machine products and services are•  Suppliers and users do not need to be in the 
same location. 
• The trade of data is fluid and frequent, and it 
is possible to trade the same data repeatedly.
 
• The physical location of data accessed is 
hard to determine, and hence is difficult to 
assess what data is ‘imported’ and what is 
‘exported’. In fact, the physical location of 
data may be irrelevant, as ultimately what 
matters is who has access to and control 
over the data. 
 OVERVIEW AND PROGRESS-TO-DATE
• When data flows across borders, it does 
not necessarily have to be affiliated with 
a transaction. Data can be simply ‘shared’ 
across borders. For instance, in some cases, 
a copy of the data is undertaken locally. In 
others, users access data by connecting to 
the servers where the data is stored. 
• There are different types of data, most 
notably personal data and non-personal 
data. While cross-border flow of personal 
data is a much more regulated space, 
transferring non-personal data across 
borders tends to be largely unregulated. 
That said, there is increasing interest in 
regulating cross-border personal and non-
personal data flow.
•    In practice, when private sector organisations 
think about cross border data flow, it is 
difficult for them to segregate personal data 
and non-personal data as often these data 
sets are interrelated.
These aspects highlight how cross-border data 
flows may not always fit traditional definitions 
of trade, and reaffirm the need for focused 
engagement with the emerging and existing 
realities of cross-border data flows.of policymaking takes the form of blueprints, 
declarations, dialogues and fora, which often 
do not constitute or create legally binding or 
enforceable obligations at a regional level. As 
well as the ‘ASEAN Way’, countries have also 
undertaken a policy of ‘open regionalism’ that has 
shaped cohesion across the Asia-Pacific region8. 
The ASEAN organisation has also evolved 
and expanded its mandate beyond its original 
remit of shaping regional peace and security. 
In 2015 the ASEAN Economic Community was 
established, an audacious plan for enhanced 
economic integration9. As the region moves 
towards an interconnected and borderless 
model, the principles on cross-border data 
flows enshrined in the ASEAN Framework on 
Digital Data Governance are expected to guide 
state entities, the private sector and consumers 
to manage data flows. Notably, the ASEAN 
Framework on Digital Data Governance (Figure 
4)  ‘is aimed at strengthening the data ecosystem, 
achieving legal and regulatory alignment of 
data regulations and governance frameworks; 
and fostering data-driven innovation across 
ASEAN Member States to boost the growth of 
digital economy in the region’10. 
However, although economic convergence 
between ASEAN’s lower and higher-income 
countries has shown optimistic trends in the 
past twenty years, paradoxically this progress 
has been accompanied by growing inequality 
within countries11. The impact of digital 
transformation has the potential to accelerate 
development and economic growth. But at 
the same time, such efforts could slow down 
– or even reverse – the convergence between 
countries and risk widening digital and broader 
inequality between and within states12. 
Practices of cross-border data flow risk also 
entrench these inequalities. Well-resourced and 
more developed countries can more effectively 
extract value from data, and also bring to their 
shores data that is collected and produced inThe emerging ASEAN approach to cross-
border data flow
Efforts to drive cross-border data flow must 
be founded on the local and regional context. 
In the ASEAN region, this includes leveraging 
existing networks and processes to drive 
digital regional integration. ASEAN countries 
are committed to regional integration in the 
‘ASEAN Way’ , a distinctive approach to regional 
cooperation and governance. This approach 
is based on a commitment to protect national 
sovereignty, to non-interference in the domestic 
matters of fellow countries, to decisions based 
on consensus building, and to informal guiding 
relationships between leaders. This method  12 13
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDOVERVIEW AND PROGRESS-TO-DATE
his risks creating and entrenching a data 
dichotomy: between the former countries 
that have the infrastructure, knowledge, and 
resources to become digital data hubs that 
store, retain, and analyse data (for example, 
to inform data-driven technologies such as 
machine-learning); and their less-developed 
counterparts that are simply releasing data 
- with little or no real benefit from it, except 
lower value-added tasks within the supply 
chain of data production, storage, and analysis.  
This extractive relationship, resulting in non-
inclusive growth, risks increasing political 
and social instability within countries and 
could undermine support – and indeed, 
trust – in greater regional integration13. 
These wider considerations reaffirm the 
importance of defining an approach to cross-
border data – from overarching governance, 
to the underlying common or recognised 
technical standards discussed later in this 
paper, and foundational norms and principles.However, the above negative outcomes are 
far from guaranteed. Many less-developed 
countries are making significant progress in 
shaping advanced digital skills – including those 
relevant to critically interrogating and shaping 
data-driven solutions. Overall, enabling cross-
border data flows has considerable potential to 
create positive economic and social multipliers 
for countries. Increasingly, much of the 
technology and expertise of the digital economy 
is being democratised and becoming accessible 
from many countries due to cross-border data 
flows. This can create regionally-competitive 
firms and industries. Where there is a broader risk 
of creating or entrenching inequalities between 
countries – as will be discussed later – is in 
situations of data protectionism. In these contexts 
of restricting cross-border data flows, it becomes 
more challenging for domestic companies to 
grow beyond their national market. This risks 
constraining economies, dissuading international 
talent, and preventing the development of 
innovative startups and ecosystems. Figure 4: Osaka Track architecture for data governance (World Economic Forum)Figure 3 – Summary of the ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance  (ASEAN)
14 15
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDas well as a separate Singapore-Australia Digital 
Economy Agreement (SADEA)16. This aims to 
align digital rules and standards that support and 
encourage cross-border data flow, and to facilitate 
interoperability between digital systems17. Active 
involvement of the private sector is crucial in 
enabling cross-border data flows.
Regionally, this overarching framework consists 
of a collection of norms and principles shaped 
through fora, dialogues, and declarations. These 
documents and processes do not constitute or 
create legally-binding or enforceable obligations 
at a regional level (although some aspects – 
such as the ASEAN Model Contractual Clauses, 
discussed below, are binding) but rather 
guidelines drawing from privacy, data protection 
and cybersecurity laws on the one hand; and on 
the other, from trade agreements.
1. Aaroson, S. A. (2019). Data is Different: Why the World 
Needs a New Approach to Governing Cross-border 
Data Flows. Available at https://unctad.org/meetings/en/
Presentation/tdb_ede3_2019_p06_SAaronson_en.pdf  
2. Chen, L., and Kimura, L. (2020). E-commerce Connectivity in ASEAN. 
Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA). Available 
https://www.eria.org/publications/e-commerce-connectivity-in-asean/
3. Beschorner, N.,  Bartley J. M., Guermazi, B., Treadwell, J. L., Prakosa, 
P. W. B., Abdul Karim, N. A. B., Van Tuijll, D. A., Bennis, L., Nicoli, M., Van 
Rees, J., Girot, C. A. H. M. (2019). The Digital Economy in Southeast 
Asia: Strengthening the Foundations for Future Growth (English). 
Washington, D.C. World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/328941558708267736/The-Digital-Economy-in-Southeast-
Asia-Strengthening-the-Foundations-for-Future-Growth
4. World Economic Forum (2020). A Roadmap for Cross- Border Data 
Flows: Future-Proofing Readiness and Cooperation in the New Data 
Economy. White Paper, June 2020. Available at http://www3.weforum.
org/docs/WEF_A_Roadmap_for_Cross_Border_Data_Flows_2020.
pdf
5. Aaronson, S. A. (2018). Data is Different: Why the World Needs a New 
Approach to Governing Cross-border Data Flows. IIEP-WP-2018-10. 
November 2018. Available at https://www2.gwu.edu/~iiep/assets/docs/
papers/2018WP/AaronsonIIEP2018-10.pdf
6. Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The ASEAN way 
and the rule of law. Available https://asean.org/?static_post=the-asean-
way-and-the-rule-of-law
 7. World Economic Forum (2017). ASEAN 4.0:
What does the Fourth Industrial Revolution mean for regional economic 
integration? White Paper. November 2017. Available at https://www.
adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/379401/asean-fourth-industrial-
revolution-rci.pdf
8. Drysdale, P. ASEAN: The Experiment in Open Regionalism that 
Succeeded. Available at https://www.eria.org/5.1.ASEAN_50_Vol_5_
Drysdale.pdf
9. ASEAN news (2018). ASEAN 4.0:What does it mean for regional 
economic integrations. Available at https://www.thailand-business-
news.com/asean/70455-asean-4-0-what-does-it-mean-for-regional-
economic-integration.html.
10. ASEAN, Thailand. (2019). ASEAN Deputy Secretary General speaks 
at ASEAN-UK Reception. In: UK-ASEAN Business Council. Nov 2019. 
Available at https://www.ukabc.org.uk/news/asean-deputy-secretary-
general-speaks-at-asean-uk-reception/
11. Menon and Fink (2019)
12. The World Bank (2019). The Digital Economy in Southeast Asia : 
Strengthening the Foundations for Future Growth (English). Washington, 
D.C. World Bank Group. Available at http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/328941558708267736/The-Digital-Economy-in-Southeast-
Asia-Strengthening-the-Foundations-for-Future-Growth
13. Menon and Fink (2019)
14. For the model contract clauses template to be successful, the active 
involvement of the private sector is necessary. To this end, ASEAN 
has conducted extensive industry consultation to develop it. In fact, 
although it is being developed by ASEAN regulators, it is not just a 
bilateral and regional governmental approach but is used largely for 
business-to-business (B2B) transactions.
15. Available at https://www.mfat.govt.nz/en/trade/free-trade-
agreements/free-trade-agreements-concluded-but-not-in-
force/digital-economy-partnership-agreements/
16. Available at https://www.mti.gov.sg/Improving-Trade/Digital-
Economy-Agreements/The-Singapore-Australia-Digital-Economy-
Agreement
17. Grant, J. (2020). Singapore charts its way to digital future 
for trade. In: Financial Times. 28 September 2020. Available 
athttps://www.ft.com/content/05504fcb-11e6-47a0-8860-
7d156d1d82ab?segmentID=22a4a564-acc0-bdcd-29ab-
405d952fdcc3
 OVERVIEW AND PROGRESS-TO-DATE
Building the foundations: the role of regional 
and international trade agreements
In addition, bilateral and regional approaches to 
regulate traditional trade activities, and cross-border 
data flow, provide important foundations for cross-
border data flow. In this context, ASEAN states are 
working both within ASEAN and with countries 
outside the region towards a number of mechanisms 
governing cross-border data flow, including 
certifications, accreditation, and contractual 
clauses14. Extensive industry engagement has 
been an important foundation. In this context, for 
instance, Singapore has recently signed a Digital 
Economy Partnership Agreement15 with NewIn the ASEAN region there are a number of 
multilateral arrangements ensuring that, when 
data is transferred across borders, a certain 
degree of protection is granted. These include 
non-binding arrangements, such as the ASEAN 
Personal Data Protection Framework; and 
principle-based frameworks, such as the APEC 
Privacy Framework, and the APEC Cross-Border 
Privacy Rules (CBPR) System – as well as broader 
initiatives such as the ‘Data Free Flow With 
Trust’ concept arising from Japan’s 2019 G20 
leadership. Other international and regional 
trade schemes that can facilitate cross-border 
data flow between ASEAN countries include the 
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, 
the ASEAN e-Commerce Agreement, the 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership, and, more widely, 
the Council of Europe Convention 108/9181.
Active involvement of the 
private sector is crucial in 
enabling cross-border data 
flows.17
Making Cross-Border Data 
Happen: 
Policies and ProcessesExisting regional and international trade 
agreements have informed the ASEAN 
approach to cross-border data flows, although 
their broad and non-digital focus requires 
underpinning with more specific policies. This 
includes national laws, policies and structures 
– in particular, legislation, regulation, and other 
guidelines – that inform cross-border data 
flows. Of particular importance are privacy 
rights, data protection legislation, intellectual 
property rights, and cybersecurity. 
According to the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), in order 
to create a data-enabled digital government 
model, state entities should adopt ‘open by 
default policies’18, and create mechanisms to 
engage with different stakeholders around 
their data needs19. This shift has also prompted 
changes in the data skills needed in national 
government agencies to govern the entire data 
life cycle20, but also the overarching frameworks 
and foundational components needed to enable 
the sharing of data across borders . number of sectors and technologies. The 
country has expanded its localisation policies 
as part of its state-directed development and 
digital protectionism strategies23. 
Several factors drive a more restrictive approach 
to cross-border data flow, including perceived 
safeguarding of national security, protecting 
data privacy, aiding law enforcement (including 
domestic surveillance), preventing foreign 
surveillance, and appeals to the fundamental 
principle of national sovereignty more generally. 
However, localisation can often impair – or 
actively undermine – these objectives. For 
example, data localisation can increase the risks 
of data breach and impact on privacy as the data 
is more accessible and large – simplifying and 
incentivising the work of hackers to locate and 
access this sensitive data.
Data internationalism
In the ASEAN region, one of the main challenges 
to cross-border data is the fragmented and 
varying national requirements regarding the use 
of personal data. In particular, some countries 
impose localisation (or data sovereignty, or data 
protectionism) measures specifically to force 
data to be stored and/or kept within the country. 
Vietnam and Indonesia have imposed 
particularly comprehensive restrictions on 
cross-border data flows in the ASEAN region21. 
Specifically, Vietnam has a requirement for 
private firms who want to process data to 
build a server locally to operate in the country. 
This infrastructure requirement serves to 
store data for inspection should a competent 
authority request provision of information22 
Indonesia’s data-localisation laws cover a 
MAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: POLICIES AND PROCESSES18 19
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDGovernments have also restricted the transfer 
of data across national borders to foster 
the development of the technology sector 
domestically24. But at the same time states that 
implement such significant data protectionism 
practices, particularly data localisation can 
end up stifling their economies25. These 
requirements have a real, significant, and 
negative effect on the GDP of a country. In the 
context of a digital economy, they can also 
increase the price of (or actively prevent access 
to) specific services such as cloud computing - 
a crucial platform in catalysing digitally-focused 
small- and medium-enterprises, which are an 
essential growth sector for any country. 
From a broader private sector perspective, 
data localisation disincentives the entry of 
international firms – leading to less competition 
- as companies will incur additional capital and 
operational expenditures to create local data 
storage, data centres, and other infrastructure. 
Domestic digital firms – whose business models 
may rely on data – will also be unable to freely 
transfer data and benefit from economies of 
scale to the fullest extent. These localisation 
measures also create a barrier to these firms’ 
entrance into foreign markets. This can also 
have a broader and negative impact. If a country 
has strict data localisation policies, it can limit 
the potential for it to become a digital ‘hub’ 
or similar – and the total addressable growth 
opportunity in that market will be constrained 
only to the domestic digital economy. This will, in turn, affect the overall value-proposition of 
building infrastructure and investing in that 
country, compared to a neighbouring country 
that permits cross-border data flows. In 
summary, commercial risk may increase whilst 
investment attractiveness could decrease 
when a country has data localisation measures 
in place. 
Small countries, which are not home to data centres, 
can incur unnecessary administrative regulatory 
costs related to enforcing data localisation 
requirements – whilst foreign investment will be 
discouraged due to the favouring of local players. 
Data localisation requirements also increase the 
administrative expenses related to compliance - for 
governments and the private sector. Data protection 
officers are required to obtain consent mechanisms 
to transfer data across organisations and borders, 
whilst companies need to identify and determine 
the categories of data that need to be stored 
locally, and which data can be moved offshore. 
This will also slow down the pace of innovation 
as the ability to experiment is severely impeded 
– as it will either now take too long, be too costly 
or both - by onerous compliance requirements. 
On a more fundamental level, over-assertion of state 
control raises concerns about the ‘Balkanisation 
of the Internet’26. This risks shattering – perhaps 
irreparably - the interoperability and unified nature 
of the Internet, thus diminishing the value of the 
Internet, its multipliers and network effects, in 
supporting international trade transactions. If this Small countries, which are not home to data centres, can 
incur unnecessary administrative regulatory costs related 
to enforcing data localisation requirements – whilst foreign 
investment will be discouraged due to the favouring of local 
players.practice becomes widespread, there would be a 
need for a significant redesign of the technical and 
governance structures of the Internet.   nnational assets through regulatory objectives 
require regulatory cooperation. Southern East 
Asian governments have already started to 
pursue this through bilateral, regional and 
international agreements within the ASEAN 
Economic Community (AEC).
• Technical solutions. Protecting personal, 
confidential or data of national security 
should consider both policies, regulatory and 
technical aspects. The hosting location of the 
data does not necessarily provide high levels 
of privacy, confidentiality, security, availability 
and integrity. Instead, it is the combination of 
secure networks and system architectures 
and clarity on the legal protection regime 
(and enforcement) that guarantee privacy 
and security of data. The ASEAN certification 
scheme discussed below takes this approach.
 
Without a clear path towards achieving legitimate 
policy objectives and maximising the benefits 
of the digital economy, governments may 
increasingly opt for approaches that restrict data 
flows. Building relatively new policy and regulatory 
virtual borders is increasingly disrupting the 
global Internet and jeopardising service supply 
and choice, value chain integration and essential 
innovations that might otherwise be of great 
significance for the development of national 
digital economies. 
Therefore, if after careful consideration of both 
technical and legal aspects on privacy and data 
protection, confidentiality, availability and integrity of 
data, data localisation is still a national requirement, 
it becomes essential to highlight the existence of 
options and clarity on what classes of data can be 
shared across borders. Nevertheless, these different 
approaches to data sharing should be carefully 
crafted to prevent undue regulatory complexity, 
for instance, by introducing too many categories 
of data that are not clearly described or relying on 
vague conditions for sharing data. A consideration 
of ‘open by default’ could be important. Considerations: cross-border data and data 
internationalism 
While individuals, business and digital systems 
are generating enormous flows of data, 
governments, in response, are struggling with 
striking a balance between facilitating trade 
through international data flows and upholding 
domestic policy objectives of privacy, consumer 
protection, and cybersecurity, according to the 
rule of law27. However, it is possible to achieve 
legitimate privacy and security goals in ways that 
are less impactful on trade and economic growth. 
• Cross-border data sharing based on 
adequate and comparable protection.   
Similar to the EU approach, the Philippines, 
Malaysia and Singapore may allow data transfer 
to organisations outside their territories only 
when destination countries have adequate 
safeguards comparable to protections 
granted under their own jurisdictions28. These 
approaches facilitate legitimate cross-border 
data flows if certain conditions are met. For 
example, an entity may transfer personal data 
outside Singapore if the recipient organisation 
is bound by legally enforceable obligations 
such that the personal data transferred has a 
standard of protection which is comparable to 
that under Singapore’s Personal Data Protection 
Act29. These approaches underline that it is 
possible to ensure that cross-border data flow 
does not abrogate national data protection and 
privacy standards30.  
• Regulatory cooperation and the role of 
governance. Confidence that domestic 
policy objectives will be met even if data 
flows out of jurisdiction creates trust between 
policymakers. An approach that both 
embraces data flow and protects citizens andMAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: POLICIES AND PROCESSES20 21
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDof Information’ laws. Another is in relation to 
facilitating data sharing – including in the context 
of cross-border data flows. The solution to address 
these conflicts between transparency, openness 
and privacy lies in putting in place procedures that 
acknowledge privacy risks and harms linked to 
sharing personal data, and setting out appropriate 
steps to address these concerns. Data protection 
law is one mechanism to protect individual rights 
to privacy and to reduce privacy violation risks, 
particularly in the context of regional cross 
border data flow.  
In the contemporary context of ‘Big Data’, the 
potential for re-identification of individuals - by 
combining different sources of de-identifiedData governance frameworks for accountable and 
transparent processing of personal information 
(both before and after aggregation) are necessary 
to safeguard rights of privacy. Privacy is a 
fundamental right enshrined in many international 
declarations. Article 12 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) proclaims 
the right to be free from arbitrary interference of 
one’s privacy, family, home or correspondence. 
Similarly, Article 17 of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights 1966, Article 14 of the 
UN Convention on Migrant Workers, and Article 
16 of the UN Convention of the Protection of the 
Child make reference to privacy31.Privacy and Data Protection
Privacy is a fundamental human right, and should therefore 
be carefully balanced against competing rights and public 
interest goals.
In the ASEAN region, Article 21 of the ASEAN 
Human Rights Declaration32, inspired by Article 
12 of the UDHR, includes the concept of personal 
data. It declares that ‘every person has the right 
to be free from arbitrary interference with his or 
her privacy, family, home or correspondence 
including personal data.’ With the aim of 
increasing cooperation to facilitate border 
transactions at a regional level, one of ASEAN’s 
e-commerce key action lines33 is to develop 
‘Regional Data Protection and Privacy Principles’. 
In addition, the ASEAN Strategic Action Plan for 
consumer protection (2016-2025) includes an 
initiative to modernise the legislation to reflect 
relevant provisions on consumer data privacy34. 
Privacy is a fundamental human right, and 
should therefore be carefully balanced against 
competing rights and public interest goals. 
One of these competing rights is transparency, 
including in relation to ‘right to know’ or ‘Freedomof Information’ laws. Another is in relation to 
facilitating data sharing – including in the context 
of cross-border data flows. The solution to address 
these conflicts between transparency, openness 
and privacy lies in putting in place procedures that 
acknowledge privacy risks and harms linked to 
sharing personal data, and setting out appropriate 
steps to address these concerns. Data protection 
law is one mechanism to protect individual rights 
to privacy and to reduce privacy violation risks, 
particularly in the context of regional cross border 
data flow. 
In the contemporary context of ‘Big Data’, the 
potential for re-identification of individuals - by 
combining different sources of de-identified 
data through analytics and machine learning 
(the so-called mosaic effect35) – sharpens 
data privacy concerns. Malaysia, Singapore, 
the Philippines, and Thailand have developed 
comprehensive personal data protection lawsMAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: POLICIES AND PROCESSES
to tackle this problem, while Indonesia has 
a draft law that is in a relatively advanced 
stage36. Lao PDR, Vietnam, and Cambodia 
have legislation applying to specific sectors or 
mediums (for instance, relating to the press in 
case of Cambodia37). Myanmar and Brunei do 
not have any specific data protection laws38.
While losing control over an individual’s data 
is a form of harm, in a data-driven setting the 
potential consequences of this loss of control 
are amplified. For instance, a breach of sensitive 
personal data (e.g. financial, health, or biometric 
information) may impact on a person’s ability to 
secure insurance, gain employment, and other 
benefits - or it may result in discrimination or 
social stigma. Similarly, concerns over losing 
control of privacy could lead citizens to share 
less data39. This reaffirms why data protection 
should be paramount – regardless of data 
being transferred across borders. It should 
continue to be protected as though it was still 
in the jurisdiction of origin.• Data privacy laws may be diverging. 
The majority of ASEAN countries have 
effectively applied the high-level concepts 
and principles contained in international 
legal frameworks, instruments, or 
guidelines. As a result, their national legal 
systems on data protection are compatible 
across the region40. Notwithstanding, the 
transposition of high-level concepts and 
principles in national jurisdictions has not 
achieved the expected goal of regional 
consistency. In fact, when moving from the 
text of newly-enacted legislations on data 
protection to the practicality of compliance 
and enforcement, divergence increases as 
nations prescribe an increasing number of 
specific requirements. In this context, both 
regional and local efforts should aim at 
promoting the convergence of existing data 
protection laws41. Many ASEAN countries 
are reviewing their own data protection 
legislations and may consider broader 
regulatory approaches – perhaps similar to 
the GDPR, with Europe a significant trading 
partner for the region - to protect citizens’ 
privacy and enable local businesses to 
operate globally42 through some sort of 
conformity in approach43. Another scheme 
for ASEAN countries is the Cross-Border 
Privacy Rules (CBPR) System of APEC. The 
APEC CBPR has the benefit of enabling 
cross-border personal data flow even if 
governments have not formally recognised 
the equivalence of their respective privacy 
laws. APEC CBPR empowers privateentities 
to ensure that any data collected and 
transmitted to third-parties, either 
domestically or internationally, adheres to 
data protection consistent with the APEC 
principles of privacy44.
• The risks of data extraction. Conversely, 
in countries where data protection laws are 
weak or not existent (for example, MyanmarConsiderations: cross-border data, privacy, 
and data protection  
Data protection and privacy efforts are still 
evolving in the context of cross-border data 
flows. In this context, there are a number of 
considerations and challenges: 
• Preventing data extraction, or unequal data 
relationships. Citizens of countries with 
lower levels of data protection may find their 
data more exposed than those in states with 
robust data protection frameworks. When a 
data protection law is in place, governments 
and private sector organisations are obliged 
by privacy and data protection laws to avoid 
disclosing personal information except for 
authorised purposes, but these protections are 
only viable if enforcement is possible. In some 
countries, enforcement may not be viable.22 23
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDstored. Therefore, it is crucial that the organisation 
managing data implements all measures to 
prevent such breaches45, including encryption46.  
As noted above, in the ASEAN region, countries 
such as Vietnam has enhanced cybersecurity 
laws that impose data localisation requirements 
placing restrictions on digital trade. The recently 
adopted Cybersecurity Law imposes local data 
storage requirements for both domestic and 
foreign organisations that provide internet, 
telecommunications, and value-added services. 
The data is requested to be temporary locally 
stored and the specific requirements are set 
by the regulatory authorities. However, these 
restrictive data localisation provisions are 
currently under revision47. and Brunei), corporations and other 
governments could adopt practices that do 
not consider local people’s right to privacy. 
These practices could extract value by 
collecting personal data locally, while placing 
vulnerable and marginalised communities 
at risk of privacy violation. This could lead 
to ‘regulatory shopping’, where companies 
or other entities collect and use data from 
countries or regions with more favourable 
– or non-existent - data protection policies 
and legislation.
Cybersecurity
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data, 
from a regulatory perspective, depend on national 
cybersecurity policy and legislation. However, to 
protect users’ online safety and security, some 
countries may impose restrictions on data sharing 
and transfer by enacting cybersecurity legislation. 
These can be barriers to the free flow of data. 
From a cybersecurity perspective, some states 
may believe that data is more secure if it is stored 
within national borders. 
Notwithstanding, both the digital economy and 
national security are legitimate concerns for 
states. While cross-border data flows can facilitate 
the digital economy, data localisation can facilitate 
national security. Data which supports the digital 
economy should be supported by compatible 
cross-border data transfer frameworks, while data 
which impacts on national security will need to be 
more tightly secured, which may require other 
measures such as data localisation. 
However, data security is a function of the 
technical, physical, and administrative controls 
in place by the service provider - regardless 
of where the data is geographically stored. In 
the case of a security breach, if countries have 
cybersecurity legislation in place, a private entity 
operating in these countries will be subject to 
these laws. However, data breaches can happen 
independently from where the data is physically Data security is a function of 
the technical, physical, and 
administrative controls in 
place by the service provider 
- regardless of where the 
data is geographically stored.Considerations: cross-border data and 
ensuring cybersecurity 
Despite differences in terms of regulatory 
models between ASEAN countries, improving 
the compatibility of cross-border data transfer 
frameworks would enhance legal certainty, 
with a positive impact on collective and 
national positions on cross-border data 
flow. Conversely, laws prescribing different 
conditions for the collection, storage, 
and transferring of data can increase the 
burden on private sector organisations.Intellectual property rights 
The digital economy generates a large volume 
of data, which has great value for economic 
operators49. While data in the personal domain 
is usually protected by privacy regulation, 
proprietary compilation of data is normally 
protected by intellectual property rights (IPR). 
These include copyright, trade secrets, patents, 
and contractual frameworks50. 
The role of IPR in cross border trade cannot 
be overstated, considering that private 
sectororganisations which want to trade their 
goods internationally need assurances that 
their intellectual property rights are protected 
on foreign territories. In a digital environment, 
intellectual property can be seen as a security 
measure when data moves across borders51, Considerations: cross-border data and 
intellectual property rights 
It is uncommon, at least in ASEAN – and besides the 
Singapore case - to assign IPR to public sector data. 
In general, it is accepted and expected that public 
sector data should be made available through open 
data, free of any intellectual property restrictions and 
free of charge53. This data can be made available in 
the public domain if there are no conflicting interests 
- such as national security or law enforcement
Considering that data can fuel countless applications 
across different industries and benefits society as a 
whole, Singapore has recently proposed changes 
to its copyright act recommending an exception 
to copyright law for data analysis. This exception 
applies to any ‘reproduction that [is] performed in 
the course of text and data mining’, when automated Considering that data can fuel countless applications 
across different industries and benefits society as a whole, 
Singapore has recently proposed changes to its copyright 
act recommending an exception to copyright law for data 
analysis.
and therefore, compilation of data (such 
as annotation, creative arrangements, or 
selection of data) covered by IPR may be 
subject to restrictions of crossing borders. 
New rights for creators in the digital environments 
have been introduced by the World Intellectual 
Property Organisation Copyright Treaty. According 
to the Treaty, the author or successor-in-
title is the only subject that can authorise the
distribution of a piece of work to the public. It also 
has the exclusive right to communicate the work 
to the public, including through the Internet. In 
other words, the copyright holder controls who can 
access a work covered by copyright52.  This could lead to the adoption of sub-optimal 
and vulnerable IT infrastructures, which may 
then increase the risk of cybersecurity attacks48.
The security of data (including confidentiality, 
integrity and availability) does not depend on the 
physical location of the servers which are hosting 
such data. Rather, it is a function of the normative 
rules - including norms, policies, regulations, and 
laws; protocols (such as data standards and technical 
interfaces), and implementation of technologies and 
security measures  – such as encryption, firewalls, 
and access controls - that are put in place by public 
or private service providers in the way that they 
store, access, share and use the data. These should 
be a priority consideration in any data setting.
 MAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: POLICIES AND PROCESSES24 25
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDtechniques are involved to extract, analyse and copy 
large quantities of data, to capture new meaning 
and information. Without this exception, the act of 
mining and analysing data may infringe copyright, in 
turn limiting data activities54.
18.  OECD (2019). Data availability: Policy frameworks, stakeholder 
engagement and data release. Available at https://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org//sites/cea2bbb6-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/
cea2bbb6-en#fig-9.5
19.  Boyd, M., Frejova, J., and Wilde, E. (2020). Better governance, one 
API at a time. Axway White Paper. Available at https://www.apidays.co/
wp-content/uploads/2020/06/axway-wp-better-governance-en.pdf
20.  For the various phases of the data lifecycle, see Wing, J. M. (2019). 
The Data Life Cycle.(1). https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.e26845b4
21. The World Bank (2019). The Digital Economy in Southeast Asia 
Strengthening the Foundations for Future Growth. Available at http://
documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/328941558708267736/
pdf/The-Digital-Economy-in-Southeast-Asia-Strengthening-the-
Foundations-for-Future-Growth.pdf
22. Ferracane (2017).
23. Cory, N. (2017). Cross-Border Data Flows: Where are the Barriers, 
and What Do They Cost? Information Technology and Innovation 
Foundation. May 2017. Available at http://www2.itif.org/2017-cross-
border-data-flows.pdf
24. The World Bank (2019).
25. Prapangpong (2018)
26. Kurbalija, J. (2012). The Internet and ‘balkanisation through 
regulation’. In: Diplo. Available at https://www.diplomacy.edu/blog/
internet-and-‘balkanisation-through-regulation’
27. Prapangpong (2018)
28. (Section 129 (1) and (2) of the Malaysia’s Personal Data Protection 
Act 2010; Section 26 (1) and (2) of the Singapore’s Personal Data 
Protection Act 2012). In the Philippines, the ‘Accountability Principle’ 
contained in the Data Privacy Act of 2012 (DPA) s 21 gives responsibility 
to the controller over “personal information under its control and 
custody, including information that has been transferred to third parties 
for processing, whether domestically or internationally”.
29. Linklaters (2020). Data Protected – Singapore. Available at https://
www.linklaters.com/es-es/insights/data-protected/data-protected---
singapore
30. World Bank (2019)
31. Privacy International (2017). What Is Privacy? Available at https://
privacyinternational.org/explainer/56/what-privacy
32. ASEAN Human Rights Declaration. Available at https://www.asean.
org/storage/images/ASEAN_RTK_2014/6_AHRD_Booklet.pdf33. ASEAN AEM and AEC Council, ASEAN Economic Community 
2025 Consolidated Strategic Action Plan, number 90. Available at 
https://asean.org/storage/2012/05/Consolidated-Strategic-Action-Plan-
endorsed-060217rev.pdf
34. ASEAN. The ASEAN Strategic action plan for consumer protection 
(ASAPCP) 2016-2025: meeting the challenges of a people-centered 
ASEAN beyond 2015. Available at https://aseanconsumer.org/file/post_
image/The%20ASEAN%20Strategic%20Action%20Plan%20For%20
Consumer%20Protection%202016_2025%20Meeting%20The%20
Challenges%20of%20A%20People%20%20Centered%20ASEAN%20
Beyond%202015.pdf
35. Centre for Humdata (2020). Exploring The Mosaic Effect 
on HDX Datasets. 22 July 2020. Available at https://centre.
humdata.org/exploring-the-mosaic-effect-on-hdx-datasets/
36. The Jakarta Post (2020). Indonesia to conclude data 
protection bill in November. September 2, 2020. Available at 
https://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2020/09/02/indonesia-to-
conclude-data-protection-bill-in-november.html
37. Zico law (2020). Personal Data Protection in ASEAN. ASEAN 
insiders series. Available at https://www.zicolaw.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/09/ASEAN-INSIDERS_PDPA-in-ASEAN-3.pdf
38. For a summary, see ZICO law (2020). ASEAN insiders series. 
Available at https://www.zicolaw.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/
ASEAN-INSIDERS_PDPA-in-ASEAN-3.pdf
39. State of Open Data. Privacy. Available at https://stateofopendata.
od4d.net/chapters/issues/privacy.html
40. The World Bank (2019). The Digital Economy in Southeast Asia 
Strengthening the Foundations for Future Growth. Available at http://
documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/328941558708267736/
pdf/The-Digital-Economy-in-Southeast-Asia-Strengthening-the-
Foundations-for-Future-Growth.pdf
41. The World Bank (2019)
42. PR Newswire (2020). Raising the standards of authentication. In: 
Tech Vantage. 16 June, 2020. Available at https://thetechvantage.net/
raising-the-standards-of-authentication/
43. Financier Worldwide Magazine (2019). The EU GDPR’s 
impact on ASEAN data protection law. Available at https://www.
financierworldwide.com/the-eu-gdprs-impact-on-asean-data-
protection-law#.X3drF5MzZTY
44. To date, in Asia, Japan, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, and 
Taiwan have joined the scheme.
45. Cory (2017).
46. Although encryption does not necessarily prevent data breaches, it 
can mitigate the risks considering that in the event encrypted data are 
leaked, they cannot be read. 
47.  Vishwakarma, N. (2019). Vietnam plans to narrow data localization 
requirements under its cybersecurity law. In: MEDIANAMA. Available at 
https://www.medianama.com/2019/10/223-data-localisation-vietnam/48. Asian Business Law Institute (2020). Transferring Personal Data in 
Asia: A path to legal certainty and regional convergence. Available at 
https://www.abli.asia/NEWS-EVENTS/Whats-New/ID/134/Transferring-
Personal-Data-in-Asia-A-path-to-legal-certainty-and-regional-
convergence
49. European Commission (2016). Facilitating cross border data flow in 
the Digital Single Market.
50. OECD (2020). Mapping approaches to data and data flows. Report 
for the G20 Digital Economy Task Force. Saudi Arabia, 2020. Available 
at http://www.oecd.org/trade/documents/mapping-approaches-to-
data-and-data-flows.pdf
51. WEF (2020).
52. Research ICT Africa (2020). SADC PF Discussion Paper on the 
Digital Economy and Society. 
53. OECD (2020).
54. Foo, G. (2019). Singapore’s biggest copyright report in 30 years. 
WIPO Magazine. Available at https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/
en/2019/04/article_0003.htmlMAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: POLICIES AND PROCESSES27
Cross-Border 
Data MechanismsThe ASEAN framework on Digital Data 
Governance55 (Figure 5), adopted in 2017, is 
an attempt to develop a conducive regulatory 
framework even in a context of varying national 
data maturities across countries. It aims to 
maximise the free flow of data within the region 
to encourage a dynamic data ecosystem while 
ensuring that the necessary protections are in 
place with data is transferred56. 
One of the four ‘Strategic Priorities of Digital 
Data Governance’ in the framework is cross-
border data flows. The outcomes of this priority 
are to ensure business certainty regarding 
cross-border data flows, and to ensure that 
there are no unnecessary restrictions on data 
flows. These aims are being explored through 
a voluntary and non-binding Mechanism57, 
which encompasses regulatory certainty on 
the practice of data sharing, including ‘who 
they may share data with, the types of data 
that may be shared, and how they may share 
such data’58. The underlying objective of the mechanism is 
to take into consideration the various maturity 
levels and national laws that are in place in every 
Member State within the ASEAN region. Countries 
can subsequently evaluate their participation in 
the mechanism. This approach respects digital 
sovereignty and is a way to explore cross-border 
data flows with the underlying objective of guiding 
national policies. The mechanism involves two 
fundamental methods:
• Certification. Organisations that demonstrate 
they have reliable and effective data 
management practices in place are provided 
with a certification that confirms they operate 
in compliance with data management 
requirements. For example, they have proven 
to have measures in place that safeguard 
protection of people’s rights to privacy and 
have effective security mechanisms in place. Potential approaches to enabling cross-
border data
Figure 5 – Summary of the ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance (ASEAN)CROSS-BORDER DATA MECHANISMS
28 29
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDOver the last few years, more and more 
regional nations, such as Japan and South 
Korea, have put certification systems in 
place as a means of assisting businesses 
to prove they operate in compliance with 
the national data protection laws. These 
systems provide encouraging signs for 
interoperability59. Organisations achieve 
certification if they can adequately 
demonstrate that they take appropriate 
precautions and manage data in a safe 
and effective way in accordance with the 
data protection laws in place in different 
jurisdictions. In some cases, different 
certification schemes may emerge; as 
such, one business may receive different 
certifications according to different 
frameworks. In some jurisdictions, such 
as Singapore, and Thailand, it is not 
possible for self-regulatory, non-binding 
certification mechanisms to effectively 
operate under the data transfer rules 
that are in place as it is typically a 
requirement that certification policies can 
be enforceable for application in such 
situation60. Certifications can also provide 
confirmation that a given organisation 
has appropriate data minimisation and 
security protocols in place that adequately 
prevent data from being accessed by any 
unauthorised party61.
• Model Contractual Clauses (MCCs). 
MCCs, which are also referred to as data 
transfer agreements, are contractually 
enforceable and mandate that all 
personal data is fully protected in the 
event that it is transferred to an overseas 
territory62. They also clearly outline the 
data protection mechanisms that are in 
place, the obligations that govern data 
transferring, responsibilities for data 
management, data portability and data 
access - including how data subjects can 
exercise their right to delete, access and 
move the data63. MCCs can also indicatethe governing law for any contract involving 
data, and therefore the authority that will be 
responsible for any data breaches. These are 
widely agreed to provide a valid method by 
which organisations can ensure that they are 
in agreement with data transfer requirements. 
In the case of countries that are putting 
data protection mechanisms in place and 
have yet to finalise their enactment, MCCs 
can be implemented as a lawful foundation 
for the transfer of data within the region. 
The Working Group on Digital Data Governance 
(WG-DDG) is in charge of developing ‘the 
implementation details and guidelines for 
ASEAN Certification and ASEAN Model 
Contractual Clauses, including the appropriate 
enforcement mechanisms, standards, policies, 
and processes’, and of guiding TELSOM64 
and TELMIN65 on capacity building needs 
and interoperability with other international 
frameworks and mechanisms66. 
Certifications and MCCs should be accessible 
for all organisations in all industries throughout 
the ASEAN region and should not be limited to 
specific sectors. This helps to guarantee that 
data subjects will benefit from equal protection 
mechanisms and will enable businesses that 
are based in the ASEAN region to optimise the 
associated benefits67.
Many legal professionals are in broad agreement 
that evaluating the suitability of each country’s 
privacy regime on a case-by-case basis would 
incur significant practical liability. This would be 
exacerbated in situations in which the law does 
not provide a list of fundamental standards that 
serve to prove that the legal requirements that 
are in place in an alternative legal setting afford 
a comparable standard of data protection. 
Furthermore, industry actors have highlighted 
how assessments of this nature are not realistic 
and are at risk of becoming rapidly out of 
date due to changes in the situation in each 
respective jurisdiction.They also argue that, even if it were possible to 
secure resource and time required to perform 
such evaluations, the hypothetical legal 
adequacy of a given regime would not focus 
on problems such as practical conformity, 
execution or enforceability in the jurisdiction 
of interest68. As such, it is not particularly 
effective for a ‘data exporter’ to perform self-
assessment because it does not guarantee 
that the data protection mechanisms are 
compatible. Even in situations in which self-
assessment is deemed to be legitimate for 
cross-border data transmissions, there is a 
need to have clear rules regarding how such 
an assessment is performed and by whom69. 
Various other mechanisms are in place that 
facilitate cross-border data flow. The two more 
favourable approaches are outlined below:
• Binding Corporate Rules (BCRs). BCRs 
were established in the EU as a means to 
transfer data across borders in a manner that 
complies with Directive 95/46/EC (Article 25) 
- now EU GDPR (Article 47). Organisations 
adhere to these data protection protocols 
when transferring any personal data 
between enterprises or groups. The primary 
feature of BCRs are relatively standard per 
EU legislation. In a comparable way to 
Codes of Conduct (detailed below), BCRs 
make sure organisations operate in a way 
that adheres to local legal requirements 
while simultaneously ensuring that any data 
transferred across borders is sufficiently 
protected70. BCRs also include more 
relaxed internal regulations that govern how 
personal data is shared within corporate 
groups. They are legally binding on all 
appropriate bodies and individuals who 
form the group. BCRs are often supported 
by a wide-ranging privacy and compliance 
framework that spans procedures, policies, 
governance processes, data protection 
officers, training systems, communication 
channels, and assessments. On a holistic level, they adhere to the primary aspects 
of corporate compliance mechanisms71. 
As the implementation of BCRs can be 
less time-, resource-, and cost-intensive 
than alternative methods, such as model 
contracts, they can be advantageous for 
organisations that engage in numerous 
data transfers. As such, they are particularly 
attractive to SMEs. Over a long period 
of time, it is anticipated that the costs of 
compliance as a result of the use of BCRs 
will typically be lower than alternative 
approaches to managing more complicated 
transfers across intra-group entities – in 
the EU setting at least72. ASEAN’s Model 
Contractual Clauses take this approach, 
with modification. By adding modularity, 
they result more flexible than the EU’s 
Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC).
 
• Codes of Conduct. Codes of Conduct are 
designed by professional industry societies 
and other representative bodies. They can be 
particularly useful as they allow businesses 
to develop bespoke data protection 
provisions that are aligned with their unique 
requirements. A further benefit of such Codes 
is that market efficiencies can emerge when 
organisations adhere to the underlying 
provisions on a voluntary basis. The body or 
association that is responsible for developing 
a Code of Conduct is required to perform 
an in-depth review of any applicant that is 
seeking membership of the wider group or 
that is expressing a desire to comply with the 
Code73. Prescribing to a Code of Conduct can 
mean that an organisation does not need to 
perform its own evaluation of a prospective 
provider’s system as it can, instead, find 
processors or providers that have already 
been found to be in adherence with the rules 
specified in the Code and can depend the 
association to ensure compliance74.CROSS-BORDER DATA MECHANISMS30
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYOND55. ASEAN (2017). Telecommunications and Information Technology 
Ministers Meeting (TELMIN). Framework on Digital Data Governance. 
Available at https://asean.org/storage/2012/05/6B-ASEAN-Framework-
on-Digital-Data-Governance_Endorsed.pdf
56. ASEAN (2017). Framework on Digital Data Governance.
57. ASEAN. Key approaches for ASEAN cross border data flows 
mechanism. Available at https://asean.org/storage/2012/05/Key-
Approaches-for-ASEAN-Cross-Border-Data-Flows-Mechanism.pdf
58. ASEAN (2017). Framework on Digital Data Governance.
59. Legal domain in which certification schemes in place that are 
valid for the purse of data transfers are sufficiently broad to facilitate 
certification in accordance with international standards; for example, 
ISO/IEC 27701:2019 on Privacy Information Management System (PIMS). 
This has the capability to facilitate data flows not only from one-country-
to-many-countries but also from most-countries-to-most-countries. 
60. Asian Business Law Institute (2020). Transferring Personal Data in 
Asia: A path to legal certainty and regional convergence. Available at 
https://www.abli.asia/NEWS-EVENTS/Whats-New/ID/134/Transferring-
Personal-Data-in-Asia-A-path-to-legal-certainty-and-regional-
convergence
61. Digital Europe (2020). An early analysis of Schrems II – key 
questions and possible ways forward. 21 August 2020. Available at 
https://www.digitaleurope.org/resources/an-early-analysis-of-schrems-
ii-key-questions-and-possible-ways-forward/
62. Asian Business Law Institute (2020).
63. ASEAN. Key approaches for ASEAN cross border data flows 
mechanism. Available at https://asean.org/storage/2012/05/Key-
Approaches-for-ASEAN-Cross-Border-Data-Flows-Mechanism.pdf
64. The ASEAN Telecommunications and Information Technology 
Senior Officials Meeting
65. The ASEAN Telecommunications Ministers Meeting 
66. ASEAN. Key approaches for ASEAN cross border data flows 
mechanism.
67. Digital Europe (2020).
68. Bellamy, B., Heyder, M. (2017). Essential Legislative Approaches 
for Enabling Cross-Border Data Transfers in a Global Economy. Centre 
for Information Policy Leadership. Hunton & Williams LLP. Available at 
https://www.informationpolicycentre.com/uploads/5/7/1/0/57104281/
cipl_white_paper__final__-_essential_legislative_approaches_for_
enabling_cross-border_data_transfers.pdf. Cited in: Asian Business 
Law Institute (2020).
69. Asian Business Law Institute (2020). Transferring Personal Data in 
Asia: A path to legal certainty and regional convergence
70. Bellamy, B., Heyder, M. (2017).
71. Asian Business Law Institute (2020).
72. Asian Business Law Institute (2020).73. Heimes, R. (2016). Top 10 operational impacts of the GDPR: Part 9 
- Codes of conduct and certifications. The Privacy Advisory. Available 
at https://iapp.org/news/a/top-10-operational-impacts-of-the-gdpr-part-
9-codes-of-conduct-and-certifications/
74. Heimes, R. (2018). Top 10 Operational Responses to the GDPR – Part 
9: Vetting and contracting with processors. Available at https://iapp.org/
news/a/top-10-operational-responses-to-the-gdpr-part-9-vetting-and-
contracting-with-processors/
Making Cross-Border Data 
Happen: 
Technical Components32 33
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDTechnical interoperability plays a fundamental 
role in cross-border data flows – and in the 
data life-cycle more broadly (see boxout-
forthcoming). Technical interoperability refers 
to the ‘ability to share data between different 
systems and to enable those systems to make 
use of the data’75. Systems need to have the 
ability to achieve data interoperability and 
interconnectivity to ensure that the information 
flows in a seamless manner when being 
provided to those who need it, when they need 
it, where they need it, and in the form in which 
they need it.On a practical level, data is compiled and stored by 
many organisations at global, national, and local 
levels. Both proprietary and open technologies 
are currently employed in the management of 
data. As such, it can be difficult to distribute or 
share data across various disjointed applications 
and databases. The challenges associated with 
data management can impede cross-border data 
sharing and hinder horizontal data usage entities 
in different industries and data use mechanisms 
such as AI and IoT76.Both wired and wireless (3G, 4G, and 5G) 
technologies represent fundamental aspects 
of the process through which data is collected, 
shared, distributed and analysed. They provide 
connectivity between systems and processes, 
and are crucial foundations in enabling data 
collection and transfer.
It is essential that a minimum level of meaningful 
connectivity77 is set and appropriate levels of 
investment are made to ensure last-mile access. 
The cross-border flow of data can also be aided 
through the use of low-cost connectivity systems, 
such as community networks, and by releasing 
spectrum bands to catalyse wireless connectivity.Connectivity
Considerations
National connectivity can be enhanced 
through the establishment of various 
mechanisms. These include local and high-
quality Internet Exchange Points, which can 
drive the development of local connectivity 
ecosystems. Investments in high-quality wired 
– including full-fibre – and wireless networks 
can also lead to significant economic and wider 
multiplier effects. More broadly, connectivity is 
founded on strong and effective collaboration 
between the public and private sectors. This 
also includes the importance of an enabling 
environment – including policy and regulation 
to guide fair spectrum allocation, to balance 
the rights of landowners with the importance 
of delivering connectivity, and to accelerate 
the deployment of network apparatus. 
 
Data Standardsapplications and systems can reuse metadata 
and other key components of information 
in a given data value chain. Operating in 
accordance with standards is important to 
achieve interoperability and to improve the 
quality of data79. 
To accommodate any future reiterations that 
can be observed in response to data policy 
changes, novel information sources, and 
other evolutions in the data supply and value 
chain, standards need to be both technology-
neutral and flexible. Two well-known global 
bodies that are responsible for managing data 
standards are the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) and the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C).
Considerations
Porism describes how data standards could 
be explicitly defined as a means of setting out 
how data is shared, distributed, and accessed 
by different people and access points78. Data 
standards form the backbone of technical 
interoperability as they ensure that different A W3C study of practices and tooling for Web 
data standardisation found that the primary 
objective of data standards is to facilitate service 
growth while also ensuring interoperability. As 
per the findings of the W3C, interoperability is 
only possible when the data formats and items 
of the vocabulary pertaining to data items 
are known. Common formats of representing 
data include Comma Separated Values, JSON 
(JavaScript Object Notation), and XML. 
The W3C encourages data providers to employ 
common data representations to simplify the 
future development of services80 and present 
a description of their datasets and associated 
reference guide to alternative data providers. 
Such descriptions can cover the constraints 
that may be applied to validate the information 
and verify the absence of any inconsistency. 
Communities that are formed of data providers 
and data users all stand to benefit from the 
development and implementation of data 
standards. Such standards can be community-
based or may necessitate a more formal 
approach whereby global players engage in an 
international agreement pertaining to how the 
standards are created and managed81. MAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: TECHNICAL COMPONENTS
34 35
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDState entities can endorse the implementation 
of standards to facilitate interoperability across 
applications, databases, and services. One 
method of promoting the use of standards could 
involve incentivising organisations in each 
participating jurisdiction to develop comparable 
data standards without actually enforcing a 
distinct set of criteria. This will help governments 
to remain technology-neutral and future-proof82.
Data and System Interoperability
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) 
are ‘computing interface[s] allowing access to 
a software or technical system and defining 
the conditions under which the system can 
be used. APIs are typically intermediate in a 
standardised manner a series of data (and 
information) flows between systems’83. They 
represent a sophisticated method of ensuring 
users, applications, and systems can access 
data sources over the Internet. 
Through using APIs to ensure that higher 
volumes of real-time data are available to a variety 
of systems, applications, and users, businesses 
are better placed to develop cutting-edge 
offerings. APIs provide interoperability between 
systems and software, and in this sense they can 
drive cross-border data flow by connecting not 
only various datasets and systems across different 
organisations within the same jurisdictions, but 
also located in different countries.
These technologies can also be strong 
mobilisational drivers for national and regional 
policies and processes. For example, APIX – the 
open-architecture platform led by the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore, the International Finance 
Corporation, and the ASEAN Bankers Association.
ConsiderationsIn a cross-border data flow context, APIs can 
be employed to ensure secure data exchange. 
They can embed dynamic identity management 
controls, for instance, to provide authentication, 
to determine real-time access privileges, and 
to track identifies through the data life cycle. A 
service management platform based on APIs 
can support the monitoring of large data flows 
through scanning for anomalies which may 
represent security or fraudulent events84.
The OpenAPI Specification85 has arisen as 
the standard structure by which it is possible 
to delineate the interface between services 
and client applications, Through the use of 
OpenAPI, players can tap into the power of 
databases of distributed services a means of 
making it simpler and more cost-effective to 
develop applications. 
However, it is currently very expensive to 
integrate legacy system APIs into the more 
contemporary OpenAPI standards, and some 
organisations are required to administrate 
several API services or tailored services to specific 
uses. One alternative method of enhancing API 
interoperability is by developing ‘API mashups’ or 
an API ‘middle layer’. These service provisions 
extract data from a series of APIs (legacy APIs or 
alternative services) and re-bundle them in the 
form of a new API endpoint. API aggregations 
of this nature can significantly enhance the 
integration experience and outcomes86.
However, it was recently noted that 
communication protocols - i.e. a system which 
‘defines a set of messages that can be sent 
between two or more systems to share information 
and invoke features – via the Internet or other 
networks (or even on the same computing 
system)87’ are better suited to open-up platforms 
to higher levels of competition underpinned 
by peer-to-peer communications models88 
In a cross-border data flow context, APIs can 
be employed to ensure secure data exchange. 
They can embed dynamic identity management competition by reducing switching costs across 
service providers95. 
Data sandboxes are used for ‘trusted access and 
re-use of sensitive and proprietary data’89. They can 
be described as ‘any isolated environment, through 
which data are accessed and analysed, and analytic 
results are only exported, if at all, when they are 
non-sensitive’90. They are a data access mechanism 
which offer a strong level of control, and therefore 
they promise to provide access to very sensitive 
data across borders91.Data Sandboxes
Considerations
GSMA has put forward a proposal to 
operationalise the ASEAN Framework on 
Digital Data Governance through a regulatory 
sandbox. The regulatory sandbox is a controlled 
environment, created for a defined purpose 
and for a predefined amount of time. According 
to GSMA, this can be an important first step 
towards a more formalised mechanism for cross 
border data flow. It can be viewed as a testing 
ground to address all concerns that may arise 
during the implementation of the mechanism92.
Data portability refers to the ability to transfer 
data across different systems. It aims at 
empowering individuals by giving them 
control and rights over their personal data93. It 
represents a method by which users can switch 
between different service providers. Vendor 
lock-in represents one of the primary barriers 
to achieving data portability. It can arise when 
proprietary systems, pricing models, and system 
architectures issue penalties or excessive 
charges for removing data from a system94. 
Data portability is often regarded as a good way 
to promote cross-sectoral and cross-border re-
use of data (while providing individuals with 
control rights over their personal or business 
data). Overall, data portability has a positive 
effect on the economy and can promote. Data PortabilityConsiderations
The main barriers to data portability are of 
jurisdictional nature, considering that different 
countries may implement different definitions 
and requirements on the conditions under which 
data portability can occur. However, due to the 
‘network effects’ of many platforms, users may 
find it difficult to switch to competing services, 
especially where a significant amount of data 
is required to be transferred. This can make it 
very difficult for small start-ups and other small 
firms to use data portability as a competition 
lever to compete with large corporations96.
From a technical point of view, data portability 
issues may arise due to limitations in the speed 
at which a physical network infrastructure can 
permit real-time update to a new system. Finally, 
if providers put unreasonable contractual 
clauses pertaining to, for instance, bundling, 
users may find it difficult to move to a new system. 
Vendor lock-ins can impede the transmissionof 
data both locally, nationally, and internationally. 
It can also prevent new market entrants from 
participating in the market97. More widely, supporting 
and promoting interoperability standards can 
have positive multiplier effects in this context.  
Data Tracing
Data tracing is employed to guarantee the 
quality of data and its veracity such as reliability, 
provenance, and accurateness98. It can be 
defined as the ‘digital records of activities 
and events that are produced, stored and 
retrieved using information technologies’99. 
Digitally traced data can be either private or 
public. Private digitally traced data remains 
inaccessible to the general public, or it can be 
made available for a fee, while public digital 
trace data is accessible to the general public. MAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: TECHNICAL COMPONENTS36 37
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDDistributed Ledger Technologies (DLT) 
can support data tracing by providing a 
cryptographically secure and immutable record 
of transactions with their associated metadata. 
It can be defined as an encoded and distributed 
database which serves as a ledger which 
records and stores transactions. Cryptography 
is used in each transaction update100. In the 
context of cross border data flow, the Singapore 
TradeTrust Initiative uses DLT to provide proof of 
authenticity and provenance (discussed below). 
To address some of the inefficiencies caused 
by manual handling and verification processes, 
DLT is employed to facilitate the interoperability 
of electronic trade documents exchanged 
across different digital ecosystems101. MAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: TECHNICAL COMPONENTS
A data registry is a repository of data, and often 
allows public and private entities alike to use 
a shared set of data. By providing support 
for the creation of administrative level data 
standards, it ensures that data collected as 
part of an administrative process is validated 
and disaggregated108. Data registries improve 
exchange of business-related documents or 
data and between public sector administrations. 
In the EU, a federated IT architecture for cross-
border data flow across the region has been 
Data Registries and Data Exchange
X-Road (Figure 6)
X-Road (or 'X-Tee') is the 
foundation to Estonia's digital 
government, and digital 
society. It has also been 
applied in other countries 
and settings. Founded on 
canonical data registries, 
security servers, and 
'once-only' legislation, the 
system ensures that data is 
not duplicated and can be 
processed whilst adhering to 
strict privacy requirements. 
The Estonian and Finnish 
governments have established 
X-Road systems in their 
respective countries, enabling 
cross-border data exchange.
Considerations
Although data tracing has potential for 
facilitating cross border data flow by providing 
authenticity and provenance of data during 
the process of transfer, in order for this to be 
realised the quality of digital data tracing needs 
to be properly addressed. 
 
However, during the collection, storage, and 
retrieve, and transformation phases of the datalife 
cycle, data quality might be compromised. DLT - 
for instance, blockchain - can be used to record 
the origin of any data and subsequently track 
its use through a largely tamper-proof record 
system. Any operation that is performed on the 
data is tracked and traced102.
 Data Provenance
Data provenance involves delineating the origin 
and the owner of the data and subsequently 
compiling records for all actions involving the 
data since the point at which it was first collected. 
The authenticity of the data can be preserved 
through a robust system of provenance103. 
Data provenance is often a technical issue104. 
If properly implemented, by guaranteeing 
theorigin of data, it can enhance data quality when 
data is transferred and shared across borders.
 
Considerations
It can be very challenging, if not impossible, 
to ensure provenance for de-identified data or 
any alternative forms of data for which historical 
information pertaining to its origins is missing. 
Furthermore, data is typically produced by 
secondary data producers. As a consequence, 
in some cases, it can be hard to track the journey 
of a single data point from its origin through to 
the point at which it reaches the user. 
In these, and other, cases, establishing data 
provenance is very problematic – if not 
impossible. In some instances, it could be 
useful to determine or highlight that a set of 
data lacks provenance. This designation would 
then inform any users of that data that there is 
a potential risk associated with its use or reuse.
Encryption is an important element to protect 
the confidentiality of both stored data and data 
that is being transmitted between two parties. 
Encrypting data prevents unauthorised parties 
from reading it and limits a service providers’ 
capacity to share it with illegitimate users. As 
such, encryption plays a fundamental role 
in making sure data is protected during the 
process of being transmitted.EncryptionConsiderations
Instructing the development of ‘backdoors’ or 
disclosure requests will have explicit consequences 
in terms of an organisation’s ability to achieve 
the certification requirements or adhere to the 
contractual conditions related to the transfer of data 
cross borders. This will ultimately have negative 
impact on the extent to which data subjects 
are protected. In this context, states bodies’ 
requirements for the use of encryption should be 
considered through a principle-based approach to 
effectively identify and question requests that are 
unnecessary or disproportionate106. 
When data is transferred across borders, it is 
important that such transfer happens in a secure way, 
and that the data is made available at destination. 
Encryption should be employed at each step of 
this process, including the transferring, the storage, 
and while it is displayed at destination. Encryption 
key management can be leveraged also to prevent 
decryption of data in countries where the data is not 
allowed to be transferred107.Encryption systems should be specifically 
tailored to ensure that they deliver the highest 
level of data security and privacy. In this 
context, it is important to protect and safeguard 
organisations’ ability to implement and develop 
such  encryption systems105. 38 39
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDset-up, with the aim of connecting registries 
and e-government architectures across many 
countries in Europe109. 
Considerations
A good practice of how data registries can 
be used to facilitate cross border data flow is 
a project implemented in Estonia and other 
Northern European countries on online ship 
and crew certificates maintained by national 
Maritime Administrations. The process of 
checking and validating ships and their crews 
has been made more efficient by making the 
certificates accessible for Port State Control 
officers directly from the issuers - not through 
the Master of the ship as it was previously. 
The project improves the efficiency of re-
using information that exists across different 
administrative bodies by connecting databases 
of national Maritime Authorities or internationally 
recognised classification societies and makes 
the information available to authorised parties110.
Another good practice on exchanging data 
across organisations is X-Road (Figure 6), a 
free and open source data exchange layer 
software which provides a ‘standard, cohesive, 
collaborative, interoperable and secure data 
exchange layer’ which combines different 
services and data sources in a cost efficient 
and simple way111. X-Road is based on a set of 
standards that facilitates data exchange while at 
the same time it ensures confidentiality, integrity, 
and interoperability between data exchange 
entities. It is the foundation to Estonia’s digital 
government112.78. Porism. What is a standard? Available at https://standards.porism.
com/doc.html#/
79. WEF (2020).
80. W3C study of practices and tooling for Web data standardization. 
Available at https://www.w3.org/2017/12/odi-study/#standards
81. W3C (2017)
82. WEF (2020)
83. European Commission DG Connect, The Digital Services Act 
package, 2 June 2020. In: Brown, I. (2020). The technical components 
of interoperability as a tool for competition regulation. Available at 
https://cyberbrics.info/the-technical-components-of-interoperability-as-
a-tool-for-competition-regulation/
84. Boyd, M., Frejova, J., and Wilde, E. (2020). Better governance, one 
API at a time. Axway White Paper. Available at https://www.apidays.co/
wp-content/uploads/2020/06/axway-wp-better-governance-en.pdf.
85. OpenAPI Specification. Available at https://github.com/OAI/
OpenAPI-Specification
86. WEF (2020).
87. Brown, I. (2020). The technical components of interoperability as a 
tool for competition regulation.
88. Brown, I. (2020)
89. OECD (2020). Mapping approaches to data and data flows.
90. OECD (2019). In: OECD (2020). Mapping approaches to data and 
data flows.
91. OECD (2020).
92. The GSMA regulatory Sandbox is available at the following link: 
https://www.gsma.com/asia-pacific/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/
ASEAN-Sandbox-Proposal-EXTERNAL-_Final_20190403.pdf
93. OECD (2020). Mapping approaches to data and data flows.
94. WEF (2020)
95. OECD (2020). Mapping approaches to data and data flows. Available 
at http://www.oecd.org/trade/documents/mapping-approaches-to-
data-and-data-flows.pdf
96. Brown, I. (2020). Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation. 
Pre-print. Available at https://osf.io/preprints/lawarxiv/fbvxd
97. WEF (2020)
98. Haviluddin, R. A. (2019). Big data: issues, trends, problems, 
controversies in ASEAN perspective. Bulletin of Social Informatics 
Theory and Application, Vol. 3, No. 2, December 2019, pp. 80-93. 
ISSN 2614-0047. Available at https://repository.unmul.ac.id/bitstream/
handle/123456789/3902/2.%20BUSINTA-Big%20Data%20Issues.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y75. World Economic Forum (2020). A Roadmap for Cross Border Data 
Flows: Future-Proofing Readiness and Cooperation in the New Data 
Economy. White Paper. June 2020. Available at http://www3.weforum.
org/docs/WEF_A_Roadmap_for_Cross_Border_Data_Flows_2020.
pdf
76. World Economic Forum (2020).
77. A4AI (2020). Meaningful Connectivity — unlocking the full power of 
internet access. Available at https://a4ai.org/meaningful-connectivity/99. Vial, Gregory (2019). Reflections on quality requirements for digital 
trace data in IS research, Decision Support Systems, Volume 126, 
2019, 113133, ISSN 0167-9236, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2019.113133. 
Available at (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167923619301629)
100. I-scoop. Blockchain technology and distributed ledger technology 
(DLT) in business. Available at https://www.i-scoop.eu/blockchain-
distributed-ledger-technology/
101. Loh, S. Y. (2018). TradeTrust: A Singapore Initiative. Available at 
https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/cf_forums/2018_China/
Blockchain_Bio-PPT/PPT-07-Loh.pdf
102. WEF (2020)
103. WEF (2020)
104. Casalini, F., and Gonzalez, J. L. (2019). Trade and Cross-Border 
Data Flows. OECD Trade Policy Papers No. 220, OECD Publishing, 
Paris. Available at https://www.sipotra.it/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/
Trade-and-Cross-Border-Data-Flows.pdf
105. Digital Europe (2020). An early analysis of Schrems II – key 
questions and possible ways forward. 31 August 2020. Available at 
https://www.digitaleurope.org/resources/an-early-analysis-of-schrems-
ii-key-questions-and-possible-ways-forward/
106. Digital Europe (2020)
107. Epiq Reach. Cross-Border Data: Managing the Risks. Available at 
https://www.epiqglobal.com/epiq/media/ResourceFiles/Cross-Border-
Data-White-Paper-2016.pdf
108. Kwantu. Data Registry. Available at http://www.kwantu.net/data-
registry
109. TOOP. Providing data once-only.eu. Available at https://www.toop.
eu/info
110. TOOP. Pilot Area 3. Online Ship and Crew Certificates. Available at 
https://www.toop.eu/pilot-area3
111. GitHub page of X-Road, available at https://github.com/nordic-
institute/X-Road
112. X-Road project page. Available at https://x-road.globalMAKING CROSS-BORDER DATA HAPPEN: TECHNICAL COMPONENTS41
Cross-Border 
Data In Practice: 
Open BankingAn increasing number of business models 
are founded on the importance of accessing, 
holding, analysing and utilising data, including 
Open Banking. Open Banking is based on the 
idea of developing a single, cohesive pool of 
data that spans all products and services. It 
is anticipated that it could address many of 
the issues associated with unifying diverse 
financial services.Open Banking represents an 
exciting development in the region. The model 
is expected to provide more transparency and 
flexibility in financial services. It is estimated 
that by the end of 2020, 40 per cent of Asia 
Pacific banks will have invested in open 
banking management platforms113. datasets involved, and what the data contained 
in the different data repositories is used for; (c) 
the assessment should treat the data as an asset, 
including depreciation and amortisation values, 
the monetised value of data in the balance 
sheet, and profits and revenues of data114. 
Data is a different type of asset. It is not uniquely 
consumable, and it does not get destroyed after 
used, like any other perishable item115. Also, the 
same data can have different value for different 
stakeholders depending on the intended use of 
the collector and processor. Last but not least, 
standard and structured data might have more 
value than unstructured and ‘raw’ data. At the 
same time, data can become a liability if not well-
secured and protected. Therefore, in addition 
to its capacity to generate revenue, a balance 
sheet should consider the costs to secure it. 
Another challenge of assessing the value of 
data is how to attribute revenues, profits, or 
loss across the different components of the 
data lifecycle. In the case of Open Banking, 
for instance, to share or transfer data from 
one organisation to another can significantly 
save the costs of collecting data from scratch, The complexities associated with measuring 
the value of data
To measure the value of Open Banking data, 
a new economic and accounting paradigm is 
needed. This should take into consideration 
elements including: (a) the methodologies 
to assess the value of the data, which should 
consider the distinctive characteristics of 
different stakeholders involved; (b) the variety of
Figure 7 – Variations across devices, networks and applications in digital landscape (BBVA)CROSS-BORDER DATA IN PRACTOCE: OPEN BANKING
42 43
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDand cybersecurity legislations should provide 
legal certainty in terms of protection granted 
under national jurisdictions – particularly in 
cases where, during the transaction, either 
privacy or data security is violated. 
An attribution framework could enable cross-
border data. This framework should leverage 
the value of data as a controlled asset, with 
measurable revenue streams, and with ways 
to mitigate risks and breaches when they 
may occur. An attribution framework should 
also consider the declining value of data over 
time, to help account for depreciation and data 
scheduling. In addition, the framework should 
include security or mis-use costs. The attribution 
framework could also support taxation, as it 
would provide a method to reflect the refinement 
of data (from its initial raw status) and the added 
value118 at each stage of the data lifecycle.
Trading rules of attribution can be set 
through the international and regional trade 
agreements discussed above, while the 
methods implementing the ASEAN data 
governance framework can then provide the 
right certification and contractual clauses to 
trade such asset across organisations and 
borders. At a national level, data protection and can improve the analytics capacity of 
companies providing banking or other financial 
services. These companies can then focus 
their business proposition on value-added and 
personalised services. In this scenario, the core 
value of these organisations is not only banking 
and finance, but a good portion an be attributed 
to data analytics, optimisation, and data science 
more broadly.
On a more fundamental level, trust remains 
crucial. Growth in mobile and Internet banking 
(estimated to increase by 400 per cent by 2025 
in Vietnam116) could be hindered by lack of trust 
in sharing information online. Approximately 
70 per cent of digital buyers in the Philippines, 
60 per cent in Thailand, and 40 per cent in 
Singapore are reluctant to share financial 
information online117.
An attribution framework to drive cross-
border dataOpen Banking is a direct result of digitisation 
and digitalisation in the finance, banking and 
payment industries. These sectors are now 
characterised by increased use of network and 
digital technologies. This foundational work is 
proving important. Since the beginning of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, many banks in the region 
have reported a surge in online banking activities, 
including increases in digital transactions and 
payments - and a rise in the opening of digital 
accounts. Open Banking architectures have also 
encouraged financial institutions to innovate 
quickly to avoid the risk of falling behind.
Open Banking processes significantly increase 
the flow of data within the economy. By adopting 
open banking, financial institutions (including 
banks and ‘fintech’ organisations) that benefit 
from extensive access and use of datasets, can 
generate more effective insights and introduce 
services that are more closely aligned with 
their customers’ needs. At present, Singapore-
based fintech companies dominate the ASEAN 
fintech sector120, with Thailand in second place 
and Indonesia third. The sector is proving to be 
particularly vibrant; as such, some of the more 
traditional institutions have started to re-evaluate 
their portfolio and reposition their offerings.
Data that is shared across different sectors and 
organisations can be employed and merged 
in a variety of different ways, leading to the 
development of novel business frameworks and 
cutting-edge services as part of a holistic Digital 
Economy. However, Open Banking is associated 
with elevated compliance costs. If properly 
implemented, it is likely that organisations will  How Open Banking is linked to cross-border 
dataCROSS-BORDER DATA IN PRACTOCE: OPEN BANKING
seek to pass these costs on to the end-users. 
Nonetheless, Open Banking is expected to yield 
a positive net-effect as compliance expenses 
should be incremental to requirements to offer 
enhanced access to services, something that 
will be possible as a result of Open Banking 
systems121. As such, there is a requirement to 
evaluate compliance as a means of certifying 
that Open Banking requirements are effectively 
implemented. Such evaluations should include 
consideration of competition law and personal 
data protection law, consumer protection 
requirements, data protection requirements, 
data management practices, and the security 
and interoperability processes used.
How policies and processes could drive Open 
Banking
Many countries and their regulatory agencies 
are aware of the potential of Open Banking and 
are developing regulatory guidance to facilitate 
a new era of financial services. In Europe, 
Open Banking is regulated by the European 
Commission Revised Directive on Payment 
Services (PSDR2), which introduced a data 
portability scheme and the concept of Open 
Banking. PSDR2’s provisions require financial 
institutions to share their customers’ financial 
data with third parties. As with the GDPR, the 
individual controls what data they are willing to 
share and who they are willing to share it with.
Some ASEAN countries have accelerated their 
efforts towards this model. But, contrary to 
Europe, the region has adopted a market-driven 
approach to Open Banking. This is broadly in 
line with the ‘ASEAN way’ discussed earlier, 
which centres around voluntary and informal 
aspects rather than policy or regulatory-
driven approaches. Instead, policymakers are 
introducing a series of measures to accelerate 
and promote the uptake of frameworks 
to facilitate data sharing in banking121. 
The potential of Open Banking also dependson technologies, rules and regulations of data 
portability. Therefore, one of the main challenges 
of Open Banking is to obtain customer consent 
for data sharing and portability between 
different systems used by the same institution, 
or with external and third party organisations. 
Considering that an individual’s financial data is 
private, the future of these services depends on 
the application of a stable regulatory framework 
and guidelines that set high data protection 
rules for all parties involved.
According to a Study on Data Portability in 
Singapore, from a regulatory perspective, 
implementing data portability requires 
considering not only data protection legislation, 
but also competition law. This combination 
is about determining the best approach to 
maximising benefits from such a provision, 
while keeping costs and impact manageable123. 
Data plays an integral role in the development 
of new products within the financial sector. 
If a given organisation is not able to access 
and use key data, it will be at a competitive 
disadvantage. The implementation of data 
portability standards could help institutions 
to access critical information and reduce the 
barriers to entry that impede expansion and 
development. This will help to encourage more 
competition and challenge the status quo that 
has resulted from the emergence of a small 
number of dominant players124.
From the perspective of competition, establishing 
data portability within the banking sector could 
help to generate efficiencies for both the banks 
and any other entities that interact with them 
by making it more straightforward for entities to 
access data from a variety of sources. In turn, 
this could enhance financial institutions’ ability 
to develop new products and services that are 
aligned with customer needs as the organisation 
will have better access to meaningful customer 
insights. Data portability could also decrease the 
cost of switching from one bank to another as a 44 45
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDintroducing a series of measures to accelerate 
and promote the uptake of frameworks to 
facilitate data sharing in banking121.
 
The potential of Open Banking also depends 
on technologies, rules and regulations of data 
portability. Therefore, one of the main challenges 
of Open Banking is to obtain customer consent 
for data sharing and portability between 
different systems used by the same institution, 
or with external and third party organisations. 
Considering that an individual’s financial data is 
private, the future of these services depends on 
the application of a stable regulatory framework 
and guidelines that set high data protection 
rules for all parties involved.CROSS-BORDER DATA IN PRACTOCE: OPEN BANKING
customer can initiate a transfer of his or her data 
without having to provide it afresh. This would 
make it easier for consumers to quickly and easily 
switch suppliers according to which institution is 
offering the most attractive product or service. 
Again, this would serve to increase competition125.
Banking. PSDR2’s provisions require financial 
institutions to share their customers’ financial 
data with third parties. As with the GDPR, the 
individual controls what data they are willing to 
share and who they are willing to share it with.
Some ASEAN countries have accelerated their 
efforts towards this model. But, contrary to 
Europe, the region has adopted a market-driven 
approach to Open Banking. This is broadly in 
line with the ‘ASEAN way’ discussed earlier, 
which centres around voluntary and informal 
aspects rather than policy or regulatory-
driven approaches. Instead, policymakers are How technical components could enable 
Open Banking
Singapore is a leading country on Open Banking 
Figure 8 – Guiding principles for API design (MAS)Although Open Banking is still a nascent sector 
in the ASEAN region, a number of indicators 
relating to the broader economic trends in 
the region provide a good indication of its 
potential130. According to the World Bank, there 
are 264 million ‘unbanked’ adults in Southern 
East Asia, representing a sizeable customer-
base for Open Banking131. In addition, more 
than a half of the ASEAN population are young 
– and often tech-savvy. 161 million citizens of 
the region are aged between 15 and 29.
Beyond this, the total amount of digital payments 
in Asia is anticipated to reach over US$1 trillion 
by 2025 - accounting for almost half of the 
spending in the region132. By the same year, 
the e-wallet market is expected to be worth 
US$114 billion – a fivefold increase from its Singapore is a leading country on Open Banking 
in ASEAN. In line with its ambitious Smart 
Nation initiatives126, Singapore has encouraged 
financial institutions to develop and share open 
APIs with technology and fintech companies127. 
As part of the programme, the Association 
of Banks in Singapore and the Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS) in 2016 issued 
the Finance-as-a-Service: API Playbook (Figure 
8), a comprehensive guide for banks, fintech 
companies, and other stakeholders interested 
in adopting the Open Banking model128. MAS 
has also implemented a regulatory sandbox.
Malaysia has also recently begun to explore 
Open Banking. The country's Central Bank 
has published its Open Banking Guidelines, 
focusing on the implementation of Open APIs 
in three areas: vehicle insurance, credit card 
products and services, and SME financing129.
 Exploring the value of Open Banking data
Figure 9 – Digital readiness of ASEAN countries (UOB)
46 47
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDand by increasing transparency and 
accountability. This latter aspect adds value 
from a regulatory perspective.
The impact of Open Banking in economic terms 
is primarily linked to how data portability adds 
value to the data. Specifically, data portability on 
the one hand brings about a reduction in the cost 
of transferring data between different entities (i.e. 
banks and fintech organisations, for instance); 
and on the other, value is added by the ability to 
combine data from different sources. 
From the perspective of market competition, 
Open Banking has the potential to reduce the 
cost of switching, remove barriers to entry for 
new service providers, and facilitate expansion. 
The establishment of data portability will enable 
consumers to switch between financial institutions. 
 value in 2019. Many organisations in the region 
are also willing to embrace innovation and new 
technology. A 2016 TRA survey conducted in
three ASEAN countries revealed that 71 per 
cent of organisations in Indonesia intended 
to invest in online payments in 2016 while 
approximately 40 per cent were about to deploy 
mobile wallets. In Singapore, 33 per cent of 
firms expected to adopt contactless payments 
in 2017. COVID-19 has likely increased these 
totals. In a survey conducted by the Emerging 
Payments Association Asia (EPAA), 75 per 
cent of industry participants believe that Open 
Banking will bring value to the payments 
industry, and that interoperability is needed to 
reach its full potential. Approximately half of 
the respondents indicated that national and 
cross-border interoperability is very important 
in driving Open Banking133.
Open Banking can lead to greater 
personalisation of products, services, marketing 
and advertising. Indeed, the fact that many 
digital services are offered at a ‘zero price’ to 
the consumer — in exchange for the data and 
information generated while using them — 
demonstrates he value of data in the digital 
economy134. This builds on strong foundations. 
ASEAN consumers find fintech products easy 
to use, offering fast service, and providing a 
good user experience. In 2016, investments 
in the ASEAN fintech market rose about 33 
per cent and increased to US$252 million. 
This growth was primarily supported by seed 
and angel investors135. By September 2017, 
total investment had already exceeded that 
of 2016 and was standing at US$338 million. 
 CROSS-BORDER DATA IN PRACTOCE: OPEN BANKING
Key aspects of values
The value of increased data flow resulting 
from Open Banking comes from a number of 
interrelated factors. This includes increased 
competition in the market segment - by 
creating new and personalised services for 
customers; through improving productivity, The value of increased 
data flow resulting from 
Open Banking comes from 
a number of interrelated 
factors. This includes 
increased competition 
in the market segment 
- by creating new and 
personalised services 
for customers; through 
improving productivity, and 
by increasing transparency 
and accountability.  It also fosters transparency across service 
providers on all aspects of banking - from 
transaction timeframes through to fees 
and liabilities.and technical interoperability. Open Banking 
demonstrates why interoperability is key to 
increase the value of data across organisations 
and borders140. Finally, it will provide a more competitive 
environment that is open to new providers136. 
The end user will stand to benefit from services 
that are better aligned with their needs. 
Furthermore, by exploiting a combination of 
customer-centric data and real-time credit risk 
assessments, underlying analytics engines will 
be able to produce targeted offers that take 
unique needs into consideration. Individuals’ 
applications for new products and services 
could also be streamlined, particularly as the 
vast majority of the data required will already 
be available to institutions through analytics 
engines and APIs137.
More broadly, Open Banking:
Can increase productivity as a result of 
facilitating the development of a central 
repository of data derived from a myriad of 
sources. This will serve to reduce the cost of 
delivering data-enabled offerings138.
 Enhances innovation opportunities by 
combining datasets in novel ways across 
business entities that were previously 
operating in silos. 
   Offers benefits from a regulatory perspective. 
Under Open Banking requirements, 
financial institutions are required to ensure 
that user data can be securely accessed.
 As banks across the region become more 
digital, they need to standardise data collection 
practices, digitise (historical) data and clean 
existing datasets to extract value from them. 
Banks and other financial institutions collect 
personally identifiable information about 
their customers, and by analysing all their 
transactions (including loans, deposits, and 
purchase made through credit, debit cards, 
money transfers and e-wallets), they can have 
an accurate understanding of individuals’ 
financial strength.
An important element related to their ability 
to extract value from the data is their capacity 
for straight-through processing (STP), 
which refers to the process of consistent 
and automated data processing. It can 
considerably reduce human resource costs 
required in this processing – and save further 
costs by reducing errors, and error correction. 
For STP to work effectively, structured and 
unstructured data needs to be cleaned, 
and a proper data governance framework 
must be in place. While siloed systems can 
transfer data between each other using APIs, 
the reality is that different systems might use 
different data structures and taxonomies.
Primarily, banks can open up three datasets, 
datasets, namely 1) channel-interaction data, 
for example, cookies and call-centre logs; 2) 
transaction data; and 3) demographic data. 
Banks can also source additional data through 
strategic partnerships with external sources, such 
as credit bureaus, e-commerce websites, social 
media platforms, and other service providers142. 
The depth and variety of data and information 
also presents a challenge in how to create a  Data collection
Value added at each element of the broad 
data lifecycle
The value of data grows as it moves through 
the value chain of Open Banking, and it can be 
repeatedly reused and shared. To maximise 
such value, the system necessitates both a 
certain level of standardisation of the data48 49
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDData integration and sharing infrastructure
Open Banking platforms rely on APIs, which enable 
developers to create services for the financial 
sector. APIs are considered the communication 
standard of Open Banking. They allow financial 
institutions and fintechs to connect their systems 
and provide new offerings to customers144. APIs 
can also facilitate Data Portability.
APIs allow the development of standardised 
interfaces which make it easier for the financial 
supply-chain (including billers, merchants, 
intermediaries, and fintechs) to leverage the 
value of different platforms producing and 
hosting different data145. They have particular 
importance in catalysing broader Digital 
Economy opportunities146.
APIs are opening up banking systems by 
providing new services such as central 
access to banking operations and balances 
from different financial institutions; real-time 
querying of a customer’s bank before facilitating 
payments; and allowing instant transfers 
between different banks and accounts147. This 
is a growing space. As of November 2019, 
Singapore’s API Register has logged 238 
transactional and 279 informational APIs148. CROSS-BORDER DATA IN PRACTOCE: OPEN BANKING
single view of the customer. As many financial 
institutions are a conglomeration of mergers, 
acquisitions, and divestitures of businesses, 
each has its own view of the customer. Data 
associated with customers must be accurate 
and integrated into one data reference. Open 
Banking provides the opportunity to aggregate 
data for a single customer - taking data from 
a variety of sources to enrich the view of the 
customer143. Single customers' views can be 
required by regulation, such as in the Philippines. 
Data Processing and Analyticsproducts and services that are based on customer 
profiles. Open Banking facilitates the integration 
of multiple datasets, thereby making it possible 
for financial services to design sales campaign 
based on customer profiles and insights. It also 
provides organisations with access to crucial 
information such as predicted conversion rates 
based on prior activity, revenue forecasts, and 
potential prospects. 
Financial services can also use the information 
that is available through Open Banking to develop 
a customer-centric sales approach. For example, 
banks can profile customers in accordance with 
their preferred contact methods. In some cases, 
customers may be happy to be contacted via 
email, while others may prefer to be contacted 
via phone149.
Multiple forms of sales initiatives can be designed 
based on the outputs of data analytics. For 
example, a bank could launch an event- based 
offering that is triggered when a customer reaches 
a certain milestone - for instance, fully paying off a 
loan. Propensity models of this nature can enable 
banks to reach customers at the most opportune 
time – and using the most effective channel150.
In addition to the more traditional methods 
of automation, Robotic Process Automation 
(RPA) can act as a supplemental approach that 
harnesses the power of software-based robots, 
or AI-supported workers, to emulate interactions 
between human users and software systems.
Data processing can be used to both generate 
fresh opportunities and develop bespokeData risk management
For Open Banking to build a sustainable and 
scalable business model, it requires a foundational 
risk management framework. Such a framework 
for Open Banking should cover a number of 
components. These include cybersecurity, 
regulatory compliance (related to the institutions’ 
responsibilities to ensure compliance, and prevent 
money laundering), data privacy (through a 
consent management framework with regulatory guidelines), contract management (including API 
and other service-level agreements), and product 
management (i.e. a procedural framework to 
foster innovation at a product level)151.
A data-driven risk management system can be 
employed to minimise risks of fraud and to make 
the process of exchanging data more secure. For 
instance, by enabling access to account data, 
banks can grant account information services that 
are legally compliant and digitally analysed. In this 
way, performing credit checks on customers can 
become faster, smarter, and more reliable152.
Data Sharing
The development of open standards for data-
sharing in banking is expected to increase 
competition and innovation in the sector153. 
Financial institutions can transition towards a pan-
regional cross-border payment system by working 
with technology providers which embed privacy 
and security by design and leveraging existing 
standards such as ISO 20022. At the same time, 
this will allow them to retain extensibility for future 
upgrades and extensions154. Using established 
standards reduces standardisation costs and 
improves the interoperability of applications 
across institutions. 
There is a significant value associated with the 
adoption of standards such as ISO 20022155. 
ISO 20022 is an international standard for 
financial communication and electronic data 
exchange between financial institutions. It is 
considered the global and common language 
for financial communications of the future156. 
The standard is agnostic of technology and 
can be used in different formats (including 
XML, JSON, etc.)157. It can be used to execute 
payments, to trade in securities, and finance 
supply chain, or to manage clients’ accounts158.
113. Backbase (2020). Available at https://www.backbase.
com/2020/04/22/best-fintech-digital-banking-articles-in-asean-of-
april-may-2020/113. Backbase (2020). Available at https://www.backbase.
com/2020/04/22/best-fintech-digital-banking-articles-in-asean-of-
april-may-2020/
114. Institute of international finance (2020). Briefing note: Data 
Monetization – a new accounting paradigm? The Global Dialogue on 
Digital Finance. September 2020. Available at https://www.iif.com/
Portals/0/Files/content/Innovation/09_28_2020_iif_briefing_note.pdf
115. Institute of international finance (2020).
116. Backbase (2020). Best Fintech & Digital Banking Articles in ASEAN 
of April & May 2020. April 22, 2020. Available at https://www.backbase.
com/2020/04/22/best-fintech-digital-banking-articles-in-asean-of-
april-may-2020/
117. BBVA Research (2017). Fintech in Emerging ASEAN. Trends and 
Prospects. June 2017. Available at https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/07/June-2017-ASEAN-Fintech-Trends1.pdf
118. Hardoon, D. (2020). In: Institute of international finance (2020).
119. PDPC Singapore (2019). Discussion paper on Data Portability. 25 
February 2019). Available at https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/Files/
PDPC/PDF-Files/Resource-for-Organisation/Data-Portability/PDPC-
CCCS-Data-Portability-Discussion-Paper---250219.pdf
120. BBVA Research (2017). Fintech in Emerging ASEAN. Trends and 
Prospects. Available at https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-content/
uploads/2017/07/June-2017-ASEAN-Fintech-Trends1.pdf
121. PDPC Singapore (2019).
122. Deloitte. Blurring the lines. Creating an Open Banking data-sharing 
ecosystem. Available at https://www2.deloitte.com/ie/en/pages/
financial-services/articles/Creating_an_Open_Banking_data_sharing_
ecosystem.html
123. Competition & Consumer Commission Singapore (2019). 
Discussion Paper on Data Portability: Personal Data Protection 
Commission In collaboration with Competition and Consumer 
Commission of Singapore. Available at https://www.cccs.gov.sg/
resources/publications/occasional-research-papers/pdpc-cccs-data-
portability
124. PDPC Singapore (2019). 
125. PDPC Singapore (2019). Discussion paper on Data Portability. 25 
February 2019). Available at https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/Files/
PDPC/PDF-Files/Resource-for-Organisation/Data-Portability/PDPC-
CCCS-Data-Portability-Discussion-Paper---250219.pdf
126. Smart National Singapore. Transforming Singapore through 
technology. Available at https://www.smartnation.gov.sg
127. Monetary Authority of Singapore. Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs). Available at https://www.mas.gov.sg/development/
fintech/technologies---apis
128. Finance-as-a-Service: API Playbook. Available at https://abs.org.
sg/docs/library/abs-api-playbook.pdf
129. Bank Negara Malaysia (2019). Policy Document on Publishing Open 
Data using Open API. 07 Jan 2019. Available at https://www.bnm.gov.
my/index.php?ch=en_announcement&pg=en_announcement&ac=68750
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYOND149. Banking Hub (2017). Straight-through processing: taking current 
opportunities and overcoming challenges. Case study: successfully 
implementing straight-through processing. 14 December 2017. 
Available at https://www.bankinghub.eu/banking/finance-risk/straight-
processing-taking-current-opportunities-overcoming-challenges
150. McKinsey&Company (2013)
151. The Digital Fifth (2020). Risk Management: Most Critical Element to 
Open Banking. March 3, 2020. Available at https://thedigitalfifth.com/
risk-management-most-critical-element-to-open-banking/
152. FintecSystems (2020). How Open Banking Increases the Security, 
Speed and Intelligence of Risk Management. 13 January 2020. Available 
at https://knowledge.fintecsystems.com/en/blog/open-banking-risk-
management
153. The Open Banking Standard. Available at http://theodi.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/298569302-The-Open-Banking-Standard-1.
pdf
154. Daily News Starkville (2020). Southeast Asia’s Cross-Border Real-
Time Payments Network Emerges with Payments Innovation as Driving 
Force, New Research from ACI Worldwide and Kapronasia Reveals. 
Available at http://business.starkvilledailynews.com/starkvilledailynews/
news/read/40108873/southeast_asia%E2%80%99s_cross
155. ‘SWIFT estimates that by 2023, 80 percent of high-value payments 
by volume and 90 percent by value will already have migrated to ISO 
20022’. https://bankingblog.accenture.com/iso-20022-watershed-
moment-payments-industry 
156. Accenture (2019). ISO 20022: A watershed moment for the 
payments industry. Available at https://bankingblog.accenture.com/iso-
20022-watershed-moment-payments-industry
157. heikh, S. (2019). ISO 20022: a better payments 
experience for customers. In: Finextra. Available at 
https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/18222/iso-
20022-a-better-payments-experience-for-customers  
158. Sheikh (2019).130. Tech Research Asia TEMENOS (2019). Open Banking: The New 
Paradigm In Asia Pacific Financial Services Open APIs ensure beneficial 
collaboration in financial sector. Available at https://www.temenos.
com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/open-banking-apac-paradigm-
whitepaper-2018-apr-23.pdf
131. De Luna-Martinez, J. (2016) How to scale up financial inclusion 
in ASEAN countries. World Bank Blogs. Available at https://blogs.
worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/how-to-scale-up-financial-inclusion-in-
asean-countries
132. Francisco, J. (2019). How Southeast Asia is Playing a Crucial Role 
in Driving Payment Flexibility. December 23, 2019. Available at https://
www.entrepreneur.com/article/344183
133. Fintechnews Singapore (2020). Singapore Leads Asia Pacific in 
Open Banking. February 28, 2020. Available at https://fintechnews.
sg/37980/openbanking/singapore-open-banking-apac/
134. Institute of International Finance (2018). Reciprocity in customer 
data sharing frameworks. July 2018. Available at https://www.iif.com/
portals/0/Files/private/32370132_reciprocity_in_customer_data_
sharing_frameworks_20170730.pdf
135. UOB. State of FinTech in ASEAN. Available at https://www.uobgroup.
com/techecosystem/pdf/UOB-State-of-FinTech-in-ASEAN.pdf
136. PDPC Singapore (2019).
137. McKinsey&Company (2013). Retail banking in Asia. Actionable 
insights for new opportunities. Available at https://www.mckinsey.
com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/financial%20services/
latest%20thinking/consumer%20and%20small%20business%20
banking/retail_banking_in_asia_actionable_insights_for_new_
opportunities.pdf 
138. PDPC Singapore (2019).
139.https://www.pymnts.com/api/2019/open-banking-cross-border/
140. WEF (2020).
141. Banking Hub (2017). Straight-through processing: taking current 
opportunities and overcoming challenges. Case study: successfully 
implementing straight-through processing. Available at https://www.
bankinghub.eu/banking/finance-risk/straight-processing-taking-
current-opportunities-overcoming-challenges
142. McKinsey&Company (2013)
143. McKinsey&Company (2013)
144.https://www.pymnts.com/api/2019/open-banking-cross-border/
146. https://www.paymentscardsandmobile.com/open-banking-market-
could-be-worth-7-2bn-by-2022/ 
147. Limonetik (2019). Grégory Boulanger presents: Using APIs for 
payment: a trade-off between openness and security. 28 March 2019. 
Available at https://www.limonetik.com/gregory-boulanger-presents-
using-apis-for-payment-a-trade-off-between-openness-and-security/
148. Monetary Authority of Singapore. Financial Industry API Register. 
Available at https://www.mas.gov.sg/development/fintech/financial-
industry-api-registerConcluding Thoughts52 53
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYOND• Shaping a strong regional data governance 
framework to boost the above potential – 
and mitigate data-related risks and harm. 
This includes formalising ‘cooperation 
mechanisms to ensure shared responsibility 
for data privacy’  and other priorities. The 
contractually-enforceable ASEAN MCCs 
are a strong foundation, whilst international 
trade with regions such as the EU highlight 
the need for frameworks such as the GDPR 
that move beyond the ‘open regionalism’ 
foundations of the ASEAN region.   
• Avoiding data localisation or similar 
protectionist approaches. This includes 
regional discussion between those countries 
that have implemented data localisation or 
residency requirements, in order to identify  
ways of removing these barriers to national 
and regional benefits.   
 There are significant positive multipliers of 
enabling cross-border data, as highlighted in the 
Open Banking case study. In addition, there are 
a number of risks. Recognising this, al ASEAN 
countries – large and small; digital leaders and 
explorers – should contribute to shaping the 
policy, regulatory, and technical standards of 
cross-border data. This will require:
 
• National prioritisation and engagement 
with the realities of cross-border data – 
from policies (including those on internet 
access, data usage, and privacy) through 
to the underlying technical architecture 
highlighted below. For the former, this 
includes ‘open by default’ data policies – 
which could catalyse cross-border data, 
in a similar way to how they have enabled 
national data efforts in many countries.
The speed of change in the sector may also require 
a more agile, iterative, and experimental approach to 
regulation, legislation, and policymaking.CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
6.  Partnerships – establishing partnerships both 
across government institutions and with other 
governments, civil society organisations, and 
the private sector. Established partnerships 
move beyond ad hoc interaction to have an 
on-going model of engagement with clear, 
stable, and transparent processes for public 
administration officials to work together on 
publishing and using data.
7.  Sustainable funding – identifying sustainable 
sources to resource the implementation of 
open data policy and related initiatives.
8.  Capacity building – establishing programmes 
that ensure the necessary intellectual, human, 
and financial resources for on-going provision 
and use of data.
9. Communication planning – ensuring broad 
communication of intentions, efforts, and results.
10. Measurement processes – assessing and 
publishing results of open data efforts in 
order to take corrective actions as needed 
to realise the strategic vision for open data, 
secure value creation, and ensure continuous 
support for reforms. A pathway to convergence 
Broader work on shaping an effective 
governance framework around open data can 
be extended to facilitate cross-border data 
flow. In particular, the ‘ten key elements of 
an effective governance framework’160 have 
particular relevance beyond borders. 
The elements of the framework are:
1.  A strategic vision – defining and guiding 
actions, actors, and sector initiatives in 
pursuit of common strategic objectives. 
A shared strategic vision should be 
complemented by a roadmap or action plan 
for implementation and should be backed 
by clear public leadership.
2.  Legal and regulatory framework – providing 
for required changes in the laws or 
regulations to support safe and effective 
release and reuse of open data.
3. Institutional and organisational leadership 
arrangements – providing a focal point for 
reforms, but distributing responsibilities for 
data release and use across government 
as far as is appropriate given capacity.
4.  Technical infrastructure – providing for data 
searching, access, sharing, and reuse.
5.       User engagement – increasing the value of data 
as a public good by meeting user requirements 
and identifying priority high-value datasets.Cross-border data is 
an important aspect 
of national, regional, 
and global economic 
development – including 
driving progress toward 
achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals.Singapore’s recent Digital Economy Partnership 
Agreement, drawing on extensive private 
sector engagement, is a strong example here.• Ensuring continued convergence between 
national policies, particularly data protection 
legislation and other foundational aspects. 
This does not require case-by-case 
assessment of each country’s privacy 
regime – but at least a focus on avoiding 
further divergence.'
• Taking a forward-thinking approach to 
regulation, particularly in the context of a 
technology-driven and fast-moving sector. 
Singapore’s consideration of permitting the 
use of copyrighted material to inform text 
and data mining is one example, as well as 
emerging discussions around data trusts 
and other initiatives. The speed of change 
in the sector may also require a more agile, 
iterative, and experimental approach to 
regulation, legislation, and policymaking.
• Investing in, and enabling, the considerable 
technical foundations needed to enable 
cross-border data. These include 
extensive and high-quality connectivity, 
shaping data standards, and developing 
API functionalities. Foundational national 
infrastructure – such as data registries, 
and technologies such as DLTs – are also 
important. Wherever possible, countries 
should seek to build on and expand 
international best practice – particularly to 
ensure tech-neutrality and future-proofing.
All of the above is founded on collaboration 
with all stakeholders in the national, and 
regional, data ecosystem. However, of 
particular importance is the need for extensive 
industry engagement – from rolling-out 
connectivity, through to shaping standards.54 55
ENABLING CROSS-BORDER DATA FLOW: ASEAN AND BEYONDReflecting the international nature of cross-
border data exchange, the role of international 
organisations – including the private sector, 
and multilateral institutions, is important. This 
includes driving progress in cross-border data 
development and usage by:
•   Supporting coordination at an ASEAN level, 
including guiding alignment of cross-border 
data privacy – and other standards – in 
the region in order to drive economic and 
broader benefits.
•     Building capacity and expertise, particularly 
in supporting policymakers and regulators in 
engaging with a complex, fast-moving, and 
evolving technical and technological landscape.
•  Driving collaboration and shaping best 
practice. In addition to capacity building 
activities, there is scope to facilitate more 
substantive coordination. For example, 
defining a multi-stakeholder group focusing 
on driving cross-border data flows for 
economic and social development. This 
would build on the existing and important 
efforts of the ASEAN Data Protection and 
Privacy Forum.The role of international partners
All of these efforts should be founded on 
working closely with existing initiatives, and not 
duplicating efforts. This includes alignment with 
the Working Group on Digital Data Governance 
(WG-DDG), which is appointed to develop the 
standards, requirements and processes for the 
operationalisation of the ASEAN Cross Border 
Data Flows Mechanism. 
 
How we manage cross-border data is an 
important aspect of national, regional, and global 
economic development – including driving 
progress toward achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Similarly, leveraging the 
benefits of emerging and new technologies 159. WEP Roadmap
160. Ubaldi, B. (2019). Governments. In: State of Open Data. Open 
data for development. Available at https://stateofopendata.od4d.net/
chapters/stakeholders/government.html
will demand looking outward – recognising 
the digitalisation, data, and innovation often 
do not recognise borders. This perspective 
will be crucial in seizing opportunities, as 
well as addressing shared global challenges 
in using data to drive policymaking, 
service delivery, and wider development.@UNDPtech
registry.sg@undp.org
