Fueling Digital Trade in Mercosur:
A Regulatory Roadmap
Kati Suominen
IDB-TN-01549Departamento de Países del 
Cono Su r
TECHNICAL 
NOTE Nº
October 2018Fueling Digital Trade in Mercosur:
A Regulatory Roadmap
Kati Suominen
October 2018Cataloging-in-Publication data provided by the 
Inter-American Development Bank Felipe Herrera Library Suominen, Kati. Fueling digital trade in Mercosur: a regulatory roadmap / Kati Suominen. p. cm. — (IDB Technical Note ; 1549) Includes bibliographic references. 1. Electronic commerce-Law and legislation-Southern Cone of South America.  2. Trade blocs-Southern Cone of South America.  3. Exports-Southern Cone of South 
America.  4. Southern Cone of South America-Commerce.  5. Southern Cone of South 
America-Economic integration.  6. Southern Cone of South America-Foreign economic 
relations.  I. Inter-American Development Bank. Country Department Southern Cone.  II. Title.  III. Series. IDB-TN-1549 
Copyright ©              Inter-American Development Bank. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/
legalcode ) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any non-commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed. 
Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to arbitration pursua nt to 
the UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB's name for any purpose other than for attribution, and the use of IDB's logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user and is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO licen se. 
Note that link provided above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Inter-Ameri can 
Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent. 
 http://www.iadb.org
20181 
 
 Fueling Digital Trade in Mercosur: A Regulatory Roadmap  
  
Executive Summary  
 
Kati Suominen  
 
 
Mercosur members  have grown into Latin America’s digital leaders in the past decade. Online sales 
have grown much faster than national economies, retail, or foreign trade. Brazil generates 60 percent of 
Latin America’s ecommerce purchases and is home to such ecommerce pow erhouses as B2W, 
Argentina  has produced dozens of startups such as Mercado Libre that h ave grown into global 
technology companies , and Buenos Aires and Montevideo are booming as regional startup hubs. 
Regional tech events bring habitually together thousand s of ecommerce companies and tech 
entrepreneurs with first -rate foreign speakers.   
 
Mercosur member countries’ rapid transformation into digital economies is in many ways a staggering 
for a region that as for decades been known primarily for its commoditie s and, in the case of Brazil, 
heavy manufactures. Digitization has changed the way people in Mercosur countries shop, bank, and 
communicate. More recently, it has changed the prospects of the region’s trade. Digital trade – trade in 
goods and services sold  online and across borders – appears to have grown much faster than regional 
overall trade.  
  
The next frontier in the region’s digitization must be regional integration. Indeed, most digital sales and 
purchases in Mercosur countries are still domestic; digital trade in the region is still quite nascent. One 
reason is that t he regional economies have yet to attain regulatory coherence that would enable digital 
companies and online sellers to seamlessly operate across the regional market. Mercosur government s 
have in some cases widely differing visions and proposals on such key domestic regulations as data 
privacy and transfer, over the top rules regulating online services and audiovisual productions, Internet 
companies’ legal liability for online content, an d taxation of online sales. This is an area where 
Mercosur go vernments can make a difference : work together to create the right conditions for 
Mercosur region’s digital companies and online sellers to grow and scale their sales not just in their 
domestic markets, but in the broader intra -regional market.  
 
The purpose of this report is to provide a regulatory roadmap that helps Mercosur region’s 
policymakers and business leaders in this key juncture to unlock digital trade in goods and services as 
an engine of regional trade and job -creation.  The report  pays particular attention to frameworks and 
policies that enable Mercosur region g overnments  best help SMEs that sell  goods and services online to 
grow,  export, and create jobs. This report draws on new interview and survey data on the way firms in 
the region leverage ecommerce, and on the enabling environment for ecommerce, and puts forth policy 
recommendations.  
 
The main findings of this report are as f ollows:  
 
● Internet is essential for the growth, productivity, and trade of Mercosur companies.  
Almost all companies in the regional economies use email to interact with client and suppliers, 
and some one half has websites – 68 percent of companies in Argentina, 58 percent in Brazil, 
and 50 percent in Uruguay have their own websites. Over 80 percent  of companies agree that 2 
 
 limiting their access to the Internet would reduce their productivity by more than 15 percent, 
and nine percent say their productivity would drop by 5 -15 percent.  
 
● Mercosur region companies that sell online are likelier to export,  export to many markets, 
and grow faster.  While only 17 percent of small Mercosur region companies that do not have 
online sales or purchases export, some 60 percent of small companies that sell and buy online 
also export, and nearly all large companies th at sell online export. Online sellers are also more 
diversified in terms of their export exposure: 65 percent of online sellers in the Mercosur region 
export to two or more markets and 28 percent export to four or more markets, while only 20 
percent of off line sellers export to two or more markets and only 8 percent export to four or 
more markets. Online sellers are often also two -way traders – they both import and export, 
which suggests that transacting online may fuel participation in regional and global value 
chains. Online sellers, data show, tend to be firms that have entered the virtuous cycle of online 
sales, exports, and growth.  
 
● Mercosur economies are each other’s main digital trade partners – and markets of most 
struggle. Most Mercosur companies ex port to other Mercosur markets, followed by the rest of 
Latin America, the United States, and China and EU. For example, 60 percent of Argentine 
online sellers sell to Brazil and vice versa, and 77 percent of Paraguayan and 67 percent of 
Uruguayan online s ellers export to Argentina. The main markets in which especially 
Paraguayan and Uruguayan companies struggle with real or perceived regulatory issues are 
their most common export markets Argentina and Brazil, followed by the United States – which 
to most c ompanies is still an aspirational market . 
 
● The main challenges for small companies in the Mercosur region  to engage in domestic 
and cross -border ecommerce are in the areas of ac cess to finance , logistics and customs 
procedures , and digital regulations . Whe n asked about regulatory challenges to their online 
sales, small businesses are most concerned about IP protections, OTT rules, copyright rules, 
taxes, and legal liability rules, while for large companies, taxes, OTT rules, and legal liability 
are especially important. In cro ss-border trade within Mercosur, c ompanies are concerned about 
IP and copyr ight regimes, data localization  issues, and interoperability of their respective 
countries’ digital regulations with those of other Mercosur markets. C ustoms procedures and 
cost of logistics are a challenge for 5 0 percent of small businesses, while l arge companies are 
particularly concerned about  delivery  costs , customs procedures, and functioning of single 
windows.  
 
● Improving the regulatory environment f or Internet services and the sale of digital goods 
and services would enable companies to increase their revenues and exports by almost 30 
percent annually. Digital r egulations are no minor matter. Companies surveyed here estimate 
that improving digital re gulations in the Mercosur region would enable them to increase their 
revenues and exports by almost 30 percent annually. If their top -3 constraints to doing 
ecommerce were removed, Mercosur companies say they would score annual revenue gains of 
34 percent in their domestic markets and 35 percent in international markets. The majority of 
companies in every country report that they would expand their sales in the Mercosur region in 
particular if these regulatory barriers were removed . 
 3 
 
 Creating a more coheren t regional digital market is essential for regional digital companies and SMEs 
that sell goods and services to scale, export, and create new jobs – which in turn is key for them to 
compete in Latin America and internationally. As this report shows, such a regional project requires 
focus and hard work. But there is also data to draw on. Empirically, complicated, uncertain, or stringent 
digital regulations, such as stringent data privacy regimes, limits on data transfer, legal liability on 
Internet companies for user content on their sites, and high taxes on online sales a re all found to 
limit the growth of the online economy , reduce investment in Internet start -ups, lower the rate of 
technology adoption, and hold economic growth back . 
 
This report draws on ne w interview and survey data on the way firms in the region leverage 
ecommerce and how they view the enabling environment for ecommerce, and makes a number of 
proposals for Mercosur governments to unlock the region’s economic potential through digitization.  
Among them are:  
 
● Create smart digital regulations , and enforce in a pragmatic manner : Mercosur region’s 
regulatory frameworks need to be upgraded to the digital era, and they need to interoperate with 
trading partners to enable online sellers and buyers t ransact without undue frictions and costs 
and grow. Priority should be on flexible enforcement of data protection regulations that focus 
on improving security rather than limiting the use of data, and promote interoperable policy 
frameworks; safe harbor rules that limit internet intermediaries’ liability from user -generated 
content; update d copyright laws that include limitations and exceptions; consumer protection 
laws that balance protection and compliance costs; and savvy, pro -investment tax regimes on  
the key input for companies and consumers – digital and digitally sold goods and services. In 
addition to these immediate regulatory priorities, it is important the regional governments start 
considering regional interoperability of online payments, the c ritical conduit for online trade.  
 
● Drive at mutual recognition of online service providers: Internet companies that operate in 
multiple markets, such as of online payment, online delivery service, data analysis, digital 
marketing, online lending, and ecomm erce companies. Providers of these services can more 
quickly expand to service multiple countries in the presence of mutual recognition across 
countries of their business licenses, certificates, professional qualifications, and digital 
signatures, among ot her requirements.  
 
● Modernize customs procedures to facilitate and secure new trade: Governments need to 
make better use of the established mechanisms to fuel trade, such as increase customs clearance 
times 24 hours per day, put in place electronic filing o f customs documents via “single 
windows” for one -stop compliance; and enable  the collection and remit of value added and 
other  taxes for goods above the de minimis  level from away from the border. As ecommerce 
shipments proliferate, and new , data -driven “Trusted eTrader” program could foster small 
businesses’ trade compliance and ameliorate the tension in customs between facilitating and 
securing trade.  Use of blockchain  and machine learning  in customs can be seminal in  balancing  
the aims of product traceab ility, customs security,  revenue collection, and trade facilitation.  
 
● Create new instruments to fund SME skills development: Recently, export promotion 
agencies have in several countries , including in the Mercosur region,  introduced programs to 
help companies export online. To scale these efforts and make them highly actionable to 
companies, Mercosur governments could copy experiences in Latin America where export 4 
 
 promotion agencies work closely with ecommerce platforms to  train companies to use 
ecommerce. Governments can also use innovative public -private funding mechanisms to scale 
these efforts. For example,  governments could work with the private sector take advantage  of 
social impact bonds, whereby private foundations,  social impact investors, and/or ecommerce 
platforms make the initial investment in ecommerce training programs, and get compensated at  
a premium by the government if the program meets certain per -established performance 
indicators, such as target number o f ecommerce -related jobs created or amount of new online 
exports.1  
 
● Start systematic “Regional Digital Dialogues”: Mercosur governments are at a crucial 
juncture: they are today establishing rules for the digital economy that will have far -reaching 
consequences for their trade, entrepreneurship, investment, and economic growth for years to 
come. In the process, they will critically benefit from the views of the drivers of digital trade, 
the private sector, and from discussing the regulatory issues at  the regional level with other 
Mercosur governments and private sectors. Some positive national efforts are already on the 
way; it is now time to regionalize and institutionalize them. The region has a timely opportunity 
to establish a Digital Dialogue (Di alogo Digital) that brings together each quarter government 
officials with businesses and consumer groups to discuss the benefits of new technologies and 
optimal regulatory frameworks for them, and learn from best regulatory practices from other 
regions an d world -class researchers.  
 
Taking a step further, the regional governments could draw on UK’s work in FinTech 
regulations and establish a regional regulatory “sandbox” where companies in the Mercosur 
region could introduce digital innovations to any one Mercosur market or all Mercosur markets 
without requiring full regulatory approvals, and regulators could proceed learn how the 
innovation is used in the marketplace  and establish regulations where they may be beneficial. 
This type of “learning by doing” t akes guesswork and costly errors from the process of 
fashioning domestic and regional digital regulations.  
 
The two risks Mercosur faces is that each economy sets its own rules and those rules are too stringent 
for companies to operate effectively, and/or national rules do not interoperate – so that companies 
seeking to engage trade online and grow into regional businesses have to apply a different set of 
regulations in each market, which especially for small businesses is often too costly, undermining thei r 
interest in exporting and regionalizing their operations. Mercosur governments have a unique window 
of opportunity to create an entirely different outcome: a vibrant regional digital economy. It is 
imperative to get this right if the regional leaders wan t to continue leveraging digitization for trade and 
prosperity. Time is now.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 
 Fueling Digital Trade in Mercosur: A Regulatory Roadmap  
  
Kati Suominen  
 
November 2017 , with updates in September 2018  
 
 
 
I. Introduction  
 
Mercosur’s long integration process has responded to demands of times. In the 1990s when the bloc 
was created as a safeguard for democracy and a conduit for the members to expand their trade and 
investment flows with each other. In the 2000s, Mercosur began to act as a bloc in foreig n trade policy, 
including with such trading powers as the European Union. Today, Mercosur is faced with yet another 
task and opportunity: to create a vibrant digital economy.  
 
Mercosur member countries have made extraordinary progress in the past decade, b ecoming Latin 
America’s digital leaders. Online sales have grown much faster than national economies, retail, or 
foreign trade. Brazil generates 60 percent of Latin America’s ecommerce purchases and is home to 
such ecommerce powerhouses as B2W, Argentina h as produced dozens of digital startups such as 
Mercado Libre that have grown into global technology leaders, and Buenos Aires and Montevideo are 
booming as regional startup hubs. Regional tech events bring habitually together thousands of 
ecommerce compani es and tech entrepreneurs with first -rate foreign speakers.  
 
Mercosur economies’ digital transformation is in many ways a staggering for a region that has for 
decades been known for its commodities and, in the case of Brazil, heavy manufactures. Digitizat ion 
has changed the way people in Mercosur countries shop, bank, and communicate. And it is now 
propelling cross -border trade – trade in physical and digital goods and services sold online and across 
borders. Digital trade in Mercosur appears to have grown  many times faster than overall regional trade.  
  
However, the region’s digital trade will not reach its potential without regional integration – creation of 
a market where companies and consumers can buy and sell goods and services online seamlessly, 
unhampered by national borders. Indeed, most digital sales and purchases in Mercosur countries are 
still domestic; digital trade is still quite nascent in the region. This is where Mercosur governments can 
make a difference: create the right conditions for di gital companies and online sellers grow and scale 
their sales not just in their domestic markets, but in the broader intra -regional market.  
 
Creating a more coherent regional digital market is essential for regional digital companies and SMEs 
that sell go ods and services to scale, export, and create new jobs – which in turn is key for them to 
compete in Latin America and internationally. As this report shows, such a regional project requires 
focus and hard work. As of now, Mercosur governments are amid fas hioning their domestic regulations 
in such areas as data privacy and data transfer, over the top rules regulating online services and 
audiovisual productions sold online, Internet companies’ legal liability for online content, copyright 
rules for online co ntent and digital designs, and taxation of online sales. From a regional point of view, 
Mercosur governments have in some cases widely differing visions, proposals, and progress in these 
areas. For example, proposals have resurfaced in Brazil to force comp anies seeking market access to 
build servers in Brazil, something that can be prohibitively costly for companies in the other Mercosur 6 
 
 nations. Meanwhile, Uruguay has recently concluded a free trade agreement with Chile with a robust 
ecommerce chapter that  respects free flow of data across borders and bars localization, and Argentina is 
about to conclude an agreement of similar intent with Chile. Brazil and Paraguay have been among the 
front runners of protecting Internet companies from liability of third p arty content posted on their sites, 
while Argentina and Uruguay are only considering such safe harbors. Mercosur economies also have 
differing interests; for example, Argentina stands out with a strong offensive interest in digital services, 
given its vibr ant tech startups and large digital services companies.  
  
The risk is that after all is said and done, each Mercosur government will have set its own rules on its 
own and with other trading partners and those rules do not interoperate – so that companies seeking to 
sell online in Mercosur market have to apply a different set of regulations in each of the four markets. 
This is too costly especially for small businesses, undermining their interest in exporting and 
regionalizing their operations.  
 
However an d positively, given that digital regulatory regimes are currently being shaped in the region 
also means that Mercosur governments have a unique window of opportunity to create an entirely 
different outcome: a vibrant regional digital economy. For regional leaders to continue leveraging 
digitization for trade and prosperity, it is imperative to get regulations right, at home and regionally.  
 
The purpose of this report is to provide a regulatory roadmap that helps Mercosur region’s 
policymakers and business l eaders in this key juncture to unlock digital trade in goods and services as 
an engine of regional trade and job -creation. I pay particular attention to frameworks and policies that 
enable Mercosur region governments can best help SMEs selling goods and se rvices online to grow, 
export, and create jobs. This report draws on new interview and survey data on the way firms in the 
region leverage ecommerce and how they view the enabling environment for ecommerce, and puts 
forth policy recommendations.  
 
The follo wing section reviews the patterns of digitization and ecommerce in Mercosur, while section 
three examines regional firms’ use of the Internet as a catalyst for trade. Section three takes stock of the 
state of play in digital regulations and digital trade p rovisions pursued by Mercosur countries, and 
provides data and research results on the costs of benefits of different kinds of digital regulations and 
integration efforts, for Mercosur governments to weigh. Section four turns to Mercosur firms’ 
perspective s on the opportunities and challenges to digital transactions and trade at home and with 
other Mercosur nations. Section five concludes with priority policy recommendations, including a call 
for a new regional Digital Dialogue among public and private sect ors.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
 II. Digitization and Digital Trade in Mercosur  
 
Mercosur is amid an Internet boom. In 2000 fewer than 5 percent of people in the region used the 
Internet; by 2015, over one -half the region was online (figure 1). Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay all 
surpass Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) regional averag e in connectivity. Though the regional 
economies still have relatively low broadband penetration rates – only 5 -15 percent of regional 
populations have access to fixed broadband, depending on country, less than half of levels in the United 
States (figure 2 ). However, mobile broadband rates have grown in most countries and broadband 
subscription fees are by now quite at a par with several Western European countries such as France, 
Denmark, and Belgium.  
 
 
Figure 1 – Internet Usage in 2015, Selected Countries  and Regions  
 
 
Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.  
 
 
Figure 2 – Mobile and Fixed Broadband Subscriptions in Mercosur 2016, by Country  
 
 
 
Source: World Economic Forum’s Networked Readiness Index.  
8 
 
 Mercosur businesses have also grown more connected. Almost all companies in the regional economies 
use email to interact with client and suppliers, and some one half has websites – 68 percent of 
companies in Argentina, 58 percent in Brazil, and 50 percent in Uruguay have their own websites 
(figure 3). Most regional companies say they use the Internet “always” for internal communication. 
Market research, and advertising (figure 4). Overall, the Internet has become a very important tool. 
When asked about the productivity drop if their companies were cut off from the web, 83 percent of 
companies reported a loss of over 15 percent and 9 percent reported a loss of 5 -15 percent (figure 5).  
 
Figure 3 – Firms’ use of Email and Websites for Doing Business in 2015, b y region  
 
Source: Enterprise Surveys.  
 
Figure 4 – % of Companies in Mercosur Using the Internet “Always” in a Business Function  
 
 
Source: Suominen, Kati (2017). “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report for the Inter -
American Development Bank (January).  
9 
 
 Figure 5 – Importance of the Internet for Mercosur Companies’ Productivity (share of 
companies answering to question “what would be the negative impact on your organization's 
productivity, measured as the value of  sales per employee, if it did not have access to the Internet 
or other digital networks?”)  
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Suominen, Kati (2017). “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report for the Inter -
American Development Bank (January).  
 
 
The Internet has had a dramatic impact on the region’s retail landscape. By 2017, ecommerce made up 
some 4.3 percent of retail in Brazil and 2.7 percent in Argentina.2 Granted, Mercosur region’s 
ecommerce is not nearly as vibrant as in the U.S. or China (whe re it makes up 12.7 percent and 15.5 
percent of retail, respectively).  
 
However, ecommerce in Mercosur has grown robustly and much faster than national economies, retail, 
or foreign trade, and is expected to grow by double digital rates in 2018 -19 (figure  6). While the boom 
has been attenuating from the days when ecommerce was very new and started from a low base, growth 
is still strong. The region is also a significant market: Brazil is a top -10 market in the world for 
ecommerce retail, after China, Unite d States, Japan, and several European economies, and combined, 
the regional economies make up nearly 70 percent of Latin American ecommerce purchases (figure 7).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 Figure 6 – Year -on-year Growth of B2C Ecommerce in Argentina, Brazil and Latin America, 
2014 -19 
 
 
Source: eMarketer.  
 
Figure 7 – Distribution of B2C Ecommerce Spending in LAC in 2015, by Economy  
 
 
Source: Statista.  
 
  
 
 
Box 1 – FinTechs, EdTechs, AgTechs: Mercosur Region’s Vibrant Online Companies  
 
Mercosur region has countless com panies that provide online services. In Brazil, Samba Tech enables small 
businesses to create and distribute world -class videos; Sympla provides a platform for event organizers to boost 
ticket sales and manage and track their events; and SmarttBot is break ing new ground in offering automated 
investment strategies in the stock market.  Brazilian start -up Nubank, a mobile -based credit card business, has 
raised $80 million in venture funding. Argentine company Restorando offers online recommendations and 
reserv ations for restaurants across Latin America, and Papumba gives children educational games based on 
mobile devices. Paraguayan Aposta.la enables users to bet on sports across Latin America.  
  
11 
 
 There are also in the Mercosur region several two -sided online ma rket places. Argentina’s Mercado Libre 
connects buyers and sellers of products across Latin America. Another Argentine company Argofy connects 
sellers and buyers of agricultural machinery and equipment, Brazilian startup DogHero connects pets to pet 
sitter s, and Uruguayan company PedidosYa! helps foodies order meals from 15,000 restaurants in more than 400 
Latin American cities.  
 
Labor markets are also digitizing. Argentina’s Workana connects Latin American freelancers with companies 
looking for temporary staff that can execute remote projects. Many foreign companies have also entered to 
service the region. For example, using the global work platform Upwork that enables some 40 million online 
jobs each year, Uruguayan company Codigo Del Sur has worked on mo re than 150 projects for foreign 
companies such as Skout, a dating app with more than 200 million users, and Kindara, a popular health startup. 
The company has grown rapidly on the back of its services exports, from two employees in 2008 to 48 
employees in  2016, working over 50,000 hours and earning more than $1 million over the period.3  
 
  
 
 
Digital Trade in the Mercosur Region: How Much Is There and Who Drives It?  
 
Mercosur region’s trade has traditionally been driven by a small number firms – only about  13 percent 
of companies in the region export – and most of the region’s trade is produced by very large 
companies, such as Brazilian conglomerates Vale and Embraer. Indeed, the top -5 percent largest 
exporters in Mercosur economies, as in most economies, h ave traditionally generated some 90 percent 
of the region’s exports.4 Empirical studies by now strongly suggest that digitization and the Internet are 
changing these patterns. For example, Riker (2014) finds that growth in broadband use in 2000 -11 
increase d trade -to-GDP ratio by 4.2 percentage points in a broad sample of countries.5 Data also 
suggest that the Internet is helping to expand the odds for especially small businesses to export and 
import, for at least three reasons:6  
 
● Access to a worldwide mark et of buyers.  Ecommerce is widely found to reduce the 
geographic distance which for centuries has curtailed visibility, trust and trade between buyers 
and sellers geographically located far apart. Online, buyers around the world have more 
visibility into s ellers from around the planet than ever before – in other words, the Internet 
curtail search costs.  In addition, online platforms provide credibility signals and ease for 
transacting: star ratings systems, customer reviews, policies that allow return of it ems, and 
payment tools give the buyer a sense of trust, the lubricant of trade that in the offline economy 
takes several transactions between buyer and seller to build. Data accordingly suggest that 
companies that sell online are more poised to export and import and scale their sales.  
 
● Wider availability of quality products and inputs at lower cost . The Internet enables 
consumers and companies to shop around for the best deal. SMEs that buy online can access a 
worldwide pool of suppliers – which  enables th em to buy the best inputs at lowest cost and thus 
increases their  productivity and competitiveness According to a study by the Boston Consulting 
Group, SMEs that use the web intensively are 63 percent likelier to source products and 
services from farther a field than  were light or medium web users.7 Similarly, accessing  online  a 
far wider variety of products  than they might from stores in their cities or regions , consumers 
can score significant welfare gains.  
 12 
 
 ● Improvements for trading across borders.  The Internet enables companies of all sizes to 
make, market, and move products and services worldwide with greater ease than ever before. 
Using online services for logistics, payments, market research, trade compliance, user data 
analytics, advertising, a nd so on, companies can streamline logistics, speed up transactions, and 
get a bigger return on investment on marketing and customer service.  
 
How much online cross -border trade is there then in the Mercosur region? And to what extent are the 
trade gains f rom the Internet being realized in the region? One simple way to explore the likely amount 
cross -border ecommerce is to use as a proxy variable trade in parcels shipped through postal systems, 
which has grown explosively in the past few years. Internationa l parcel shipment data from the 
Universal Postal Union show that the number of domestic parcel shipments in Mercosur countries grew 
by 142 percent in 2009 -14, and inbound international parcel shipments on average grew by some 61 
percent, double the rate of  the regional economies’ import growth, and international parcel Dispatches 
grew by 33 percent, also exceeding regional economies’ export growth, respectively (figure 8). 
Possibly replaced by posts, express shipments have decline somewhat – however, the da ta are volatile 
year-on-year.  
 
 
Figure 8 – Domestic and International Parcel Shipments in Mercosur Countries in 2009 -14  
 
 
Source: United Postal Union.  
 
Where are the international parcels going? UPU data suggest that the volume (in tonnage) of intra-
regional parcels flows has grown by 35 percent in Latin America (whose data are here dominated by 
Mercosur members) in 2011 -15, a period when intra -regional trade growth has turned negative (figure 
9). The region’s parcel traffic lags behind the grow th of global cross -border parcel flows and intra -
regional flows in the European Union and Pacific Alliance, and the explosive 140 percent growth in the 
tonnage of parcels within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The volume of the 
region’s  extra -regional parcel exports grew faster at 25 percent during the period and imported tonnage 
by 7 percent. Proprietary industry data suggests that about 80 percent of ecommerce export shipments 
in Latin America, whose data are driven Mercosur, are low -value items of less than $100.8 
13 
 
  
Figure 9 – Growth in Tonnage of Cross -Border Parcel Flows in 2011 -15, Selected Regions and 
Directions (Index where World in 2011 = 100)  
 
 
 
Source: UPU.  
 
 
Another means to explore the extent to which digitization has helped drive trade in Mercosur is to ask 
companies about their online sales. Indeed, it should be the case that digitization and the rise of 
ecommerce are translating into new exports and exporters also in the Mercosur region. To that effect, I 
carried out a surv ey of 823 Mercosur region companies selling goods and/or services in August 2017.9 
The survey is composed of small companies of less than 50 employees (45 percent), mid -size 
companies with 51 -250 employees (13 percent), and large enterprise with over 250 e mployees (42 
percent) (appendix I). The respondents vary mostly from vice president and senior vice president to 
CEOs; some 58 percent are men and 42 percent women. Of the total sample, 12 percent of respondents 
are male CEO and 11 percent female CEOs.  
 
The surveyed companies are actively selling and buying online.10 Some 20 percent of surveyed 
Mercosur companies sell products or services online, and 11 percent purchase products or services 
online, and 36 percent both sell and buy online, while 33 percent d o not have online sales and purchase 
activity (figure 12).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
  
Figure 10 – Surveyed Mercosur Companies, by Online Activity  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
Those Mercosur companies that sell online are much more internationalized than companies that 
neither buy nor sell goods or services online. For example, while only 17 percent of small companies 
that do not have online sales or purchases export, some 60 pe rcent of small companies that sell and buy 
online also export (figure 11). As expected, large companies are likelier to export in general than small 
companies; nearly all large companies that buy and sell online also export, as opposed to 43 percent of 
offline seller large companies.  
 
Figure 11 – % of Mercosur Companies that Export, by Online Presence, 2016  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
15 
 
 Online sellers are also more diversified in terms of their expor t exposure: 65 percent of online sellers in 
the Mercosur region export to two or more markets and 28 percent export to four or more markets, 
while only 20 percent of offline sellers export to two or more markets and only 8 percent export to four 
or more ma rkets (figure 12).  In other words, most offline sellers that export, export to just one market, 
whereas most online sellers that export, tend to export to several markets.  
 
Figure 12 - Number of Export and Import Markets, by % of Mercosur Companies  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
These data are echoed in a Boston Consulting Group study that finds that SMEs that use the Internet 
intensively are almost 50 percent likelier to sell products and services  outside of their countries than 
those that do not.11 The correlation between online sales and exporting is even more resounding in 
eBay’s  transactional data, likely because eBay has a global buyer base that accentuates the odds for 
companies in Latin Ameri ca to be discovered by foreign buyers. For example, in Brazil, 100 percent of 
companies that sell on eBay also export, as opposed to only 6 percent of Brazilian companies that have 
traditionally exported. Brazilian eBay sellers on average to 22 different m arkets, as opposed to 2.5 
markets that the median traditional offline exporter sells to.12 Data on Chilean companies show that 
online sellers are also more resilient, likely because they are more diversified in their export markets: 
80 percent of eBay sellers that start exporting in year 1 still export in year 2, as opposed to only 30 
percent f or offline sellers.  
 
While it cannot by these data be said that online selling causes companies to export and have more 
diverse export destinations, it can be said that selling online is associated with, and can be hypothesized 
to drive, exporting and exp ort diversification. It appears that online sellers are also frequent two -way 
traders – they both import and export, which suggests that transacting online may fuel companies’ 
participation in regional and global value chains (figure 13). Indeed, selling o nline can help even the 
smallest companies build their own regional and global value chains. Not only are online  sellers more 
prolific and exporters; they tend to be higher -growing companies that offline sellers of companies that 
16 
 
 only buy online (figure 14 ). It appears then that many online sellers are firms that have entered the 
virtuous cycle of online sales, exports, and growth.  
 
 
Figure 13 – % of Firms that Both Export and Import in Mercosur, by Online Activity  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
Figure 14 – % of High -Growth Companies in Mercosur, by Online Activity  
 
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
17 
 
 Trade matters to the surveyed firms. Cross -border sales represent 22 percent of surveyed small 
exporters’ revenues and 29 percent of large exporters’ revenues, while cross -border purchases represent 
32 percent of all purchases of small companies and 25 percent of the purchases of large companies in 
the region (figure 15).  
 
Most surveyed companies export to other Mercosur markets, followed by the rest of Latin America, the 
United States, and China and EU (table 1).13 Another study suggests that the Internet has enabled 
Mercosur companies to gain new over seas customers. When asked about the type of customers that 
order their goods or services online form foreign countries, 27 percent of Mercosur companies report 
those customers are new customers, while 43 percent say their online export sales are generated  by a 
mix of existing and new foreign customers. Only 30 percent say their online export sales are from 
existing customers that only now place orders online (figure 16).  
 
 
Figure 15 – Importance of Cross -Border Sales and Purchases to Mercosur Companies th at Sell 
and/or Buy Online, 2016  
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
Table 1 – Mercosur Region Online Sellers’ Export Destinations, by Country  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
18 
 
 Figure 16 – % of Mercosur Companies by Type of Customer in Online Export Sales  
 
 
 
Source: Suominen, Kati (2017).  . “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report for the Inter -
American Development Bank (January).  
 
 
Summary  
 
In sum, this section has shown that the Internet has become absolutely essential for the growth, 
productivity, and trade of Mercosur companies. Almost all companies in the regional economies use 
email to interact with clients and sup pliers, and over 80 percent of companies agree that limiting their 
access to the Internet would reduce their productivity by more than 15 percent. Mercosur region 
companies that sell online are far likelier to export, export to many markets, and grow faste r than those 
that are still offline.  Online sellers are often also two -way traders, integrated in regional supply chains, 
and fast -growing. The next section explores the unfolding regional regulatory panorama companies 
seeking to growth through digital tra de are poised to operate in in years to come.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 III. Mercosur’s Digital Regulations: State of Play and Lessons for the Future  
 
Digitization and digital trade have grown in Mercosur in recent years. However, the region is still in 
many ways at “ecommerce 1.0” – there will be much more digital trade and ecommerce both 
domestically and regionally as Mercosur region’s consumers and co mpanies get online and transactions 
digitize. How well do national and regional policies and markets facilitate this digital transformation 
and facilitate online transactions and trade? What are the priorities and issues Mercosur region’s 
policymakers need  to consider today to bring about a vibrant digital marketplace tomorrow?  
 
Policymakers in the Mercosur countries have long appreciated the importance of a good enabling 
environment for trade, and have promoted market access, solid transport infrastructur es, and firms’ 
ability to export for the region’s competitiveness in world trade. In the digital era where transactions 
are made online, this “enabling environment for trade” requires further components to work well for 
businesses seeking to engage in trad e – such as Internet connectivity, well -functioning online 
payments, workers with technological skills, access to fast -disbursing digital working capital loans, and 
regulations and tax regimes conducive to online transactions and new innovations.  
 
Of this  set of issues, digital regulations have become a battleground among businesses that want to 
service customers and attain scale key to their competitiveness, consumer lobbies keen on securing 
individuals’ data, and governments’ own interests in taxing boom ing digital businesses. Several law 
proposals have been introduced in the Mercosur region to regulate digital companies and transactions 
that reflect these various interests. The debate has centered on five issues in particular:  
 
● Data privacy and localizat ion. Whether transacting on - or offline, Mercosur companies have 
grown into avid users of data on their operations, customers, and market at home and abroad 
(box 2). Understanding and analyzing these data on a cross -border basis is crucial for 
companies se eking to streamline operations, improve their services, and lower costs to 
customers. At the same time, pressed by consumer lobbies and other considerations, 
governments in the region have considered proposals to regulate companies’ access to 
consumer data  and the movement of personal data or other data across borders, as well as rules 
that would require companies to set up servers or other IT infrastructure in -country as a pre -
condition for market access. For example, in September 2013, Brazil considered a  policy that 
would have forced Internet -based companies, such as Google and Facebook, to store data on 
Brazilians in local data centers, but it withdrew this provision from the bill. Brazil’s Central 
Bank introduced a similar proposal in September 2017 for  a public consultation about cloud 
services for the financial sector.  
 
Mercosur governments have also revised their data protection laws.  Brazil ’s data protection 
law, Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados (LGPD) that passed in 2018 and will go into effect  in 
2020 , require s companies to comply with strict requirements related to the processing of 
personal data , in rather similar fashion as European Union’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) . It has similar extraterritorial reach as GDPR, but is more lenient in some 
areas, such as anonymized data or fines for incompliance.14 Companies globally view the 
GDPR as straitjacketing and very costly to implement; the United States and the APEC region 
have viable alternative regimes turning more on sectoral regu lation and firm -level commitments 
on privacy, backed up by national privacy enforcers (box 3). Argentina’s data protection law 
has a similar extraterritorial reach and has been clarified to permit transfer of data to certain 20 
 
 jurisdiction deemed to have ade quate protection of data privacy – member states of the 
European Union and the European Economic Area, Switzerland, Guernsey and Jersey, the Isle 
of Man, the Faeroe Islands, Canada (only applicable to their private sector), New Zealand, 
Andorra and Uruguay .15  
 
 
 
 
Box 2 – How Mercosur Region Companies Use Data to Provide Better Service at Lower Cost  
 
Large companies in the Mercosur region have long used data to optimize their operations and customer service. 
For example, Brazil’s airplane company Embraer uses data on to monitor in real -time the performance and 
operations and maintenance needs of its 5,600 active aircraft with 1,700 clients globally.16 Brazilian energy giant 
Petrobras draws on 387 indicators to monitor its environmental performance and a pla tform to capture and 
process real -time operational data from the various drilling rigs.17 Argentina’s telecom company Movistar 
Argentina leverages data and machine -learning capabilities to monitor and forecast the performance of its 
services and operations and to detect deviations in usage data.  
 
However, data and analytics are today not just for large companies to streamline and scale. They are also 
accessible to even the smallest companies which can now rent pay -per-use data services from companies such as  
Amazon or Salesforce, instead of having to buy expensive hardware and software systems and in -house data 
analysts. One example is Brazilian company WebMotors that hosts 200,000 classified ads for new and used 
vehicles each month. WebMotors has used Amazon  CloudFront to transmit vast quantities of data that improved 
its performance by 45 percent and enabled it to scale up to support more than 20 million unique visitors per 
month from around the world.18  
 
There are also small yet highly scalable online data businesses that enable other businesses to tap crucial data at 
very low cost. For example, Argentine small business DataPro enables small ecommerce merchants to assess its 
markets and competitors on Mercado Libre for free, and in -depth at mere $5 per compe titor.19 The savings in 
market research enable small business clients to invest in new activities.  
 
 
 
● Internet intermediary liability.  Internet intermediary liability has become an issue of 
heightened focus in recent years, as some governments have begun to  look to digital companies 
to police illegal and other problematic content posted by users, and monitor users’ copyright 
violations. Companies have sought to remove illegal content – for example, Facebook removes 
15,000 items in Germany each month .20 Howeve r, companies have also pushed back against 
onerous liability regimes and ambiguous monitoring requirements that can be costly and 
complex to implement, rather asking for a more predictable set of liability protection measures. 
As a result, some countries h ave put in place liability laws, typically referred to as “safe 
harbors”. In its Marco Civil Internet law of 2014 that defines Internet users’ rights, Brazil has a 
“safe harbor” that limits the responsibility of providers for hosting or transferring third -party 
content. Companies implementing Marco Civil see it generally as a major improvement to the 
preceding, more ambiguous liability law. Outside Mercosur, Chile’s copyright law of 2010 
specifies similarly that internet intermediaries are not liable for us er content on their sites if they 
take appropriate actions in response to official notices.21 Both Argentina and Uruguay are 
considering liability laws.  
 21 
 
 ● Over the top (OTT) rules.  Internet services delivered via the Internet include, among others, 
broadcas ting services such as Netflix or Hulu that provide audio, video, and other media over 
the Internet without similar subscription as required by traditional cable companies; messaging 
services, such as services provided by WhatsApp, Skype, and Facebook, that  are not text -
messaging services provided by traditional mobile network operators; and various other 
services such as Uber or Lyft that enable anyone with a mobile phone to order private cars and 
taxis. The usage rates of these services are very high globa lly as well as in Mercosur , and 
growing much faster than traditional telecommunications and cable services.  Facebook has 2 
billion monthly users worldwide and WhatsApp has over a billion users; according to 
eMarketer, almost 100 percent of Internet users in Brazil use WhatsApp.22 Uber provides for 
millions of trips globally each month: some 62 million trips were  taken in July 2016 alone.23   
 
Leveraging the Internet, Internet service providers are supplementing traditional providers by 
providing consumers with means of communicating and accessing content which drastically cut 
consumers’ costs – but also are percei ved by telecommunications companies as biting into their 
revenues, when these services are not developed, created, or provided by the telecoms.24 The 
vibrant debate in the Mercosur region on OTT regulations reflects these concerns of 
telecommunications comp anies for their market share in the increasingly digitizing region. For 
example, there are proposals in Argentina on OTT rules that regulate audiovisual and voice 
distribution. Several countries are also amid broader debates of whether it is appropriate to  
extend traditional telecommunications regulations to these new digital services that do not share 
the same technical and market characteristics as telecommunications services – and concern that 
the application of these traditional regulations would likely  force consumers to pay a premium 
for accessing digital content and services.  
 
● Taxes on digital companies.  Governments in Mercosur, as in other parts of the world, are 
considering how to implement taxes on Internet services without making it more difficul t to 
deliver digital services on a cross -border basis. For example, in January 2018, Uruguay 
introduced a 22 percent tax on online services such as AirBnB and Uber, and in March 2018, 
Argentina introduced a 21 percent tax on domestic and offshore Internet services. In Brazil,  the 
National Cinema Agency has proposed a tax on  audiovisual platform s regardless of their 
geographical origin. It has also proposed local content rules – a minimum quota of 20 percent of 
Brazilian content on TV and audiovisual compani es’ catalogues, and require investments in co -
production of original content equivalent to 4 percent of gross income.25  
 
Companies in the Mercosur region are keen on taxes that are consistent and applied in a non -
discriminatory manner, given the cross -border nature of digital services. For example, 
companies tend to think that governments should seek to avoid unilateral digital taxation 
measures that deviate from regional and global norms, and avoid singling out digital platforms 
for special or unique treat ment – since the digital economy is increasingly indistinguishable 
from the economy itself.  
 
● Copyright and IP.  As content, services, and products digitize, concerns have been growing 
about infringement of intellectual property rights associated with digital or non -digital products 
or services, including copyright, patent, trademark, or trade secret infringement. T o promote 
growth of the digital economy, it is critical to enforce these rights while guarding against 22 
 
 unbalanced or onerous intellectual property rules that could limit market access and inhibit 
development of services that are critical to digital trade, such as search engines, cloud services, 
translation software, and machine learning tools. Companies also tend to highlight the 
importance of safe harbors to protect intermediaries from user -generated content, as that content 
often has copyright consequence s.  
 
All Mercosur members have a copyright regime in place, but none of them are fully updated to 
reflect the challenges of the digital era, and enforcement of existing laws is weak in many 
countries. In Uruguay, a 2003 law did include computer programs an d databases in the 
definition of “works” governed by the 1937 copyright regime. Yet few countries have updated 
their copyright framework with fair use rules or other limitations and exceptions that are 
necessary to enable companies and researchers to build  next-generation technologies around 
machine learning and text and data mining. Discussions are intensifying in the region on the 
appropriate copyright regimes that would strike a balance between protecting rights owners and 
propelling innovation.  
 
Table 2 summarizes various key existing regulations and regulatory proposals in the Mercosur region.  
 
 
Table 2 – Regulations and Recent Regulatory Proposals in Mercosur Countries, Selected 
Categories  (as of November 2017, with some updates in September 2018)  
 
  
Argentina  
  
Brazil  
  
Paraguay  
  
Uruguay  
 
 
Data Privacy 
and Transfer  
  
The government is 
finishing a data 
protection draft bill 
which has been open to 
public consultation. 
The bill has a good 
international data 
transfer regime; there 
are problematic 
provisions regarding 
extra -territorial 
application of the law.  
They expect to submit 
the bill to Congress 
during this year. The 
existing Data Protection 
Law of 2000 prohibits 
the transfer of personal 
data to countries that 
lack protections, but so 
far Arg entina has not 
determined which 
countries fall within 
this category.  
  
Brazilian Congress 
approved Marco Civil da 
Internet defining Internet 
users’ rights was 
approved in 2014. 
Brazil’s data protection 
law, Lei Geral de 
Proteção de Dados 
(LGPD) that passed  in 
2018 and will go into 
effect in 202 0, requires 
require companies to 
comply with strict 
requirements related to 
the processing of personal 
data, in rather similar 
fashion as European 
Union’s General Data 
Protection Regulation 
(GDPR). During the 
discussions of Marco 
Civil, Brazil considered a 
policy that would have 
forced Internet -based 
companies , to store data  
A 2001 law details 
conditions for access 
to and use and 
transfer of data, and 
the kinds of data that 
can be transferred.26 
Under 2002 
modification, transfer 
of data is prohibited 
after three years and 
includes specific 
fines for violations.   
Has data protection law 
of 2008 in place. 
Resolution of 201 3 
defines personal data 
and its treatment,27 Any 
company that has a 
Uruguayan website 
ending in .uy in which 
it captures personal data 
needs to register the 
data and write out 
privacy policy. Other 
websites only need to 
register data bases. 
Companies should  have 
written text on how a 
person can access his or 
her data and modify or 
suppress it.  23 
 
 relating to Brazilians in 
local data centers, but it 
withdrew this provision 
from the bill.  
Internet 
Intermediary 
Liability  
 Existing intermediary 
liability bill expected to 
be approved by the end 
of 2017. Viewed 
positively y private 
sector for protecting al l 
Internet intermediates 
and referring to a wide 
range of content 
(including content with 
intellectual property 
protections).   
“Safe harbor” that limits 
the responsibility for 
hosting or transferring 
third -party content. ISPs 
will typically not be found 
civilly liable for damages 
resulting from third -party 
generated content.28   
  
No laws yet. Law 
proposals introduced in 
October 2016.  
 
Over the Top 
Rules and 
Taxes  
  
In March 2018, 
Argentina introduced a 
21 percent tax on 
domestic and offshore 
Internet services.   
There is ongoing 
discussion on the proposal 
by the Brazilian National 
Cinema Agency to 
regulate audiovisual OTT 
platforms to levy taxes 
regardless of their 
geographical origin, 
create a minimum quota 
of 20 percent of Brazilian 
content on TV and 
audiovisual companies’ 
catalogues, and require 
investments in co -
production of original 
content equivalent to 4 
percent of gross income.29 
  
Consideration in 
2016 of a law to 
regulate and tax OTT 
operators such as 
Netflix.   
22 percent t axes for 
sales of Internet 
services took effect  in 
January 2018.30   
 
Copyright 
and IP  
 
  
Copyright law dating 
back to 1930 does 
provide a sound legal 
framework to protect 
intellectual property 
such as books, films, 
music, and software, 
but enforcement is 
weak.31 Lack of key 
copyright limitations 
and exceptions that are 
necessary for machine 
learning and the digital 
environment.   
Copyright is regulated by 
a 1998 law. New 
copyright reform bill 
proposed by the Ministry 
of Culture in 2013 was 
not taken into 
consideration in 
Congress. In 2016, Brazil 
launched a new public 
consultation about 
copyright in the digital 
environment -- but has not 
yet developed key 
copyright limitations and 
exceptions that are 
necessary for machine 
learning and the digital 
environment . High levels 
of Internet piracy and 
online sales of counterfeit  
Latest copyright law 
in 1998; discussions 
on modifications.  
Lack of key 
copyright lim itations 
and exceptions that 
are necessary for 
digital environment.   
Copyright laws on 
literary and artistic 
property in force since 
1937; modification of 
2003 includes computer 
programs and databases 
among “works” and 
establishes the author 
retains his/he r right of 
ownership throughout 
his life, and his/her 
heirs for the term of 
fifty years thereafter. 
Lack of key copyright 
limitations and 
exceptions that are 
necessary for digital 
environment.  24 
 
 goods persist, in part 
keeping Brazil on US 
Trade Representative’s 
Special 301 Watch List 
since 2007.32 
 
 
 
Box 3 – How to Regulate Data Privacy? The battle of GDPR vs . CBPR  
 
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is the EU’s means to strengthen and unify data protection for 
all individuals within the EU, and to regulate transfer of personal data outside the EU. GDPR bec ame 
enforceable on 25 May 2018 after a two -year transition period.  
 
GDPR applies to EU -based “data controllers”, or organizations that collect data from EU residents, and 
“processors”, or organizations such as cloud service providers that process data on behalf of data controller. It 
also applies to  organizations based outside the EU if they collect or process personal data of EU residents.  
 
It protects such data as basic identity information such as name, address and ID numbers, web data such as 
location, IP address, cookie data and RFID tags, heal th and genetic data, biometric data, racial or ethnic data, 
political opinions, and sexual orientation. Under GDPR, EU citizens have the right to know upon request what 
personal data a company is using and how it is being used.  
 
All companies with 250 empl oyees or more need to adhere; companies with fewer than 250 employees whose 
data processing is not occasional, or includes certain types of sensitive personal data, also need to comply.  
 
The private sector widely views GDPR as overly straitjacketing and v ery costly to implement. For example, 
companies:  
 
● Can store and process personal data only when the individual consents and for “no longer than is necessary 
for the purposes for which the personal data are processed”;  
 
● Must erase personal data upon request;  
 
● Must report data breaches to supervisory authorities and individuals affected by a breach within 72 hours of 
when the breach was detected;  
 
● Have to conduct data protection impact assessments to identify risks to EU citizens;  
 
● Have a data protect ion officer (DPO) if process large amounts of data.  
 
There are various discussed costs imposed by the GDPR:  
 
● Implementation costs alone are very high.  Two-thirds of American businesses are spending between $1 
and $10 million just to implement the GDPR by t he time it enters into effect in May 2018.  
 
● Impending penalties . Companies are swallowing the implementation costs in part because the penalties for 
companies that fail to enforce GDPR run as high as €20 million or 4 percent of a company’s global 
revenues.  However, losses are impending: GDPR fines are expected to cost European banks $5.2 billion  in 
the firs t three years in hard cash.33 The 100 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange could face fines 25 
 
 of up to £5 billion for GDPR breaches .34 Had the regime been in place for the past five years, the top listed 
UK companies could have been fined £25 billion.  
 
● Business losses from decreased access to data.  Given its limits to access to data that curb effi ciencies, 
GDPR is estimated to result in an immediate loss of $66 billion in sales for EU companies . The more 
profoun d implications, such as the curtailment of credit information on consumers and ability for web 
analytics firms to function is expected to result in losses of $173 billion and 2.8 million European jobs.35 
 
● Negative impacts on GDPs, trade, investment, and welfare.  Brussels think -tank ECIPE’s simulations 
discovered that EU’s data privacy and localization laws, depending on their final outcome, will lower EU 
GDP by 0.4 -1.1 percent, exports by 0.4 percent, domestic investments by 3.9 -5.1 percent, and welfare b y 
$334 -$806 per worker.36 
 
In practice, the implementation will likely vary by country. Germany and France tend to have strict rules. For 
example, a foreign company that wishes to transfer data from Germany needs to contend with state and federal 
data prote ction laws, review the data in Germany, and ask their own country’s court or government entity to 
request the documents from Germany, for example citing a mutual legal assistance treaty.37 
 
Also EU itself will incur implementation and enforcement costs. In addition, trade agreements are not 
necessarily GDPR -compatible. For example, GDPR appears to be inconsistent with the General Agreement of 
Trade in Services (GATS).38 From EU’s vantage point, trade rules should upgrade exceptions privacy and data 
protection ; trading partners may however disagree.  
    
Data privacy rules in the United States are very different . There exists no one comprehensive federal law 
regulating the collection and use of personal data services in the United States. Rather, there are vario us federal 
and state laws and some 20 sectoral regulations in different spheres such as in healthcare or in financial services. 
In addition, there are various self -regulatory frameworks in such industries as payments, online advertising, and 
mobile marketi ng.39  
 
As examples, the Federal Trade Commission prohibits large companies from deceptive practices online and has 
enforced its rules against companies that have not lived up to their privacy policies or implemented reasonable 
minimal data security measure s; the Financial Services Modernization Act and Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act regulate companies’ access to personal financial and medical data; while the Fair Credit 
Reporting Act regulates use of data related to a consumer’s creditw orthiness, credit history, and overall 
eligibility for credit or insurance. There are also many state law regulating the use and collection of personal 
data, with California having more extensive privacy laws than other states.  
 
APEC’s Cross -Border Privacy  Rules (CBPR)  endorsed by APEC ministers in 2011 is a different data privacy 
regime than GDPR. CBPR is an enforceable code -of-conduct governing electronic flows of private data in the 
APEC region. It is based on self -assessment with third party verificatio n underpinned by national enforcement 
authorities. CBPR is a more flexible framework than the much more formal GDPR, but it can result in strong 
binding commitments from company members. Unlike GDPR that is a law applying uniformly to EU 
economies, the CBP R system does not displace or change a country’s domestic laws and regulations.  
 
CBPR is aimed to harmonize data privacy regimes across the APEC region, and is envisaged as a blueprint for a 
more far -reaching global scheme. In order to join CBPR, APEC mem ber economies need to submit a formal 
declaration and discuss how the CBPR can be enforced under national law, and identify at least one APEC -
recognized third party certifying organization.  
 
CBPR can offer a useful step for companies and organizations to put in place data protection policies and 
procedures. Businesses and organizations that opt in the CBPR system must submit their privacy practices and 26 
 
 policies for evaluation by an APEC -recognized “Accountability Agent”; in the United States this organizat ion is 
called TRUSTe; in Japan, JIPDEC. They study such aspects as a company’s online properties (websites, mobile 
apps, cloud platforms) and customer and employee data management practices. Upon certification, the practices 
and policies will become bindin g on that organization and enforceable by a privacy enforcement authority (such 
as the Federal Trade Commission in the United States). Participating businesses are required to develop and 
implement data privacy policies consistent with the APEC Privacy Fra mework. There are currently 21 
companies that have been certified, such as Apple, Box, HP, IBM, and Merck.  Businesses participate because 
they perceive value in the external validation and sense of accountability they gain by the CBPR certifications.40 
A persistent criticism of CBPR is the low level of awareness about it and its benefits.  
 
So far, five APEC economies have joined the CBPR – Canada, Japan, Mexico, South Korea, and the United 
States. Some Asian economies have so far not joined due to lack of d omestic legislation.  
 
The privacy enforcement authorities of a country that takes part in CBPR need to be able to enforce domestic 
laws and regulations on protecting personal information. Relying on enforcement by countries, the CBPR lacks 
the GDPR’s cent ralized enforcement mechanism. Rather, APEC encourages the cooperation of privacy 
enforcement authorities within the Asia -Pacific and has in place established the Cross -Border Privacy 
Enforcement Arrangement (CPEA) as a  multilateral arrangement to share in formation, carry out research, and 
engage in cross -border cooperation in investigation and enforcement.41 
 
Appendix I Table 1 provides a side -by-side comparison of GDPR and CBPR.  
 
 
 
 
A growing body of research on the impact of digital regulations on trade, investment, and growth 
indicates that the choices Mercosur countries make on digital regulations domestically and regional are 
far from trivial. Some recent findings are as follows:  
 
● Data localization increases costs to all companies : Research finds that d ata localization is 
self-defeating. Countries that require data to be cordoned off increase costs for their own firms 
that have to turn to costlier domestic services, paying up to 60 percent more for their computing 
needs. In contrast, centralized data sto rage and processing takes advantage of economies of 
scale in cloud computing and saves costs. According to one estimate, in Brazil, a local company 
would pay 54 percent less using cloud services located outside the country than when using a 
local cloud pro vider for the same services.42 It is estimated that European businesses could save 
some 36 percent on their server costs if moving their servers outside the EU.  
 
Of course, the costs  of data localization c ould well outright deter small businesses from entering 
new market s. However, many traditional industry companies could be most badly hurt: 
McKinsey has found that 75 percent of the value added created by data flows is in traditional 
industries, in part through increases in prod uctivity.43 Data localization requirements may also 
be counterproductive: giving governments more control over information, they can threaten 
consumers and businesses’ access to both knowledge and international markets.44   
 
● Data localization hurts economic growth, investment, and welfare: The macroeconomic 
impacts of data localization are significant. According to simulations by the European Center 
for International Political Economy (ECIPE), data localization in India can impose a welfare 
loss of 11 percent  of the average worker’s monthly salary; in China, almost 13 percent, in Korea 27 
 
 and Brazil, as much as  20 percent.45 The impact  on domestic investment would decline by 4.2 
percent in Brazil as a result of data localization standards. Box 3 illustrated the ne gative 
economic impacts on EU citizens of the EU’s data protection regime; EU companies’ 
immediate direct costs is estimated at $66 billion loss in sales revenue.  
 
● Internet intermediaries boost growth and productivity of other firms – when not stifled by 
an onerous liability regime. Internet intermediaries such as Facebook fuel the flow of 
information online by helping individuals and companies find, share and access content and 
interact and transact with each other. This in turn improves growth and product ivity across the 
economy. A 2013 study by Copenhagen Economics found that internet intermediaries increased 
EU GDP by €430 billion in 2012, or about 3.3 percent of EU’s GDP; of this, €220 were gains 
from investment, private consumption, and exports, while €210 billion was indirect effect of 
productivity increases in firms serviced by intermediaries.46 Additional €640 were consumer 
benefits from free services, increases in online advertising, and B2B platform revenues. 
However, these numbers could well be higher: it has been argued that the success of Silicon 
Valley is based on freedom of speech undergi rding the American Internet laws; in contrast, 
Europe and Asia imposed strict intermediary liability regimes, inflexible intellectual property 
rules, and complex or inflexible privacy rules that stifled innovation.47  
 
● Clear liability regimes with limited l iability on online companies expand startup 
investments: There is a particularly important link between digital regulations, such as 
copyright and legal liability rules, and access to early -stage finance, the main challenge small 
Mercosur region digital co mpanies cite to thriving online: unclear and restrictive liability and 
copyright  regulations deter investors.  
 
A recent Pricewaterhouse Coopers survey of early -stage investors in digital companies finds 
that copyright regulations that increase liability f or either users or websites have a negative 
impact on investment.48 Regulations holding websites liable for user -uploaded content without a 
license would reduce the pool of interested investors by 81 percent. In the presence of strict 
regulatory regimes, in vestors gravitate to companies promising a very high return multiplier – 
which likely means that investors would only focus on a handful of promising digital 
businesses. Meanwhile, clarifying copyright regulations to allow websites to resolve legal 
dispute s quickly would expand the pool of interested investors by 111 percent and limiting 
penalties for websites acting in good faith would expand the pool of interested investors by 115 
percent. Nine out of ten investors would prefer to invest in companies oper ating under U.S. than 
European copyright laws.     
 
Of course, onerous rules also impact startup founders and users of platforms. Small businesses 
and start -ups are unlikely experts in liability issues – and thus either take risks and become 
liable for fines, or divert their precious capital to pay lawyers and specialized software to ensure 
compliance with stringent liability laws. One study supported by Google found that a liability 
regime that defines clear and cost -efficient requirements for intermedi aries could bolster 
success rates for internet intermediary start -ups by 4 percent in Chile, 8 percent in Germany, 22 
percent in India, and 24 percent in Thailand, and increase expected profits for intermediaries by 
1 percent in Chile, 2.3 percent in Thail and, 3 percent in Germany, and 5 percent in India.49   
 28 
 
 ● OTT rules that create new costs for consumers to access online services and content 
undermine social gains – and can undermine freedom of expression.  Proposals that would 
force Internet services to get  a license or register with the government before they can make 
their services available in a country can limit free expression and innovation: in 2011, the 
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Freedom of Expression wrote that “unlike the 
broadcasting sector, for which registration or licensing has been necessary to allow States to 
distribute limited frequencies, such requirements cannot be justified in the case of the Internet, 
as it can accommodate an unlimited number of points of entry and an essenti ally unlimited 
number of users.”50 Rigid OTT rules can also hurt the imposing country’s companies and 
consumers by curbing their access to information and data, such as accessible via apps.51 For 
example, a recent dissertation by  Min Jung Kim shows that cons umers score major gains from 
the fact that many apps are free – they are like paid apps but with zero price.52 In the United 
States, she finds, Smartphones created up to $271 in annual consumer surplus in 2011, with 90 
percent of the welfare gain coming from free apps . 
 
● Internet services that operate more  freely can boost telecom operators’ revenues.  Telecom 
opera tors do not need to view online service providers as a threat: there are many successful 
cases where telecoms have partnered with Internet services to monetize the strong growth in 
messaging and data traffic, so as to make up for losses from declining voic e traffic. For 
example, Malaysian mobile service provider DiGi telecommunications has entered into a 
partnership with WhatsApp – which enables DiGi customers to get unlimited access to 
WhatsApp for a fixed fee.53 In India, Bharti Airtel attributed its over 30 percent increase in net 
profits in the first quarter of 2015 to increases in mobile data revenue.54 Swedish mobile 
services have recorded increase in revenue in 2002 -14, with data services making up an 
increasingly sizable share of total revenues.55 More collaboration between internet companies 
and telecoms may be in fact the future. For example, Facebook is lending some of its artificial 
intelligence experts to telecoms through its Telecom Infra Project (TIP), which is an umbrella 
for Facebook and other c ompanies to collaborate on telecommunications technologies, such as 
open -source long -distance antennas to spread connectivity in remote regions, or small cellular 
stations that can be planted on street lamps or other infrastructure to accelerate the deploy ment 
of wireless service.56 
 
● Lowering taxes on digital goods and services generated more growth and revenue over 
time . Governments are increasingly seeking to apply new corporate and sales tax rules to digital 
businesses that operate across borders. European officials have made muscular proposals to tax 
foreign tech companies that do not necessarily have a physical prese nce in Europe, yet do have 
a strong market share of European digital markets. Many U.S. state governments have crafted 
tax rules for online transactions of products and for the sale of digital goods and services, such 
as digital audio -visual works, digital  books, and even for digital ringtones – while some states 
such as North Dakota and District of Columbia has expressly declined to tax digital goods or 
services.  
 
These measures need to be taken with care, so that digitization will continue translating in to 
economies growth. After all, since digital goods and services affect practically all industries 
much like any critical infrastructure, or financial services, or energy do, taxes on them have 
economy -wide spill -overs in productivity, new business creatio n, and investment. Furthermore, 29 
 
 online services are widely found the have a positive impact on economic growth – and this 
growth can further increase with scale of usage, for example due to network effects, so that 
maximizing growth gains from digitization  benefits from wide -spread adoption of digital 
devices, goods, and services by all firms and consumers.  
 
As such, if the public policy objective is to maximize access to and penetration of devices and 
digital goods and services across consumers and busine sses, tax rate on online transactions 
should be lowest possible: empirically, tax cuts and exemptions generate more economic 
growth and, ultimately, more government revenue than high taxes that raise the technology’s 
cost of ownership.57 After all, as compa nies use digital goods and services and cloud computing 
services as a critical input in their operations and production, excessive taxes on them are akin 
to a tariff or tax on intermediate products. Similarly, consumers of digital goods and services 
will b e dissuaded from buying and using them if taxes raise their total cost of ownerships. For 
example, there is empirical evidence that 3G penetration rates decline with tax burden on 3G 
services, revealing how the tax code may inadvertently penalize technolog y diffusion.58  
 
The worst impact of taxing key services will lower adoption of digital goods and services 
maybe among the poor, the most price sensitive consumers. Taxation can also dissuade 
investment: firms are likely to shift their deployment footprint to minimize their tax burden, all 
other things equal.  In contrast, in a natural experiment, when North Dakota ended its 6 percent 
sales tax on wireless and wireline services, investment per capita in these services more than 
doubled in a year.59 In addition , there is also an important coordination issue: there is no one 
internationally accepted VAT/GST treatment on cross -border sales of digital services – so that 
instances of double taxation and non -taxation are likely to arise.  
 
Regional Dimension of Digit al Regulations  
 
Governments aspiring to help their countries’ digitizing companies sell more online and expand their 
presence across borders also need to consider the interoperability of their digital regulations and online 
payment systems with trading pa rtners – and pay attention to the traditional topics of market access and 
customs procedures affecting SMEs selling goods online cross -border.  
 
Attention to digital regulations has also heightened in Mercosur as the region has been reviving its 
trade talks with the European Union and as Argentina in particular has risen to play a key role in the 
new Friends of Ecommerce Development (FEDs) group at  the World Trade Organization. Some 
leaders in the region have also been inspired by such trade agreements as the Trans -Pacific Partnership 
(TPP) agreement and the 2016 Chile -Uruguay free trade agreement that have pioneered with 
ecommerce chapters and the Chile -Argentina free trade agreement negotiated in 2017 that has similarly 
forward -looking language on digital economy.  
 
How, then do trade agreements treat digital trade? TPP negotiators produced the most sophisticated 
language yet on digital trade. For example, TPP:  
 
● Requires non -discrimination when members states protect ecommerce users from violations of 
personal information;  
 
● Demands parties enable cross -border data transfers;  30 
 
  
● Bans making market access contingent on forced transfers of technology , production processes, 
or data to a member state;  
 
● Includes strong and balanced copyright protections and shields Internet intermediaries from 
legal liability for the infringing acts of their users;  
 
● Prohibits customs duties or taxes on digital products; and  
 
● Governs digital industries via a negative list and thus automatically keeps them open, unless a 
TPP member government explicitly exempts an industry.  
 
The Chile -Uruguay FTA’s ecommerce chapter is very similar in intent and language to TPP’s 
ecommerce cha pter. The one difference is that it omitted copyright clauses similar to TPP chapter due 
to Chile and Uruguay’s differing copyright regimes. Box 4 outlines key clauses of the Chile -Uruguay 
FTA.  
 
Selected other FTAs that cover ecommerce include the Australi a-Singapore FTA of 2012 and EU -
Canada FTA of 2016; however, both are silent on data transfer and localization issues and non -
discriminatory treatment of digital products that TPP stresses., while table 3 summarizes some key 
highlights on digital trade and ecommerce rules in recent trade agreements. The Trade in Services 
Agreement that is being negotiated among 24 parties also touches on regulating the digital economy.  
 
 
 
Box 4 – Best in Latin America Yet? Chile -Uruguay FTA on Digital Trade  
 
In October 2016, Chile and Uruguay signed an FTA that has 20 chapters, including on ecommerce and SMEs. 
Hailed as “gold standard” agreement, the FTA provides for interoperable electronic signatures, acceptance of 
electronically filed trade documents, coope ration on protections of consumers online, protections of the data of 
consumers that shop online and sharing of experiences in protection of personal information, and clear 
information to consumers on ow their data may be transferred.  
 
The agreement also puts forth cooperation to further SMEs’ use of ecommerce, and to advance ecommerce 
development in regional and multilateral forums, and self -regulation by the private sector in a way that promote 
ecommerce. The SME chapter requires both parties to make tra de information available for SMEs electronically 
and creates a committee to further SMEs’ use of the agreement and to build their capacity to export.  
 
The agreement does not prohibit access to consumer data, free flow of data across borders, and it prohibi ts either 
party from requiring the other to set up servers in market. This latter provision has an exception for legitimate 
public policy reasons, but also a prohibition to exercise the exception if that is arbitrarily discriminating or 
unjustifiable. Arge ntina is now negotiating a similar agreement with Chile, connecting another Mercosur market 
more closely to the Pacific Alliance; the agreement is poised to have a similar intent as the Chile -Uruguay 
agreement.     
 
 
 
 31 
 
 Table 3 – Digital Trade and Ecommerce  Rules in Selected Trade Agreements, Selected Highlights  
 
  
 
TPP  Uruguay - Chile FTA   
 
Australia -Singapore 
FTA   
 
EU-Canada FTA  
Data Privacy   
Each party needs to 
adopt non -
discriminatory practices 
in protecting users of 
ecommerce from 
personal information 
protection violations in 
its jurisdiction.  
Each Party should 
publish information on 
the personal 
information protections 
it provides to users of 
electronic commerce, 
including how: 
individuals can pursue 
remedies; and business 
can comply with 
requirements.  Parties 
are to promote 
compatibility among 
each other’s persona 
data regimes.  
 
  
Each party needs to 
adopt non -
discriminatory 
practices in protecting 
users of ecommerce 
from personal 
information protection 
violations in its 
jurisdiction.  
Each Party should 
publish information on 
the personal 
information  
Protections it provides 
to users of electronic 
commerce, including 
how individuals can 
pursue remedies; and 
business can comply 
with requirements. 
Parties are to promote 
compatibility among 
each other’ s persona 
data regimes.  
  
Parties are to take such 
measures as it considers 
appropriate and 
necessary to protect the 
personal data of users of 
electronic commerce.   
Each Party should adopt 
or maintain laws, 
regulations or 
administrative measures 
for the p rotection of 
personal information of 
users engaged in 
electronic commerce 
and, when doing so, shall 
take into due 
consideration 
international standards of 
data protection of 
relevant international 
organizations of which 
both parties are a 
member.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transfer of 
data   
Parties are to allow the 
cross -border transfer of 
information by  
electronic means, 
including personal 
information, when this 
activity is for the  
conduct of the business 
of a company, Parties 
can be inconsistent with 
this rule to   
achieve a legitimate 
public policy  
objective, provided that 
the measure:  
(a) is not applied in a 
manner which would 
constitute a means of 
arbitrary or 
unjustifiable 
discrimination or a  
Parties are to allow the 
cross -border transfer 
of information by  
electronic means, 
including personal 
information, when this 
activity is for the  
conduct of the 
business of a 
comp any, Parties can 
be inconsistent with 
this rule to   
achieve a legitimate 
public policy  
objective, provided 
that the measure:  
is not applied in a 
manner which would 
constitute a means of 
arbitrary or 
unjustifiable   32 
 
 disguised restriction on 
trade; and (b) does not 
impose restrictions on 
transfers of information 
greater than are 
required to achieve the 
objective.  
 discrimination or a 
disguised restriction.  
 
 
 
 
Forced 
localization 
of servers   
Parties are not allowed 
to require companies to 
use or locate computing 
facilities in their 
respective territory as a 
condition for 
conducting business in 
that territory. Parties 
can be inconsistent with 
this rule is  not applied 
in a manner which 
would constitute a 
means of  
arbitrary or 
unjustifiable 
discrimination or a 
disguised restriction on 
trade; and does not 
impose restrictions on 
the use or location of 
computing facilities 
greater than are 
required to achieve t he 
objective.  
  
Parties are not allowed 
to require companies 
to use or locate 
computing facilities in 
their respective 
territory as a condition 
for conducting 
business in that 
territory. Parties can 
be inconsistent with 
this rule is not applied 
in a manner  which 
would constitute a 
means of  
arbitrary or 
unjustifiable 
discrimination or a 
disguised restriction 
on trade.    
 
Customs 
duties on 
digital 
products   
Customs duties on 
electronic transmissions 
prohibited. Taxes 
consistent with 
agreement are allowed   
Customs duties on 
electronic 
transmissions 
prohibited. Taxes 
consistent with 
agreement are allowed.    
Customs duties on 
electronic transmissions 
prohibited. Taxes 
consistent with 
agreement are allowed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Copyright rules and 
enforcement reflect 
those of in U.S. law. 
ISPs cannot be required 
to monitor their 
systems for 
infringement of 
copyright.  
 
Parties are to ensure 
that legal remedies are  
available for right 
holders to address such  
Omitted copyr ight 
clauses similar to TPP 
chapter due to the 
countries’ differing 
regimes.   
Each party will provide 
(a) legal incentives for 
service providers to 
cooperate with copyright  
owners in deterring the  
unauthorized storage and 
transmission of  
copyrighted materials; 
and (b) limitations in its 
law regarding the scope 
of remedies available 
against service providers 
for copyright  
Parties provide 
limitations or exceptions 
in its law regarding the 
liability of service 
providers, when acting 
as intermediaries, for 
infringements of 
copyright or related 
rights that take place on 
or through 
communication 
networks, in relation to 
the provision or use of 
their services.  33 
 
 Copyright 
and Liability  
 copyright infringement 
and shall  
establish or maintain 
appropriate safe 
harbors in respect of 
online services that  
are Internet Service 
Providers. This 
framework of legal 
remedies and safe  
harbors shall include:  
(a) legal incentive for 
Internet Service 
Providers to cooperate 
with 
copyrigh t owners to 
deter the unauthorized 
storage and  
transmission of 
copyrighted materials 
or, in the alternative, to 
take other action to 
deter the unauthorized 
storage and 
transmission of  
copyrighted materials; 
and 
(b) limitations in its law 
that have the effe ct of 
precluding monetary  
relief against Internet 
Service Providers for 
copyright  
infringements that they 
do not control, initiate 
or direct, and that  
take place through 
systems or networks 
controlled or operated 
by them or on their 
behalf.  
 infringements that they 
do not control, initiate  
or direct, and that take 
place through systems or 
networks controlled or  
operated b y them or on 
their behalf, as set forth 
in this Article   
Parties may establish 
appropriate procedures 
for effective notifications 
of claimed infringement, 
and effective counter -
notifications by those 
whose material is 
remov ed or disabled 
through mistake or 
misidentification.  
 
Parties will engage in 
dialogue on liability of 
intermediary service 
suppliers with respect to 
the transmission, or the 
storage of information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer 
protection   
Parties need to maintain 
consumer protection 
laws to proscribe 
fraudulent and 
deceptive commercial 
activities.  
 
Parties need to adopt 
non-discriminatory 
practices in protecting 
users of electronic 
commerce from 
personal information  
Parties need to 
maintain consumer 
protection laws to 
proscribe fraudulent 
and deceptive 
commercial activities.  
 
Parties need to adopt 
non-discriminatory 
practices in protecting 
users of electronic 
commerce from 
personal information  
Parties will, in a manner 
considered appropriate 
by each of them, provide 
protection for consumers 
using electronic 
commerce that is at least 
equivalent to that 
provided for consumers 
of other forms of 
commerce under their 
respective domestic 
laws.   
Parties will engage in 
dialogue on the 
protection of personal 
information and the 
protection of consumers 
and businesses from 
fraudulent and deceptive 
commercial practices in 
the sphere of electronic 
commerce.  34 
 
 protection violations 
occurring within its 
jurisd iction.  
 protection vi olations 
occurring within its 
jurisdiction.  
 
 
Non-
discriminato
ry treatment 
of digital 
products   
Parties cannot provide 
less favorable treatment 
to digital products 
created, produced, 
published, contracted 
for, commissioned or 
first made available on 
commercial terms in 
the territory of another 
party.  
    
 
 
Cost-Savings from Integrating Digital Markets  
 
Imagine for a moment what might have happened with Facebook, Google, or Netflix if every state in 
the United States had separate interconnection points, different payment networks, limits on inter -state 
data flows, distinct mobile spectra, or widely different liability, copyright, and privacy laws. Would 
these companies have attained the scale they did in the early stages of their growth, had they had to 
deal with different state regulations and infrastructu res? Unlikely not.  
 
Digital regulations also need to interoperate so companies selling in one country can also sell in others, 
without having to apply entirely new IP, consumer protection, legal liability, data privacy, tax, and 
other rules. Conceptually,  common regional digital regulatory and policy frameworks that facilitate 
doing digital business and that do not saddle companies with excessive compliance can fuel ecommerce 
within the region and with the rest of the world; enable scale economies that are  the lifeblood of many 
digital companies and that help consumers access services at low cost; and help especially small 
businesses and startups that usually lack resources to navigate or adapt operation to complex 
frameworks between different countries.  
 
Common policy frameworks are also important for incentivizing investment in start -ups – investors are 
much more enthusiastic about early -stage investments knowing their investees can grow unfettered 
across the regional market.  
 
Various simulations indicat e that regional digital integration in rules and infrastructures could yield 
significant returns. For example:   
 
● The implementation of a digital agenda and strategy, including harmonization of cybersecurity, 
data security and privacy laws across the region and creating a single digital payment platform, 
could add $1 trillion to ASEAN GDP over the next 10 years,60 providing a 40 percent boost the 
region’s output.  
 35 
 
 ● The Asia -Pacific region, where countries have different mobile spectra, could unlock up to  $1 
trillion in GDP growth by 2020 through the harmonized adoption of the 700 MHz spectrum 
band for mobile services.61   
 
● In Latin America, regional Internet Exchange Points (IXPs), facilities where all Internet players 
can interconnect directly to each other, could reduce internet traffic transit costs by as much as 
33 percent.62 IXPs have played a key role in the development of advanced Internet ecosystems 
in North America, Europe and Asia, improving quality of service and reducing transmission 
costs.63  
 
Yet most regions remain fragmented by national regulations and infrastructures that disincentivize 
digital companies and online sellers from regionalizing. Europe is a case in point. The European single 
market is not yet a single digital market – counties  have until now had their own licensing, copyright, 
and many other regulations. Cross -border ecommerce is thus artificially stunted: 46 percent of 
European retailers and 48 percent of omnichannel retailers sell mostly domestically, getting less than 
10 per cent of their sale revenue from other EU markets.64  
 
A key reason for this relative concentration of sales in domestic markets is European countries’ 
different payment systems, consumer protection laws and their enforcement, and value added taxes, as 
well as limited choice and markups on cross -border logistics.65 In fact, 45 percent of European 
companies considering selling digital services online to individuals see differences in copyright 
restrictions preventing them from selling abroad.66 The European Comm ission estimates that if the 
same rules for ecommerce were applied in all EU Member States, it is estimated that 57 percent of 
European companies would either start or increase their online sales to other EU economies.67 
Common consumer protection and other  Internet laws could save EU consumers €11.7 billion each 
year in online shopping, with the gains stemming from access to all goods and services sold online 
across the EU region.68   
 
Currently devising rules for digital economy, Mercosur countries can pre -empt the regulatory 
fragmentation marking Europe, and instead pursue regional digital market integration for regional 
companies to easily expand and scale across the region. Positively, there is discussion about 
Mercosur’s reviving the Ecommerce Working Gr oup. More is needed however, and here Mercosur can 
learn from approaches taken by other integration groupings (box 5).  
 
 
 
Box 5 – Digital Integration: Experiences from around the World  
  
Many regional integration groupings have progressed on digital integration, in ways that can be 
instructive also to Mercosur companies.  Some example include:  
 
● The Pacific Alliance composed of Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru has in place a cooperation 
agreement on ecommerce covering transactions of goods, services, di gital products. The agreement 
promotes interoperability among the regional economies’ regulatory frameworks and promotion of 
SMEs in ecommerce. In 2016, the group adopted a Digital Agenda, pledging to work in 2017 toward 
regional digital market, regional c ybersecurity, and public -private dialogues on the digital economy. The 
Alliance countries have also joined forces recently as a bloc to negotiate a trade agreement with 36 
 
 Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Singapore, updating members’ work especially on digi tal trade, 
small and medium -size enterprises,  issues related to women’ inclusion in trade.  
 
● European Union’s Digital Single Market.  In May 2015, the European Commission unveiled its plan to 
create a Digital Single Market aimed to tear down national regulat ory silos by the end of 2016 through 
(1) improved access for consumers and businesses to digital goods and services across Europe; (2) a 
level playing field for digital networks and innovative services to flourish; (3) maximized the growth 
potential of the  digital economy. The EU has also enabled online content portability, allowing EU 
citizens to access online subscription services while traveling within the EU – thereby ending the so -
called “geo -blocking” tactics.  
 
● ASEAN ICT Master Plan.  The ASEAN ICT Ma sterplan 2020 focuses on fueling digital transformation 
of traditional industries and building a single integrated market for digital economy.69 It follows a 
Masterplan 2015 that was more about digital infrastructures and human capital for digital industrie s. 
ASEAN legislation has especially focused on electronic transactions, cybercrime, consumer protection, 
content regulation, data protection and privacy, domain names, and dispute resolution.  
 
● APEC’s Electronic Commerce Steering Group (ECSG).  APEC’s ECSG promotes the development 
and use of e -commerce though legal, regulatory, and policy environments in the APEC region that are 
predictable, transparent, and consistent. The ECSG also explores how ICTs can drive economic growth 
and social develop ment, and has guided numerous capacity -building projects promoting the 
development and use of ecommerce and ICTs in the APEC region.  
 
● APEC’s Paperless Trading Subgroup  develops projects on the use of paperless trading in B2B and 
B2C transactions and promotes the use of electronic documents in international trade. APEC is also 
implementing APEC’s Strategies and Actions toward a Cross -Border Paperless Trading Environment to 
enable the electronic transmission of trade -related information across the region by 2020.  
 
● The APEC Data Privacy Pathfinder and Subgroup. In 2007, APEC ministers endorsed the APEC 
Data Privacy Pathfinder initiative aimed to achieve cross -border flow of  personal information within the 
Asia-Pacific region. APEC also has in place a Data Privacy Subgroup that helps identify best practices 
and build member economies’ capacity for data protection and promote comment data privacy 
approaches across the APEC reg ion, and oversee the CBPR’s functioning. In August 2017, ECSG’s 
Data Privacy Subgroup met with the European Commission to discuss interoperability on data protection 
and transfer between the CBPR and GDPR.   
 
 
Some of the lessons from the efforts in other r egions that can be useful for Mercosur members to 
consider include:  
 
● Digital transformation as a cornerstone of digital trade.  Pacific Alliance and Asian economies 
alike have stressed the importance of building ICT infrastructures and capabilities in the e conomy, 
and inducing digitization in traditional industries, as precursors  to thriving digital trade.   
 
● Public -private collaboration and dialogue.  Pacific Alliance and Asian integration schemes are in 
many ways public -private partnerships. The private sec tor is actively included in the Pacific 
Alliance’s work, and plays a long -standing and institutionalized role in APEC and ASEAN, with 
governments paying close attention to the recommendation of the private sector. This only makes 
sense: the private sector has a front -row seat to the opportunities and challenges to digital trade, and 37 
 
 often has actionable ideas to solve them. Public and private sectors can also work together to 
finance the buildout of the digital economy.  
 
● Attention to inclusive trade: SMEs, women, rural companies.  There are in most economies 
gaping disparities in digitization and ecommerce participation between urban and rural companies, 
small and large companies, young and old people, and men and women. Ironing out these 
disparities both pro vides legitimacy for the integration effort, and lifts all boats: more companies 
prosper, and more people can use the online economy to shop, save, and be informed. Pacific 
Alliance has brought the SME and gender dimensions to the dialogue on the future of  digital 
economy and trade.  
 
● Negotiation as bloc.  Mercosur has long sought to negotiate as a bloc with third parties, such as the 
EU. A major challenge has been incomplete regional integration and internal differences in visions 
and interests. The Pacific Alliance is providing a promising example on how a group of countries 
can come together to upgrade trade commitments in key areas of the digital economy.      
 
Summary  
 
Empirical evidence shows that complicated, uncertain, or stringent digital regulations, such as stringent 
data privacy regimes, limits o n data transfer, legal liability on Internet companies for user content on 
their sites, and high taxes on the sale of digital goods and services, are all found to limit the growth of 
the online economy, reduce investment in Internet start -ups, lower the ra te of technology adoption, and 
hold economic growth back from what it could be under a smart regulations that provide Internet 
companies with safe harbor from liability.  
 
Research also concurs that creating coherent regional digital markets is essential f or regional digital 
companies and SMEs that sell goods and services to scale, export, and create new jobs – which in turn 
is key for them to compete globally. The next section explores how the current regulatory state of play 
in the region affects Mercosur  companies – and what companies could do if regulations were optimized 
in domestic and regional markets.  
 
 
  38 
 
 IV. Digital Regulatory Priorities and Challenges to Companies in the Mercosur Region  
 
As the regional regulatory framework for digital transactions an d trade unfolds, what are the priorities 
of companies in the Mercosur region? In particular, how high on their list are regulatory issues as 
opposed to such issues such as access to finance or skills development for online sales? And what are 
the regulator y priorities as highlighted by companies of different sizes and types in the different 
countries?  
 
The simplest way to answer these questions is to ask companies. Here, we leverage the 823 -firm survey 
discussed above. Asked to score elements of the enabli ng environment for ecommerce from 1 (very 
poor, significant barriers to ecommerce) to 10 (excellent, facilitates ecommerce), small Mercosur 
companies report access to finance, overall regulatory environment, a digital and ecommerce 
regulations as most chal lenging to their online activity in their domestic markets. Companies with 0 -50 
employees score these factors 6 or less, out of 10, and mid -size companies give a score between 6 and 
7 out of 10 (figure 17). Mid -size and large companies tend to highlight bu siness regulations and digital 
and ecommerce regulations as most challenging. There is no appreciable difference between companies 
in product and service sectors.  
 
Figure 17 – Mercosur Companies’ Scoring of Components of the Enabling Environment for 
Their Domestic Ecommerce Sales (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by Company Size  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
When asked about the quality of the enabling environment for cross -border sales in the Mercosur 
region, the priorities were quite similar: companies highlighted trade finance, regulatory environment, 
ecommerce -related logistics (which includes logistics, c ustoms procedures, and market access), and 
ecommerce and digital regulations of their Mercosur markets as most challenging (figure 18). Of 
39 
 
 course, these are merely the largest challenges – all areas form skills development to online payments 
appear to requ ire attention, as none receives a rating higher than 7 by small and mid -size companies.  
 
 
Figure 18 – Mercosur Companies’ Scoring of Components of the Enabling Environment for 
Their Cross -Border Ecommerce Sales within Mercosur (1= very poor; 10 = excellen t), by 
Company Size  
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
Figures 19 and 20 analyze the data at country level, mapping out the ranking by small and large 
companies, respectively. Uruguayan small business app ear to struggle most with access to finance and 
trade finance, while Brazilian small companies wrestle with regulatory challenges and logistics.  For 
large Paraguayan companies, connectivity and online payments with Mercosur appear as challenges.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 Figure 19 – Small Mercosur Companies’ Scoring of Components of the Enabling Environment 
for Their Cross -Border Ecommerce Sales within Mercosur (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by 
Country  
 
 
Figure 20 – Large Mercosur Companies’ Scoring of Components of the Enabling Environment 
for Their Ecommerce Sales within Mercosur (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by Country  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
41 
 
 To be sure, there are significant differences among diff erent types of companies within each size 
categories. Aggregating the variables in figure 19 into one single average score shows that companies 
that export, sell online, and are fast -growing all tend to report fewer challenges to online sales in each 
size category and country than do companies that do not export, sell offline, and grow slowly. There 
does not appear to be a major differences between companies that sell goods versus those that sell 
services, or companies that are farther from major cities ver sus companies in such cities as Buenos 
Aires, Rio de Janeiro, or Montevideo (figure 21).   
 
Figure 21 – Mercosur Companies’ Average Score for the Enabling Environment for Their 
Domestic and Cross -Border Ecommerce Sales within Mercosur (1= very poor; 10 = e xcellent), by 
Firm Type and Size  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
Mercosur economies’ ecommerce challenges and readiness levels are quite similar to those of countries 
at similar levels of development. Using the single aggregate score for each country for countries for 
which I have the same data and correlating it with d evelopment levels shows that Uruguay 
underperforms vis -a-vis countries at similar levels of development, while Paraguay and Brazil 
outperform (figure 22).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
 Figure 22 – Correlation of Ecommerce Development Index and GDP Per Capita, Selected 
Economies  
 
 
 
Source: Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Survey and Index.”  
 
 
Which Digital Regulations Are Most Difficult for Companies?  
 
Of the specific regulations, about one -half of firms are quite unhappy or very unhappy with it – small 
comp anies highlight especially taxes on online transactions, IP protections, OTT regulations, and data 
privacy regulations as concerns (figure 23). These perceptions may reflect the current regulatory 
uncertainties or real -life impacts experienced by the compa nies. Large companies meanwhile worry 
about OTT, data localization, and payment regulations.  
 
Digital regulations of course also have a regional dimension, given the interest of digital companies 
regionalize and for many SMEs to sell more of their service s and goods online to other Mercosur 
markets. At a minimum, businesses tend to highlight the importance of interoperable regulations and 
free flow of data among Mercosur partners.  
 
Small companies mention copyright laws, OTT regulations, and taxes on onli ne sellers as the most 
challenging areas (figure 24).  Large companies tend to be more concerned with Internet intermediary 
liability rules, IP, taxes, and data localization issues. In short, companies large and small and most 
concerned about the region’s hot-button issues outline above. These are also vexing for companies in 
other Latin American countries. In another survey, I found that a third of online sellers in Latin 
America view uncertain legal liability rules as “very significant” obstacles to their  foreign trade, while 
a quarter is negatively impacted by foreign data localization and data privacy rules.70  
 
43 
 
 These findings also indicate that when fashioning national and regional digital regulations, Mercosur 
governments need to bear in mind that their  regulatory choices impact not only large global platforms 
or tech companies. Rather, adopted regulations will be especially important for the future of small 
businesses and startups in the region. They can be even more important for these players, in that  small 
companies tend to lack the resources needed to navigate and adapt operations to complex and differing 
national frameworks. The rules set today are key to the future of SMEs that are looking to ecommerce 
and online sales as a means to grow, scale, an d fully realize their entrepreneurial potential.   
 
 
Figure 23 – Mercosur Online Buyer and Seller Companies’ Scoring Digital Regulations for Their 
Domestic Ecommerce Sales (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by Company Size  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey  of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
 
 Figure 24 – Mercosur Online Buyer and Seller Companies’ Scoring Digital Regulations for Their 
Cross -Border Ecommerce Sales within Mercosur (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by Company 
Size  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
These results are echoed by an analysis of Mercosur economies’ performance vis -à-vis their peers at 
the same level of development in the political and regulatory environme nt for information and 
communications industries. In a survey run by the World Economic Forum, Mercosur economies, just 
like most other LAC economies, underperform their peer economies – Argentina and Paraguay by a 
wide margin (figure 25).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 Figure 25 – Political and Regulatory Environment Surrounding Information and 
Communications Technologies in 2015 (1 = low; 7 = high), Selected Economies  
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Author on the basis of World Bank’s World Development Indicators and World Economic Forum ’s Networked 
Readiness Index.  
 
 
The main markets in which especially Paraguayan and Uruguayan companies struggle with real or 
perceived regulatory issues are their most common export markets Argentina and Brazil, followed by 
the United States – which to mo st companies is still an aspirational market (table 4). Some 29 percent 
of Argentine companies wrestle most with Brazilian regulations and 28 percent of Brazilian companies 
report challenges with Argentine regulations, followed in both cases by the perceiv ed regulatory 
complexity in the U.S. and Chinese markets.  
 
 
Table 4 – Markets in Which Mercosur Companies Perceive Greatest Regulatory Challenges  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
 
46 
 
 Removing the top -3 regulatory barriers would result in significant trade, job, and production gains in 
every country. If their top -3 constraints to doing ecommerce were removed, Mercosur companies 
would score annual revenue gains of 34 percent in their dom estic markets and 35 percent in 
international markets (figure 26). Moreover, the majority of companies in every country report that 
they would expand their sales in Mercosur region in particular if these regulatory barriers were 
removed (table 5).  
 
Figure  26 - Mercosur Companies’ Perceived Revenue, Export, Production, and Employment 
Growth if Regulatory Challenges to Cross -Border Ecommerce Were Removed  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
Table 5 – Market s in Which Mercosur Companies Would Increase Sales if Challenges to Cross -
Border Ecommerce Were Removed  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
Logistics Challenges  
 
For companies in goods sectors, there are  also several challenges in moving goods in the Mercosur 
market. The regional economies trail global average ratings for logistics quality and timeliness of 
47 
 
 delivery (figure 27). With the exception of El Salvador and Mexico, all Latin American countries ar e at 
best at a par with countries of similar levels of development in terms of quality of logistics services.  
 
 
Figure 27 – Competence and Quality of Logistics Services, 2014 (1 = low; 5 = high)  
 
 
 
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.  
 
 
Other data show that in Mercosur and Latin America, it also takes over twice as long to ship intra -
regionally in Latin America as it takes to ship among advanced economies. The Argentine Chamber of 
Electronic Commerce found that even domestic ecommerce del iveries typically required at least a week 
to be delivered; a third took more than two weeks. These types of delays add to the cost at the point of 
sale and to overall unpredictability, which can become cost -prohibitive for small shipments. Survey 
data sug gest that Mercosur firms’ domestic logistics challenges center on rural last mile delivery and 
delivery costs as well as quality of postal services, in particular (figure 28).  
 
In cross -border trade within Mercosur, customs procedures and cost of logistic s top small businesses 
list, with 50 percent finding the challenging, while large companies are concerned about costs of 
delivery, customs procedures, and functioning of single windows (figure 29). These findings are 
echoed in another survey I ran for Lati n American companies that already sell and buy goods and 
services to and from foreign markets: in it over 50 percent find market access barriers as a “very 
significant” obstacle, while over 40 percent find the same for poor logistics in other markets and 3 2 
percent for compliance with customs procedures.71 Consumers are not blind to the problem either. For 
example, though some 40 percent of Brazilian shoppers buy online from abroad at least once a year, 
they report strong hesitations related to shipping cost s and ability to return items purchased.72  
 
 
 
48 
 
 Figure 28 – Mercosur Companies’ Scoring Customs Procedures and Logistics for Their Domestic 
Ecommerce Sales (1 = very poor; 10 = excellent), by Company Size  
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
Figure 29 – Companies’ Scoring Customs Procedures and Logistics for Their Domestic 
Ecommerce Sales in the Mercosur Region (1= very poor; 10 = excellent), by Company Size  
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
49 
 
  
Summary  
 
In growing their online sales, particularly small companies in the Mercosur region struggle with access 
to finance and trade finance, logistics and customs procedures and digital regulations, to sell more 
online, including cross -border. When asked about re gulatory challenges to their online sales, small 
businesses are most concerned about IP protections, OTT rules, copyright rules, taxes, and legal 
liability rules, while for large companies, taxes, OTT rules, and liability are especially important. In 
cross -border trade within Mercosur, customs procedures and cost of logistics top small businesses list, 
with 50 percent finding the challenging, while large companies are concerned about costs of delivery, 
customs procedures, and functioning of single windows. Companies are also concerned about IP and 
copyright regimes, data localization, issues, interoperability of their respective countries’ digital 
regulations with those of other Mercosur markets.  
 
Regulations are no minor matter. Companies surveyed here est imate that improving digital regulations 
in the Mercosur region would enable them to increase their revenues and exports by almost 30 percent 
annually.  If their top -3 constraints to doing ecommerce were removed, Mercosur companies say they 
would score ann ual revenue gains of 34 percent in their domestic markets and 35 percent in 
international markets. The majority of companies in every country report that they would expand their 
sales in Mercosur region in particular if these regulatory barriers were remov ed. The next section puts 
forth proposals on ways to do just that,  
 
  50 
 
 V. Priorities for Mercosur Digital Trade and Regulations  
 
Ecommerce has changed the face of world trade and trade in the Mercosur. However, survey data and 
comparative indicators suggest t hat there are several challenges and uncertainties – regulatory, 
logistical, and so on – that Mercosur governments need to work out in order to create a vibrant regional 
digital market. Positively, Mercosur governments tend to appreciate that regulatory fr ameworks need to 
be upgraded to the digital era, and they need to interoperate with trading partners to enable online 
sellers and buyers transact without undue frictions and costs and grow. The following considerations 
can fuel digital trade and economy in  the region:73 
 
● Access to data from around the world is critical for companies’ competitiveness and customer 
service. Countries should not bar cross -border data transfers, force companies to localize 
servers on their soil or transfer technology, or mandate local presence for such critical tools of 
ecommerce as electronic payment services. This, research suggests, is conducive to more 
foreign investment, expanded trade, lower costs on local businesses. As such, Mercosur 
economies need to treat GDPR -type data privacy and transfer rules with  care. The 
implementation costs can be very high, especially for SMEs, and economic effects can be 
detrimental, including hurting job creation. The price to pay is heavy – when alternative 
regimes exist. Priority should be on  enforcing data protection regulations with the aim of 
improving security rather than limiting the use of data, and promote interoperable policy 
frameworks  (e.g., APEC Cross Border Privacy Rules) that enable firms to do business across 
borders.74 Also the Chile -Uruguay and TPP have blueprints of practical regulations that fuel 
regional digital business.  
 
● Create or modernize safe harbor rules that limit internet intermediaries’ liability from user -
generated content . Internet intermediaries such as ecommerce sites depend on user reviews of 
goods and services sold on such sites, and need to be protected from liability for such content. 
To encourage Internet intermediaries to serve local markets, Mercosur countries should create 
and modernize “safe har bors” that limit intermediary liability from user -generated content. 
Good templates already exist in the region, in the form of intermediary liability protections are 
already present in Chile’s Intellectual Property Law and Brazil’s Marco Civil da Internet .  
 
● Ensure copyright laws are b alanced  to protect rightsowners and fuel innovation . As products 
and services digitize, and as millions of microenterprises and consumers can create or copy 
content, designs, and 3D printed products, IP is becoming harder to protect. Mercosur countries 
need to balance the protection of trademarks and copyrights with the development of new 
Internet services and platforms. For example, copyright laws  that include limitations and 
exceptions and fair use of protected works, the do ctrine that permits limited use of copyrighted 
material without a permission from the rights holders, help fuel innovation and creation of new 
products and services such as in cloud computing, machine learning, and data mining, and 
many other fields. There  is a need for safe harbors for intermediaries in the area of copyright , so 
that intermediaries are not liable for potential infringements by their users.    
 
● Limit over -regulation of online services and applications of legacy infrastructure regulations 
to online services , such as extending telecommunications or broadcasting regulation to 
messaging applications or streaming platforms.  One-size-fits-all telecom licensing frameworks 
– based on the flawed notion that telecom services and internet applications are similarly sold 51 
 
 and offered and substitutes not complements – should not be forced upon Internet applications 
or services. “Innovation without permission” -policy frameworks have enabled the development 
of the most robust startups ecosystems.  
 
● Avoid excessive taxes on the key input for companies and consumers – digital and digitally 
sold goods and services.  Excessive taxation of technologies will have a detrimental impact on 
digitization growth and ultimately on economic development. If the policy obj ective is to 
maximize adoption of digital access devices and digital and digitally sold goods and services, 
empirically low taxes drive adoption, which in turn results in large economic gains, which 
compensate for the foregone tax revenues. Tax policy shou ld as such balance short -term 
revenue generation and long -term support of innovation and economic growth. As a rule of 
thumb, taxation of digital activities should not be discriminatory vis -à-vis other industries.  
 
● Create balanced consumer protection laws.  Consumer trust in products and services sold  
online, delivery systems, online payments, and other online services is critical for digital 
economies to grow. At the same time, governments need to work with industry to ensure 
consumer protection laws d o not impose excessive compliance costs on online companies.   
 
It is essential that domestic reforms not be pursued in isolation: for Mercosur governments to create a 
vibrant space for digital trade and growing regional digital companies, domestic regulat ions need to 
interoperate with those of other Mercosur members . Regionally interoperable regulatory and policy 
frameworks in such areas as free circulation of digital goods and services, internet intermediary 
liability laws, privacy, consumer protection, O TT regulations, cybersecurity, taxation of digital 
companies, and others help lower the costs for companies to operate across the regional market, 
incentivize investment and startup formation, and fuel the expansion of digital networks and services. 
Fragme ntation in these regulations can unnecessarily hold Mercosur companies back from 
regionalizing, just like fragmentation in Europe is holding EU companies back. One good place to look 
for models is close by: the Chile -Uruguay FTA. This type of bold agreemen t in the region on common 
rules of the road will also be instrumental in talks with the EU.  
 
The region needs to work toward mutual recognition of online service providers  that operate in 
multiple markets, such as of online payment, online delivery service , data analysis, digital marketing, 
online lending, and ecommerce companies. Providers of these services can more quickly expand to 
service multiple countries in the presence of mutual recognition across countries of their business 
licenses, certificates, professional qualifications, and digital signatures, among other requirements.  
 
In addition to these immediate regulatory priorities, it is important the regional governments start 
considering  regional interoperability of online payments,  the critical cond uit for online trade. Online 
payments are highlighted by the interviewed companies as the emerging major policy issue. One of the 
main concern for consumers in cross -border purchases is that they cannot be certain that their payment 
is returned if they ret urn the item. Addressing payment policies for returned items is critical for the 
regional economies to fuel cross -border sales for Mercosur region’s online retailers. In general, solving 
payment challenges goes much beyond the portfolios of economy ministe rs, requiring coordination 
with central banks and finance ministries.  
 
 
 52 
 
 Customs Procedures and Logistics Services  
 
Mercosur companies surveyed here that sell goods online but deliver them physically cite as obstacles 
Latin America’s traditional barriers t o trade – market access, customs procedures, and logistics 
challenges. However, old solutions do not adequately further this new trade. The region’s customs 
agencies and regimes are not optimized for trade among small businesses and individuals – transactions 
where countless of small shipments are sent and/or received by parties with limited trade compliance 
capabilities and high fixed costs per shipment.  
 
● Simplified and digitized clearance process for shipments. Governments need to make better use  
of the established mechanisms to fuel trade, such as increase customs clearance times 24 hours 
per day, put in place electronic filing of customs documents via “single windows” for one -stop 
compliance; and enable the collection and remit of VAT and taxes for goods above the de minimis  
level from away from the border. Positively, Latin America’s Exporta Fácil program has 
simplified customs clearance for Latin American SMEs for shipments typically weighing less 
than 30 kilograms and with a value of less than  US$5,000. However, the program is only for 
postal systems and thus does not cover express shippers – and can in a sense be viewed as a 
subsidy for the posts.  
 
One further, ambitious solution for the region to remove the frictions of customs procedures is  to 
negotiate a regional trade agreement for low -value items. This would imply raising together the 
still low customs de minimis  levels – or the ceiling value below which goods pass duty -free. 
Increased de minimis  thresholds would also ease return shipment s, whose availability is critical 
for the competitiveness of companies in ecommerce.  
 
● Improve logistics quality and service . Logistics quality is a major concern for Mercosur 
companies engaged in online trade. Ecommerce operations often require fast and sophisticated 
warehousing and shipping operations that are beyond the capabilities of smaller businesses. 
While third -party log istics (3PL) companies have been investing aggressively in the region, 
policy issues such as the persistence of fiscal warehouses in Peru, Brazil, and other LAC 
economies, slows import processes. Prohibitions, such as in Mexico, for foreign investors to 
operate a dedicated fleet hampers efficiency and competition.   
 
● Trusted eTrader program to facilitate and secure trade . Trusted Trader programs that fast -
track trade through customs are still tailored to the patterns of traditional trade – large, regular 
trade volumes shipped by large companies – rather than accommodating small enterprises and 
consumers, whose trade is more sporadic and who are ill -equipped to comply with complex 
trade rules and the high costs of Trusted Trader programs. Customs worldwide me anwhile are 
growing uneasy with the proliferation of small parcels crossing borders. Governments are thus 
torn between two seemingly opposing objectives, to facilitate small business trade and secure 
trade. A “Trusted eTrader” program could overcome this t ension, and both facilitating  and 
securing trade. Truster eTrader program would consist of two elements. 75 
 
o The first element is incentivizing SMEs’ trade compliance through simplified and 
digitized trade compliance and ability for SMEs that consistently comply for a period of 
18 months to become Trusted eTraders whose shipments are fast -tracked through 
customs.   53 
 
  
o The second element is enabling customs to use anonymized Big Data held by major 
online platforms to get comfortable with the patterns of new trade and enhance risk -
targeting in trade , something that is considered by some companies and governments in 
South America . The effort could be tailored after the Air Cargo Advanced Screening 
program that the United States piloted a few years ago with major shippers such as 
FedEx, DHL, and UPS, for providing U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to 
gain air cargo -related data prior to loading an aircraft at a foreign port.  
 
Some Mercosur economies have expressed concerns about transshipment of illicit cargo 
through Paraguay. Efforts of this kind to fast -track trade should be coupled with data -driven 
risk-targetin g of illicit cargo.  Use of blockchain and machine learning in customs can be 
seminal in balancing the aims of product traceability, customs security, revenue collection, and 
trade facilitation.  
 
Of course, there are many further areas to address to creatin g a vibrant digital market. Two further key 
priorities is skills and finance.  
 
Help SMEs  and also Larger Companies  Develop Digital Skills  
 
To engage in digital trade, businesses need to master two things: how to do digital business, such as 
running geo -targeted ads and analyzing customer data; and how to export, such as dealing with foreign 
product standards and trading finance providers. In other words, companies with an online store do not 
automatically become exporters: many other things have to go right , including their own capabilities to 
operate and attract customers in the cyberspace and meet regulations in other markets. The challenge 
can be very steep for analog companies used to operating offline and in the domestic market, however 
competitive thei r products and services might be. And clearly online sellers face challenges to engage 
in export – while over one half of small online sellers in Mercosur export, almost one half still does 
not. 
 
Numerous developing countries have set up export promotion a gencies in the past two decades, and 
export promotion has become a key pillar of every country’s trade toolkit. Recently, export promotion 
agencies have in several countries introduced programs to help companies export online. Brazil’s Apex 
has created tra ining programs for SMEs to use ecommerce to export; Chilean export promotion agency 
ProChile has comprehensive “Digital Exports” seminars on ecommerce, digital marketing, international 
promotional campaigns, and others;76 and Mexico’s export promotion agency Proméxico has organized 
seminars and training for Mexican SMEs, created a B2B platform for Mexican SMEs selling to 
overseas markets, and offers consulting services for SMEs to develop digital marketing strategy, 
develo pment of one stores and online payments systems, and social media engagement.77 Costa Rica’s 
export promotion agency Procomer brings together for B2C and B2B merchants a simplified, one -stop 
access to three global platforms – I.Gourmet, Alibaba y Amazon.78 
 
Some of these efforts have been carried out with private sector entities, given that export promotion 
agencies seldom have the requisite expertise for technical issues in cross -border ecommerce, such as 
digital advertisement or user engagement in foreign m arkets. For example, eBay is working with the 54 
 
 International Trade Center’s e -Solutions program, offering ITC access to eBay’s network of fulfilment 
centers in least developed countries.  
 
To truly scale these models and bring the private sector to drive ecommerce development, public and 
private sectors need to pool not only expertise but also funding. One innovative way to do that is to use 
social impact bonds, whereby private foundations, social impact investors, and/or ecommerce 
platforms make the initial investment in training programs , and get compensated at a premium by the 
government and public development agencies if the program meets certain per -established performance 
indicators, su ch as target number of ecommerce -related jobs created or amount of new online exports.79  
 
Social impact bonds have been used to curing malaria and saving rhinos – and they lend themselves 
extremely well for ecommerce development, given the keen interest of  impact funds for social returns 
such as job -creation and by ecommerce platforms in cultivating merchants. This model incentivizes 
investors and project implementing entities to deliver results desired by the public sector. Upon success 
and metric hit, gov ernments secure both trade gains, economic and social returns. Upon failure, they 
incur no cost: this is “risk -free development.” Resting on rigorous measurement of results, this model 
would by default create transparency in project evaluation.  
 
Not only is it important to build SMEs’ capacity for digital trade. It is just as important to  build 
awareness of the benefits of digitization and digital trade with the top management and board members 
of larger and older, traditionally analog companies. These lea ders are often of a generation that is not 
fully sensitized to the potential gains digitization would have on their companies, or how their 
companies could take advantage of digital trade. The efficiency gains imparted by digital 
transformation in large co mpanies can be transformative for the region – and thus training and 
education needs to go beyond SMEs.  
 
Create Public -Private Partnerships for Expanded SME Finance  
 
A major constraint reported by Mercosur SMEs to their ecommerce sales domestically and a cross 
borders is finance – including early -stage capital, working capital, and trade finance. The smaller the 
company, the worse the challenge.  
 
● One solution to the credit crunch experiences by Mercosur region small online sellers requires 
not funding: it  is about ensuring digital regulations – particularly data transfer, liability, and 
copyright regimes – incentivize the operation and regional expansion of  startups.  If they do, 
investors will be much more interested in investing in regional digital busine sses.  
 
● Offer government guarantees on online microloans to online sellers . Government entities, 
multilateral development banks, and export credit agencies like Export -Import banks have 
traditionally provided loan guarantees to bank loans issued to small businesses or exporters. 
Now the rise of FinTech and online lenders such as Mercado Crédito of Mercado Libre, which 
can provide microloans now of interest to banks at a fraction of the time it takes for banks, is 
opening new opportunities for government agencies to alleviate online sellers credit constraint, 
and do so at the pace of business. For example, government agencies can now partner with 
online lenders to guarantee diversified pools of microloans to small online merchants. This 
approach would help the public agencies diversify their risk and, by leveraging online lenders’ 
nontraditional but typically effective underwriting, speed up and scale their own arcane 55 
 
 underwriting. The result: more microloans to successful online merchants at a lower cost of 
capital, likely in new markets online lenders feared to venture into.  
 
● Ensur e growth capital for born global companies . Traditionally, companies would expand 
international markets only after scaling and maturing in their domestic market. Today, 
digitization and the Internet are enabling companies to be “born global” and the abilit y to be 
active global markets earlier in their life cycles than ever before. These companies typically  
want to move fast to  seize the demand they perceive in global markets – and because they 
rarely have the quantum of cash on hand needed to do that, let  alone access it from banks, they 
need long -term debt or equity financing from venture capital funds, angel investors, and other 
investors.80  
 
Export credit agencies can play a role in this as well – for example, Uruguay’s export 
promotion agency Uruguay X XI has a Proexport+ program that supports both new and existing 
exporters up to $40,000 in product development, market research, trade show participation, and 
so on.81 Canada’s Ex -Im Bank Export Development Canada has offered an Equity Program that 
targets born global companies and later -stage SMEs intent on growing through exports and 
often helps globalizing small businesses access venture capital funds. Without subsidizing 
exporters outright or engaging in the misguided practice of “picking winners,” devel oping 
country governments can do the same: lower investors’ per -deal search and transactions costs 
for promising globalizing companies, and possibly provide co -financing or risk mitigation 
instruments to incentivize investments in these companies.82 
 
Establ ish Digital Dialogue for Trade   
 
Mercosur governments are at a crucial juncture of establishing rules for the digital economy that will 
have far -reaching consequences for their trade, entrepreneurship, investment, and economic growth. In 
the process, they  will critically benefit from the views of the private sector that is in the front lines of 
the digital economy, as producers and users of digital goods and services, as well as from investors in 
digital businesses. Some positive efforts are already on the  way; it is now time to regionalize and 
institutionalize them. The region has a timely opportunity to establish a Digital Dialogue (Dialogo 
Digital) that brings together each quarter government officials with businesses to:  
 
● For governments to learn about leading digital applications and their benefits , both from the 
private sector and from rigorous academic research;  
 
● For public and private sectors to dialogue about regulatory frameworks  that optimize trade, 
investment, technology adoption, growth, and consumer rights the digital economy, based on 
data, research, and comparative experience from other regions, such as the Pacific Alliance or 
APEC;  
 
● For public sector to get feedback on regulatory proposals and  ideas; and.  
 
● For all participants to learn about data and findings  on the implementation costs and 
economic gains and losses imposed by regulations on firms of different sizes and consumers, 
including the poorer segments.   
 56 
 
 Taking a step further, the regio nal governments could draw on UK’s work in FinTech regulations and 
establish a regional regulatory “sandbox” where companies in the Mercosur region could introduce 
digital innovations to any one Mercosur market or all Mercosur markets without requiring ful l 
regulatory approvals, and regulators could proceed learn how the innovation is used in the marketplace 
and establish regulations where they may be beneficial.  This type of “learning by doing” takes 
guesswork and costly errors from the process of fashioni ng domestic and regional digital regulations.  
 
The dialogues should result in:  
 
● Concrete regulatory roadmaps  and implementation schedules;  
 
● Plan for metrics and analytics to  monitor of the impact of regulations  once they are in place, 
based on business and consumer surveys, case studies and interviews, and rigorous econometric 
analyses;  
 
● Metri cs and analytics to track SMEs’  digital trade and their skills for doing cross -border 
ecommerce;   
 
● An online platform to track the implementation regulations  and is available public ly, as in 
Chile’s Digital Chile Digital 2020 website that tracks the implementation of over 60 measures 
impacting the digital economy;  
 
● Rigorous, data -driven assessments of the interoperability of  domestic digital regulations  with 
Mercosur markets, so that digital companies and online sellers grow and scale in the broader 
intra-regional market.  
 
● Concrete plan to improve data and measurements of the digital economy , so as to help track 
policies, mo tivate policy improvements, and craft appropriate policies to facilitate digital trade. 
Innovative censuses and surveys can bolster official statistics, while public -private partnerships 
can leverage the rich real -time data that private sector has to asses s the state of the regional 
digital economy.  
 
 
  57 
 
 VI. Conclusion  
 
This report has explored the rise of ecommerce in Mercosur economies’ trade, described how Mercosur 
companies leverage the Internet in their operations and trade, and analyzed the priority regulatory and 
other challenges to ecommerce in the region. The dat a show that ecommerce has expanded in Mercosur 
countries domestic economies and also to an extent in the region’s trade, and benefited regional 
companies’ in terms of export sales, new customers, and higher revenues.  
 
The next frontier in the region’s dig ital journey is regional integration. Creating a more coherent 
regional digital market is essential for regional digital companies and SMEs that sell goods and 
services to scale, export, and create new jobs – which in turn is key for them to compete in Lat in 
America and internationally. Mercosur economies have yet to progress to such a place – an era where 
digital companies and online sellers are able to seamlessly operate across the regional market.  
 
Companies fac e regulatory uncertainties and somewhat divergent regulations and tax regimes in the 
four different markets, and sellers and buyers of products sold online encounter inefficient customs and 
complexities of trade compliance. Mercosur governments have in some cases differing visions on such 
regulati ons as data privacy and transfer, over the top rules regulating online services and audiovisual 
productions, and taxation of online sales.  
 
Against this backdrop, this report has provided a regulatory roadmap for Mercosur region’s 
policymakers and business  leaders to unlock regional digital economy and trade. The region’s 
governments have a golden opportunity to create such a platform of innovation, trade, and 
competitiveness. They also do not have to start from scratch, but can draw on the regulatory 
frame works fashioned in such recent trade agreements as the Chile -Uruguay FTA – which can be a 
beachhead for the Mercosur economies to integrate more closely with the Pacific Alliance and Asian 
markets. It is imperative to get rules right at home and abroad, fo r companies, consumers, and small 
businesses to continue translating the region’s great gains in digitization into trade and prosperity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 58 
 
 APPENDIX I – SURVEYED COMPANIES  
 
 
 
Figure I -1 – Surveyed Mercosur Companies, by Size  
 
 
 
Source: Author based on a survey of 823 Mercosur region firms in 1 -15 August 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
 APPENDIX II - GDPR VS. C BPR 
 
 
 APEC Privacy Framework (or CBPRs)  EU’s GDPR  
Purpose  To develop effective privacy protections that 
avoid barriers to information flows, and ensure 
continued trade, and economic growth in the 
APEC region.  To enable to free movement of personal data within 
the Union while protecting fundamental rights and 
freedoms of natural persons and in particular their 
right to the pro tection of personal data.  
Material 
scope  Applies to persons or organizations in the public 
and private sectors who control the collection, 
holding, processing, use, transfer or disclosure of 
personal information.  Applies to the processing of personal data  wholly or 
partly by automated means, within the scope of 
Union law.  
Territorial 
scope  Applies to the same extent that the laws of each 
member country apply.  Applies to processing that takes place in the Union 
or by a processor who has an establishment in  the 
Union within the context of activities in the Union or 
to processing activities that are related to the 
offering of goods and services to (or behavioral 
monitoring of) data subjects in the Union.  
Data 
controller  Personal information controller means a person or 
organization who controls the collection, holding, 
processing or use of personal information.  Controller means the natural or legal person, public 
authority, agency or other body which, alone or 
jointly with others, determines the purposes and 
means of the processing of personal data.  
Data 
processors  APEC Privacy Framework and CBPRs do not 
apply to processors, only controllers.  Processor means a natural or legal person, public 
authority, agency or other body which processes 
personal data on behalf of the controller.  
Publicly 
available 
information  The APEC Privacy Framework has limited 
application to publicly available information. 
Notice and choice requirements, in particular, 
often are superfluous where the information is 
already publicly a vailable, and the personal 
information controller does not collect the 
information directly from the individual 
concerned.  The processing of publicly available information 
may be permitted for certain archiving purposes in 
the public interest, scientific o r historical research 
purposes or statistical purposes, insofar as providing 
notice is likely to render impossible or seriously 
impair the achievement of the objectives of that 
processing.  
Permitted 
member 
country 
variations 
(derogations)  Economies implementing the framework at a 
domestic level may adopt suitable exceptions to 
scope that suit their particular domestic 
circumstances.  The framework is not intended to 
impede governmental activities authorized by law 
when taken to protect national securi ty, public 
safety, national sovereignty or other public policy.  Member States have discretion in a number of 
subject areas including: Supervisory Authority; 
Sanctions; Demonstrating Compliance; Data 
Protection Officers; Archiving and Research; Third 
Countr y Transfers; Sensitive personal data and 
exceptions; Criminal Convictions; Rights and 
Remedies; Processing of Children’s Personal Data 
by Online Services; Freedom of Expression in the 
Media; Processing of Data; Restrictions; Rules 
surrounding Churches and Religious Associations. 
Exceptions to general GDPR applicability also exist 
for national security, public safety, and police 
powers.  
Access and 
correction  Individuals should be able to obtain from the 
personal information controller confirmation of 
whether or not the personal information controller 
holds personal information about them, and have 
access to information held about them, challenge 
the accuracy of information relating to them, have 
the information rectified, completed, amended or The data subjec t has the right to obtain from the 
controller confirmation as to whether or not personal 
data concerning him or her are being processed, and 
to access to the personal data and information about 
the processing including: what categories of data are 
processe d, the recipients of the data, and rights to 
erasure and rectification of the personal data, the 60 
 
 deleted.  All of the above rights subject to a 
balancing of the burden or expense of compliance, 
legal or security reasons, the protection of 
commercial information, the protection of the 
privacy rights of persons other than the affected 
individual.  right to lodge a complaint with a DPA, the source of 
the data, whether the data was subject to automated 
profiling (and if so, meaningful information about 
the logic involved, as well as the significance and 
the envisaged consequences of such processing for 
the data subject).  
Collection 
limitation  The collection of personal information should be 
limited to information that is relevant to the 
purposes of collect ion and any such information 
should be obtained by lawful and fair means, and 
where appropriate, with notice to, or consent of, 
the individual concerned.  Personal data shall be collected for specified, 
explicit and legitimate purposes and not further 
proce ssed in a manner that is incompatible with 
those purposes; adequate, relevant and limited to 
what is necessary in relation to the purposes for 
which they are processed. The processing of publicly 
available information may be permitted for certain 
archiving  purposes in the public interest, scientific or 
historical research purposes or statistical purposes, 
insofar as providing notice is likely to render 
impossible or seriously impair the achievement of 
the objectives of that processing.  
Notice  Personal information controllers should provide 
clear and easily accessible statements about their 
practices and policies with respect to personal 
information. All reasonably practicable steps shall 
be taken to ensure that such notice is provided 
either before or a t the time of collection of 
personal information. Otherwise, such notice 
should be provided as soon after as is practicable.  If the data subject’s consent is given in the context 
of a written declaration which also concerns other 
matters, the request for c onsent shall be presented in 
a manner which is clearly distinguishable from the 
other matters, in an intelligible and easily accessible 
form, using clear and plain language.  
Use limitation  Personal information collected should be used 
only to fulfill the purposes of collection and other 
compatible or related purposes except: a) with the 
consent of the individual whose personal 
information is collected; b) when necessary to 
provide a service or product requested by the 
individual; or, c) by the authority of  law and other 
legal instruments, proclamations and 
pronouncements of legal effect  Personal data shall be collected for specified, 
explicit and legitimate purposes and not further 
processed in a manner that is incompatible with 
those purposes; adequate, re levant and limited to 
what is necessary in relation to the purposes for 
which they are processed.  
Choice and 
consent  Where appropriate, individuals should be 
provided with clear, prominent, easily 
understandable, accessible and affordable 
mechanisms to ex ercise choice in relation to the 
collection, use and disclosure of their personal 
information. It may not be appropriate for 
personal information controllers to provide these 
mechanisms when collecting publicly available 
information.  Permits the use of hea lth-related personal data with 
explicit consent from the subject, unless reliance on 
consent is prohibited by EU or member state law. 
"Explicit consent" must meet a higher standard than 
consent for the processing of other forms of personal 
data — an indivi dual must be clearly informed of the 
use of their data and take an affirmative action to 
demonstrate their consent. Consent of the data 
subject means any freely given, specific, informed 
and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s 
wishes by which he o r she, by a statement or by a 
clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the 
processing of personal data relating to him or her.  
Data integrity  Personal information should be accurate, 
complete and kept up -to-date to the extent 
necessary for the purposes of use.  Personal data should be processed in a manner that 
ensures appropriate security of the personal data, 
including protection against unauthorized  or 
unlawful processing and against accidental loss, 
destruction or damage, using appropriate te chnical or 
organizational measures.  61 
 
 Security 
safeguards  Personal information controllers should protect 
personal information that they hold with 
appropriate safeguards against risks, such as loss 
or unauthorized access to personal information, or 
unauthorized destruction, use, modification or 
disclosure of information or other misuses. Such 
safeguards should be proportional to the 
likelihood and severity of the harm threatened, the 
sensitivity of the information and the context in 
which it is held,  and should be subject to periodic 
review and reassessment.  Taking into account the state of the art, the costs of 
implementation and the nature, scope, context and 
purposes of processing as well as the risk of varying 
likelihood and severity for the right s and freedoms 
of natural persons, the controller and the processor 
shall implement appropriate technical and 
organizational measures to ensure a level of security 
appropriate to the risk.  
Access and 
correction  Individuals should be able to obtain from th e 
personal information controller confirmation of 
whether or not the personal information controller 
holds personal information about them, and have 
access to information held about them, challenge 
the accuracy of information relating to them, have 
the inf ormation rectified, completed, amended or 
deleted. All of the above rights subject to a 
balancing of the burden or expense of compliance, 
legal or security reasons, the protection of 
commercial information, the protection of the 
privacy rights of persons o ther than the affected 
individual.  The data subject has the right to obtain from the 
controller confirmation as to whether or not personal 
data concerning him or her are being processed, and 
to access to the personal data and information about 
the processi ng including: what categories of data are 
processed, the recipients of the data, and rights to 
erasure and rectification of the personal data, the 
right to lodge a complaint with a DPA, the source of 
the data, whether the data was subject to automated 
profiling (and if so, meaningful information about 
the logic involved, as well as the significance and 
the envisaged consequences of such processing for 
the data subject).  
Accountabilit
y A personal information controller should be 
accountable for complying with measures that 
give effect to the Principles stated above.  The controller shall be responsible for, and be able 
to demonstrate compliance with, the principles of the 
processing of personal data under the GDPR.  
Transfer of 
personal data 
to another 
person or 
country  When personal information is to be transferred to 
another person or organization, whether 
domestically or internationally, the personal 
information controller should obtain the consent 
of the individual or exercise due diligence and 
take reasonable steps to ensure that the recipient 
person or organization will protect the 
information consistently with these Principles.  When a controller sends data to another party to be 
processed, they are a processor and therefore must 
be bound by contrac t with the controller to protect 
the personal data. Personal data may only be 
transferred to third countries where the EU has 
considered the laws to provide adequate protection 
or where protected by a binding corporate rules, 
approved model clauses, bindin g agreements 
combined with an approved code of conduct or 
approved certification.  
Breach 
definition  There is no specified definition of breach under 
the APEC Privacy Framework or CBPRs.  Personal data breach means a breach of security 
leading to the accide ntal or unlawful destruction, 
loss, alteration, unauthorized  disclosure of, or access 
to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise 
processed.  
Breach 
notification  The Cross -Border Privacy Rules (CBPR) to which 
APEC economies must bind themselves to join, 
require that member countries impose rules 
requiring that data controllers contractually 
protect data by requiring notification to 
themselves by data processors, agents, contractors 
or other service providers. The CBPRs do not 
require that member cou ntries impose mandatory 
notification of breach to privacy enforcement 
authorities or data subjects.   62 
 
 Breach 
mitigation  The APEC Privacy Framework requires that 
appropriate safeguards.  
The CBPRs require the applicant country to 
describe how it enforces a requirement to have 
technical (authentication and access control, 
encryption, firewalls and intrusion detection, audit 
logging, monitoring, etc.) and administrative 
(training, policies, enforcement, etc.)  
Safeguards.  Notification to data subjects is not re quired if: the 
controller has implemented appropriate technical and 
organizational protection measures, and that those 
measures were applied to the data affected by the 
personal data breach, in particular those that render 
the data unintelligible to any pe rson who is not 
authorized to access it, such as encryption; or  
the controller has taken subsequent measures which 
ensure that the high risk for the rights and freedoms 
of data subjects is no longer likely to materialize; or  
it would involve disproportion ate effort. In such 
case, there shall instead be a public communication 
or similar measure whereby the data subjects are 
informed in an equally effective manner.  
 
 
Source: Alex Wall, “GDPR matchup: The APEC Privacy Framework and Cross -Border Privacy Rules ” 
https://iapp.org/news/a/gdpr -matchup -the-apec -privacy -framework -and-cross -border -privacy -rules/  
 
 
 
 
 
Notes  
 
1  Kati Suominen, “How The Global Fund For Ecommerce Is Helping Entrepreneurs In Developing Countries Enter The 
Digital Era,” 12 April 2016 http://www.gereports.com/kati -suominen -how-to-help-entrepreneurs -in-developing -countries -
enter -the-ecommerce -era/ “  
 
2 For Brazil, see https://www.export.gov/article?id=Brazil -e-Commerce ; for Argentina, 
seehttps://www.statista.com/statistics/379158/e -commerce -share -of-retail -sales -in-argentina/  
 
3  “How Codigo Del Sur Became a Leading Mobile Development Agency on Upwork,” Upwork Blog 
https://www.upwork.com/blog/2015/08/codigo -del-sur-mobile -developme nt-agency -upwork/  
 
4 See World Bank’s Exporter Dynamics Database.  
 
5 Riker, David. 2014. “Internet Use and Openness to Trade.” U.S. International Trade Commission Working Paper 2014 -
12C (December).  
 
6 See Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Accelerating Digital Trade i n Latin America and the Caribbean,” IDB Working Paper  
(January) http://late.online/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Late_Study_Full_ENG.pdf  
 
7 Zwillenberg, Paul, Dominic Field, and David Dean. 2014. “Greasing the Wheels of the Internet Economy,” Boston 
Consulting Group, 20 January. 
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/digital_economy_telecommunications_greasing_wheels_internet_econo
my. 
 
8 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Silver Bullet to Fire up Small Business Exports: Plurilateral Agreement on De Minimis,” Report, 
24 April. https://katisuominen.wordpress.com/2017/04/21/silver -bullet -to-fire-up-small -business -exports -plurilateral -
agreement -on-de-minimis  
 
9 See Suominen, Kati. 2017b. “Ecommerce Development Survey and Index.” Report for the USAID (April) 
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00MP8T.pdf                                                             63 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 
10 There is some self -selection in that the surveyed companies are inherently in some fashion online., as they were all 
surveyed online  
 
11 Zwillenberg, Paul, Dominic Field, and David Dean. 2014. “Greasing the Wheels o f the Internet Economy,” Boston 
Consulting Group, 20 January. 
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/digital_econ omy_telecommunications_greasing_wheels_internet_econo
my. 
 
12 “Brazil,” eBay Global Report 2017 https://www.ebaymainstreet.com/sites/default/files/ebay_global -report_brazil.pdf  
 
13 There is no appreciable difference in the data between offline and online sellers’ export intensity, or in their exports 
revenue as share of all revenue.  
 
14 Cooley LLP, “Brazil's New Data Protection Law: The LGPD,” Mondaq , 19 Seotember 2018 
http://www.mondaq.com/brazil/x/737694/data+protection/Brazils+New+Data+Protection+Law+The+LGPD  
 
15 “Important Developments in Argentina Regarding Personal Data Protection,” itechlaw, 
https://www.itechlaw.org/news/important -developments -argentina -regarding -personal -data-protection  
 
16  See ”Services & Support, Embraer http://embraer.com/global/support  
 
17  See ”Intelie”, 7th Brazili an Industry Innovation Summit http://www.congressodeinovacao.com.br/o -congresso  
 
18  Amazon Web Services, “AWS Case Study: WebMotors” https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/case -studies/webmotors/  
 
19  See Datapro at https://www.dataproapp.com  
 
20 Richard Allan, “ Wir arbeiten hart daran, Hassrede zu bekämpfen und haben bereits große Fortschritte erzielt” Facebook 
Politk und Gesellshaft, 19 June 2017 https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook -politik -und-gesellschaft/wir -arbeiten -hart-
daran -hassrede -zu-bek%C3%A4mpfen -und-haben -bereits -gro%C3%9Fe -fortschrit/1361657510554965/  
 
21 Ministry of Foreign Realtions of Chile, ”Chile: Últimos Avances En Materia De Propiedad Intelectual,” 
https://www.direcon.gob.cl/wp -content/uploads/2014/04/Informe -de-Propiedad -Intelectual -Direcon -25-04-2014.pdf , 
accessed on 30 Sep tember 2017.  
 
22 eMarketer, “Internet Users in Brazil Favor WhatsApp, Facebook for Mobile Messaging Skype and Twitter are also fairly 
popular among users,” May 10.  
 
23  Craig Smith, “83 Amazing Uber Statistics and Facts (September 2017)”, DMR, 10 September 2 017 
https://expandedramblings.com/index.php/uber -statistics/  
 
24  For example, Internet protocol communications services such as VoIP are estimated to represent globally 8.7 billion 
minutes and $63 billion in revenue in 2018. See Pestanes, Philippe, and Vic tor Marcais. 2016. “Challenges and Impacts  
Created by “Over -The-Top” (OTT) Players in the African Telecommunication Sector,” Wavestone (September)  
 https://www.wavestone.com/app/uploads/2016/09/OTT_UK.pdf  
 
25  “Ancine‘s OTT Regulation is Under Fire,” ttvnew s, 30 May 2017 http://www.todotvnews.com/news/ancine -ott-
regulation -is-inder -fire.html  
 
26 See law by Paraguayan National Congress, “Ley N° 1.682 Que Reglamenta La Información De Carácter Privado” 
http://www.cpdp.gob.ar/images/articuloscpdp/Inter/ley_1682.p df 
 
27 El Senado y la Cámara de Representantes de la República Oriental del Uruguay, “Ley de Protección de Datos Personales 
y Acción de Habeas Data,” Ley N° 18.331, 18 August 2008  
https://www.datospersonales.gub.uy/wps/wcm/connect/urcdp/f085d1b8 -0a24 -4070 -9dad -64 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
adc87b7595f2/18.331_con_modificaciones_de_la_19.355..pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CONVERT_TO=url&CACHEID=f085d
1b8-0a24 -4070 -9dad -adc87b7595f2  
 
28 “Brazil - eCommerce,” Brazil Country Commercial Guide, U.S. Department of Commerce, 5 July 2017  
https://www.export.gov/article?id=Brazil -e-Commerce  
 
29  “Ancine‘s OTT Regulation is Under Fire,” ttvnews , 30 May 2017 http://www.todotvnews.com/news/ancine -ott-
regulation -is-inder -fire.html  
 
30  ”Impuestos a servicios ofrecidos por internet,” Informacion , 22 June 2017 
http://www.elpais.com.uy/informacion/impuestos -servicios -ofrecidos -internet.html.  
 
31  “Argentina - Protecting Intellectual Property”, Argentina Country Commercial Guide, U.S. Department of Commerce 
https://www.export.gov/article?id=Argentina -protection -of-property -rights  
 
32  “Brazil - Protecting Intellectual Property,” Brazil Country Commercial Guide, U.S. Department of Commerce, 10 August  
2017 https://www.export.gov/article?id=Brazil -Protecting -Intellectual -Property  
 
33  “Consult Hyperion Forec asts Banks to Face Fines Totalling €4.7bn in First Three Years Under GDPR,” AllClear ID ,14 
June 2017  https://www.allclearid.com/business/newsreleases/consult -hyperion -forecasts -banks -face-fines -totalling -e4-7bn-
first-three -years -gdpr/  
 
34  “FTSE 100 Companies Could Face Up to £5 Billion a Year in Fines When GDPR Tsunami Hits Our Shores,” Oliver 
Wyman, 22 May 2017 http://www.oliverwyman.com/media -center/2017/may/ftse -100-companies -could -face-up-to-p5-
billion -a-year-in-fines -w.html  
 
35  Deloi tte. 2013. “Economic Impact Assessment of the European General Data Protection Regulation: Final Report,” (16 
December) https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/about -deloitte/deloitte -uk-european -data-
protection -tmt.pdf  
 
36 van der Marel , Erik, Hosuk Lee -Makiyama, and Matthias Bauer. 2014. “The Costs of Data Localisation: A Friendly Fire 
on Economic Recovery,” European Centre for International Political Economy (ECIPE) (May) 
http://ecipe.org/publications/dataloc/  
 
37 Jamie Carter, “How to handle the new US -EU data regulations,” Techradar.pro, 23 May 2016  
 http://www.techradar.com/news/internet/how -to-handle -the-new-us-eu-data-regulations -1320554/2#  
 
38 K. Irion, S. Yakovleva and M. Bartl, “Trade and Privacy: Complicated Bedfellows? How to achieve data protection -proof 
free trade agreements”, independent stud y commissioned by BEUC et al., published 13 July 2016, Amsterdam, Institute for 
Information Law (IViR). https://ivir.nl/publicaties/download/1807  
 
39  See Ieuan Jolly, “Data protection in the United States: overview,” Thompson Reuters Practical Law , 1 July 2017 
https://content.next.westlaw.com/Document/I02064fbd1cb611e38578f7cc c38dcbee/View/FullText.html?contextData=(sc.D
efault)&transitionType=Default&firstPage=true&bhcp=1 . See also DLA Piper, ”Data Protection laws arund the World,” 25 
January 2017 https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.com/index.html?t=law&c=US  
 
40  See, for example , Electronic Commerce Steering Group “Enabling Legal Compliance & Cross -Border Data Transfers 
with the APEC Cross -Border Privacy Rules (CBPR),” An APEC & CIPL workshop for information controllers, information 
processors and regulators in the Asia -Pacific r egion, 18 July 2016  
https://www.informationpolicycentre.com/uploads/5/7/1/0/57104281/apec_cipl_cbpr_workshop_report_final_version__18_
july_2016_singapore__61639396_1__2_ -c_rev_24_oct.pdf  
 
41  Valerio Barrad, Catherine and Alan Charles Raul. 2015. “APEC Over vew,” The Privacy, Data Protection and 
Cybersecurity Law Review, Second Edition, London: Law Business Research Ltd, London  https://www.sidley.com/ -
/media/publications/apec -overview.pdf?la=en  
 65 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
42 Leviathan Security Group. 2015. “Quantifying the Costs of Forc ed Localization.”  
http://static1.squarespace.com/static/556340ece4b0869396f21099/t/559dad76e4b0899d97726a8b/1436396918881/  
 
43  McKinsey  Global Institute, Internet Matters: The Net’s Sweeping Impact On Growth, Jobs, And Prosperity 22 (2011), 
available at http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/internet_matters  
 
44 Chander, Anupam, and Uyen P. Le. 2014. “Breaking the Web : Data Localization vs. the Global Internet,” UC Davis 
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 378 (March).  
 
45  Bauer, Matthias, Hosuk Lee -Makiyama, Erik van der Marel, Bert Verschelde. 2014. “The Costs Of Data Localization: 
Friendly Fire On Economic Recovery,” ECIPE Occasional Paper No 3/2014.  
 
46  Ellersgaard Nielsen, Katrine, Bruno Basalisco, and Martin H. Thelle. 2013. ”The impact of online intermediaries on the 
EU economy,” Report prepared for EdiMA (April) 
https://www.copenhageneconomics.com/dyn/resources/Publication/publicationPDF/6/226/0/The%20impact%20of%20onlin
e%20intermediaries%20 -%20April%202013.pdf  
 
47  Chander, Anupam. 2014. ”How Law Made Silicon Valley,” Emory Law Journal  63, 639 
http://law.emory.edu /elj/_documents/volumes/63/3/articles/chander.pdf.  
 
48  Matthew Le Merle, Raju Sarma, Tashfeen Ahmed and Christopher Pencavel. 2016. The Impact of U.S. Internet 
Copyright Regulations on Early -Stage Investment A Quantitative Study,” 
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/uploads/Strategyand -Impact -US-Internet -Copyright -Regulations -Early -Stage -
Investment.pdf  
 
49  Oxera.  2015. ”The economic impact of safe harbours on Internet intermediary start -ups,” Study prepared for Google 
(February) https://www.oxera.com/Latest -Thinking/Publications/Reports/2015/How -are-Internet -start-ups-affected -by-
liability -f.aspx  
 
50  United Nation s - Human Rights Council, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right 
to freedom of opinion and expression, Frank La Rue, 16 May 2011, 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf  cited in 
https://www.accessnow.org/cms/assets/uploads/2017/08/Access_Now_OTT -position%E2%80%93paper.pdf  
 
51  See for the argument, Javier Pallero and Raman Jit Sin gh Chima. 2017. ”Proposals for Regulating Internet  
Apps and Services: Understanding the Digital Rights Impact of the ’Over -The-Top’ Debate” Access.now  
(21 August) https://www.accessnow.org/cms/assets/uploads/2017/08/Access_Now_OTT -position%E2%80%93paper.pd f 
 
52 Kim, Ming Jung. 2013. “Essays on the Economics of the Smartphone and  
Application Industry,” A Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School of the University of Minnesota 
http://conservancy.umn.edu/bitstream/handle/11299/159773/1/Kim_umn_0130 E_14389.pdf  
 
53  Joshi Sujata, Sarkar Sohag, Dewan Tanu, Dharmani Chintan, Purohit Shubham and Gandhi Sumit. 2015. ”Impact of 
Over the Top (OTT) Services on Telecom Service Providers,” Indian Journal of Science and Technology 8 (S4) (February) 
indjst.org ht tp://www.indjst.org/index.php/indjst/article/viewFile/62238/48529  
 
54  See Asia Internet Coalition. 2015. “Smart Regulation for OTT Growth,” (October)  https://www.aicasia.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/10/AIC -White -Paper -on-OTT_Final2.pdf  
55  Asia Internet Coa lition. 2015. “Smart Regulation for OTT Growth,” (October)  https://www.aicasia.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/10/AIC -White -Paper -on-OTT_Final2.pdf  
 
56 Klint Finley, After Slurping Up AI Researchers, Facebook Offers to Share,” Wired, 10 November 2017 
https://w ww.wired.com/story/after -slurping -up-ai-researchers -facebook -offers -to-share/  
 
57 Katz, Raul, ”The Impact Of Taxation On The Digital Economy,” A presentation to the ITU Regional Economic and  
Financial Forum of Telecommunications/ICT for Africa, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, January 19, 2016.  66 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 
58 At Kearney. 2013. “Taxing Telecom,” https://www.atkearney.com/documents/10192/1046683/Taxing+Telecom -
The+Case+for+Reform.pdf/88c2d30c -f0d4-4496 -b7e3 -ab9298d09ced  
 
59 Raul Katz, “The Impact of Taxation on the Digital Econ omy,” A presentation to the ITU Regional Economic and  
Financial Forum of Telecommunications/ICT for Africa, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, January 19, 2016 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU -D/Regulatory -Market/Pages/Events2016/Abidjan/Ses3_2_Katz_Taxation%20v4.pdf . Another 
study in this presentation foun d that every one percent decrease in the average sales tax rate on purchased equipment results 
in an increase in total wireline and wireless investment of $0.85 per capita  
 
60  AT Kearney and Axiata. 2015. “The ASEAN Digital Revolution” 
https://www.atkearne y.com/documents/10192/6986374/ASEAN+Digital+Revolution.pdf/86c51659 -c7fb-4bc5 -b6e1 -
22be3d801ad2  
 
61   GSMA and the Boston Consulting Group. 2012. “The Economic Benefits of Early Harmonization of the Digital 
Dividend Spectrum & the Cost of Fragmentation in A sia-Pacific,” http://www.gsma.com/spectrum/wp -
content/uploads/2012/07/277967 -01-Asia-PacificFINAL -vf1.pdf . 
 
62  Andean Development Corporation, “I XP in Latin America: Low cost internet at higher speed,” 11 August 2014 
http://www.caf.com/en/currently/news/2014/08/ixp -in-latin-america -low-cost-internet -at-higher -speed  
 
63  World Economic Forum. 2014. Delivering Digital Infrastructure: Advancing the Internet Economy  
http://reports.weforum.org/delivering -digital -infrastructure/  
 
64  Ecommerce Europe. 2016. “Cross -border E -commerce Baromete r,” (30 May) https://www.ecommerce -
europe.eu/publication/cross -border -e-commerce -barometer -2016/  
 
65  Ecommerce Europe. 2016. “Cross -border E -commerce Barometer,” (30 May) https://www.ecommerce -
europe.eu/publication/cross -border -e-commerce -barometer -2016/  
 
66  “A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe,” Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2015) 192 final. 6 May 
2015  
http://eur -lex.europa .eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?qid=1447773803386&uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0192  
 
67  “A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe,” Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee o f the Regions, COM(2015) 192 final. 6 May 
2015 http://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?qid=1447773803386&uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0192  
 
68  “A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe,” Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2015) 192 final. 6 May 
2015 http://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?qid=1447773803386&uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0192  
 
69 See A SEAN Masterplan at http://www.asean.org/storage/images/2015/November/ICT/15b%20 --
%20AIM%202020_Publication_Final.pdf  
 
70 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report for the Inter -American 
Development Bank (January) http://late.online/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Late_Study_Full_ENG.pdf  
 
71 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report for the Inter -American 
Development Bank (January) http://late.online/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Late_Study_Full_ENG.pdf  
 
72 See data analysis in Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Report  for 
the Inter -American Development Bank (January) http://late.online/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Late_Study_Full_ENG.pdf  
 67 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        
73 This section draws to an extent on recommendations in Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Accelerating Digital Trade in Latin 
America and the Car ibbean,” IDB Working Paper  
(January) http://late.online/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Late_Study_Full_ENG.pdf  
 
74 “Another approach to dealing with the interaction betwee n global data flows and protecting privacy is the APEC Privacy 
Framework, a set of principles to guide APEC members and businesses on privacy issues. APEC does not require or expect 
countries to adopt top -down privacy laws and instead emphasize flexibility  in its implementation that could include in  
addition to legislation, industry self -regulation”. See World Economic Forum (2016): “Maximizing the Opportunities of the 
Internet for International Trade” Page 13. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/E15/WEF_Digital_Trade_report_2015_1401.pdf   
 
75 Suominen, Kati. 2015. “Fueling the Online Trade Revolution: New Customs Security Framework to Secure and Facilitate 
Small Business Eco mmerce”: CSISI Policy Paper https://www.csis.org/analysis/fueling -online -trade -revolution  
 
76  ” Exporta Digital,” ProChile, http://www.prochile.gob.cl/landing/exporta -digital/ . 
 
77 Proméxico website accessed 15 January 2016: http://www.promexico.gob.mx/en/mx/desarrollo -estrategia -ecommerce -
marketing -digital/_rid/9?language=en&lng_act=lng_step2  
 
78  “PROCOMER de Costa Rica presentó un nuevo servicio para exportar a través de e -commerce ,” 24 February 2016 
http://www.legiscomex.com/BancoConocimiento/P/procomer -presenta -nuevo -servicio -para-exportar -feb-24-16-
15not/procomer -presenta -nuevo -servicio -para-exportar -feb-24-16-
15not.asp?CodSubseccion=306&Codseccion=190&numArticulo=67065  
 
79  Kati Suominen, “How The Global Fund For Ecommerce Is Helping Entrepreneurs In Developing Countries Enter The 
Digital Era,” 12 April 2016 http://www.gereports.com/kati -suominen -how-to-help-entrepreneurs -in-developing -countries -
enter -the-ecommerce -era/ “  
 
80  Kati Suominen. “ Growth Capital Gap Vital to Debate on Trade Finance Gap,” BRINK News, 20 March 2016 
http://www.brinknews.com/growth -capital -gap-vital-to-debate -on-trade -finance -gap/ 
 
81 “Proexport+,” Uruguay XXI, http://www.uruguayxxi.gub.uy/exportaciones/proexport/  
 
82  See Suominen, Kati. 2016. “ Growth Capital Gap Vital to Debate on Trade Finance Gap,” BRINK News, 20 March 2016 
<http://www.brinknews.com/growth -capital -gap-vital-to-debate -on-trade -finance -gap/>  