Gender, Media & ICTs
New approaches for research, education & training
UNESCO Series on Journalism  EducationPublished in 2019 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2019
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 
3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/igo/ ). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be 
bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository ( http://www.
unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en ).
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this 
publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part 
of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or 
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; 
they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Editors:  Professor Lisa French, Professor Aimée Vega Montiel, Professor Claudia 
Padovani
Contributing Authors: Dr Mark Poole, Dr María Soledad Vargas, Dr María Pilar 
Bruce Hoyuelos , Professor Carolyn M Byerly, Assistant Professor Melisew Dejene, 
Dr Edgar Vega Suriaga, Professor Mira K Desai, Professor Patricia Núñez-Gómez, 
Associate Professor Francisco A Zurian, Assistant Professor Francisco José 
García-Ramos, Dr Aída Mencía-Ripley, Professor Solangel Díaz
Peer Reviewers:  Julie Posetti, Snr Research Fellow at RISJ, University of Oxford: 
Journalism Innovation Project Lead; Elspeth McOmish, Programme Specialist, 
Division of Gender Equality, UNESCO.
Graphic design:  Mr. Clinton
Cover design:  Mr. Clinton
Typeset:  UNESCO
Printed by:  UNESCO
Printed in France ISBN: 978-92-3-100320-2Gender,  
Media  
& ICTs
New approaches for research,  
education & training5 
UNESCO and Journalism Education
UNESCO’s support for journalism education is underpinned by 
a strong conviction that professional journalistic standards 
are essential to bring out the potential of media systems to 
foster democracy, dialogue, sustainable development and 
gender equality.
Professional news media acts as a guardian of public interest. This is an important 
component of the checks and balances that form part of a democracy. By 
disseminating trusted information to citizens, the news media enables citizen 
participation in development and strengthens accountability. Citizens cannot 
exercise and enjoy their citizenship in the absence of crucial information and 
knowledge, which well-trained journalists are better placed to provide.
However, recent trends in the last few years have placed journalism under fire. 
A range of factors are transforming the communications landscape, raising 
questions about the quality, impact and credibility of journalism. All this makes 
UNESCO’s Excellence in Journalism Series  a crucial repository for journalism 
education and training worldwide.
Journalism educators can explore UNESCO’s offer, which includes syllabi on 
Journalism, ‘Fake News’ and Disinformation , handbooks to assist journalists 
on reporting climate change, including in Africa and the Asia-Pacific region, 
Teaching Journalism for Sustainable Development: new syllabi,  and Model 
course on safety of journalists: a guide for journalism teachers in the Arab States .
The model curricula in this handbook are designed to be used as an entire 
course, or can be used in bespoke ways to suit the media landscape and the 
needs of journalism students at the local level. They have been developed by 
experts who are at the cutting edge of journalism education and are presented 
in a variety of formats and languages.
To discover how UNESCO’s series on journalism education can enhance your 
institution’s work, visit: https://en.unesco.org/unesco-series-on-journalism-
education6
6
CONTENTS 
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations  8
Glossary  10
Foreword  14
Preface 17
 
1. Introduction: a conceptual framework for  
 teaching media, ICT s and gender equality 23
1.1  Gender equality, media and ICTs 24
1.2  Background to the syllabi 27
1.3  Model course objectives and pedagogical approach 29
1.4  Course design, content, approach, and delivery 32
  
2.  User’s Guide  39
2.1  Scenarios of use 40
2.2  Levels of intervention: global proposal, local adoption 41
2.3  Learning activities 42
2.4  Challenges and opportunities of working with the course model 43 
 proposed by the UNITWIN Network on Gender Media and ICTs7 
3. Units  47 
3.1  Representation, language and discourse 49 
3.2  Access to decision-making/decision-making power 61 
3.3  Gender in media and ICT structures 67 
3.4  Audience, reception and uses of media and ICTs 74 
3.5  Violence against women (VAW) in and through the media and ICTs  81
3.6  Gender mainstreaming in media and ICT policies 88 
3.7  Advocacy and activism                101
Appendices   108
Appendix 1: Foundational documents 108
Appendix 2: Available resources 110
  
Collaborators  114 
List of unit authors  114
List of peer reviewers  115
Acknowledgements 115
Extended Bibliography 1188
8
LIST OF ACRONYMS  
AND ABBREVIATIONS
AWID Association for Women’s Rights in Development
AGEMI Advancing Gender Equality in Media Industries
An international EU-funded project that runs parallel to the UNITWIN 
course model elaboration ( https://www.agemi-eu.org ). The project 
consortium includes members of the UNESCO UNITWIN Network on 
Gender, Media and ICTs
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women
ECREA European Communication Research and Education
FoE Freedom of Expression
FoI Freedom of Information
GAMAG Global Alliance for Media and Gender
A global movement to promote gender equality in and through 
media. Members of GAMAG are part of the UNESCO UNITWIN 
Network on Gender, Media and ICTs
GMMP Global Media Monitoring Project
GSIM Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media
A UNESCO resource that provides a comprehensive overview of 
gender in media; a useful guideline for understanding gender and 
media issues in their complexity and interaction 
IAMCR International Association for Media and Communication9List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
IPDC (UNESCO) International Programme for the Development of 
Communication
LGBT Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender 
LGBTQI Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, gender diverse, queer and 
intersex 
 LGBTQ+ Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, gender diverse, intersex, queer 
and other evolving identities
NGO Non-governmental organisation
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
STEM Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
UNITWIN UNESCO’s University Twinning and Networking Programme 
UNITWIN networks aim to advance research training and program 
development in UNESCO’s fields of competence by building 
university networks and encouraging cooperation ( http://www.
UNITWIN .net )
UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights
VAW Violence Against Women
WACC World Association for Christian Communication10
10
GLOSSARY1
Cisnormativity is the assumption that all, or almost all, individuals are 
cisgender. Although transgender-identified people comprise a fairly small 
percentage of the human population, many trans* people and allies 
consider it to be offensive to presume that everyone is cisgender unless 
otherwise specified.  
Empowerment   Collective and individual process of women and men having 
control over their lives, setting their own agendas, gaining skills, building 
self-confidence, solving problems and developing self-reliance.
Feminism   The political position of advocating for women’s rights and to 
achieve equality between men and women. Persons who advocate for this 
position are feminists.
Feminist pedagogy  A feminist way of thinking about the theory and practice 
of teaching, learning environments, study of disciplines. See: http://www.
genderandeducation.com/issues/feminist-pedagogy/
Gender   The differences between males and females that are socially 
constructed, changeable over time, and have wide variations within and 
between cultures. As opposed to biologically determined characteristics 
(sex), gender refers to learned behaviour and expectations to fulfil an 
image of masculinity and femininity. Gender is also a socioeconomic and 
political variable with which to analyse people’s roles, responsibilities, 
constraints and opportunities. The term ‘gender’ is not synonymous with 
women; rather the term is used to refer to human or social attributes 
concerning both women and men collectively.
1 The sources for this glossary are: UNESCO 2012, Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media: 
Framework of indicators to gauge gender sensitivity in media operations and content, 
available at: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/
resources/publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/
gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-of-indicators-to-gauge-gender-
sensitivity-in-media-operations-and-content/  (Accessed 14/11/2018) and  
UNESCO 2003, UNESCO’s Gender Mainstreaming Implementation Framework: Baseline 
definitions of key concepts and terms, available at: http://www.unesco.org/new/
fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/BSP/GENDER/PDF/1.%20Baseline%20Definitions%20of%20
key%20gender-related%20concepts.pdf  (Accessed 14/11/2018)11Glossary
 Gender analysis  The collection and analysis of sex-disaggregated 
information. Where men and women perform different roles. This leads to 
their having different experience, knowledge, talents and needs. Gender 
analysis explores these differences so policies, programs and projects can 
identify and meet the different needs of men and women. Gender analysis 
also facilitates the strategic use of distinct knowledge and skills possessed 
by women and men. 
Gender awareness  Commitment to recognising male-female social 
inequalities in order to redress these through addressing women’s needs 
and priorities, and to analyse programs and projects for the differential 
impacts that they have on women and men. This awareness or gender 
sensitivity includes knowing that women, as well as men, should be involved 
in policy about media practice.
Gender balance   See gender parity.
Gender-based violence  Any act that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, 
sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering based on male/female 
lines or on the gender adopted by a person. It usually refers to women and 
girls, but includes violence against lesbians, gay men and transgender 
people. It includes threats, coercion, and deprivation of liberty, deprivation 
of the right to work or earn income, sexual or mental rape, stalking or other 
forms of harassment, whether occurring in public or private life.
Gender equality   Women and men enjoy the same status and have equal 
opportunity to realise their full human rights and potential to contribute 
to national, political, economic, social and cultural development, and 
to benefit from the results. It is the equal valuing by society of both the 
similarities and the differences between women and men and the different 
roles they may choose to play. The UN Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) sets the principles 
of gender equality through ensuring women’s equal access to, and equal 
opportunities in, political and public life, as well as education, health and 
employment.12
12
Gender equity   Balanced presence and participation of women and men in 
order to bring about equality in specific environments. It is the process 
of being fair to women and men. To ensure fairness, measures are often 
needed to compensate for historical and social disadvantages that prevent 
women and men from otherwise operating as equals.
Gender mainstreaming  This is a ‘methodology’: the process of integrating a 
gender perspective in all activities carried by an organisation, including its 
policies, programs, training, recruitment and evaluations, with the main aim 
being to achieve gender equality.
Gender parity   This is a numeric concept for representation and participation. 
Gender parity is a necessary but not sufficient step on the road to gender 
equality. Gender parity is the same as gender balance.
Gender portrayal   Representation of gender roles, behaviour and 
characteristics.
Gender-responsive   The first step in gender responsiveness is being gender 
aware or gender sensitive. The second step is being ‘gender-responsive’, 
a concept that refers to the articulation of policies and initiatives that 
address the different needs, aspirations, capacities and contributions of 
women and men.
Gender stereotype   Socially constructed beliefs about men and women, often 
but not necessarily, sexist and negative, which ignore complexity and serve 
to rule out exceptions and choices.
Gender-transformative   Policies and initiatives that aim at changing existing 
and biased/discriminatory policies, practices, programs and foster 
structural transformations for the betterment of life for all.13Glossary
ICTs  Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are modern forms 
of information and communication technologies that use electronic 
methods (both digital and non-digital) to transmit, process, store, create, 
display, share or exchange information. UNESCO includes within the 
definition: computers, the internet (websites, blogs, emails, social media 
and social messaging), live broadcasting technologies (radio, television 
and webcasting), recorded broadcasting technologies (podcasting, audio 
and video players and storage devices) and telephony (fixed or mobile, 
satellite, video-conferencing, etc.).
 Sex  Sex describes the biological differences between men and women, which 
are determined at birth. 
Sex-disaggregation or sex-disaggregated data   Data are cross-classified by 
sex, distinguishing information for women and men.
Sexism   Supposition, belief or assertion that one sex is superior to the other, 
often expressed in the context of traditional stereotyping of social roles on 
the basis of sex, with resultant discrimination practised against members of 
the supposedly inferior sex.14
14Foreword
Guy Berger
Everyone can see how quickly digital communication has changed. But not 
everyone notices the snail’s pace of transforming gender inequality in media 
and through media. Even fewer of us fully grasp the  complex underlying 
factors and how best to address them. 
But one thing is clear: we need to speed up the pace of progress in gender 
equality. We need to take advantage of digital opportunities to advance 
this goal, and we need to fight new trends that reinforce and exacerbate the 
existing patterns of discrimination, stereotyping and oppression.
Insight into the problems and the solutions can be found in this new 
publication, Gender, Media and ICTs: new approaches for research, education 
& training . It is a timely resource for everyone interested in the future of 
journalism, media and communications. Even those who may think they 
already know about the subject, or who think that it is tangential to their 
field, will find relevance in these pages. Some readers may struggle with the 
complex concepts and analyses as presented, but persistence will pay off 
in terms of delivering new understanding and knowledge. Do not expect a 
cook-book of exercises, but rather an opportunity for systematic interrogation 
(in seven units) of the key issues at stake. Those who teach journalism and 
communications students are especially invited to use this publication to 
support your work to help your students engage with gender equality as a key 
dimension of today’s digital revolution. 
The initiative of this book responds to a practical need identified by UNESCO 
and higher education partners in the Unitwin Network on Gender, Media and 
ICTs. This is, in times of rapid change, the imperative to equip a new generation 
of journalists and other media practitioners to be fully gender-sensitive, both in 
their workplaces and in their work products.  
It is evident that media and social media can play a key role in both 
reproducing gender inequality and also in fostering equality. It follows then 15Foreword
that journalism that is gender-sensitive can contribute directly to achieving 
Sustainable Development Goal 5 “Achieve gender equality and empower all 
women and girls”. Such journalism is also integral to SDG 16.10 which challenges 
the world to ensure “public access to information and fundamental freedoms”.  
And it is key to democracy and sustainable development more broadly. 
In sum, teachers can cultivate gender-sensitive graduates able to impact on 
the future communication environment to help make it inclusive, diverse and 
open. 
Scholars from 10 universities from across all world regions have collaborated 
on this project: Complutense University (Spain), Hawassa University (Ethiopia), 
Howard University (United States), Iberoamerican University of the Dominican 
Republic (UNIBE), National Autonomous University of Mexico (Mexico), Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Valparaíso (Chile), RMIT University (Australia), SNDT 
Women’s University (India), Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, (Ecuador), 
University of Padova (Italy). 
In preparing this curriculum, members of these Unitwin universities embarked 
on a year-long process of research, mapping and writing to ensure that 
cultural differences were taken into consideration in writing the chapters. This 
underpins the focus on core concepts such as gender mainstreaming, gender 
sensitivity, equality and equity, all which have been reflected in the book. It 
also ensures a wide range of information and up-to-date evidence, that can 
appropriately resonate in different ways in different countries. 
This new product forms part of UNESCO’s Series on Journalism Education, 
and joins other syllabi and handbooks such as Journalism, ‘ Fake News ’ and 
Disinformation; Getting the Message Across, Reporting on Climate Change  and 
Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific ; and Teaching Journalism for 
Sustainable Development . It also follows closely the Gender Sensitive Indicators 
for Media (GSIM),  thereby providing an educational companion piece to the 
GSIM. It can be profitably partnered with the 2019 UNESCO-GAMAG study titled 
Gender Equality in and through the media and ICTs. Position papers .
It may be noted that this publication corresponds to the agreement of 
UNESCO’s 193 member states that Gender Equality must be a priority in all the 16
16work of the Organization. In this context, the publication results from the same 
emphasis within the specialised UNESCO council that leads the International 
Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC). In particular, it has 
been under the leadership of Albana Shala, the elected chair of the Council 
from 2014 to 2018, that funding was made available from the Netherlands to 
make this resource possible. Finally, the publication aligns with the remarks 
by UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres that “so long as people face 
criminalisation, bias and violence based on their sexual orientation, gender 
identity or sex characteristics, we must redouble our efforts to end these 
violations”.
UNESCO, together with the Unitwin Network on Gender Media and ICTs, urges 
journalism educators to use this publication to cultivate gender awareness in 
the journalists, media professionals and communicators of tomorrow. Without 
us being sensitive to the inequalities entailed, it is not possible to respond to 
the challenge, let alone to help with transformation.  This publication therefore 
seeks to help achieve the full development of each human being, irrespective 
of sex or gender, and in conjunction with the possibilities of the digital age. 
Guy Berger
Secretary to the IPDC  17Preface
Preface
Margaret Gallagher
In the late 1970s UNESCO commissioned two international stock-taking 
analyses of the literature on women and media (Ceulemans and Fauconnier, 
1979; Gallagher, 1979). The first of their kind, these reports surveyed research 
findings and highlighted areas that needed action. Both of them identified 
the importance of education and training to improve women’s access to 
and influence within media organisations, but neither of them engaged with 
the issue of the curriculum. One of Ceulemans and Fauconnier’s proposals 
was a ‘review of educational textbooks of communication schools to modify 
sexually differentiating conceptualisations’ (p. 68). Gallagher emphasized the 
media as cultural agents that ‘reinforce definitions and identities set within 
pre-determined systems of socialisation’ (p. 49), but did not make explicit the 
connections between cultural values, curriculum content and socialisation. 
One of the tenets of these early studies was that women’s access to 
education and training was fundamental to the achievement of equality in 
and through the media. Yet the absence of a detailed critique of the content 
of that education and training severely limited any gains that might accrue 
from greater access to it.
As far back as the early 1990s UNESCO data covering 83 countries showed that 
in 53 of them (64%) women were in the majority among third-level journalism 
and communication students (Gallagher, 1995, p. 5). But it was already clear 
that the influx of women into journalism education and training had not led to 
noticeable change in the gender patterns of either media content or media 
decision-making structures. It was at this point that feminist researchers 
began to focus seriously on the gendered nature of the media curriculum (ibid, 
p.7). Writing in 1993, Lana Rakow reflected on the superficial and tangential 
ways in which gender and race are treated within the curriculum. At best, she 
argued, they are ‘tolerated or accommodated’, while what is actually required 
is a transformation based on a reconsideration of the standpoint of all the 
material currently being taught: ‘Whose experiences are enshrined in the 
canons of theory and research now being taught? Who wrote the theories, who 
did the research, who was the subject of the research? Whose speech, whose 18
18
rhetorical strategies, whose relationships, whose experiences with technology, 
whose media, whose definitions of news are your students learning about?’ 
(Rakow, 1993, p.159).
Questions like these have continued to preoccupy feminist teachers and 
researchers in search of material that gives voice to standpoints outside the 
traditional canon. Some have produced their own resources, driven by the need 
to fill a gap in the available literature2. For example, introducing the rationale 
behind their 2001 collection of essays for use in mass communication courses, 
Elizabeth Toth and Linda Aldoory explained: ‘The book took form, in recognition 
that most standard text-books did not discuss mass communication from 
the standpoints of gender and diversity. The books we looked at had an air of 
‘objectivity’ but no acknowledgement of whose objectivity and experience we 
were meant to believe. Because we were grappling with material that did not 
speak to our own gender and diversity, we thought others might have the same 
problems’ (pp. viii-ix).
Nearly 20 years later, a glance at most standard textbooks and curricula will 
confirm the view that gender and media studies are still frequently regarded 
as sub-specialty areas within the core curriculum. Despite decades of 
feminist media scholarship, gender and media issues have been only semi-
institutionalised within academic and training curricula. Notwithstanding 
the substantial body of literature now available, gender-based critiques of 
media systems and processes have had remarkably little impact on the wider 
contours of the field. A concern with power, rights and democracy has been at 
the heart of feminist media analysis since its earliest days. And over the past 
two decades, there has been a growing body of feminist work on globalization, 
media policy, technology development, and political economy. Yet authoritative 
communication textbooks – if they acknowledge gender issues at all – continue 
to ignore these dimensions of feminist scholarship. For instance although the 
highly influential McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory, in successive editions 
published between 1983 and 2010, did gradually expand its discussion of gender 
and media, even the sixth edition (2010) situated feminist theory and scholarship 
exclusively in the context of culture, representation, texts and audiences. There 
2 Some, like the Namibia Polytechnic through the support of UNESCO, awarded the 
journalism curriculum and revised it to “demasculinise” the pre-existing bias.  
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=47835&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_
SECTION=201.html19Preface
was no consideration of gender in relation to theories of media and society, 
media freedom and accountability, media economics and governance, 
global media issues, or political communication. The impression given is that 
feminist analysis is unconnected with these core matters in the communication 
curriculum, and that feminist concerns are limited to the sphere of gender 
identity and its construction. In this interpretation feminist media scholarship is 
seen as a specialisation within communication, rather than as a perspective to 
be applied to the field as a whole.
The presentation of gender as a ‘specialism within’ rather than an ‘approach 
to’ communication is prevalent in key texts in the field. One of the ways in which 
this happens is through the inclusion of the feminist or ‘gender chapter’ in 
anthologies or collections. This chapter is usually expected to set out an overall 
gender-based analysis of the topic in question – for example journalism, 
policy, media practice - while the other chapters provide more ‘mainstream’ 
perspectives. Similarly, the inclusion of a ‘gender module’ or ‘gender elective’ 
within communication curricula tends to separate out discussion of gender 
issues into a discrete package whose relationship to other elements of the 
curriculum is at best tenuous. Yet a fully integrated gender-based analysis can 
add to our grasp of complex communication processes and practices – for 
instance by moving away from a purely abstract level of analysis to a point of 
entry that recognises the actions and experience of the people who exist within 
these processes and practices.
For all these reasons the UNITWIN framework and syllabi provide a potential 
break-through. The model proposes a holistic approach to the teaching and 
study of gender, media and ICTs, based on a set of themes and possible 
sub-themes. One of the problems with a great deal of gender-based media 
analysis is that its two principal foci – content/representation, participation/
decision-making – have often been analysed separately, in isolation from 
one another. This has been a conservative, self-limiting approach. By ignoring 
structural and policy questions, it has frequently failed to recognise the 
deep interconnections – between cultural, commercial, political and media 
institutions - that drive, maintain and reinforce unequal gender relations. The 
UNITWIN framework explicitly recognises the interconnected nature of the 
various dimensions of gender inequality in the broad sphere of media and 
ICT. Its multi-dimensional and intersectional perspective aims to produce a 20
20
transformative educational experience for both students and teachers. Thus 
it is not so much concerned with providing detailed content as with laying out 
a range of topics, approaches and resources which – taken together – should 
encourage users to develop their own pathways through the complex web of 
issues that emerge in particular geo-cultural contexts.
An important aspect of the framework is its insistence on the need to articulate 
the often disconnected experiences of academics, media professionals and 
gender activists through encounters, discussions and activities that can enrich 
both theoretical/critical reflection and media practice. This is fundamental 
to the change-oriented philosophy that has guided the UNITWIN Network in 
producing its course model. Its ultimate goal is to shape a new generation of 
gender-aware professionals equipped with the knowledge and critical skills to 
advance equality, diversity and inclusion in tomorrow’s media, digital and ICT 
environment. This will be an enormous challenge.
In the four decades since UNESCO’s first international stock-taking analyses 
of the women and media field, much has changed. To revisit those early 
reports is to be reminded of a media landscape that in some ways is barely 
recognisable today. Since then feminist media scholarship has greatly 
expanded and deepened, while new media have demanded new analytical 
approaches. Yet many of the issues and problems identified 40 years ago 
remain, even if in different guises. Deep-seated change is elusive. Indeed, 
more than two decades since the Beijing Conference declared the media 
a ‘critical area of concern’, there are signs that on many fronts the pace of 
progress towards gender equality has slowed down or reached a plateau 
(Gallagher, 2017). This may be attributable to a range of socio-political 
and economic factors, including unequal access to education and training 
for girls and women. But if the question of access has been high on the 
international agenda for several decades, relatively little attention has 
focused on gender bias in the curriculum and the need for gender sensitive 
alternatives. That is why, in our media saturated world, the UNITWIN course 
model is so important and potentially transformative. 21Preface
References
Brown, E.M. 2010, A Gender Toolkit for Educators: Techniques to assist 
educators in mainstreaming gender  http://portal.unesco.org/
en/files/47654/12737402501Gender_Toolkit_for_Educators.pdf/
Gender%2BToolkit%2Bfor%2BEducators.pdf  
Ceulemans, M & Guido FF 1979, Mass Media: The Image, Role and Social 
Conditions of Women . UNESCO, Paris. 
Gallagher, M 1979, The Portrayal and Participation of Women in the Media.  Paris: 
UNESCO. 
Gallagher, M 1995, An Unfinished Story: Gender Patterns in Media Employment . 
UNESCO: Paris. Reports and Papers on Mass Communication, 110.
Gallagher, M 2017, ‘Gender and Media: A Critical Analysis 20 Years After Beijing’, 
Comunicazione Politica , 2/2017, pp. 191-208.
Lowe Morna, C. 2002 Gender in Media Training: A Southern African Toolkit 
http://portal.unesco.org/en/files/47269/12650028681Gender_in_Media_
Training_A_southern_African_Toolkit.pdf/Gender%2Bin%2BMedia%2B  
Training%2BA%2Bsouthern%2BAfrican%2BToolkit.pdf
McQuail, D 2010, McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory  (6th edition). Sage 
Publications: London.
Rakow, L 1993, ‘The Curriculum Is the Future’, Journal of Communication , vol. 43, 
no. 4, pp. 154-162.
Aldoory, L & Toth, E L (eds.) 2001, The Gender challenge to media: diverse voices 
from the field , Hampton Press: Cresskill, NJ.
  23Section I 
Introduction: A Conceptual 
Framework for Teaching Media, 
ICTs and Gender Equality
24
1.1 Gender equality, media and ICTs 
Gender equality is vital to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, a framework for policy development that engages the 
international community and a plurality of stakeholders, including higher 
education institutions. The 2030 Agenda envisions a world of ‘universal respect 
for human rights and human dignity’ and a world in which ‘every woman and 
girl enjoys full gender equality and all legal, social and economic barriers to 
their empowerment have been removed’ (Goal 5). It asserts gender equality 
not only as a fundamental human right, but as a necessary foundation for a 
peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world (UNDP 2016).
Non-discrimination on the basis of sex has been a cornerstone in the 
development of international principles and norms, from the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UN 1948, article 2) to the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW 1979); while 
gender equality has been articulated as a fundamental goal on the occasion 
of the Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995 (UN Beijing 
PfA 1995, para. 3), alongside development and peace. 
Over the years, principles of non-discrimination and gender equality have 
been enshrined in a number of international, regional and national provisions, 
including the European Convention on Human Rights (Council of Europe 1950, 
article 14), the Treaties of the European Union (EU 1999 and 2009, articles 2 
and 3), the European Charter of Fundamental Rights (EU 2000, article 21), the 
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights 
of Women in Africa (AU 2003), the Inter-American Convention signed in 
Belem do Parà (OAS 1995), the Protocol on Gender and Development adopted 
by the Southern African Development Community (SADC 2008), and the 
recommendations that emerged from the Triennial Conference of Pacific 
Women hosted by the Pacific Community (2013).
UNESCO has indicated gender equality as one of its global priorities in the 
Medium-Term Strategy for 2014–2021; and the UNESCO Gender Equality 
Action Plan provides guidance on how a gender equality perspective is to be 
reflected in policies, programs and processes at different levels. In the plan, 
specific attention is paid to information and communication with the aim 251. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
of ‘Overcoming gender imbalances universally and promoting sustainable 
development and reducing poverty through communication and information’ 
(UNESCO 2014, Major programme V). Thus building on a longstanding 
commitment to gender equality – deemed as crucial to plural, diverse, 
free and independent media – and committed to the creation of inclusive 
knowledge societies, UNESCO works with UN Women and other partners to 
develop global mechanisms for follow-up to the Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action (UN Beijing PfA 1995), where ‘Women and media diagnosis’ 
(including communication and digital technologies) was inserted as one of the 
strategic domains to foster gender equality.
In fact, Section J of the Beijing Plaftorm includes Strategic Objective J.1, to 
‘Increase the participation and access of women to expression and decision-
making in and through the media and new technologies of communication’; 
and Strategic Objective J.2, to ‘Promote a balanced and non-stereotyped 
portrayal of women in the media’, as well as a number of recommendations to 
governments, NGOs, media themselves, and other interested actors.
Section J highlights issues concerning inequality in relation to gender and 
the media that have a long history (Ross 2013) and have been consistently 
monitored through international initiatives, such as the Global Media 
Monitoring Project (GMMP 2015).
In fact decades of scholarly reflections3 and policy interventions4 have stressed 
the plurality of challenges affecting particularly women in their relation to 
the media, including distorted representation or persisting invisibility, and a 
diffused tendency to the adoption of stereotyped portrayal in the media, from 
the news media (Tuchman 1978; Gallagher 1985; Van Zoonen 1994) to film 
and advertising (Goffman 1979; Pollay 1986; Kilbourne et al 1996). Researchers 
have investigated discrimination against women in the workforce, manifesting 
in unequal pay and carrier opportunity (Gallagher 1981; IWMF 2012), as well 
as women’s unequal access to economic resources and assets, including 
media ownership (Byerly & Valentine 2016). Also, low levels of women’s 
participation, particularly in managerial roles and decision-making positions, 
characterise traditional media (IWMF 2012; EIGE 2013), as well as digital 
3 See recent collections providing overviews of themes and perspectives: Ross 2012; 
Byerly 2013; Carter, Steiner and McLaughlin 2013. 
4 See Padovani and Pavan 2017; Padovani 2018.26
industries (Edstrom & Facht 2018). Violence, abuse and harassment, including 
against female journalists, have become one of the major concerns in today’s 
digital environment (Malamuth & Briere 1986; Vega Montiel 2014; OCSE 2016), 
alongside problematic issues related to gender divides and unequal access 
to technologies and relevant knowledge. These have been highlighted in the 
context of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS Declaration of 
Principles 2003, para. 12), in recent institutional reports (UNESCO 2016) and 
within the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) 62, whose 2018 review 
theme related to gender, media and ICTs. Thanks to the influence of the Global 
Alliance for Media and Gender (GAMAG), eight recommendations linked to 
this agenda were included in the agreed conclusions of the CSW adopted by 
member states in March 2018. 
Complex configurations of gender inequalities across media environments 
are therefore to be acknowledged and addressed, in due consideration of the 
fact that the media and ICTs occupy a strategic yet delicate position in society 
when it comes to gender relations. They are crucial in making gender equality 
a reality by supporting gender aware and responsive views of the world; at the 
same time, media and ICTs are all too often immersed in systems of unequal 
gendered power dynamics, which are easily reproduced by not recognising the 
media’s own unequal structures and modes of operation, or by prioritising profit 
over human and women’s communication rights. And, yet, following the SDGs’ 
rationale, achieving sustainable development requires recognising women’s 
contributions, in all their diversity, and ensuring their equal and meaningful 
participation in the decisions that affect their lives and their communities. 
Addressing the many challenges deriving from unequal practices in the media 
and communication sectors requires both targeted efforts focused on gender 
equality and women’s empowerment, and multidimensional approaches that 
take into consideration the experiences, needs and contributions of all citizens 
as part of development efforts.
Education is at the core of any attempt to foster gender equality as an 
integrated component of the whole 2030 Agenda, so as to make young women 
and men aware, capable of identifying unequal practices, and adequately 
equipped to contribute to making their future professions and working 
environments more gender-sensitive and gender-responsive. In relation to 271. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
communication, media and digital transformations, serious commitment is to 
be expected from educational institutions, so as to provide a next generation of 
professionals in these sectors with the knowledge and understanding that will 
make a difference.
In this context, UNESCO partners with global networks mandated to promote 
gender equality in and through the media, such as the Global Alliance for 
Media and Gender5, with researchers’ associations such as the International 
Association for Media and Communication Research (IAMCR6), and with 
university networks, in particular the UNITWIN Network on Gender, Media 
and ICTs.7 The present syllabi – or course model - is an outcome of such 
collaboration: though published in the UNESCO’s series on journalism 
education, it speaks to a broad audience of teachers and higher education 
institutions across journalism, media and communication domains. 
1.2 Background to the syllabi
Understanding the causes, realities and consequences of gender unequal 
relations across the media sector, and addressing resulting unequal 
communication opportunities and practices, remains a challenge, and an 
objective that, given the centrality of media and communication in today’s 
world, needs to be kept high on the agenda in view of fostering just, diverse, 
and equitable societies.
In light of the above, the UNESCO UNITWIN Network on Gender, Media and ICTs 
was created in 2015 as a worldwide network of universities with the aim of 
promoting an integrated system of research, education and dissemination 
of activities on gender, media and ICTs across world regions. The Network 
operates consistently within the framework and goals of the UNESCO-
promoted Global Alliance on Media and Gender, to respond to the requirement 
for action established by the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which 
validates the significance and importance of research and education to foster 
gender equality and sensitivity across all types of media.
5 www.gamag.net
6 www.iamcr.org
7 www.unitwin.net  28
Starting from a mapping exercise of existing educational practices in different 
world regions – in order to highlight gaps and good practices – the UNITWIN 
Network has elaborated the proposed course model to respond to the urgent 
need to equip a new generation of journalists, media and communication 
professionals who are gender-aware in their workplaces and gender-sensitive 
in the content they produce. 
The course model has been developed by a group of scholars, active in a 
number of the UNITWIN Network member institutions from across the world’s 
regions (see Annexes), who have come together thanks to a project titled 
‘Mapping Educational Strategies for Creating Gender-sensitive Journalism, 
Media and ICT Curriculums’, funded by the International Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC) with the support of the Kingdom of 
the Netherlands.
Coordinated by the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, RMIT, (Australia, 
Professor Lisa French), the National Autonomous University of Mexico (Mexico, 
Professor Aimée Vega Montiel), and the University of Padova (Italy, Professor 
Claudia Padovani), UNITWIN Network members met in Costa Rica in April 2018 to 
develop a framework for the course model, define its goals and structure, and 
share expertise and experiences so as to make the model meaningful to a broad 
and diverse audience. Sustained exchanges throughout 2018 and several rounds 
of review have made it possible to finalise the resulting syllaby.
UNITWIN Network members have been operating on the conviction that the 
media and ICTs are part of the ‘gender-and-intersecting-inequalities-problem’, 
but they can certainly play a fundamental role in developing solutions that 
contribute to achieving the ambitious goals of the Sustainable Development 
Agenda. The proponents of the present course model believe that in order 
to harness the potential of media and ICTs for gender-aware and gender-
responsive change, transformations in organisational cultures of both heritage 
media and new media, as well as the development of personal awareness 
and critical capacities are key. A new generation of professionals must be 
adequately prepared to face the challenges of equality, diversity and inclusion in 
global communications, from newsmaking to advertising, from movie making to 
public relations, from political communication to algorithm development.291. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
To this end it is critical that media, journalism and ICT students receive 
training on the issues that surround gender inequalities in media industries, 
in the journalistic workspace, and in digital environments; training that allows 
young professionals to develop a gender-aware understanding of the content 
produced by the media, the working environment in which they operate, the 
different opportunities and challenges for women and men to participation 
and access, including to decision-making positions.
In elaborating the proposed syllabi, the UNITWIN Network aims at providing a 
gender-sensitive and internationally applicable model to institutions offering 
media, communication, journalism and ICT training. A course model that is 
informed by the mapping of existing teaching and learning practices, and of 
good practices from around the world; and a model conceived to contribute to 
filling gaps in the educational offer of most higher education institutions where 
such programs are taught. This is in view of eliminating gender disparities 
within education, and consequently in the media sector, in order to support 
the construction of just and equitable societies, and to empower women in 
journalism, media and communication industries. Finally, it is a course model 
that is grounded in UNESCO’s commitment to gender equality and consistent 
with the language and approaches through which UNESCO envisions gender 
equality strategies and programs to be developed.
1.3 Model course objectives and pedagogical 
approach 
The UNITWIN Network on Gender Media and ICTs operates to promote gender 
equality in communication and journalism education programs in all regions of 
the world and to create knowledge of the global situation of gender inequalities 
around gender, media and ICT issues across higher education institutions. 
In this light, a number of criteria and specific objectives have guided the 
Network’s efforts in elaborating model course.
In the awareness that although institutions and nations differ dramatically, 
gender equality in and through the media and ICTs remains a controversial 
issue across the world’s regions, the model course provides a flexible resource 30
aimed at impacting positively on students and young professionals. It takes 
a holistic approach so that it can be adapted to a range of journalism and 
media curricula; it adopts a broad understanding of global communications 
so as to enable a wide use across disciplinary domains. Addressing the goal 
of educating gender-sensitive graduates – so as to impact on the future 
communication environment to make it inclusive, diverse and plural – the 
holistic approach is reflected in a series of themes, sub-themes and principles 
that are translated into the structure of the course model. In developing 
educational activities based on the proposed model, dialogues between 
teaching staff from different disciplines should be facilitated and valued, since 
they can prepare future professionals to deal with gender-related complexities 
of media and ICTs.
At the same time the model course is intended to have a transformative impact 
on the academic staff also, promoting their gender sensitivity, and supporting 
their initiatives within their home institutions with informed materials, new ideas 
and useful tips on how to enrich their educational interventions. 
Moreover the UNITWIN Network highlights the necessity to mainstream – 
at the institutional level of universities, faculties, departments and formal 
degrees – the notion that a course on gender, media and ICTs must be 
an integral part of media, communication and journalism programs. More 
broadly, mainstreaming gender awareness across the university ensures 
new educational gender-sensitive modules are made within a context that 
guarantees sustainability and institutional support.
The present resource thus proposes some scenarios of use of the course 
model, so as to make it flexible, adaptable and relevant to the specific context 
where it will be offered. To this end, as well as making reference to international 
reading materials, sets of international and regional recommended resources 
have been included to be presented and discussed in class, and referred to in 
the conduct of various activities.
 Aware of the fact that a disconnection between the educational and 
professional worlds still characterises the media and ICT sectors in many 
regions and contexts, the proposed model invites connecting theoretical 311. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
elements and learning objectives with media processes and structures. This 
can also be done by engaging media and ICT industries, possibly involving 
them in the design and implementation of specific educational activities, 
through talks, internships and monitoring activities.
Furthermore, in due consideration of the multi-actor and multi-level context 
that characterises media and ICT operations, it is suggested that teaching 
and learning activities are designed and carried out helping students to 
acknowledge efforts by non-academic actors/agents to promote gender 
equality in and through the media; raising awareness and examining on-going 
national, as well as transnational, advocacy interventions, can contribute to 
an appreciation of the role of gender equality activism towards transformative 
media and ICT practices.
Finally, as the model adopts as a baseline resource UNESCO’s Gender-Sensitive 
Indicators for the Media8 – a framework to gauge gender sensitivity in media 
operations and content, (2012).
The resulting overall pedagogical approach  is multi-level : it links local and 
global experiences, local and global knowledge, as well as local and global 
available resources. Furthermore it is an approach that acknowledges the 
transformative  potential of participatory and innovative educational practices 
that see students, teachers and the institutions where they operate as active 
components in a transformative educational experience.
Moreover the approach is grounded in constructivist  theories: as gender 
equality in and through the media remains a contested concept, the UNITWIN 
Network invites teaching and training personnel to create opportunities for 
students and interested people to critically contribute to defining the ways 
in which gender equality should be framed in specific contexts and what 
solutions should be envisaged to overcome inequalities.
This is all the more important in consideration of the interconnected nature of 
the many dimensions of gender inequality that characterise the media and 
8 UNESCO GSIMs http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/
resources/publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/
gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-of-indicators-to-gauge-gender-
sensitivity-in-media-operations-and-content/  (Accessed 14/11/201/)32
ICT sector – from representation to access to decision-making positions, from 
unequal working conditions to the absence of adequate policies and programs 
– but also of other axes of unequal power and privilege that may intersect with 
gender, such as age, ethnicity, sexual orientation and physical ability. Hence a 
multidimensional  and an intersectional  perspective is assumed.
Finally the need to link theory and praxis  remains a fundamental tenet of 
the feminist advocacy tradition that has informed the present model. In this 
vein, the model also values the possibility to create spaces for encounters 
between theoretical knowledge and evidence-based investigation, and on the 
other side, the professional expertise coming from the world of media and ICT 
practice, as well as from the world of the many NGOs, professional associations 
and grassroots groups that operate to foster gender equality in the sector. 
1.4 Course design, content, approach,  
and delivery
Given the multidimensional and complex nature of the nexus between gender, 
media and ICTs, and the diversity of geo-cultural, economic and political 
contexts in which the model course may be introduced, the different units 
propose ideas for course design and implementation within an approach 
to the general theme that is articulated in three components: main themes, 
subthemes and theoretical-methodological approaches.
Gender inequalities in the media and ICTs are complex and interrelated: 
each thematic unit in this course model addresses a ‘main theme’, while 
suggesting how each theme may be articulated into ‘subthemes’. Moreover, 
interdependencies amongst inequality issues are to be critically considered in 
their geo-cultural specificity.
A set of main themes  has been identified, which on the one side reflects the 
long established scholarly tradition that has shed light on gender and media 
issues. On the other side it builds on existing educational opportunities, expert 
knowledge, trans-disciplinary debates and a forward-looking perspective on 
how media and ICT professions evolve. 
The seven main themes identified for the model course, and organised in the 331. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
units are:
1. Representation, language and discourse
2. Access to decision-making/decision-making power
3. Gender in media and ICT structures
4. Audience, reception and uses of media and ICTs 
5. Violence against women (VAW) in and through the media and ICTs
6. Gender mainstreaming in media and ICT policies 
7. Advocacy and activism
Each of these themes can be addressed in different ways, in general terms, or 
focusing on specific aspects. Hence each thematic section suggests a set of 
(possible) subthemes . These can be found in Syllabi (section 3).
Finally, depending on the disciplinary area within which the course is 
offered, on the educational goals of the specific degree/program, and on 
educators’ preferences or previous experiences, teachers may privilege 
specific approaches  to gender, media and ICT issues. The proposed course 
model indicates different approaches that may be adopted: they are not to 
be considered alternative or exclusive; rather they may be integrated and 
matched in consideration of the contribution that each can bring to a better 
understanding of the issues at stake. 
The following relevant approaches that have been identified and included in 
the model, and briefly elaborated upon in relation to each theme, include:
 ~Feminist
 ~Intersectional
 ~Intercultural
 ~Historical
 ~Postcolonial
 ~Political economy
 ~Policy process
 ~Human rights 
 ~Sexual diversity/orientation34
Overall, each thematic unit is organised in sections.
a. Units are introduced by a short statement that clarifies the primary goal  
in addressing the specific issue and the expected learning outcomes. 
Teachers can choose to start from these introductory paragraphs to identify 
themes that are more relevant to their educational activities.
b. An outline for each theme  is presented, highlighting definitional issues, 
clarifying why the topic is relevant to a gender media and ICT curriculum, 
and providing basic evidence and reference to relevant literature.
c. A section devoted to the subthemes  follows: this provides suggestions on 
how the general theme can be approached. Subthemes can be addressed 
in their totality and interaction; or they can be selected to elaborate more 
focused educational designs.
d. Possible theoretical  approaches  to the theme are then listed and shortly 
elaborated upon as to how they relate to the main theme: also, in this case, 
selection is to be operated by teachers on the basis of course and degree 
final objectives.
e. Each unit also includes a section where the UNESCO Gender-Sensitive 
Indicators for Media  (GSIM) that are relevant to the main theme are listed: 
interested teachers are invited to make use of the GSIM as an educational 
resource, possibly engaging students in exploring ways to apply one or 
more indicator to their local, national or regional context.
f. A list of selected references  completes each unit, thus making the proposed 
model a resource in relation to essential readings around gender, media 
and ICTs.
g. Finally, further interesting resources  – such as digital platforms, archives, 
multimedia materials or tool kits, but also relevant good practices from 
across the world – are indicated in a box. That may be used to engage 
students in various activities, from research to developing critical 
commentaries, so as to get a better sense of gender (un)equal realities on 
the ground and related initiatives.351. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
References
AU 2003, Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the 
Rights of Women in Africa , African Union. 
Byerly, CM (ed.) 2013, The Palgrave Handbook of Women and Journalism , 
Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Byerly, CM & Valentin, A 2016, ‘Legal dimensions of ownership and employment 
in the United States’ in Race and gender in electronic media: Content, 
context, culture , RA Lind, (ed.) Routledge Taylor & Francis, New York.
Carter, C, Steiner, L & McLaughlin, L (eds.) The Routledge Companion to Media 
and Gender , Taylor & Francis/Routledge, Abingdon.
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) 2018, Agreed Conclusions , 
available online: http://www.unwomen.org/en/csw/outcomes
Council of Europe 1950, Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms , Council of Europe.
Council of Europe 2017, Recommendation CM/Rec(2017)9 of the Committee of 
Ministers to member States on gender equality in the audiovisual sector  
(Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 27 September 2017 at the 1295th 
meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies), Strasbourg, available online: https://
search.coe.int/cm/Pages/result_details.aspx?ObjectID=09000016807509e6
Edstrom, M & Facht, U 2018, Men and (a few) women in the top 100 international 
media corporations , University of Gothenburg, Nordicom, available from: 
www.nordicom.gu.se
EIGE 2013, Advancing gender equality in decision-making in media 
organizations , European Institute for Gender Equality.
EU 1999, Treaty of the European Union , European Union.
Gallagher, M 1981, Unequal opportunities: The case of women and the media , 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Gallagher, M 1985, ‘Women and NWICO’, in Communication for All: New World 
Information and Communication Order  (ed.) Lee, Orbis Books, Maryknoll.
Global Alliance on Media and Gender 2018, Written Statement to the 
Commission on the Status of Women 62 , available online: http://undocs.
org/E/CN.6/2018/NGO/15536
Global  Alliance on Media and Gender 2018, Shadow Report on ‘Violence against 
women and gender inequality in and through the Media and ICT in Mexico’, 
available online: https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CEDAW/Shared%20
Documents/MEX/INT_CEDAW_GO_MEX_31410_E.pdf
Goffman, E 1979, Gender advertisements . Palgrave, 
Kilbourne, J. Fallon P., Katzman M. and Wooley S.C. (eds) 1996.  Still Killing Us 
Softly: Advertising and the Obsession with Thinness . Guilford Press.
IWMF 2012, Global Report on the Status of Women in the News Media , 
International Women’s Media Foundation.
Malamuth, MN & Briere, J 1986, ‘Sexual violence in the media: Indirect effects 
on aggression against women’, Journal of Social Issues, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 
75–92. 
OAS 1995, Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and 
Eradication of Violence against Women, Organization of the American 
States.
OCSE 2016, New challenges to freedom of expression: Countering online abuse 
of female journalists , OCSE Office of the Representative of Freedom of the 
Media. 
Padovani, C 2018, ‘Gendering media policy research and communication 
governance’,  Javnost – The Public , Journal of the European Institute for 
Communication and Culture , vol. 25:1-2, pp. 256-64.
Padovani, C & Pavan, E 2017, ‘The politics of media gender equality. Lessons 
learned and struggles for change twenty years after the Beijing Fourth 
World Conference on Women’, Comunicazione politica, Quadrimestrale 
dell’Associazione Italiana di Comunicazione Politica, vol. 2.
Pollay, R. 1986. ‘The Distorted Mirror: Reflections on the Unintended 
Consequences of Advertising’. Journal of Marketing  vol. 50: 18_36.
Ross, K 2012, The handbook of gender, sex, and media , Blackwell Publishing: 
Oxford.
Ross, K 2013, ‘Gender and media: a very short herstory’, in Handbook of 
Communication History , Simonson, Peck, Craig & Jackson (eds.) Routledge 
Taylor & Francis, New York.371. Introduction: A Conceptual Framework for Teaching Media, ICTs and Gender Equality 
SADC 2008, Protocol on gender and development , Southern African 
Development Community.
Tuchman, G 1978, Making news: A study in the construction of reality , The Free 
Press, New York.
UN1995, Declaration and Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on 
Women , United Nations. 
UNDP 2016, UNDP support to the integration of gender equality across the SDGs 
including Goal 5 , United Nations Development Programme.
UNESCO 2012, Gender Sensitive Indicators for the Media , United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
UNESCO 2014, Medium-term strategy 2014–2021 , 37/C4, United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
UNESCO 2014, UNESCO Priority Gender Equality Action Plan 2014–2021 . 
Complementary strategic documents to 37 C/4 and 37 C/5, United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 
UNESCO 2016, Cracking the code: girls’ and women’s education in science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) , United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
United Nations 1979, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women , United Nations.
Van Zoonen, L 1994, Feminist Media Studies , Sage Publications, London.
Vega Montiel, A 2014 (ed.) Gender and Media: A Scholarly Agenda for the 
Global Alliance on Media and Gender , United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization/International Association for Media and 
Communication Research.
Vega Montiel, A 2014, ‘Violence against women and media: advancements and 
challenges of a research and political agenda’, in Gender and Media: A 
Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and Gender  (ed.), Vega 
Montiel, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization/
International Association for Media and Communication Research.39Section 2
User’s Guide
40
2.1 Scenarios of use
How can the model course be used? It can be used in many ways.
Teachers bring to class their experience and expertise. The present course 
model is designed to respond to the specific educational goals of the 
overall qualification of which this would be a component. Local and national 
situations may require adaptation and further elaboration towards designing 
educational models that are meaningful, appealing and forward-looking.
Hence the proposed model is not about prescribing topics, materials and 
activities: rather, the present proposal is an attempt to offer suggestions for 
the design of up-to-date and innovative models and courses, as well as to 
highlight useful resources that may be included in the design of courses that 
certainly need to reflect and address specific situations. 
Inevitably what is proposed in the units has limitations. It may not reflect 
the global richness of scholarly reflections and educational approaches 
fostering gender equality across higher education. It may not adequately 
address contemporary challenges deriving from a fast-changing media and 
communication environment. Indeed, the content and suggestions of the 
proposed course model can certainly be enriched on the bases of teachers’ 
own knowledge and understanding, as well as of students’ contributions and of 
context-related educational and communication practices.
In general terms the proposed course model can be used as a resource to 
enrich existing educational activities or develop new ones:
1. The model course as a further resource:  the model can be adopted to 
supplement existing courses on gender, media and ICT issues, providing 
international references and suggestions on how to integrate different 
approaches in educational activities.
2. The model course as an innovative resource:  the model can be taken as a 
starting point towards creating new, stand-alone courses, to be introduced 
in existing programs and degrees. In this case (all or some) thematic 
units can be included in the design of a new course; while for each theme, 
subthemes and theoretical-methodological approaches can be prioritised 
and further developed depending on contextual specificities.41
2. User's Guide
3. The focused module resource:  the model can also be taken as a resource 
from which to pick and select themes, references and materials for creating 
thematic modules on specific aspects of media gender (in)equality: 
on representation, images and language; on media-related aspects of 
gender-based violence; or on exploring the steps to be taken to develop 
adequate codes of conduct and policies. 
4. The training manual and reading resource:  the proposed syllabi can also 
be conceived as an extra resource for interested trainers, professionals, 
advocates and policy makers, who may find in this collection an articulated 
framework to address gender-related issues in their work around media and 
ICTs, as well as relevant reading suggestions.
In this way the model course constitutes a flexible resources It is a menu-
type proposal whereby individual teachers, in due respect of their academic 
freedom and experience, may compose ad hoc, original and innovative 
educational designs in response to contextual and disciplinary exigencies. 
2.2 Levels of intervention: global proposal,  
local adoption
Aware of the diverse situations in which the course model may be 
implemented, the UNITWIN Network suggests working towards the course 
model adoption and adaptation with a focus on the following aspects:
1. Institutional framework:  the course model provides interested scholars 
a resource that is not just about ‘content’ and ‘how to’ establish a new 
course, but also aims to promote awareness and forward-looking decisions 
at the level of higher education institutions. The key concept here is: 
mainstreaming gender in media, communication and ICT studies.
2. Course title:  there may be several aspects influencing decisions concerning 
course title adoption, depending on the cultural and political context, 
programs where the course is included, and expertise of the teacher. For this 
reason it is suggested that the course title should be decided at the local level 
in order to strike the best balance between the shared objectives of expanding 
knowledge about gender in media and ICT and the local specificities.42
3. Content:  the proposed course model is articulated according to main 
themes, subthemes and approaches: these can (and should) be matched 
in different ways and ‘translated’ so as to develop an educational offer that 
is relevant to the local level by pulling together shared components and 
organising them to reflect local needs.
4. Level of university education : rather than opting for an undergraduate or 
graduate course, the proposed model provides a general structure, various 
themes and approaches that can be flexibly adapted to undergraduate and 
postgraduate programs, or potentially to other types of educational and 
training activity.
2.3 Learning activities
The proposed course model highlights the plurality of learning activities  that 
can be adopted to teach gender-related subjects in media and ICT curricula: 
activities that are grounded in approaches and methodologies that are 
productive in cognitive terms towards developing transversal skills for future 
professionals. 
These include:
1. Focusing on core concepts,  such as gender equality, gender 
mainstreaming, gender sensitivity and responsiveness. To this end the 
present syllabi provides a glossary as a starting point.
2. Adopting critical frameworks  concerning the social construction of 
knowledge and gender in media and ICT. For example, activities based on 
frame analysis of policy documents or existing initiatives may help students 
elaborate on the multiple meanings of gender equality in media and ICT.
3. Taking advantage of the framework elaborated in the context of an 
international collaborative network, learning activities may be proposed 
that adopt comparative approaches towards the development of cultural 
competency  in intercultural communication.
4. Incorporating contextual studies  of gender equality in workplaces, media 
portrayals, and in relation to various cultural, political or economic factors 
that may also be of interest to students. These may include field trips, field 
research, interviews with professionals.43
2. User's Guide
5. Making use of data presented in international studies – such as the GMMP, 
the IWMF Global Report on the Status of Women in the News Media, or other 
available resources. Students can be invited to develop critical reading of 
gender inequalities with a global, comparative perspective.  
6. Introducing  critical reading of media texts – including different genres, such 
as news, fiction, advertising, but also literary texts, official reports, or policy 
documents – can be another productive way to engage young learners with 
(in)equalities and foster gender sensitivity. 
7. Introducing a  gender-sensitive review  of existing educational materials for 
media and ICT may also be an interesting exercise to highlight the gaps and 
shortcomings in literature, policy intervention and educational opportunities.
8. Promoting learning activities that may also invite students to link, compare, 
and assess gender-related situations  in the media and ICT with gender 
inequalities in academia, including a focus on structural issues, production 
and reproduction of inequalities, and women and knowledge transfer.
9. Promoting practical-based, hands-on type activities,  such as audio or 
video production, conduct of interviews, creation of info graphics (to be 
conducted in groups, with a research component, reaching outside the 
university) to develop gender-aware practical skills.
10. Fostering the dialogue between academic and professional contexts  
with laboratories and workshops organising collaboratively with non-
academic stakeholders, such as media companies, journalist unions, female 
professional associations, feminist NGOs.
2.4 Challenges and opportunities of working with 
the course model proposed by the UNITWIN 
Network on Gender Media and ICTs
Some challenges and opportunities have been identified, discussed amongst 
UNITWIN members, and are highlighted here as elements to be taken into 
consideration in the design, organisation and implementation of educational 
activities based on the course model. 44
Challenges:
1. Languages and cultural elements:  adequate attention must be paid to 
the use of gender-fair and gender-inclusive language when addressing 
gender equality issues in media and ICTs. Also, developing educational 
activities based on an international course model implies awareness of the 
necessary translation of core termts in the language of instruction; but also 
the possibility of creating multilingual spaces for transnational collaboration 
across regions. Attention should be given to different ‘languages’ – oral, 
written and visual – that contribute to construct gender in and across media 
and ICTs.
2. Contextual issues/priorities:  priorities and concerns in relation to gender, 
media and ICT – and related education – vary widely across geo-cultural 
and linguistic contexts. This invites the elaboration of educational modules 
and activities that, although based on shared elements, make flexible use 
of the proposed materials so as to make themes, examples, resources 
and references relevant to the specific geo-cultural context. In particular 
the proposed course model invites consideration for truly international 
resources and experiences.
3. Public discourse:  addressing gender issues in media and ICTs may raise 
controversial debates and overt opposition, also within university settings. 
Nevertheless, in the design of models and courses, a critical approach to 
core concepts – such as gender equality and gender mainstreaming – 
should be adopted and fostered in order to maintain the transformative 
potential that is embedded in such concepts, and not see it become diluted.
4. Resistance to reference ‘feminist’ thinking:  in some contexts the explicit 
mention of ‘feminist approach’ or ‘feminist theory’ may result in resistance 
from the side of different stakeholders. A strategic approach to the use of 
vocabulary should be adopted at the local level, while maintaining explicit 
reference to the transformative potential of education on gender, media 
and ICTs; this can be done by foregrounding positive societal gains through 
gender equality progress.
5. Link gender studies with the design of policies:  the policy dimension 
of gender, media and ICTs has been widely disregarded by different 
stakeholders in spite of the many recommendations that have been made 
at the international and regional level. It is suggested that this should be 
a core component of educational and training activities, to guarantee 45
2. User's Guide
explicit mention of internationally-agreed principles and goals, as well as 
sustainability of gender mainstreaming activities at the level of individual 
media and ICT companies.
6. Trans-disciplinary knowledge/approaches:  given the complexities of 
gender inequalities in the media and ICTs, the articulation of the proposed 
seven ‘main themes’ – from representation to working conditions, violence 
and advocacy – invites sustained efforts in developing trans-disciplinary 
exchanges, not only in research but also in education.
7. Threats to women who teach gender-related courses:  issues of support, 
and even protection of scholars who are active in the gender, media and 
ICT field is an open issue in many contexts. This is for higher education 
institutions to consider, making sure there is adequate and substantial 
institutional support to any educational activity and program.
8. Sustainability:  a concern with sustainability of all gender-sensitive 
educational activities should be embedded in the design and adoption of 
any new course or model. This attention to detail means to design, plan and 
implement new educational activities in due consideration of the human, 
knowledge and financial resources that are needed, as well as of the 
creation of ‘enabling environments’ within institutional frameworks.
Opportunities
1. Gender, media and ICTs for the 21st century:  building on the diverse knowledge 
and experiences of the UNITWIN Network’s members, the course model adopts 
a forward-looking, inclusive and comprehensive approach: one that aims 
at overcoming a still prevailing ‘binary’ interpretation of gender and media 
issues, opening a space to a more articulated understanding of gender in its 
intersection with axes of inequality and power, while at the same time trying to 
integrate concerns related to traditional media and digital media. 
2. Moving theories of gender:  not just linguistic and geo-cultural diversities 
are to be considered, but also the wealth of knowledge, pedagogical 
approaches and theoretical frameworks that pertain to the analysis and 
investigation of gender (in)equalities. In this respect any new educational 
activity should consider pulling together and fostering a critical vision of 
gender theories to support young professionals’ understanding of gender 
theories and practices as an evolving reality.46
3. Sharing knowledge:  the possibility to share knowledge and 
understandings of gender- and media-related issues that come from 
diverse cultural contexts and situations should be valued. The UNITWIN 
Network provides a global platform for sustained knowledge sharing, which 
is open to any interested university institution. Adopting knowledge sharing 
as a principle in course design and implementation also pertains to the 
possibility to create dialogues and collaboration between academic and 
non-academic entities.
4. Create curricula that respond to the specific contexts:  at the same time, 
the diversity that characterises the different contexts where new courses 
and models on gender, media and ICTs may develop, allows us to think, 
design and foster educational offers that respond to the challenges of 
diversity within a global shared plan for gender equality.
5. Institutional frameworks at universities:  calling on university institutions 
to strengthen their educational offer with an explicit focus on the gendered 
processes that characterise media and communication is likely to entail the 
elaboration of adequate institutional frameworks, at the level of university, 
departments and programs, to promote gender equality regimes also within 
the institution. 
6. Transnational developments:  as the critical issues concerning gender 
inequalities in the media and ICTs are a global challenge, the proposed 
course model offers the opportunity to think globally and implement 
transnational educational approaches and modes of delivery, while 
designing and implementing local activities. This includes the possibility 
to integrate virtual exchange innovative modes of delivery, making use of 
digitally supported platforms and implementing transnational collaborative 
projects involving universities, departments and classes from different 
countries and regions.
7. Getting connected globally:  engaging in the design and implementation 
of new courses or models on gender, media and ICTs also opens an 
opportunity to link to existing international networks, such as the UNITWIN 
Network on Gender Media and ICTs or the Gender and Communication 
sections of international professional associations (like the IAMCR or ECREA); 
but it also opens the possibility to create new networks.47Section 3  
Units
48
Given the articulated and complex nature of the nexus between gender, media 
and ICTs, and the diversity of geo-cultural, economic and political contexts 
in which the course model may be introduced, the Network promotes a 
holistic approach to the theme and elaborates a proposal for course design 
and implementation that is grounded in three components: main themes, 
subthemes and approaches.
A set of main themes has been identified, on the basis of the mapping of 
existing courses, expert knowledge, and trans-disciplinary discussions. 
Furthermore it is highlighted that each of these themes can be addressed in 
different ways, either general or with one or more specific focus/foci. For this 
reason, in the following the course outline is organised in units, each of which 
includes a set of subthemes. These are for interested teachers to consider.
Depending on the teacher’s interest and contextual exigencies, any course 
designed and implemented may:
1. adopt a general perspective  and include all the main themes – and related 
units – and, for each theme, address some or all of the subthemes (this 
is more effective where whole courses on gender, media and ICTs are 
designed and offered)
2. select one or more themes  and address some or all of the related 
subthemes (this may originate a course with a specific focus or be a sound 
way to organise thematic modules within courses offered on different 
topics)
3. explicitly adopt one or more of the suggested approaches , so as to enrich 
the students in terms of their learning experience
In this way the course model constitutes a very flexible resource: a menu-
type proposal whereby individual teachers, in due respect of their academic 
freedom, may compose ad hoc educational plans in response to contextual 
and disciplinary exigencies. Ideas and examples of how the themes, 
approaches, methods and resources may be combined are provided.49
3. Units
MAIN THEME ONE
Representation, Language And Discourse
Goal
To analyse the representations of gender that circulate in the media and in ICT 
in order to denaturalise stereotypes and discriminatory forms against women, 
against gender/generic diversities and against non-hegemonic forms of 
masculinity.
Introduction to the topic
Representation, language and discourse are systems of meaning. Media and 
ICTs use language, images and stories to create and transmit the discourse 
that forms the meaning. This practice of representation implies a production 
and exchange of written, oral, sound and visual signs, whose significance takes 
place in and responds to social, political, cultural, historical, economic and 
ideological contexts.
All societies produce systems of signs, shared codes of interpretation and 
social conventions that relate individuals and connectivities to each other. 
Therefore a study of representations necessarily involves the study of signs and 
meanings, since everything is potentially a sign and carries a significance, and 
semiotics is about decoding that meaning in a multimedia text.
Representations in the media and ICTs not only respond to the individual 
cultural context in which they were produced, but also create or reinforce 
meanings. In this sense several feminist theorists (Tuchman 1978; Moreno 
Sardá 1988, 1991; Richard 1996; Gledhill 1999; Sakr 2004; Castellanos 2010; 
Natansohn 2013) have coincided in pointing out that representations of women 
in the media and in ICTs assign to both the masculine and men a place of 50
superiority, and both to women and the feminine a subordinated place. In 
addition they have analysed how androcentrism, patriarchy and machismo 
are representations of power, expressed in languages and discourses in 
different ways and political and economic systems, and throughout history. 
Thus realities and asymmetrical social places have been configured between 
men and women, between the feminine and the masculine.
Stereotypes, sexism, reification, discrimination and violence are common 
representations of women and the feminine in the media and ICTs. These 
representations are not only consubstantial to patriarchy as an ideology, but 
have been integrated with the economic system on which the profitability of 
the media industries is based. And when women are represented in such a 
way, their capacity for leadership and protagonism in social transformation 
diminishes.
For this reason this curricular proposal starts from the historical character of 
gender representations in the media and ICTs, and also from the dispute over 
meaning within them.
Subthemes
 »Constructions of gender in the media
 >Stereotypes, gender roles, cultural patterns, archetypes
 >Relations of power (e.g. that favour and naturalise patriarchy)
 >Links between stereotypes, and the specific cultures where they are 
produced, as a practice that reinforces norms9 
 >Evidence of gender bias within representation
 »The expertise of women in the media
 >Spaces occupied by women in the news, in the cinema or television, e.g. 
how often women are relied upon as experts compared to men
 >Linking of women to stereotyped roles and places – entertainment, 
household, etc. Gender roles assigned based on, and limited by, sex
9 For example, ‘the wife’ is represented in all societies, particularly the ‘good 
wife’. In some countries, men can have several wives and the stereotypes 
vary (e.g. first wife is the matriarch and long-suffering confidant; second 
wife is a scorned woman; the third is the youngest and favoured).51
3. Units
 »Identities and subjectivities
 >The ways that systems of representation represent gendered identities e.g. 
in social media or other ICTs 
 >Identity as a result of the intersection of gender, sexuality, class, ethnicity, 
age
 >How sex and gender are represented in media and ICTs
 >Analysis of the cultural patterns that sustain sexist stereotypes and 
patriarchal power relations
 »Spectacle of the ‘Other’
 >Stuart Hall’s (1999) idea that the media is fascinated with representing 
‘otherness’ enables an interrogation of the ways representational practices 
portray ‘difference’; where popular stereotypes come from; and how 
meaning is constructed by discourses and practices that perpetuate 
inequality (including in relation to gender)
 >Examination of the figure of the woman as ‘spectacle’ e.g. to be looked at or 
as ‘the object of desire’, and how this a) constructs women as less powerful, 
or passive; b) how female characters as ‘spectacle’ maintain patriarchal 
ideology; and c) how this spectacle is intrinsically linked to the economic 
profitability of the media
 »Uses of language (oral, written, visual, sound)
 >Sexist use of language. Types of women and femininities that build language
 >Discursive, visual and sound strategies from which gender representations 
are constructed
 »Representations of women in politics
 >Representation of women’s leadership
 >Representation of women’s political participation
 »Power relations between genders
 >Power relations between genders
 >Discrimination, exclusion and sexism against women in the media
 >Analysis of whether representations promote equality (equal conditions) 
and equity (fairness), or work against these human rights52
 »Role of the media in the reproduction of gender-symbolic violence
 >Naturalisation of gender-based violence
 >Male impunity in the face of gender violence
 >Gender violence as a fatality and a destiny
 >Toxic masculinity and hegemonic masculinity
 »Masculinity and femininity (including toxic masculinity)
 >How texts operate to produce meanings that reproduce dominant 
ideologies of gender, e.g. what is masculine and what is feminine in a given 
culture, and how these binaries exclude other ways of being and often 
create negative and limiting images of women 
 >Men and the plurality of male subjects
 >Representation of male virility, privileges and authority
 >Other non-violent and non-patriarchal ways of being male
 >The impact of the representation of traditional gender roles on formations 
of identity (e.g. toxic masculinity oppresses men, represents them as ideally 
violent and imposes prescriptive ways of being ‘masculine’ for males)
 >Representations of femininity differ across cultures and different historical 
periods. A study of the way femininity is culturally and socially constructed 
over time can illustrate and potentially change the stereotypes women are 
exposed to, whilst also revealing how the media and ICTs actively produce 
gender
 »The participation of women in the production of media and ICTs
 >A significant element in representation is who produces images and whether 
women have access to self-representation and creative expression. An 
examination of industry credits (e.g. on a film or TV credit role) may reveal 
gender segregation in some fields (e.g. women are more likely to be found 
in makeup and hair than in directing)
 >Gender diversity is an issue in ICT, technology and STEM industries. Media 
representations tend to reinforce gender norms and this may have an 
impact on attracting women into those industries, as can be seen by an 
analysis of the gender norms represented. An example might be the under-
representation of women in science and technology potentially adds to 
gender differences and inequalities in that field53
3. Units
Possible approaches
There are several approaches from which each of the proposed subthemes 
can be developed. These approaches can be used individually, or at the same 
time, several of them can be used to work on the same topic. 
We suggest, below, some approaches:
Semiotics:  This approach allows us to understand how construction works 
and the meaning of the signs used in a specific representation. Gender is 
constructed through representation e.g. binary gender identities construct 
concepts of masculinity and femininity. Behaviour, power and roles in society 
are shaped according to deep-seated cultural assumptions and values 
that prescribe what a person of a particular sex can and should do. These 
are reinforced within media representations that create cultural norms and 
stereotypes that can be deconstructed through semiotic analysis.
Ideology: This approach is necessary because it allows us to locate 
representations within systems of greater meaning that, in turn, correspond to 
particular regimes of power, such as patriarchy. Ideology is promoted through 
representation whereby the prevailing ideology of a culture dominates. The media 
and ICTs are not neutral but can be major instruments of ideological domination.
Intersectionality:  In the representation of gender, identity as well as subjectivity 
occurs in the articulation of different oppression variables, such as sexuality, 
class, ethnicity or age. An analysis of intersectional representation can enhance 
an understanding of the fact that gender is only one aspect of identity and 
influence on social oppression (e.g. there is a complex relationship between the 
way in which different forms of subordination relate to each other). 
Intercultural: Language and discourse are developed within cultural 
representations that are in constant interaction. Interculturality in gender 
allows us to locate the role of the relationship between cultures as a significant 
element of power between genders.54
Women’s human rights : This approach helps us to recognise in the media 
the violation of the human right to communicate from standards of equity, 
non-discrimination and non-violence. Likewise this approach supports the 
enforceability initiatives of women’s human rights.
Postcolonial:  This approach favours the recognition of geopolitics and 
colonialism in which the representation of women in the media is inscribed. It 
also raises the need to locate the specific voice of women in their particular 
historical environments.
Political economy of the media:  This approach helps us to investigate the 
relationship between sexism and advertising, for example, and to analyse the 
direct relationship between the objectification of women and the economy of 
symbolic goods.
Policy process:  Overcoming the objectification of women in the media allows 
us to pass from passivity to political participation. This approach also helps us 
to analyse the political place of women in the media.
Feminism:  Based on values of equality and emancipation, feminism is an 
essential approach to analyse the representations of gender inequality, and 
to develop initiatives that promote the dismantling of machismo, gender 
violence and patriarchy.
Sexual diversity LGBTI: The gender/generic diversity approach allows us 
to place the feminine as central to the LGBTI, and therefore to question the 
different variables of lesbophobia, homophobia, and transphobia.
Historical: The historical approach allows us to locate specific contexts in 
which representations of genres are constructed in the media. In addition it 
allows us to put into dialogue different perspectives of the genre that have 
been constructed throughout history.
Masculinities:  This approach allows analysing the plurality of masculinities as 
an effect and reaction to hegemonic masculinity. In addition, this approach 
allows us to review the cultural patterns on which machismo and gender 
violence are based and favours the understanding that only a commitment to 
removing gender violence positions other forms of masculinity and of men.55
3. Units
Reference to UNESCO’s Gender Sensitive 
Indicators for Media
UNESCO’s Gender Sensitive Indicators for Media (GSIMs) are in two sections:
A: Actions to foster gender equality and
B: Gender portrayal in media content
The current unit focuses mainly on the second section, gender portrayal in 
media content.
B1.1-Strategic Objective 1:  Balanced presence of women and men – reflecting 
the composition of society, and human experiences, actions, views and 
concerns in media coverage of news and current affairs (UNESCO 2012, p. 41).
This unit promotes the analysis of gender representations in media content, 
as well as the structural conditions that determine said representations. 
In that sense we suggest evaluating how women and men and people of 
gender/generic diversity appear in media; how they are cited as sources of 
information; how they are valued in relation to cultural patterns. The purpose 
of this analysis is to review how social, ideological, political, racial, and cultural 
hierarchies are expressed in gender asymmetry.
B1.2-Strategic Objective 2: Fair portrayal of women and men through 
elimination of stereotypes and promotion of multidimensional representation/
portrayal, (UNESCO 2012, pp. 42–43).
Based on the analysis of how men and women and people of gender/gender 
diversity are represented, this curricular proposal encourages the conception, 
development and dissemination of non-sexist gender representations, which 
do not discriminate on the grounds of gender identity or sexual option, and that 
express the social benefits of a society governed by gender equity.
B1.4-Strategic Objective 4: Evidence of gender consciousness in different 
types of editorial content (e.g. reporting, editing, commentary, features, 
documentaries, interviews, talk shows, etc.) and across the spectrum of 
subject areas (politics & governance, economics & business, science & 56
technology, etc.) and content categories/sections (e.g. news pages, edit/op-
ed pages, business sections, sports sections, etc.) (UNESCO 2012, pp. 44–45). 
This unit proposal also examines the representation of gender in journalistic 
information. In that sense it is proposed to examine how the language used 
daily in the news, chronicles, editorials, reports, etc., affords a sense of reality 
that naturalises gender inequality, but also has the potential to encourage 
gender equality in the way of referring to men, women and people of different 
sex/generic status.
B1.5-Strategic Objective 5: Evidence of accurate and holistic understanding 
of gender-based violence in all its forms as an internationally recognised 
violation of human rights (UNESCO 2012, pp. 45–46).
This unit promotes the recognition of how structural gender inequality is 
represented in patriarchal societies. Machismo, harassment, and gender 
violence are linked to this structure, as is the lack of gender parity in salaries, in 
political participation or among the managerial positions of public or private 
companies. Media and communication representations express that structural 
and constitutive feature of patriarchal societies. In this sense, this theme is 
based on national and international regulations that promote gender equity 
and dignity among peoples and nations, such as the ‘Declaration on the 
Elimination of Violence against Women’ (UN General Assembly, 1993a).
B2.1-Strategic Objective 1: Fair portrayal of women and men in commercial 
messages in the media (UNESCO 2012, pp. 47–48).
After reviewing how, historically, representations of gender have placed women 
in a subordinate position (e.g. not as expert, nor intelligent but in roles such 
as decorative prop); and from an awareness of women’s rights and gender/
gender diversity to be treated in terms of fairness and justice, this theme 
promotes students to develop equitable representations among men, women 
and people of different sex/gender diversity.57
3. Units
B2.2-Strategic Objective 2:  Identification of gender-based stereotypes in 
commercial messages in media (UNESCO 2012, p. 48).
This unit puts special emphasis on advertising and advertising discourse. 
Historically, advertising has reified women’s bodies to associate them with 
desires for possession, control, domination and success. Numerous products 
have been promoted using women’s bodies to captivate the audience and 
increase profits (Siebel 2011). But, additionally, the advertising discourse 
(González Requena & Ortiz de Zárate 1999) has assimilated the association 
between reification of the woman’s body and consumption/possession/
control. This has helped to generalise the use of discrimination and violence 
against women to sensationalise the news, political propaganda, sports, online 
games, fiction films, documentaries, soap operas, sitcoms, etc.
Selected references
Aguayo, F & Sadler, M (eds.) 2011, Masculinities and public policies: Involving 
men in gender equity , Universidad de Chile, Santiago.
Balderston, D & Guy, D 1998, Sex and sexualities in Latin America , Paidós, 
Barcelona.
Berger, P & Lukmann, T 2003, The social construction of reality , Amorrortu, 
Buenos Aires.
Bohórquez, M 2015, Masculinity and telenovela: Between identity and 
stereotype, Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, Sede Ecuador & Corporación 
Editora Nacional,  Quito.
Bourdieu, P 2000, Male domination , Anagrama, Barcelona.
Butler, J 2002, Bodies that matter: On the material and discursive limits of ‘sex ’, 
Paidós, Buenos Aires.
Carabí, A & Armengol J (eds.) 2008, Masculinity to debate , Icaria, Barcelona.
Castellanos, G 2010, We say, we do, we are: Speech, identities of gender and 
sexualities , Ediciones Universidad del Valle, Santiago de Cali.
Debord, G 2008, The Society of the Spectacle , La Marca, Buenos Aires.58
Di Leonardo, M (ed.) 1991, Gender at the crossroads of knowledge: feminist 
anthropology in the postmodern era , University of California, Berkeley, pp. 
51–101.
Espinosa, Y,  Gómez, D & Ochoa K (eds.) 2014, Weaving differently: Feminism, 
epistemology and decolonial bets in Abya Yala , Editorial Universidad del 
Cauca, Popayán.
Feher, M, Naddaff R & Tazi N (eds.) 1990, Fragments for a history of the body , 
Taurus, Madrid.
French, L 2014, ‘Gender then, gender now: surveying women’s participation 
in Australian film and television industries’, Continuum: Journal of Media 
and Cultural Studies, vol. 28, issue 2, pp. 188–200, available at: http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10304312.2014.888040  (Accessed on 
14/11/2018)
Gledhill, C 1999, ‘Genre and Gender: The Case of Soap Opera’, In Stuart Hall (ed.) 
Representation: Cultural representations and signifying practices , SAGE, 
London, pp. 337 387.
Guasch, O 2000, The crisis of heterosexuality , Laertes, Barcelona.
Hall, S (ed.) 1999, Representation: Cultural representations and signifying 
practices , SAGE, London.
Irigaray, L 2007, Speculum of the other woman , Akal, Madrid.
Kaufman, M 1989, Men, pleasure, power and change , Centro de Investigación 
para la Acción Femenina, Santo Domingo.
Laqueur, T 1994, The construction of sex: Body and gender from the Greeks to 
Freud , Cátedra, Madrid.
Lull, James 1997, Media, Communication, Culture: Global Approach , Amorrortu, 
Buenos Aires.
Martínez Oliva, J 2005, The discouragement of the warrior: Representations of 
sexuality in the art of the 80s and 90s , Centro de Documentación y Estudios 
Avanzados de Arte Contemporáneo, Murcia.
Metz, Christian 2001, The imaginary signifier: Psychoanalysis and cinema , 
Paidós, Barcelona.
Millet, K 1975, Sexual politics , Aguilar, México DF.
Moreno Sardá, A  1988, The other ‘politics’ of Aristotle, Icaria, Barcelona.59
3. Units
Moreno Sardá, A  1991, Think the History flush with skin , Ediciones de la 
Tempestad, Barcelona.
Mulvey, L 1975, ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’, Screen , vol. 16, issue 3 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 6–18.
Natansohn, G (ed.) 2013, Internet in female code: Theories and practices , La 
Crujía, Buenos Aires.
Outram, D 2009, The Enlightenment , Siglo XXI, México DF.
Parameswaran, R & Cardoza K 2009, ‘Melanin on the margins: Advertising 
and the cultural politics of fair/light/white beauty in India’, Journalism & 
Communication  Monographs , vol. 11, issue 3, pp. 213–274.
Phelan, P 2003, Art and feminism , Londres: Phaidon.
Pontón, J 2015, Women, body and image in the advertising industry of 
Ecuador: from representation to subjectivity, Doctoral thesis, Facultad 
Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales-Ecuador, Quito, available at: 
http://repositorio.flacsoandes.edu.ec/handle/10469/8057#.W0I_Cn621R0  
(Accessed 14/11/2018)
Rakow, L & Wackwitz, L (eds.) 2005, Feminist Communication Theory: Selections 
in Context , Sage, London.
Richard, Nelly 1996, Feminismo, experiencia y representación’, Revista 
Iberoamericana , Julio-Diciembre (Pitsburg: University Library System, 
University of Pitsburg), vol. LXII, nos. 176–177, pp. 733–744.
Sakr, N (ed.) 2004, Women and Media in the Middle East: Power Through Self-
Expression , IB Tauris, London & New York.
Siebel, J 2011,  Miss Representation , The Representation Project, USA.
Tuchman, Gaye 1978,  Making News.  A Study in the Construction of Reality, The 
Free Press, New York.
Van Zoonen, L 1994 , Feminist Media Studies, Sage, London.
Valdés, T & Olavarría, J (eds.)  Masculinities, power and crisis, Isis Internacional 
& Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales-Chile, Santiago de Chile.
Vega Montiel, A & Puñal, A 2015, ‘Violencia de gé nero y medios de 
comunicación . Los casos de México y España’, en Denis Renó, Marcelo 
Martínez y Catalina Campalans (eds.),  Medios y opinión pública, Bogotá: 
Universidad del Rosario, pp. 141–162. 60
Vega, E 2014, ‘ ¿Quieres ver cómo se mata a una putita?: Masculinidad y 
medios de comunicación ’ [‘Do you want to see how a bitch gets killed?: 
Masculinity and media’]. In Herrera, A & others, Women’s rights in focus: 
Observatory judgments and media: 2013–2014 , pp. 59–71, Humanas. 
Corporación Regional de Derechos Humanos y Justicia de Género, Ecuador 
& Universidad Politécnica Salesiana & Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar-
Ecuador, Quito.
Further resources  
‘Reacciona Ecuador, el machismo es violencia’. Video kit of the Ecuadorian 
campaign against gender violence. Available in in Spanish:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldQICPCyDTY&list=PL0E6136DD9F2FEA69  
(Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NTxUWQ2IE6s  (Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LV3Am5rI7Uc  (Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8-fzhAmlSs  (Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jiTnsep1uSY  (Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okA5mcBhfLQ  (Accessed 14/11/2018)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=olb8gkuNgXw  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Habla serio, sexualidad sin misterios’. Video kit of the Ecuadorian campaign 
to prevent teenage pregnancy, https://www.youtube.com/user/
hablaseriossm  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Miss Representation , Documentary film, by Jennifer Siebel.  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TyWB4KXUHlc  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
The mask you live in , Documentary film, by Jennifer Siebel.  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I1OI9B0VSlA (Accessed 14/11/2018)
International Women’s Media Foundation 2011, Global Report on the Status of 
Women in News Media,  International Women’s Media Foundation,  
https://www.iwmf.org/our-research/global-report/  (Accessed 14/11/2018)61
3. Units
MAIN THEME TWO  
Access to decision-making /  
decision-making power
Goal 
To identify the structural conditions limiting the access and participation of 
women in decision-making positions in both the media and ICT industries.
Introduction to the topic
The power dynamics that control access to decision-making power to make 
decisions about content in both media and ICTs remain in the domain of 
men. While women have gained significant economic power and are more 
represented politically in most nations of the world than they were half a 
century ago, these advances have not carried over into the communication 
industries. This is particularly true for women in developing economies where 
women face a larger number of barriers than in the more industrialised 
economies (O’Neill & Domingo 2015). In the communication technology 
industries, most of the design of hardware and software is still dominated 
by men (UNESCO Broadband Commission, n.d.). Moreover women have little 
representation in the policy realm of the corporations that dominate digital 
communication today. Research shows that in the world’s top 100 media 
corporations, men occupy 80% of the seats on boards of directors, 83% of the 
positions in top management, and 94% of the chief executive officer roles 
(Edstrom & Facht 2018). 
Addressing the broader issues of access, therefore, will explain the complexities 
of gender relations embedded in the differences between men’s and women’s 
opportunities to decide what kind of technologies are best suited for effective 
communication; how these should be designed, built and disseminated; and 62
how women have already begun to challenge their marginalisation within 
the industries. Feminist activists have engaged with gender and power issues 
within the ICT domain for a number of years. Their approach has been to join 
economic justice to women’s right to communicate, and to the knowledge that 
communication enables. Some have defined the ‘right to communicate’ as a 
guiding framework for both analysis and action, and they have pegged women 
and communication issues to national development – in other words, one is 
needed to enable the other (Gurumurthy 2017a, 2017b).
Subthemes
 »Is representation in content a facilitator for access?
 »Access to technology and media
 >Education and the digital gap
 >Gender stereotypes and technological training
 »Women in technology industries: decision-making hierarchies and 
navigating gendered power structures
 >Structural barriers that make it difficult rather than enabling women access 
to decision-making
 >Perceptions of female leadership
 >‘Glass ceilings’ and ‘sticky floors’
 »Women in media industries: decision-making hierarchies and navigating 
gendered power structures
 >Structural barriers that make it difficult enabling women access to decision-
making senior roles
 >Perceptions of female leadership and ‘unconscious bias’
 »Poverty and access in the developing world63
3. Units
 »Women’s communication rights
 >International levels
 >National levels
 »Feminist analysis of gender and digital technology
 »Feminist activism to address women’s marginalisation and ICT access 
(including the ‘digital divide’ between those who have access to media and 
ICTs and those who do not).
Possible approaches
For each subtheme, issues can be addressed from a variety of approaches.
 ~The intersectional approach is necessary when addressing issues of 
representation and power dynamics due to marginalisation of multiple 
identities e.g. afro-descendant queer identities, Latinx identities related to 
migrant women.
 ~Access issues also need to be addressed in the context of language and the 
availability of content across languages.
 ~The roles of women in traditional societies and decolonial approaches are 
necessary to understand the impact of capitalist colonial structures on 
gender dynamics.
 ~Social justice and secular humanist approaches should also be incorporated 
to provide contextual information on how religious beliefs across the world 
have shaped gender roles, women’s participation in society, and the power 
to act as decision-makers in their respective cultures.
 ~Feminist analysis of the problem draws attention to how women have been 
addressing it.64
Reference to the GSIM 
A1.1 Strategic Objective 1:  Gender balance among decision-makers within 
media organisations pp.22-23
A2.1 Strategic Objective 1: Equal treatment and recognition of capacities for 
women and men in the workplace pp.24-25
A3.1 Strategic Objective 1:  Equal presence and participation in decision-
making of women leaders in these situations pp.29-30
A3.3 Strategic Objective 3:  Structures that promote gender equality in the 
workplace p.31
A3.4 Strategic Objective 4: These structures integrate gender awareness 
into media practice through adoption of policies and uptake of initiatives 
to promote gender consciousness with regard to enhancing diversity in the 
media p.32
A4.1 Strategic Objective 1: Integration of gender awareness into media practice 
through adoption of policies and uptake of initiatives to promote gender-
conscious journalists and other creative/technical personnel contributing to 
the production of media content pp.33-34
B1.2 Strategic Objective 2: Fair portrayal of women and men through 
elimination of stereotypes and promotion of multidimensional representation/
portrayal pp.42-43.
Selected references 
Appel, M, Kronberger, N & Aronson, J 2011, Stereotype threat imparts ability 
building: Effects of test preparation among women in science and 
technology, European Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 41 , pp. 904–913.65
3. Units
Becker, JC, Zawadzki, MJ & Shields, SA 2014, Confronting and reducing sexism: 
A call for research on intervention,  Journal of Social Issues, vol. 70, pp. 
603–614.
Broos, A 2005, Gender and information and communication technologies (ICT) 
anxiety: male self-assurance and female hesitation, Cyberpsychology and 
Behavior, vol. 8, no. 1,  pp. 21–31.
Drury, B & Kaiser, C 2014, Allies against sexism: The role of men in confronting 
sexism, Journal of Social Issue s, vol. 70, pp. 637–652.
Edstrom, M & Facht, U 2018, Men and (a few) women in the top 100 international 
media corporations , University of Gothenburg, Sweden, Nordicom, www.
nordicom.gu.se  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
EIGE 2013, Advancing gender equality in decision-making in media 
organizations , EIGE, Vilnius.
Elnaggar, A 2008, Towards gender equal access to ICT, Information Technology 
for Development, vol. 14, no. 4,  pp. 280–293.
Gurumurthy, A 2017a, A history of feminist engagement with development 
and digital technologies , Association for Progressive Communications 
website, https://www.apc.org/en/pubs/history-feminist-engagement-
development-and-digital-technologies  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Gurumurthy, A 2017b, A feminist action framework on development and digital 
technologies , Association for Progressive Communications website, https://
www.apc.org/en/node/34003  (Accessed on14/11/2018)
Hafkin, JJ & Huyer, S 2007, Women and gender in ICT statistics and indicators 
for development, Information Technologies and International Development, 
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 25–41.
Halford, S, Lotherington, AT, Dyb, K & Obslfelder A2010, Un/doing gender with 
ICT? Nora: Nordic Journal of Women’s Studies, vol. 18, no. 1,  pp. 20–37.
Johnson, DR 2011, Women of color in science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics,  New Directions for Institutional Research, vol. 152, pp. 75–85.
Lee, S (n.d.), ‘The current state of gender-sensitive curricula in college-
level STEM education in Korea and a complementary course proposal’, 
Proceedings of the Multidisciplinary Academic Conference, MAC Praque 
Consulting.66
McCormick, J & Morris, WL 2015, The effects of stereotype threat and power on 
women’s and men’s outcomes in face-to-face and e-mail negotiations , Psi 
Chi Journal of Psychological Research, vol. 20, pp. 114–124. 
McGlone, MS, Aronson, J & Kobrynowicz, D 2006, Stereotype threat and the 
gender gap in political knowledge , Psychology of Women Quarterly, vol. 30, 
pp. 392–398.
McIntyre, RB, Paulson, RM, Taylor, CA, Morin, AL & Lord, CG 2011, Effects of role 
model deservingness on overcoming performance deficits induced by 
stereotype threat , European Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 41, pp. 301–311.
Nowitzki, J & Morry, MM 2009, Women’s intentions regarding, and acceptance 
of, self-sexualizing behavior, Psychology of Women Quarterly, vol. 33, pp. 
95–107.
O´Neill, T & Domingo, P 2015, The power to decide , London: Overseas 
Development Institute.
Rollero, C & Fedi, A 2014, When benevolence harms women and favours men: 
The effects of ambivalent sexism on leadership aspirations, Ceskoslovenska 
Psychologie, vol. 43, pp. 535–542.
Tellhed, U & Bjorklund, F 2011, Stereotype threat in salary negotiations is 
mediated by reservation salary, Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, vol. 
52, pp. 185–195.
Vega Montiel, A 2012, ‘¿Quiénes y Cuántas son? ¿dónde están? Acceso 
participación de las mujeres en las industrias de la comunicación’, 
en Delgado, Gian Carlo, Legorreta Díaz, María del Carmen, Sánchez 
Menchero, Mauricio y Guadalupe Valencia García (Coords), Jornadas de 
investigación , 2011, México: CEIICH UNAM, pp. 99–110. 
Vega Montiel, A & Ortega P 2013, ‘Mexico: Structural Challenges for Women 
in News Media’, in Byerly, C (ed.) The Palgrave International Handbook of 
Women and Journalism , London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 284–300. 67
3. Units
MAIN THEME THREE
Gender in media and ICT structures
Goal
To contextualise the analysis of media and ICT organisational structures 
through a developed understanding of the concept of gender. The theme aims 
to promote ‘gender sensitivity’, which enables recognition of where and how 
difference occurs. 
 
Introduction to the topic
This unit recognises media organisations as structures with policies that 
impact gender power relations within those organisations and also within 
the media texts they create. It covers key subthemes around women’s 
marginalisation in media and ICT industries. These include: visibility of women 
media professionals, status of women within media organisations, norms 
and treatment given to women media professionals, the nature of regulatory 
agencies, and the role of leadership in fostering gender equality.
As outlined in UNESCO’s Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media  (2012 p.53), 
differences between males and females are: ‘socially constructed, changeable 
over time and have wide variations within and between cultures. As opposed 
to biologically determined characteristics (sex), gender refers to learned 
behaviour and expectations to fulfil an image of masculinity and femininity. 
… The term gender is not synonymous with women; rather the term is used 
to refer to human or social attributes concerning both women and men 
collectively’ (see the glossary in this publication). 
Socially-constructed gender conceptions impact on social roles, qualities, and 
expected behaviours and values associated with men, women and those who 
do not gender identify. Meanings are constructed and circulated by varied 68
societal structures, including those in media and ICTs. These structures impose 
norms for the way people behave, take on roles and responsibilities and also 
create ideologies about what men/boys or women/girls ‘should do – rather 
than what they can do’  (Crooks, 2009, p. 8). 
This creates pressures on people to conform to the gender expectations 
and leads to rigid binary definitions that are not inclusive. Gender roles are 
influenced by social structures of family, state, religion and educational 
institutions, and these influences and the norms they create are reflected 
by media and ICT. This theme develops an understanding of gender, which 
acknowledges identities outside of gender binaries and cisnormativity (see 
possible approaches: intersectionality). 
Men control the great majority of media companies today, including those 
that own and manage ICTs. A global level study of 522 news companies found 
that men occupied three-fourths of the top management and board positions 
(Byerly 2011). 
The ways this carries over into content can be seen in numerous studies, 
including the 2017 Women’s Media Center report which analysed bylines, on-
camera anchor and correspondent appearances and TV producer credits 
on 24,117 stories in the United States. The study found that the gender gap 
existed in traditional newspapers, online news, wire services, and TV news. 
It noted that male journalists reported three times more news compared 
to female journalists – with the disparity especially glaring in television. As 
media become concentrated in the hands of fewer owners – nearly all of 
them men, women’s access to jobs also declines. Work by women anchors, 
field reporters, and correspondents in the United States fell from 32 per cent 
in 2015 to 25.2 per cent according to the report of 2016, published by the 
same organisation. The study also found that men produce most stories 
on sports, weather, and crime and justice. Women’s bylines are largely on 
lifestyle, health, and education news. This clearly indicates that media and 
ICT structures have discriminated against women in appointments to senior 
roles, board positions, opportunities for reporting news, and the kinds of 
stories they have the chance to participate in.
 69
3. Units
Subthemes
Gendered structures
 ~Sexual division of labour within organisations and media or ICT fields (over or 
under-representation e.g. women in hair and makeup and not in directing; 
or not in senior company roles)
 ~Sexism or sexual harassment in professional relationships within media 
organisations
 ~Gender issues in media finances (e.g. women-oriented media content 
promoting capitalism)
 ~Sex-role stereotypes
 ~Unconscious bias
Role of women/third gender10 in media content creation/presentation
 ~Type of stories covered by/about women
 ~Nature of work allotted to women
 ~An understanding of equality and equity (as terms and issues)
 ~Women’s designations in media organisations
 ~Difference in story presentation by men and women professionals
 ~Structural hierarchy and women in media organisations
 ~Service conditions for women media professionals (including rest rooms, 
work breaks, maternity leave and its impact on their promotions, work from 
home, office socialisation and politics of power, etc.)
 ~Assessment of women’s work within the organisational space
10  The curriculum writers acknowledge that not all people identify according to a male 
or female sex binary. Some people do not gender identify at all and others, such as 
intersex people, have both male and female chromosomes. Understandings of ‘Third’ 
or ‘Fourth’ gender are culturally variable across different global cultures. For example, 
in Asian/Hindu mythology there is a concept of ‘Ardhnarishwar’, which is half man 
and half woman. There are Hijras/transgender in South Asia, who are persons born as 
male but who identify as female or the other way round.  70
ICT in making women visible in media structures
 ~Access to ICT infrastructure for women
 ~Control over ICT usage by women and other gender minorities
 ~Women’s cyber bullying, trolls, abuse experiences
 ~Web presence of women media professionals
 ~Class, caste, technical skills, knowledge resources, assistance for being tech-
savvy, and for women to be online
 
Structural impediments to equal participation of women in media and ICT
Since women  often end up bearing the brunt of parental duties, they are 
over-represented in freelance, contractual or temporary home-based/self-
employed work, which creates challenges of continuity, security, remuneration, 
financial independence, career development and exploitation.
 
Gender policies in media organisations
The UN report Inside the News: Challenges and Aspirations of Women 
Journalists in Asia and the Pacific  (2015) noted that only 24% of media 
organisations had a gender policy that was in operation at their workplace. 
One-third (35%) was unaware if such a policy existed. Analysis of whether there 
are equal opportunity policies, and whether employees are aware of them, can 
inform an understanding of the gender awareness of individual media and ICT 
companies.
 
Possible approaches
 ~Feminist: while women make choices, the choices are dictated by the 
structural conditions and expectations. A feminist approach would reveal 
the structural pressures on women and reveal where there are gender 
inequalities.
 ~Intersectional: a study of the complex, accumulative effects of various types 
of discrimination, and how they overlap or intersect, enables a nuanced 71
3. Units
understanding of gender and gender-based bias or discrimination. The work 
of intersectional feminists informs this theme in pointing out that there are 
multiple social identities that interact to create discrimination, privilege and 
relations of power. Gender is only one, and others include sexuality, race, 
class, culture, age, and education.
 ~Intercultural: while gender is culturally constructed, a nuanced 
understanding of the subordinated status of women can show how this is 
retained across geo-social boundaries. 
 ~Political economy: this approach is essential to understand how individuals 
operate within the institutional spaces and how the value attributed to their 
work is dictated by power relations.
 ~Human rights: women are treated as body first and person later. Gender 
equality is a human right, as is access to the means of expression through 
media and ICTs.
 
Reference to the GSIM
A1.1.  Gender balance at the decision-making level: proportion of women in 
ownership, business management and board positions p.22 
A2.1.  Equal treatment and recognition of capacities for women and men in the 
workplace pp.24-24
A2.2 Safe working environment for women and men p.26
A2.3  Equal pay p.27
A2.4 Work/life balance p.28
A3.1 Equal presence and participation in decision-making of women leaders 
in unions, associations, clubs and organisations of journalists, other media 
professionals and media self-regulatory bodies pp.20-3072
A3.2  Gender mainstreaming in all the activities of unions, associations, clubs 
and organisations of journalists, other media professionals and media self-
regulatory bodies p.30
A4.1  Integration of gender awareness into media practice through adoption of 
policies and uptake of initiatives to promote gender-conscious journalists and 
other creative/technical personnel contributing to the production of media 
content p.33
A5.1 Gender equality awareness of professors/trainers, journalism students and 
other students pursuing studies relating to media and communication (e.g. 
media management, program content, production/editing techniques and 
other forms of technical areas, including ICTs) pp.35-36
A5.2  Gender equality awareness of journalists, other media workers and media 
officials (male and female) and access to education and training, including on 
gender-related issues, for women and men in the media pp.36-37.
 
Selected references
Byerly, CM 2011, Global report on the status of women in news media , 
Washington, International Women’s Media Foundation, DC.
Crooks, M 2009, Gender lens for inclusive philanthropy , Victorian Women’s Trust, 
Melbourne, https://www.vwt.org.au/gender-lens-inclusive-philanthropy  
(Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Edstrom, M & Facht, U 2018, Men and (a few) women in the top 100 international 
media corporations , Nordicom, University of Gothenburg, Sweden,  
www.nordicom.gu.se  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Orenstein, P 2009, Because I am a Girl: The State of the World’s Girls 2009 ~ Girls 
in the Global Economy: Adding it all up , (report) http://ywcacanada.ca/
data/research_docs/00000010.pdf  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Ross, K (ed.) 2012, The Handbook of Gender, Sex, and Media , Blackwell 
Publishing.73
3. Units
Joseph A & Kalpana S 2006, Whose News? The Media and Women’s Question , 
Sage, New Delhi.
Kalpana, S (ed.) 2010, Missing: Half of the Story – Journalism as if gender 
matters , Zubaan Books, Delhi. 
UN 2015, Inside the News: Challenges and Aspirations of Women Journalists 
in Asia Pacific  (report), http://asiapacific.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/
publications/2015/06/inside-the-news---challenges-and-aspirations-of-
women-journalists-in-asia-and-the-pacific  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Women’s Media Center 2017, The Status of Women in US Media , available at: 
https://www.womensmediacenter.com/about/press/press-releases/
womens-media-center-report-women-journalists-report-less-news-
than-men-tv-g  (Accessed on 14/11/2018) 
Further Resources
Women’s Media Center https://www.womensmediacenter.com/about/press
Who Makes the News (report) http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/
stories/2015/11/press-release-gmmp
Five things about women in the press https://www.worldforumdisrupt.com/
women-in-media-la-2018/2891-2/
Identity and Gender https://au.reachout.com/identity-and-gender/gender
Media & Gender Monitor (April 2010) http://waccglobal.org/images/stories/
media_and_gender_monitor/
Global Media Monitoring Project GMMP) http://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp
Wage Indicator https://wageindicator.org/
Screen Australia 2018, Code of Conduct to Assist the Prevention of Sexual 
Harassment https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/sa/media-centre/
news/2018/04-03-code-of-conduct-to-prevent-sexual-harassment
Women In News, WAN-IFRA Sexual Harrasement Toolkit for Media http://www.
womeninnews.org/resource/4174
MAIN THEME FOUR
Audience, reception and uses  
of media and ICTs
Goal
To know and to understand how the analysis of the audience with a gender 
perspective helps us to think about the relationships established between the media 
and information and communication technologies and their audiences/users 
in a complex manner, thus promoting the recognition of gender indicators and 
perspective in the investigation and analysis of audiences and their consumption.
Introduction to the theme
Have the audiences/users changed? Or has the way to study and understand 
them changed? Or are the media the ones that have transformed the relations 
with their audiences/users based on technological change? How can media 
practitioners deal with active audiences who react to content and share it 
across networks?
This is a complex discussion that is expected to be addressed in depth in this 
unit, considering that not only the answers to these questions must take care 
of all the factors mentioned above, but also understanding that the current 
context allows us to provide feminist and gender theoretical, methodological 
and pedagogical approaches to the analysis of media and ICT audiences, 
reception and ICTs uses.
Feminist audience and reception analysis has been at the core of gender 
and communication studies, which addresses the role of media and ICTs in 
the definition of gender identity, in gender power relations, in media and ICT 
consumption, negotiation of meanings, in the appropriation of media and ICT 
discourses, etc. The new media environment has introduced a new dimension 
to this field, which is related to the uses of ICTs.75
3. Units
In terms of learning outcomes, it is expected that the model will allow students 
to know how the processes of consumption of media and ICTs operate; 
understand how new technologies impact the creation of new audiences and 
know the motivations, behaviours and key notions for the interpretation of 
audience studies from different theoretical and methodological traditions.
The evidence in Spain (López 2008) shows that it is crucial to address these 
issues during formal university education processes, where journalists are more 
likely to know and be open to norms, principles and journalistic practices with 
a gender perspective. In this way this unit aims to contribute to the training of 
conscious and responsible professionals, both in the professional practice with 
a gender perspective, and in the critical consumption of journalistic content 
proposed by the media and ICT.
Subthemes
 »Research traditions about audience, reception and uses of media: 
 >Effects research
 >Uses and gratifications
 >Literary criticism
 >Cultural studies
 >Reception analysis
 »Feminist approaches to reception and audience studies and ICT uses:
 >Current perspectives in feminist media and ICTs studies
 >Women’s access to uses of ICTs
 >Good practices on the rights of women audiences and users of ICTs
 >The gender dimension of algorithms  in media (e.g. algorithmic bias in 
social media and in search engines)
 »Reception and uses of media and ICT’s like a process with gender 
perspective:
 >Media and ICTs influence in gender identities
 >Gender power relations in media and ICTs consumption and social uses
 >Negotiation and appropriation of media and ICTs discourses76
 »Design, methods and techniques of audience research with gender 
perspective:
 >Design of the research
 >Quantitative techniques (surveys, audience measurements, studies of 
digital media and networks)
 >Qualitative techniques (interviews, focus and discussion group, 
ethnography, virtual ethnography, participatory observation)
 >Network analysis
 >Analysis of open data: open data, scraping, bots
Possible approaches
 ~Feminism: As a critical theory, feminism is an essential approach to explain 
to students new forms of reception and uses of media and ICTs contents 
by audiences and users, recognising the hegemony of patriarchy and the 
subaltern condition of women. For example, the use of remote controls in a 
household, or access to cell phones.
 ~Intercultural:  This approach allows the students to understand the 
importance of the cultural variable to explain new manners of consumption, 
assuming that all kinds of consumption are cultural. 
 ~Political economy:  This approach helps students to understand how 
neoliberalism, consumer culture and media and ICT industries work in 
oppressive ways in regard to gender issues.
 ~Historical:  This approach allows students to know how the way of 
understanding and researching media audiences and communication and 
information technologies has changed.
 ~Human rights: This approach helps learners to recognise how sharing 
content should guarantee respect for the dignity of audiences/users.
 ~Case study : A case study approach may be a very effective starting point 
to engage students with regional and local realities and research. See 
audience case studies in GSIM (in particular: Thailand Public TV and radio 
experiences: Radio The Voice in Vietnam: Unión de Emisoras del Caribe, to 
mention some examples, annex 1, pp. 58–116).77
3. Units
References to the GSIM
Considering that studying audience/users involves ‘to collect information 
about attitudes, knowledge, interests, preferences, or behaviours in relation to 
messages received from the media’ (GSIM p. 18), below are the indicators of 
gender sensitivity related to the knowledge and research of the audiences and 
the processes of reception and uses of the media and ICTs.
A5.1-Strategic Objective 1:  Gender equality awareness of professors/trainers, 
journalism students and other students pursuing studies relating to media 
and communication (e.g. media management, program content, production/
editing techniques and other forms of technical areas including ICTs) (GSIM, 
pp. 35–36)
Selected references
Ang, I 1985, Watching Dallas: Soap Opera and the Melodramatic Imagination , 1st 
edn, Methuen, London.
Bird, E 1992, For Enquiring Minds: A Cultural Study of Supermarket Tabloids , 1st 
edn, TN: Univ. Of Tennessee Press, Memphis.
Bobo, J 1995, Black Women as Cultural Readers , 1st edn, Columbia University 
Press, New York.
Brown, M 1994, Soap Opera and Women’s Talk: The Pleasure of Resistance , 1st 
edn, CA: SAGE, Newbury Park.
Carter, C, Steiner, L & McLaughlin, L (eds.) 2013, ‘Rediscovering Twentieth-
Century Feminist Audience Research’, The Routledge Companion to Media 
and Gender, pp. 61–70.
Carter, C, Steiner, L & Mclaughlin, L (eds.) 2014, ‘Feminism in a Postfeminist 
World: Who’s Hot–And Why We Care–On the Collegiate “Anonymous 
Confession Board”’, The Routledge Companion to Media and Gender , 
Routledge, London and New York, pp. 543–553.
Cavalcante, A 2016, ‘“I Did It All Online:” Transgender Identity and the 
Management of Everyday Life’, Critical Studies in Media Communication,  
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 109–122.78
Drummond, P & Paterson, R (eds.) 1988, ‘Suburban family sit-coms and 
consumer product design’, Television and its Audience, British Film Institute, 
Londres.
Dwyer, T & Martin, F 2017, ‘Sharing News Online’, Digital Journalism , 5:8, pp. 1080-
1100.
Gail, D & Humes, J  1995,  Gender, Race, and Class in Media: A Text-Reader , 1st 
edn, Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Hebdige, D 1979, Subculture: The Meaning of Style , 1st edn, Methuen, Londres.
Hermes, Joke OKE (2014), ‘Rediscovering Twentieth-Century Feminist Audience 
Research’, in The Routledge Companion to Media and Gender  (edited by 
Cindy Carter, Lisa McLaughlin and Linda Steiner), New York: Routledge,  
pp. 61–70.
Hobson, D 1982, ‘Crossroads’: Drama of a Soap Opera , Methuen, Londres.
Hochschild, A & Machung, A 2012, The Second Shift: Working Families and the 
Revolution at Home, Penguin, London.
Jensen, K & Rosengren, K 1990, ‘Five Traditions in Search of the Audience’ , 
European Journal of Communication,  vol. 5, nos. 2–3.
Jiménez, D & Moreno, T 2017, ‘Mujeres y teléfonos móviles: continuo y perpetuo 
cuidado de los hijos como una función considerada exclusivamente 
femenina’ , La Desigualdad de Género Invisibilizada en la Comunicación-
Aportaciones al III Congreso Internacional de Comunicación y Género y al I 
Congreso Internacional de Micromachismo en la comunicación , Dykinson, 
SL, Madrid.
Livingstone, S 2004, ‘Media literacy and the challenge of new information and 
communication technologies’, Communication Review , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 3–14.
Kay, M & Matuszek, C & Muson, SA 2015, ‘Unequal Representation and Gender 
Stereotypes in Image Search Results for Occupations’,  Proceedings 
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing  
Systems, Seoul, Republic of Korea, https://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=2702123.2702520  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Lopes, M 1997, ‘Exploraciones metodológicas en un estudio de recepción de 
telenovela’, Comunicación y sociedad , no. 29, pp. 161–177.79
3. Units
López, P 2008, ‘Los medios y la representación de género: algunas propuestas 
para avanzar’, Feminismo/s , no. 11, pp. 95–108.
McLaughlin, L & Carter, C (eds.) 2018, Current perspectives in feminist media 
studies , Routledge, London .
McRobbie, A 1978,  Working Class Girls and the Culture of Femininity . Women 
Take Issue: Aspects of Women’s Subordination , CCCS, London.
Morley, D 1986, Family Television: Cultural Power and Domestic Leisure , 
Comedia, London.
Núñez, S, Fernández, D & Peña, P 2016, ‘Ciberactivismo contra la violencia de 
género: fetichismo tecnológico e interactividad’, Feminismo/s, vol. 27,  
pp. 177–195. 
Radway, J 1988, ‘Reception Study: Ethnography and the Problems of Dispersed 
Audiences and Nomadic Subjects’, Cultural Studies , vol. 2, no. 3,  
pp. 376–399.
Reinharz, S & Davidman, L 1992, Feminist Methods in Social  Research , Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
Sánchez-Olmos, C & Hidalgo-Marí, T 2016, ‘Del sofá a YouTube: estudio de 
género sobre la interacción en la red social en torno a las series de TV 
españolas’, Communication & Society,  vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 117–132.
Shaw, A 2015, Gaming at the Edge: Sexuality and Gender at the Margins of 
Gamer Culture . MN: University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 
Staiger, J 2005, Media Reception Studies , New York Univ. Press, New York.
Stoica, A & Riederer, C & Chaintreau, A 2018, ‘Algorithmic Glass Ceiling in Social 
Networks’, Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference  Lyon, 
France, http://www.cs.columbia.edu/igert/courses/CSEE6600/readings/
AlgGlassCeiling.pdf  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Varela, M 1999, ‘Las audiencias en los textos. Comunidades interpretativas, 
forma y cambio’, en Grimson, A & Varela, M Audiencias, cultura y poder, 
Estudios  sobre la televisión ,: Eudeba, Buenos Aires, pp. 137–157.
Vega, A 2004, La decisión de voto de las amas de casa mexicanas y  las 
noticias electorales televisadas , PhD Tesis, UAB, Barcelona.80
Vega, A 2004a ‘Forjando ciudadanía: Mujeres, televisión y participación 
política en México’ (September), in Hacia la construcción de una  Ciencia 
de la Comunicación en México. Ejercicio reflexivo 1979-2004 , Asociación 
Mexicana de Investigadores de la Comunicación, México.
Further resources 
Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) 2009, ‘Memorandum of Understanding for 
the Implementation of a European Concerted Research Action designated 
as COST Action IS0906: Transforming Audiences, Transforming Societies’, 
http://www.cost-transforming-audiences.eu/node/1  (Accessed 14/11/208 )
Media Texthack Group 2014, Media Studies 101 – A Creative Commons Textbook, 
https://mediatexthack.wordpress.com  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Primer Informe Anual del Observatorio Estatal de Violencia sobre la Mujer, 
2007, http://www.violenciagenero.igualdad.mpr.gob.es/violenciaEnCifras/
observatorio/informesEjecutivos/docs/I_Informe_Ejecutivo_anexolibro1_
castellano.pdf  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Social Media Collective, Critical Algorithm Studies: Reading List, https://
socialmediacollective.org/reading-lists/critical-algorithm-studies  
(Accessed 14/11/2018)81
3. Units
MAIN THEME 5
Violence Against Women (VAW) in  
and through the media and ICTs 
Goal
To analyse theoretical, methodological and pedagogical approaches through 
the prism of violence against women in and through the media and ICTs.
Introduction to the theme
VAW has been identified as the main obstacle for the fulfillment of women’s 
human rights. International instruments recognise different types of VAW 
(physical, sexual, psychological, economic and femicide) – and contexts 
(institutions, community, work, school) of VAW. 
Key global entities and instruments, such as CEDAW (1979), the Declaration 
adopted in Belèm Do Parà (1994), the Beijing Platform for Action (1995) and most 
recently the SDGs, recognise the key role of media and ICTs to combat VAW.
However, instead of VAW increasing, feminist research has shown that sexism 
and misogyny in media has increased dramatically over the last decades, and 
the initial issues around the accountability of media and ICTs to end violence 
against women are still at the core of international debates. In addition, 
the new media environment has exacerbated some existing problems and 
positioned new challenges that need to be addressed – such as cyber-
violence against women and women activists, in particular sex trafficking 
through social networks and misogynistic pornography on the internet. A 
specific dimension of VAW that involves media and ICTs is related to violence 
against women journalists, online and offline.82
VAW in media and ICT content is framed in different formats and platforms. 
From the news, as well as fiction, documentaries or advertising, VAW is 
prevalent in content. Diverse theoretical feminist contributions (Malamuth 
& Check 1981; Malamuth & Briere 1986; Sutherland, Simons & Blatchford 2017; 
Feminist Peace Network 2006; McCabe 2004) have suggested a continuous 
relationship between the exposure of audiences to content and the increasing 
violence against women. In addition, international instruments, such as Belem 
do Parà Declaration, insist that violent content against women rests in macho 
cultural patterns and, therefore, these contents as well as their reactions must 
be investigated and eliminated.
Such is the complexity of VAW, which needs to be addressed from different 
approaches, such as the political economy of communications, interculturality 
and postcoloniality. The individual or combined use of these approaches leads 
us to understand VAW as a structural issue that affects the whole life of a society.
Subthemes
 ~Definition of gender-based violence
 ~Legal frameworks and international tools: CEDAW, Belèm Do Parà, UNESCO’s GSIM
 ~VAW in media and ICT content
 ~Cyber-VAW
 ~Violence towards sex/gender diversity and, particularly, towards LGBTIQ+ 
communities of colour + indigenous communities
 ~Violence against women journalists, online and offline, and women media 
workers, i.e. labour and sexual harassment, unsafe working conditions, 
violation of labour rights, cyber harassment, etc.
 ~Methodologies for the study of VAW in media and ICT content: discourse 
analysis, content analysis
 ~Methodologies for the study of VAW in media and ICT structures: qualitative 
interviews, surveys, quantitative methods
 ~Good practices to stop VAW in and through the media and ICTs83
3. Units
Possible approaches
Human rights. Gender-based violence is considered a main obstacle for the 
fulfillment of women’s human rights. A human rights approach will help to 
raise awareness of the responsibility of media and ICTs for the improvement of 
women’s rights to be free of violence.
Political economy.  As a methodological framework, political economy 
subsumes economic and sociological approaches where the former makes 
the individual its centrepiece and the latter, institutions (Weingast & Wittman 
2006). Employing this methodology in dealing with VAW with reference to 
the media, for example, involves an array of actors both at individual (e.g. 
members of the audience) and institutional levels (e.g. the media themselves). 
Interculturalism.  This approach emphasises the intercultural dialogue and 
communication among interest groups (Levy 2012). VAW is a global problem 
having culture, tradition and customs as a key component. Media and ICT 
content should be evaluated taking these issues into account. 
Intersectionality.  In feminist approaches, intersectionality should aspire to 
discern the multitude of issues that come into play and should not be limited 
to ‘categorical binaries’ of gender, class and race (Taylor, Hines & Casey 2010). 
Here, intersectionality should explain sources of violence and oppression 
against women and the role of media and other individuals and institutional 
actors in that.  
Postcolonialism.  In the struggle for situating local approaches in shaping 
local/contextual realities, postcolonialism often signifies resistance to Western 
hegemony (Festa & Carey 2009). 
Reference to the GSIM
The GSIM defines gender-based violence as:  ‘Any act that results in, or is 
likely to  result in, physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering 
based on male/female lines or on the gender adopted by a person. It usually 
refers to women and girls, but includes violence against lesbians, gay men and 84
transgender people. It includes threats, coercion, and deprivation of liberty, 
deprivation of the right to work or earn income, sexual or mental rape, stalking 
or other forms of harassment, whether occurring in public or private life’ 
(UNESCO 2012, p. 53).
A3.3-Strategic Objective 3: Structures that promote gender equality in the 
workplace p.31
Proportion of statements of the associations, unions and clubs in regard to 
cases concerning violence against women.
B1.1-Strategic Objective 1:  Balanced presence of women and men – the 
composition of society, and human experiences, actions, views and concerns, 
in media coverage of news and current affairs pp.41-42
Percentage of stories focusing centrally/especially on women and/or issues 
of special relevance/concern to women in news & current affairs content (e.g. 
gender-based violence, women’s rights, women’s achievements, etc.).  
B1.2-Strategic Objective 2: Fair portrayal of women and men through 
elimination of stereotypes and promotion of multidimensional representation/
portrayal pp.42-43  
Proportions of women to men portrayed as victims (e.g. of crime, violence/
atrocity, conflict, disaster, poverty, etc.).  
Proportions of women to men portrayed as survivors (i.e. with evidence of 
active agency despite adverse experiences/circumstances, such as crime, 
violence/atrocity, conflict, disaster, poverty, etc.).  
B1.3-Strategic Objective 3:  Coverage of gender equality and equity issues 
as an important and integral part of the media’s acknowledged role as a 
watchdog of society pp.43-44.
Percentage of stories highlighting gender equality/inequality aspects of events 
and issues (including politics & government, economics & business, war & 
conflict, crime, violence/atrocity, poverty, science & technology, sports, etc.).  85
3. Units
B1.5-Strategic Objective 5: Evidence of accurate and holistic understanding 
of gender-based violence in all its forms as an internationally recognised 
violation of human rights (ref. UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence 
against Women, 1993) (relevant to this whole section) p.45-46
* Several relevant annexes
Selected references
Broadband Commission for Digital Development 2015, Cyber-Violence 
Agaist Women and Girls: A World-wide Wake-up Call  [online], http://
www.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/
library/publications/2015/cyber_violence_gender%20report.
pdf?v=1&d=20150924T154259  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Díez, P 2002, Representación de género en los informativos de radio y television, 
Madrid: Instituto de la Mujer.
Elasmar, M, Hasegawa, K & Brain, M 1999, The portrayal of women in U.S. prime 
time television, Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, vol. 44, no. 1, 
pp. 20–34.
Feminist Peace Network 2006, Pornography Revenue Statistics [online], 
available at: http://www.feministpeacenetwork.org/2010/10/20/
pornography-the-obscene-statistics  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Festa, L & Carey, D 2009, ‘Some Answers to the Question “What is Postcolonial 
Enlightment”’ in Carey, D & Festa, L (eds.) The Postcolonial Enlightenment: 
Eighteenth-Century Colonialism and Postcolonial Theory, Oxford and New 
York, Oxford University Press, pp. 1–22. 
Gallagher, M 2015, Gender, Media, ICTs and Journalism: 20 Years After the 
BPfA Forum [online], http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/
HQ/CI/CI/pdf/1_2_keynote_lecture_margaret_gallagher.pdf  (Accessed 
14/11/2018)
Levy, GB 2012, ‘Interculturalism vs Multiculturalism: A Distinction without a 
Difference?’ Journal of Intercultural Studies , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 217–224. 
Malamuth MN & Briere, J 1986, ‘Sexual Violence in the Media: Indirect Effects On 
Aggression against Women’, Journal of Social Issues , vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 75–92. 86
Malamuth MN & Check, JVP 1981, ‘The Effects of Mass Media Exposure on 
Acceptance of Violence Against Women: A Field Experiment’, Journal of 
Research in  Personality , vol. 15, pp. 436–446. 
McCabe, J 2004, Feminist Film Studies: Writing the Woman into Cinema , 
Wallflower Press, Great Britain.
McGhee, P & Frueh, T 1980, ‘Television viewing and the learning of sex-role 
Stereotypes’, Sex Roles , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 179–188.
Meyers, M 1997, News coverage of violence against women , Sage Publications, 
London. 
Posetti, J & Storm, H 2018, ‘Violence Against Women Journalists - Online and 
Offline’, in Vega Montiel, A & Macharia, S (eds.) Setting the Gender Agenda 
for Communication Policy, GAMAG-UNESCO-IAMCR, Paris, forthcoming.
Posetti, J 2018 ‘Combating Online Abuse: When Journalists and their sources 
are targeting’ in Journalism, Fake News and Disinformation (Handbook 
for Journalism Education and Training), UNESCO Series on Journalism. 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002655/265552e.pdf  (Accesed 
14/11/2018)
Sutherland, G, Simons, M & Blatchford, A 2017, ‘News Media and the Primary 
Prevention of Violence against Women: Emerging Evidence, Insights and 
Lessons’, Our Watch Evidence Paper,  https://aifs.gov.au/cfca/2017/07/10/
report-news-media-and-primary-prevention-violence-against-women-
and-their-children  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
United Nations 1999, Press Release SG/SM/6919 WOM/1113: United Nations, 
https://www.un.org/press/en/1999/19990308.sgsm6919.html  (Accessed on 
14/11/2018)
Taylor, Y, Hines, S & Casey, M 2010, ‘Introduction’, in Taylor, Y, Hines, S & Casey, M 
(eds.) Theorizing Intersectionality and Sexuality , Palgrave Macmillan, Great 
Britain, pp. 1–14. 
Thompson, T & Zerbinos, E 1995, ‘Gender roles in animated cartoons: Has the 
Picture Changed in 20 Years?’ Sex Roles , vol. 32, nos. 9/10, pp. 651–673.
United Nations 2002, Women, Media and Democratic Society: In Pursuit Of 
Rights And Freedoms [online], https://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/
egm/media2002/reports/BP1Gallagher.PDF  (Accssed 14/11/2018)87
3. Units
Vega Montiel, A 2014, ‘Violence against women and media: advancements 
and challenges of a research and political agenda’, in Vega Montiel, A, 
Gender and Media: A Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender, Paris, UNESCO/IAMCR, pp. 17–21.
Weingast, BR & Wittman, DA 2006, ‘The Reach of Political Economy’, in Weingast, 
BR & Wittman, DA (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford and New York, pp. 3–28. 
Further resources
‘Reacciona Ecuador, el machismo es violencia’, Video kit of the Ecuadorian 
campaign against gender violence, available at:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldQICPCyDTY&list=PL0E6136DD9F2FEA69  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NTxUWQ2IE6s  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LV3Am5rI7Uc  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8-fzhAmlSs  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jiTnsep1uSY  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okA5mcBhfLQ  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=olb8gkuNgXw88
MAIN THEME SIX
Gender mainstreaming in media  
and ICT policies
Goal
This unit addresses the relevance and challenges of media and ICT policy 
adoption in relation to gender concerns. The goals are to clarify the meaning 
and realities of ‘gender mainstreaming’ in relation to media and ICTs by 
providing a history of relevant international policy debates and interventions; 
and to suggest theoretical, methodological and pedagogical approaches to 
examining gender issues associated with media and ICT policy formulation, 
adoption and implementation at company, national and supranational levels. 
By the end of this course, learners are expected to have a comprehensive 
understanding of the what, why and how of policy formulation, adoption and 
implementation to promote gender equality in and through the media and 
ICTs. They will be able to critically evaluate policy measures and will move into 
the profession with a proper understanding of normative frameworks and of 
the challenges to their implementation.
Introduction to the theme
Concerns about gender inequality in communication media ownership, 
employment and content have been associated with media policy since 
the UN Decade for Women (1976–1986). International expressions of these 
concerns have been articulated by feminist researchers such as Gallagher 
(1981), an early scholar and activist who spoke of the need to frame women’s 
misrepresentation and under-employment by media as structural problems 
that needed a structural solution. 89
3. Units
The theme of gender-sensitive policies appears prominently in Section J of 
the Beijing Platform for Action11, passed by delegates to the UN Beijing Fourth 
World Conference on Women, in 1995. Section J includes an explicit call to 
governments and other actors to promote ‘an active policy of mainstreaming 
of a gender perspective in (media) policies and programs’ (par. 237). That 
section also states that governments should support research that reviews 
existing media policies (par. 239.b). The document also encourages ‘the 
participation of women in the development of professional guidelines and 
codes of conduct or other appropriate self-regulatory mechanisms to promote 
balanced and non-stereotypical portrayals of women by the media’ (par. 
241.d) while calling for media organisations themselves to ‘elaborate and 
strengthen self-regulatory mechanisms and codes of conduct’ to comply with 
the objectives in Section J (par. 236 and 244.a/b) (UN Beijing PfA 1995). 
In 2003 participants at the UN Commission on the Status of Women conference 
in New York highlighted insufficient attention to gender perspectives in media 
and communication policies and recommended ensuring ‘women’s early 
and full participation in the development and implementation of national 
policies, legislation, … strategies and regulatory and technical instruments in 
the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) and media 
and communications’ while creating adequate ‘monitoring and accountability 
mechanisms to ensure implementation of gender-sensitive policies and 
regulations as well as to analyze the gender impact of such policies’ (par. 4a). 
More recently, a Council of Europe’s Recommendation of the Committee of 
Ministers to the member States on gender equality in the audio-visual media  
(CM/Rec(2017)9) stated that one of the strategic objectives still to be met is 
that of ‘achieving gender mainstreaming in all policies and measures’. 
This is a clear acknowledgement of insufficient efforts to mainstream gender 
equality within media organisations, also revealed by the empirical findings 
of (few) available international studies, e.g. the Global Report on the Status 
of Women in the News Media  (Byerly 2011) and the report  Advancing gender 
equality in decision-making in the media (EIGE 2013; Ross & Padovani 2017). 
11 http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/BDPfA%20E.pdf   
(Accessed 14/11/2018)90
Inattention to equality in policies may be partly due to the fact that the term 
‘policy’ is widely used to indicate interventions as diverse as the adoption 
of gender equality codes of conduct elaborated by unions or professional 
organisations; equality and diversity policies adopted by media companies, 
national media laws and strategies; and international normative frameworks 
elaborated by intergovernmental organisations. Hence students should be 
invited to critically reflect on how different types of ‘gender-sensitive policies for 
the media and ICT’ could be conceptualised at different organisational levels.
A good place to start in teaching about media policy is to locate ‘policy’ within its 
proper realm. This requires distinguishing among organisational levels with basic 
terms and definitions. Media content (news, programming, images) is part of the 
micro-level of media. Employment and hierarchies of responsibilities are part of 
the meso-level of media. Media ownership and finances are part of the macro-
level within which media operate (Byerly, forthcoming). Gender mainstreaming 
through policy frameworks responds to these different concerns, and addresses 
forms of inequality at all these different levels.
As a result, policy formulation and adoption (as well as implementation and 
evaluation) should allow assessing media progress over time in relation to 
equality and diversity (Gallagher 2011). This would contribute to guarantee 
sustainability of the progress made (Padovani 2018) and may also lead to a 
much-needed cultural transformation at societal as well as company level 
(Chaher 2014).
Finally a critical focus on policy instruments that address intersecting gender 
inequality issues, as well as the interplay between gender inequalities and 
other axes of unequal power and privilege, such as age, ethnicity, class, sexual 
orientation or physical abilities should be adopted; while policy interventions 
should indicate the concrete instruments and measures to support gender-
transformative practices within media companies, as well as at the national 
levels, and make space for monitoring mechanisms, as well as for the provision 
of adequate resources.
Today’s media environments are characterised by converging technologies 
and communicative practices, as well as an array of actors who hold varied 
interests in governance arrangements across regions and platforms. This is 91
3. Units
to say that there exists a tension among philosophies of how media systems 
should be governed – namely, those who advocate a public interest (including 
gender and other diversity), those who are more commercially oriented, and 
those who advocate a state-controlled (or surveilled) media system. 
Moreover, digital technologies clearly offer new opportunities but also 
pose new challenges and unexpected threats to women’s full enjoyment 
of their communication rights. Hence gender mainstreaming should also 
become a reality in relation to digital developments – from gender-sensitive 
architectural design of networks and software to gender-aware guidelines 
for intermediaries’ operations, such as social media to gender-responsive 
governance for the internet.
In this context the need for codes, policies, and other governing mechanisms 
to combat persistent and emerging inequalities at both company and national 
levels remain as urgent as several decades ago. 
Subthemes
 »Historical development of gender and media policy issues
 >UN commitment: the Decade for Women, the Beijing Fourth World 
Conference on Women and the follow-up Commission on Status of Women 
meetings. These meetings, since 1978, have provided the forum for women-
and-media issues, including policy issues, to be framed and for strategies 
to be developed. 
 >Linking global and local: case stories and experiences of local policy 
developments inspired/driven by international events on women’s rights 
and informed by the normative frameworks elaborated in those contexts.
 »Levels of ICT and media policy (examples to be explored and discussed)
 >Definitions of micro-, meso- and macro-level policy levels.
 >Industry/company level. Individual media companies have adopted policies 
aimed at increasing men and women’s representation in employment and 
in media content. 
 >Codes of conduct and charters adopted by professional associations and 
journalist unions to promote gender equality principles and practices. 92
 >National level policy initiatives addressing gender equality: legislation, 
policy and program adoption, interventions by independent regulatory 
authorities.
 >International policy activities focused on gender: feminist experiences in/
and contribution to international venues, such as the World Summit on 
Information Society or the Internet Governance Forum and other media- 
and ICT-related gatherings.
 »Connections between communication policy and women and men’s status 
in communication fields 
 >Evidence from empirical research can be found and presented in class 
from: Global Report on the Status of Women in the News Media IWMF 2011; 
Advancing gender equality in decision-making in the media in Europe, EIGE 
2013 and Ross and Padovani 2017; Unesco Global Survey 2016; Padovani and 
Shade 2016.
 »Women’s media activism and impact on communication policies
 >Women in many countries have organised campaigns at both company and 
national levels to advance gender equality in media policy. Transnational 
collaborations have also contributed to link advocacy and policy spheres, 
as in the case of the Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP). Research, 
case histories.
 »Methods for examining gender sensitivity in communication policy
 >Policy analysis of the processes that led to the adoption of formal 
instruments for media gender equality; content and discourse analysis of 
existing documents and policy measures to explore varieties of ‘gender 
equality’ frames; analysis of policy implementation.
Possible approaches
 ~Historical:  this approach is fundamental to provide students a proper 
understanding of the long-term challenge of policies for media gender 
equality, and of the many instances where diverse actors and networks 
have contributed to the definition of normative frameworks which constitute 
fundamental references for national and local policy developments.93
3. Units
 ~Feminist political economy:  looking at policy developments – and missed 
opportunities –from a political economy perspective invites focusing on the 
power relations that structure media environments and define principles, 
priorities and outputs in relation to gender and intersecting concerns.
 ~Intersectional:  much remains to be done to develop an understanding of 
gender-sensitive policies for the media and ICTs capable of including an 
intersectional perspective that encourages examination of multiple and 
intersecting axes of inequality – such as age, ethnicity, sexual orientation – 
to emerge and be properly addressed. Gender-impacting policies outside of 
media and ICT should also be kept in mind.
 ~Postcolonial:  contributions to a better understanding of the link between 
gender inequalities and communication policy developments have come 
from different world regions, starting from the late 1990s with a series of post-
Beijing regional seminars organised by WACC (see Padovani & Pavan 2017). 
The full story beyond Western feminist concerns is yet to be told, highlighting 
the contributions that have been made by authors and advocates from 
the ‘Global South’: starting points may be the Gender Links in South Africa, 
Comunición para la Igualdad in Latin America and ITforChange in India.
 ~Human rights:  women’s communication rights are at the core of 
international initiatives, such as the Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP). 
A human rights approach to policy development would include situating 
gender equality within existing human rights statutes and other governing 
documents (e.g. the UN Declaration of Human Rights).
 ~ Case study:  a case study approach may be a very effective starting point 
to engage students with the realities – the challenges and opportunities – of 
the policy cycle in relation to media gender equality: from issue framing to 
policy design formulation and adoption and implementation.
References to the GSIM
UNESCO’s Gender-Sensitive Indicators for Media (GSIM) provide the details 
for constructing a policy framework towards gender equality in and through 
the media. Throughout the framework provided by UNESCO, policy adoption 
emerges as a priority in relation to a number of gender in/equality issues.94
Category A. ACTIONS TO FOSTER GENDER EQUALITY WITHIN MEDIA 
ORGANIZATIONS
A1 – GENDER BALANCE AT DECISION-MAKING LEVELS
A1.1 – Strategic Objective 1: Gender balance among decision-makers within 
media organisations. This objective specifically identifies the adoption of 
policies within media organisations as the means for creating equality 
between men and women at decision-making levels in media management 
pp.22-23.
Indicators:
4.  Effective equal opportunity policies with comprehensive implementing 
measures, targets, timelines and monitoring mechanisms.
5.  Equal opportunity policies developed within media houses in a cooperative 
manner and with the endorsement of staff.
6.  Measures/policies adopted for the removal of obstacles to equal 
opportunities and for the enhancement of women’s work.
A2 – GENDER EQUALITY IN WORK AND WORKING CONDITIONS  
A2.1 – Strategic Objective 1:  Equal treatment and recognition of capacities for 
women and men in the workplace pp.24-24.
Indicators:
6.  Existence of media policies securing equal treatment with respect to 
general working conditions/environment and rights including wages and 
promotion opportunities.
A2.2 – Strategic Objective 1: Safe working environment for women and men p.26.
Indicators:
3.  Alignment of media policies to relevant articles of CEDAW concerning a 
safe working environment for women and men and actions to be taken to 
address gaps.95
3. Units
A2.3 – Strategic Objective 1: Equal pay p.27.
Indicators:
7.  Staff/collective agreement provisions securing equal pay for women and men.
A2.4 – Strategic Objective 1: Work-life balance p.28.
Indicators:
3.  Specific policies on flexible working arrangements.
7.  Specific clauses and policies on maternity/paternity leave and support for 
children.
A3 – GENDER EQUALITY IN UNIONS, ASSOCIATIONS, CLUBS AND ORGANISATIONS 
OF JOURNALISTS, OTHER MEDIA PROFESSIONALS AND MEDIA SELF-REGULATORY 
BODIES  
A3.1 – Strategic Objective 1:  Equal presence and participation in decision-
making of women leaders in these structures pp.29-30.
Indicators:
4.  Existence of quota systems for representation of women in decision-
making in these structures.
5.  Existence of affirmative action to increase the female leadership presence 
in these structures.
A3.3 – Strategic Objective 3: Structures that promote gender equality in the 
workplace p.31.
1.  These structures to develop and propose recommendations for more gender 
equality to media executives and local, regional and national governments.
A3.4 – Strategic Objective 1:  Structures to integrate gender awareness into 
media practice through adoption of policies and uptake of initiatives …p.32.
3.  Adoption and promotion of resources such as policies, codes of ethics, 
stylebooks/manuals.96
A4 – MEDIA ORGANISATIONS PROMOTE ETHICAL CODES/EDITORIAL POLICIES IN 
FAVOUR OF GENDER EQUALITY IN MEDIA CONTENT
A4.1 – Strategic Objective 1: Integration of gender awareness into media 
practice through the adoption of policies and the uptake of initiatives to 
promote gender-conscious journalists and other creative/technical personnel 
contributing to the production of media content.
The entire section is devoted to the formulation and adoption of gender 
policies or codes of ethics, and to the relevance of raising awareness, 
particularly amongst staff and managerial personnel.
Selected references 
APC 2012, Critically absent. Women’s rights in internet governance , APC Issue 
Papers.
APC 2015, How technology issues impact women’s rights: 10 points on Section J .
Byerly, CM 2011, Global report on the status of women in news media , 
Washington, DC: International Women’s Media Foundation, https://www.
iwmf.org/resources/global-report-on-the-status-of-women-in-the-news-
media/  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Byerly, CM, Park, YJ, Miles, RD (The Howard Media Group) 2011, ‘Race- and 
gender-conscious policies: Toward a more egalitarian communications 
future’, in Journal of Information Policy , vol. 1, pp. 425–440. 
Byerly, CM (ed.) 2013, The Palgrave Handbook of Women and Journalism , 
Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK.
Chaher, S 2014, Public policies on communication and gender in Latin America: 
The path ahead of us , Asociación Civil Comunicación para la Igualdad 
(English text: 98 - 192).97
3. Units
Cuellar, D 2017, December 11, ‘Save net neutrality! It enables women and 
people of color to thrive online and amplify their own stories – uncensored 
and on their own terms, Women’s Media Center website, http://www.
womensmediacenter.com/news-features/save-net-neutrality-it-enables-
women-and-people-of-color-to-thrive-online-and-amplify-their-own-
storiesuncensored-and-on-their-own-terms  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
Doria, A 2015, Rights, gender and internet governance, APC Issue Papers, https://
www.apc.org/en/pubs/women%E2%80%99s-rights-gender-and-internet-
governance  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Drossou O & Jensen, H (eds.) Visions in process II, The World Summit on the 
Information Society 2003–2005,  Heinrich Böll Foundation, Berlin.
Gallagher, M 2011, Media and communication policy: Struggling for space, 
in Mansell, R & Raboy, M (eds.), The handbook of global media and 
communication policy , Wiley Blackwell, Malden, MA.
Gallagher, M 2017, Gender and media: A critical analysis after 20 years of the 
BpfA, ComPol:Comunicazione politica, vol. 2, pp. 191–208.
Gurumurthy, A 2014, ICTs for empowerment of women and girls, A research 
and policy advocacy initiative on empowering women on and through 
the web in 10 countries  (Project Background  Document), World Wide Web 
Foundation.
International Association of Women in Radio and Television IAWRT 2015, Gender 
equality and social justice in public media, Media monitoring research in 
eight countries across four continents .
IAWRT (project coordinators: G Gober & D Nastasia) (countries included: South 
Africa, Tanzania, Kenya, Cambodia, India, Poland, Moldova, the United 
States of America), ITU 2012, A bright future in ICTs, opportunities for a new 
generation of women.
Jensen, H 2010, Global feminist politics concerning media, ICTs: Past lessons 
and present challenges, Women in Action, vol. 1, pp. 47–52.
Martin, F & Goggin G 2016, ‘Digital transformations? Gendering the end user in 
digital government policy’ in Journal of Information Policy,  Special issue on 
‘Gendering Global Media Policy: Critical Perspectives On Digital Agendas’, 
Padovani C & Shade L (eds.).98
McLaughlin, L & Pickard, V 2005, ‘What is bottom up about global internet 
governance?’ Global Media and Communication , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 357–373. 
Ostling, A & I Nenadich 2017, ‘Public Service Media in Europe: Gender Equality 
Policies and the Representation of Women in Decision-Making Roles’, 
Comunicazione Politica , vol. 2, pp. 209–232.
Padovani, C 2014a, ‘Gaps in media and communication governance: Towards 
a gender-aware research and advocacy agenda’, in A Vega Montiel (ed.), 
Media and gender: A scholarly agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender, vols. 55–61, UNESCO, Paris.
Padovani, C 2018, ‘Gendering media policy research and communication 
Governance’ in Javnost –The Public, Journal of the European Institute for 
Communication and Culture , Taylor & Francis, vol. 25.
Padovani, C & Shade, LR 2016, Gendering global media policy: Critical 
perspectives on digital agendas, Journal of Information Policy  (Special 
issue), http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/jinfopoli.6.issue-2016  (Accessed 
14/11/2018)
Padovani, Claudia & Elena Pavan 2017, ‘Gender, Politics and the Media: Lessons 
Learned and Struggles for Change Twenty Years After the Beijing Fourth 
World Conference on Women,’ ComPol: Comunicazione Politica, vol. 2 
(Special issue), pp. 177–190.
Pandian, H 1999, Engendering communication policy: Key Issues in the 
International Women-and-Media Arena and Obstacles to Forging and 
Enforcing Policy , Media,  Culture and Society , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 459–480. 
Prasad, K 2008, Gender-sensitive communication policies for women’s 
development: Issues and challenges, in K Sarikakis & LR Shade (eds.), 
Feminist Interventions in  International Communication: Minding the Gap , 
Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham, MD, pp. 74–89.
Ross, K & Padovani, C 2017, Gender Equality and the Media: A Challenge for 
Europe , Routledge, New York.
Sarikakis, K & Nguyen ET 2009, The trouble with gender: Media policy and 
gender mainstreaming in the European Union, Journal of European 
Integration , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 201–216. 
Shade, LR 2014, ‘Missing in action: Gender in Canada’s digital economy agenda’, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 887–896.99
3. Units
Further resources
Advancing Gender Equality in Media Industries (AGEMI) – This EU-funded project 
has produced a resources bank of good practices to advance gender 
equality in media industries, which includes examples of policy practices. 
An interactive map of organisations working in the field can be explored. 
Moreover the project created an online educational module comprising ten 
thematic units articulated in video-lectures, learning activities and various 
materials. These units, including one on gender-responsive policies for the 
media and ICTs, www.agemi-eu.org  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Association for Progressive Communication – APC WNSP Policy Guide 
for Gender and ICTs, http://archive.kubatana.net/html/archive/
inftec/060117apc.asp?sector=inftec&year=2006&range_start=91  (Accessed 
on 14/11/2018)
Council of Europe CoE 2014, Gender Equality and the Media at National Level:  
Compilation of good practices from member states , Strasbourg: CoE 
(includes good practices on policy at national level), https://rm.coe.
int/1680590557  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Council of Europe CoE 2015, Handbook on the implementation of 
Recommendation M/Rec(2013)1 of the Committee of Ministers of the 
Council of Europe on Gender Equality and Media , Strasbourg: CoE (includes 
good practices on different types of policy), https://rm.coe.int/1680590558  
(Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Dynamic Coalition on Gender and Internet Governance, http://www.
intgovforum.org/cms/dynamiccoalitions/77-gender-and-ig#introduction  
(Accessed 14/11/2018
EFJ/IFJ 2012, A Handbook on Gender Equality Good Practices in European 
Journalists’ Unions , Brussels: I/EFJ (includes good practices on policies 
adopted by journalist unions), https://en.unesco.org/interculturaldialogue/
resources/312  (Accessed 14/11/2018)
GenderLinks, Gender and Media Policy page – This section of the Gender Links 
website describes activities carried out to ensure the SADC Gender Protocol 
targets of gender equality in and through the media are integrated into the 
work of regulatory authorities and media houses, http://genderlinks.org.za/
what-we-do/media/policy/100
Mapping Global Media Policy project – This dataset includes profiles of 
individuals, organisations, policy documents and other resources. Two 
thematic sections are devoted to gender and media, respectively, at 
international and European levels, http://www.globalmediapolicy.net 
(Accessed 14/11/2018)
Vega Montiel, A 2015, ‘La transversalización de la perspectiva de género en 
la reforma de telecomunicaciones y radiodifusión’ en Padierna, Dolores y 
Aimée Vega Montiel (Comps.),  La perspectiva de género en la reforma de 
Telecomunicaciones y Radiodifusión , Senado de la República, México,  
pp. 59–94.
Vega Montiel, A 2016, ‘Políticas de género y comunicación en México a partir 
de la aprobación de la Ley Federal de Telecomunicaciones y Radiodifusión 
en materia de igualdad de género’, en Chaher, Sandra (Comp.), Políticas 
públicas de comunicación y género en América Latina: entre andares y 
retrocesos, Buenos Aires: Friedrich Ebert, pp. 128–132.
WACC & IFJ 2014, Resource Kit for Gender Ethical Journalism and Media House 
Policy , Book 1: Conceptual issues, Book 2: Practical resources (ed. Sarah 
Macharia & Pamela Morinière), http://whomakesthenews.org/articles/
learning-resource-kit-for-gender-ethical-journalism  (Accessed on 
14/11/2018)
 101
3. Units
MAIN THEME SEVEN
Advocacy and activism
Goal
To analyze the ways that women and sexual minorities have used advocacy 
and activism to seek greater access to and diversity within and through 
ICTs and other media, through the prism  of theoretical, methodological and 
pedagogical approaches.
Introduction to the theme
This unit strives to be inclusive in its understanding of gender, including those 
identified as men and women, as well as a range of other sexualities often 
categorised together as LGBTQI – lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer 
and intersex. 
Advocacy  refers to strategies to influence policy-makers and other decision-
makers to adopt criteria, laws, regulations and/or other practices regarding 
a wide range of issues affecting human lives (Sprechman & Pelton 2011). 
Advocacy is expressed, or carried out, through activism , which includes overt 
efforts to create change. Advocacy and activism, as employed by feminist and 
LGBTQI rights groups, thus work together to maintain or expand existing rights 
associated with equality and justice. Media-related advocacy and activism 
have long histories across the world, but have had particularly noteworthy 
presences within liberation movements of the 20th and 21st centuries. These 
have arisen most visibly through the global women’s liberation movement 
(and its national counterparts), beginning with the UN Decade for Women in 
1976, when women began to articulate criticisms of the news media’s omission 
and misrepresentation of their issues and activities, and their marginalisation 
as professionals within media industries. Similar criticisms were expressed 
by gay liberation groups in this same time period, focusing particularly on 102
stereotyping and other representation aspects of LGBTQI individuals and 
communities, and a lack of information about important issues, such as HIV/
AIDS prevention. 
In recent years, media advocacy and activism have focused on issues of 
access, representation and policy in traditional media platforms, as well as 
new digital information communication technologies. Increasingly, as digital 
communication goes global, these media platforms are merged in both their 
organisational and content delivery aspects.
Media advocacy and activism may include many different repertoires of action 
e.g. letter writing, public demonstrations (both small scale and mass), sit-
ins, speech-giving, boycotts, non-violent civil disobedience, and negotiation 
between movement leaders and decision-makers. Advocacy strategies may 
be focused on a one-time event, such as a demonstration or boycott to protest 
a film or news coverage, or a longer-term plan aimed at enacting new policies, 
laws or other practices, such as getting media companies to adopt gender 
equality policies in the workplace. Advocacy and activism engaging long-term 
strategies always require multiple activities (e.g. letter writing and speeches 
and negotiation) to accomplish their goals. 
Where there have been debates about specifically media actors who are 
journalists playing an advocacy or activist role, certainly there is the issue 
of representation in usage of these activities by actors such as the #MeToo 
movement.
Subthemes
 ~Theoretical approaches to gender advocacy and activism:  key concepts 
about advocacy and activism and their relationship with gender, sexual 
diversity, media and ICTs.
 ~Historical efforts mapping advocacy and activism over time related to 
gender and diversity equality in media and ICTs:  historiographical sources 
on the presence and achievements of gender and sexual diversity advocacy 
and activism in the media and ICTs.103
3. Units
 ~Specific issue campaigns organised by feminist and LGBTQI groups: 
focusing on issues addressed, strategies employed, and achievements.
 ~Transnational networks: advocacy programs and activism that promote 
gender and sexual diversity equality in and through the media by 
connecting across countries and regions.
 ~Political opportunity structures:  from policy makers who work for the 
government to lobbyists, social stakeholders and civil society organisations 
involved in campaigns to achieve greater equality of access (or other 
gender-related goals)
 ~Advocacy for best practices: How to define a breakthrough in a gender or a 
sexual diversity inequality problem in media and ICTs from a social change 
perspective, and seek change with feminist and LGBTQI interests in mind.
 ~Media activism and alternative media:  alternative and activist women-led 
and feminist media offer participatory forums for women’s media activism 
and sites of debate and the exchange.
 ~Cases studies in gender and sexual diversity advocacy and activism in 
media and ICTs: successful strategies in local and global media and ICT 
contexts.
Possible approaches
Media advocacy and activism,  and the varied forms of resistance and 
practices they involve, may be studied using social change theory, social 
movement theory, feminist theory, and queer theory, among others (Kluge 
1982). Increasingly such study is undertaken through an intersectionality 
approach, which recognises that human beings are defined by multiple 
characteristics – gender, sexuality, nationality, socioeconomic class, religion, 
physical ability, etc. (Collins & Bilge 2017). 
Intersectionality  allows us to understand oppression, privilege and human 
rights in a global context relative to intersecting issues that cause inequality 
in society (e.g. how elements such as racism, sexism, cissexism, homophobia 
work to create interlocking systems of oppression). This allows us to see that 104
the advocacy and activism from women and LGTBIQ+ for equal rights are 
fundamental to achieving the promise of human rights for all. Intersectionality, 
therefore, can be a tool for building a global culture of human rights from the 
local grassroots to the global level.
Relationship to GSIM 
A1. Gender balance at the decision-making level pp.22-23
A2. Gender equality in work and working conditions pp.24-27
A3. Gender equality in unions, associations, clubs and organisations of 
journalists, other media professionals and media self-regulatory bodies 
pp29-30
A4. Media organisations promote ethical codes and policies in favour of 
gender equality in media content pp.33 -34
In addition, all case studies on gender mainstreaming in the media from  
the Asia-Pacific, the Caribbean, Europe, the Arab States, Latin America and 
Southern Africa, included in GSIM’s Annex 1, have extensive references to 
advocacy strategies in a holistic organisation-wide approach (pp. 57–183).
References
AWID 2004, ‘Intersectionality: A Tool for Gender and Economic Justice’, Facts 
& Issues,  9, 8, https://lgbtq.unc.edu/sites/lgbtq.unc.edu/files/documents/
intersectionality_en.pdf  (Accesed on 14/11/2018)
Buckley, S 2013, Advocacy Strategies and Approaches: Overview Paper , 
available at: http://socialeconomyaz.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/
APCProPoorKit_Advocacy_Overview_EN.pdf  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Byerly CM & Ross K 2006, Women and Media: A Critical Introduction, Wiley-
Blackwell, Malden, MA.105
3. Units
Collins, PH & Bilge, S 2016, Intersectionality , Polity Press, Cambridge, UK & 
Malden, MA, USA. 
De Waal, A (ed.) 2015, Advocacy in conflict: critical perspectives on 
transnational activism , Zed Books Ltd.
Fox, J 2001, ‘Vertically integrated policy monitoring: A tool for civil society policy 
advocacy’, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 616–627.
Ferree MM & Tripp AM (eds.) 2006, Global Feminism: Transnational Women’s 
Activism, Organizing and Human Rights , New York University Press, New York.
García A & Silva A 2017, ‘Ciberfeminismo o Feminismo en la Red: Haciendo 
arqueología en Internet’, Antropología Experimental, vol. 17, pp. 277–286.
Goodwin, J & Jasper, JM (eds.) 2003, The Social Movement Reader: Cases and 
Concepts , Blackwell Publishing: Oxford.
Jordan, T 2002, Activism! Direct Action, Hacktivism and the Future of Society , 
Reaktion Books, London. 
Keck, ME & Sikkink, K 2014, Activists beyond borders: Advocacy networks in 
international politics , Cornell University Press, Ithaca, United States.
Keck, ME & Sikkink, K 2000, ‘Historical Precursors to Modern Transnational Social 
Movements and Networks’, in Globalizations and Social Movements: Culture, 
Power, and the Transnational Public Sphere , University of Michigan Press 
Ann Arbor, pp. 35–53.
Kling, JM & Posner, PS 1990, Dilemmas of Activism: Class, Community, and the 
Politics of Local Mobilization , Temple University Press, Philadelphia. 
Mueller, M 2004, ‘Reinventing media activism: Public interest advocacy in the 
making of US communication-information policy, 1960–2002’, Information 
Society , vol. 20, no. 3, pp.169–187, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=586625  (Accessed on 14/1/2018)
Napoli, PM 2007, ‘Public Interest Media Activism and Advocacy as a Social 
Movement: A Review of the Literature’, McGannon Center Working Paper 
Series , Paper 21, http://fordham.bepress.com/mcgannon_working_
papers/21  (Accessed on 14/11/2018)
Padovani, C & Calabrese A (eds.) 2014, Communication Rights and Social 
Justice: Historical Accounts of Transnational Mobilizations, Palgrave 
Macmillan, London.106
Perlman, A 2007, ‘Feminists In The Wasteland: The National Organization for 
Women and television reform,’ Feminist Media Studies , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 413–431.
Regan Shade, L 2011, ‘Media Reform in the United States and Canada: Activism 
and Advocacy for Media Policies in the Public Interest’, in The handbook of 
global media and communication policy, General communication & media 
studies , Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, UK, pp.147–165.
Vega Montiel A 2014 (ed.) A Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance on Media 
and Gender , UNESCO-IAMCR, Paris.
Further resources
Council of Europe Gender Equality Commission 2014, Gender Equality and 
the Media at National Level: Compilation of Good Practices from Member 
States , http://bit.ly/1DvXmba  (shortened URL).
Edström M & Mølster R 2014, Making Change. Nordic Examples of Working 
Toward Gender Equality in the Media, Nordicom,  http://hdl.handle.
net/2077/37362
Inter Press Service (IPS) Africa 2008, Women in the News: Strengthening the 
Voice and Visibility of Women in the African Media’s Coverage of Elections, 
Politics and Governance, http://www.ips.org/africa/library/publications/
ips_the_women_in_the_news.pdf
Inter Press Service (IPS) Africa 2010, Gender and Development Glossary,  http://
www.ips.org/africa/library/GenderandDevelopmentGlossary.pdf
Just Associates, the Association for Progressive Communications and Women’s 
Net 2015, ICTs for Feminist Movement Building: Activists Toolkit, JASS, APC & 
WN, http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-the-news/Images/Blog/JASS-
APC-Women-Net-ICTs-Toolkit-2015.pdf
UNESCO 2011, Femmes et Medias au Maghreb. Guide à l’intention de la société civile 
pour améliorer la représentation des femmes dans les medias au Maghreb, 
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/214631f.pdf
UN Women 2011, Election Coverage from a Gender Perspective: A Media 
Monitoring Manual,  https://www.idea.int/publications/catalogue/election-
coverage-gender-perspective-media-monitoring-manual107
3. Units
Women’s Media Centre and She Should Run 2012, Name it. Change it. Sexism 
and Equality don’t mix. The Women’s Media Centre Guide to Gender Neutral 
Coverage of Women Candidates + Politicians, http://wmc.3cdn.net/
b2d5a7532d50091943_n1m6b1avk.pdf
Further web resources (for civil society  
and activists) 
Comunicación para la Igualdad: http://comunicarigualdad.com.ar
Gender Links: http://genderlinks.org.za
Human Rights Watch (LGBT Rights): https://www.hrw.org/topic/lgbt-rights
International Association of Women in Radio and Television IAWRT: https://www.
iawrt.org
Mapping Global Media Policy (gender and media section): http://www.
globalmediapolicy.net/node/849
Mujeres en Red (Spanish): www.nodo50.org/mujeresred/cyberfeminismo.html
SheSource: www.shesource.org  
Who Makes News: www.whomakesthenews.org  
Women’s Rights Programme of the Association for Progressive 
Communications: www.genderit.org108
108
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: Foundational documents
Commission on the Status of Women 47. 2003. Participation in and Access of 
Women to the Media. Agreed Conclusion. New York: United Nations. http://
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/47sess.htm
Council of Europe 2010. Action against violence against women and domestic 
violence (Istanbul Convention).
Council of Europe 2013. Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to 
member States on Gender equality and media  (CM/Rec (2013)1).
Council of Europe 2017. Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to 
the Member States  on Gender equality in the audiovisual media  (CM/
Rec(2017)9).
European Council 1995. Resolution of the Council and of the Representatives of 
Governments on  the Image of Women and Men Portrayed in Advertising 
and the Media  (95/C 296/06). 
European Council 2008. Conclusions on  Eliminating Gender Stereotypes in 
Society.
European Council 2013. Conclusions on  Advancing Women’s Roles as Decision-
makers in the Media.
Federal Communications Commission 1996. Telecommunications Act of 1996 . 
ITU & UN Women 2015. Action plan to close the gender gap  (including all 
normative references).
Organization of American States (OSA) 1995. Inter-American Convention on 
the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women  
(Convention de Belem do Para). 
Organization of American States (OSA) 2014. Declaration on Political 
Harassment and Violence Against Women  (Declaracion de Pachuca). 109Appendices
Southern African Development Community (SADC) 2011. Protocol on Gender 
and Development . 
UN 1975. Report of the World Conference of the International Women’s Year, 
Mexico City. (Par 19 – Women and communications media).
UN 1985. The Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of 
Women. Adopted by the World Conference to review and appraise 
the achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, 
Development and Peace, Nairobi July 1985 (Section C. Current trends and 
perspectives to the year 2000).
UN Women 1995. Platform for action. Women and the media. The United Nations 
Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, China. 
UN Millennium Development Goals (Goal 3: Promote Gender Equality and 
Empower Women).
UN 2015. UN Agenda 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (Goal 5: Gender 
Equality, New York March 2015).
WSIS 2003. Declaration of Principles. Building the Information Society: a global 
challenge in the new Millennium, Geneva December 2003. WSIS-03/
GENEVA/DOC/4-E (Par. 12).
WSIS 2003. Shaping Information Societies for Human Needs. Civil Society 
Declaration to the World Summit on the Information Society.
WSIS 2005. Tunis Commitment. WSIS-05/TUNIS/DOC/7-E.110
110
Appendix 2: Available resources 
An initial set of relevant resources has been identified, to support the design, 
elaboration and implementation of the course model.
Resource 
nameRelevance to course model proposal
GSIM The UNESCO-elaborated Gender-Sensitive Indicators for the 
Media provides a comprehensive overview of gender in media; 
hence it is a useful guideline for understanding gender and 
media issues in their complexity and interaction.
GSIM offers criteria for assessment, which may be used in class 
for group work or further research activities. http://www.unesco.
org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/
publications-and-communication-materials/publications/
full-list/gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-of-
indicators-to-gauge-gender-sensitivity-in-media-operations-
and-content/111Appendices
AGEMI    An international EU-funded project that runs parallel to the 
UNITWIN course model elaboration. The project aims to advance 
gender equality in the media by sharing good practices, 
developing training activities and fostering relationships between 
media and journalism students and media practitioners, 
available at: http://agemi-eu.org
AGEMI is producing:
 »a series of online, openly accessible educational materials 
(including video lectures, interviews with experts, interactive 
modes) that reflect the main themes identified for the 
course model
 »a resources bank of good practices concerning gender 
and media. This may be explored with students and used 
to conduct further research, enriched through student and 
teacher collaboration
 »an ‘app’ providing mobile access to ‘ACT’ functions: Assess 
gender equality, Challenge unequal practices, Transform 
through advocacy initiatives
Bank of 
syllabiThe UNITWIN Network has created a list of resources (with links to 
institutional pages) of syllabi related to existing relevant courses, 
starting from those that have been mapped at participating 
institutions.
Further items may be included over time so as to enrich the 
resource.
This resource will be made openly accessible on the Network 
website, for anybody to access: http://www.unitwin.net/112
112
GAMAG 
position 
papersA list of thematic position papers has been prepared by GAMAG 
members on the occasion of the UN CSW 62nd meeting in New 
York, March 2018.
Each paper includes introductory remarks on the theme, 
evidence from research, and recommendations for action by 
different stakeholders.
All papers will be made available on the Network website, for 
anybody to access. 
Additional resources for all themes
International Association for Media and Communication Research, 2014, Media 
and gender: a scholarly agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender, UNESCO, http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-
information/resources/publications-and-communication-materials/
publications/full-list/media-and-gender-a-scholarly-agenda-for-the-
global-alliance-on-media-and-gender
World Association for Christian Communication (WACC) and the International 
Federation of Journalists (IFJ) 2011,  Learning Resource Kit for Gender-Ethical 
Journalism and Media House Policy , http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-
view/browse/weiter/backpid/59/article/wacc-and-ifj-resource-kit-to-
strengthen-gender-ethical-journalism
Public Relations Institute of Australia 2016, Diversity and Inclusion Policy to 
tackle gender inequality , https://www.pria.com.au/priablog/diversity-and-
inclusion-policy-to-tackle-gender-inequity
International Women’s Media Foundation, 2011, Global Report on the Status of 
Women in News Media,  International Women’s Media Foundation, https://
www.iwmf.org/our-research/global-report
UNESCO, 2014, UNESCO Priority Gender Equality Action Plan 2014–2021 , UNESCO, 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002272/227222e.pdf
UNESCO 2003 , UNESCO’s Gender Mainstreaming Implementation Framework: 
Baseline definitions of key concepts and terms , http://www.unesco.
org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/BSP/GENDER/PDF/1.%20Baseline%20
Definitions%20of%20key%20gender-related%20concepts.pdf113Collaborators
International Association for Media and Communication Research 2014, Media 
and gender: a scholarly agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender, UNESCO, http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-
information/resources/publications-and-communication-materials/
publications/full-list/media-and-gender-a-scholarly-agenda-for-the-
global-alliance-on-media-and-gender/
Related areas: Diversity
Bahfen, N & Wake, A 2011, ‘Creating radio waves: Lessons from a content 
analysis of diversity in student community radio news’, Australian 
Journalism Review , vol. 33, no. 2, pp.113–125 
Public Relations Institute of Australia 2016, Diversity and Inclusion Policy to 
tackle gender inequity , https://www.pria.com.au/priablog/diversity-and-
inclusion-policy-to-tackle-gender-inequity
Managing Diversity, A Guide for Media Managers, World Association of 
Newspapers and News Publishers http://www.womeninnews.org/ckfinder/
userfiles/files/Managing%20Diversity-A%20Handbook%20(2018).pdf  114
114
COLLABORATORS
List of unit authors 
Aimée Vega Montiel  Researcher and Chair of the Feminist Research 
Programme of the Center of Interdisciplinary Research in Sciences  
National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
Professor Lisa French  Dean, School of Media and Communication  
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2893-9098  
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
Dr Mark Poole  Lecturer, School of Media and Communication  
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0071-6848  
RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
Claudia Padovani  Director, Interdepartmental Center for Gender Studies  
University of Padova, Italy
Dr María Soledad Vargas  Chair, Communication Master  
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Chile
Dr María Pilar Bruce Hoyuelos  Directora, Escuela de Periodismo  
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Chile
Professor Carolyn M Byerly  Chair, Department of Communication, Culture and 
Media Studies  
Howard University, USA
Assistant Professor Melisew Dejene  PhD Fellow in Development Studies 
Institute of Policy and Development Research (IPDR)  
Hawassa University, Ethiopia
Dr Edgar Vega Suriaga  Coordinador Académico Maestría en Estudios de 
Recepción  
Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar, Sede Ecuador
Professor Mira K Desai  Head, University Department of Extension Education & 
Coordinator – International Cell  
SNDT Women’s University, Mumbai, India 115Collaborators
Professor Patricia Núñez- Gómez  Chair Department of Applied 
Communication Sciences  
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain
Associate Professor  Francisco A Zurian  Director of Research Group GECA 
[Gender, Aesthetics and Audiovisual Culture]  
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain
Assistant Professor Francisco José García-Ramos , Research Group GECA  
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain
Dr Aída Mencía-Ripley  Dean of Research and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist Read Project  
Iberoamerican University of the Dominican Republic (UNIBE)
Professor Solangel Díaz    
Iberoamerican University of the Dominican Republic (UNIBE)
List of peer reviewers 
Julie Posetti,  Snr Research Fellow at RISJ, University of Oxford. Leading the 
Journalism Innovation Project
Elspeth McOmish,  Programme Specialist, Division of Gender Equality, UNESCO. 
Acknowledgements
The unit authors thank members of their universities who assisted in the 
development of this curriculum by participating in a survey titled: Mapping 
Educational Strategies for Creating Gender-sensitive Journalism, Media and 
ICT Curriculums.
The survey mapped courses, programs and degrees that include or promote 
gender equality in media and ICTs. The survey established the existing 
curriculum offerings in the UNITWIN Network and mapped best practice.116
116
Survey participants were: 
From Australia: 
Tito Ambyo, Daniel Binns, Leena van Deventer, Kieran Doolan, Kerin Elsum, Lisa 
French, Phil Kafcaloudes, Alexia Kannas, Rebekha Naim, Mark Poole, Michelle 
Aung Thin, Rebecca Young, Josie Vine, and Alexandra Wake. Plus also in the 
workshop Fiona Eagger, Ella Hyatt, Melissa Robertson, Joseph Costigan, Russell 
Skelton, Mischa Barr, Gabrielle Murray, Devi Mallal, Mary Pettigrove, Sushi Das, 
Vicki Saray, and John Molden.
From Chile: 
Rodrigo Araya, Maria Soledad Vargas Carrillo, Bruce Hoyuelos, Daniela Lazcano 
Peña, and María Pilar 
From Dominican Republic: 
Solangel (Angie) Diaz, Aida Mencia Ripley
From Ecuador: 
Maria de Lourdes Lopez, Edgar Vega Suriaga Jenny Pontón, and Cruz Tornay.
From Ethiopia: 
Tilahun Cherie Chekol, Yaregal Mekuriaw Getaneh, Yaregal Mekuriaw, 
Engdawork Tadesse, Endalkachew Teshome, Wolelaw Eshetu Tiruneh, Bereket 
Wondimu Wolde, and Hailemeskel Zewdie
From India:
Anita N Chaware, Mira K Desai, Ganesh Magar, Rajni Nair, Shikha Nema, and 
Sanjay Shitole 
From Italy:
Simonetta Ausoni, Silvana Badaloni, Irene Barbiera, Franca Bimbi, Maria Carla 
Bertolo, Maria Rosaria Cadinu, Sergio Canazza, Antonella Cancellier, Paolo 
Carrubba, Raffaele Cavalli, Alberta Contarello, Paola Degani, Ambrogio Fassina, 
Bruna Giacomini, Marcello Ghilardi, Luca Illetterati, Annalisa Oboe, Roberto 
Oboe, Claudia Padovani, Dagmar Winkler Pegoraro, Annunziata Lapolla, Maria 
Cristina La Rocca, Perini Lorenza, Angelica Moè, Giorgia Nesti, Antonio Rodà, 
Anna Scacchi, Marco Scarcelli, Alessandro Sona, Carlotta Sorba, Caterina 
Suitner, Ines Testoni, Tania Toffanin, and Luca Trappolin117Extended Bibliography
From Mexico:
Alethia Fernandez de la Reguera Ahedo, Carola García Calderón, Elvira 
Hernandez Carballido, Nelly Lucero Lara Chávez, Marcela Gabioud, Monica 
Susana Amilpas Garcia, Adina Del Carmen Barrera Hernandez, Alicia Layla 
Sánchez Kuri, Carolina Pacheco Luna, Monica Maureira, Medley Aimée 
Vega Montiel, Cirenia Celestino Ortega, Diana Marenco Sandoval, Josefina 
Hernández Téllez, Elsa L Angeles Vera
From Spain:
Ana Jorge Alonso, Margarita Ledo Andión, Isabel Tajahuerce Ángel, Carmen 
Arocena, Asunción López-Varela Azcárate, Rebeca Sanmartín Bastida, Mar 
Chicharro, Rosa Franquet, Francisco Javier Frutos, Virginia Guarinos, Carolina 
Lorenzo, Alejandro Melero, María Isabel Menéndez Menéndez, Marta Fernandez 
Morales, Sonia Nunez Puente, Alejandra Hernandez Ruiz, Virginia Villaplana 
Ruiz, Alba-Maria Martinez-Sala, Maria-Teresa Riquelme-Quionero, Iolanda 
Tortajada, and Rosa Maria Torres Valdes
From The United States:
Carolyn M Byerly, Emily Cramer, Jay Lucker, Abbas Malek, Yong Jin Park, Indira 
Somani, and Wei Sun
Thank you to Julie Stafford for copy editing assistance.118
118
Extended Bibliography
Albarran, A 2010, Management of electronic media , Wadsworth Cengage 
Learning, Boston
Agustin, LR 2013 Gender equality intersectionality and diversity in Europe . New 
York: Palgrave: New York 
APC and HIVOS 2013, Women’s rights, gender and ICT , Global Information 
Society Watch, https://www.apc.org/en/pubs/global-information-society-
watch-2013-womens-right  (Accessed October 5, 2018)
Bauer, Q J & Gruber, S 2008, ‘Balancing and optimising gender mainstreaming 
at German universities’, mainstreaming’ in S Grenz, B Kortendiek, M Kriszio & 
A Lother (eds), Gender equality programmes in higher education, VS Verl. 
für Sozialwiss, Wiesbaden, Germany, pp.119 – 135 
Berger, J 1972 Ways of Seeing . Penguin: London 
Bishop- Sambrook, C 2000, ‘The logical framework as a tool for gender 
mainstreaming in university’, Gender and Education,  vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 239 – 247
Bordo, S 1997 ‘The body and the reproduction of Femininity’, in Writing on the 
Body . Convoy et al. eds. Columbia University Press: New York 
Borzello, F et al. 1985 ‘Living Dolls and ‘Real Women’ in Kuhn, A (ed.) The Power of 
the Image; Essays on Representation and Sexuality . Routledge: London
Boyd, A Stewart, P Alexander, R 2008 Broadcast Journalism. Techniques of 
Radio and Television News  6th ed. Taylor and Francis: UK
Braidotti, R 2011 Nomadic Subjects. Embodiment and Sexual Difference in 
Contemporary Feminist Theory  (2nd ed.) Columbia University Press: New York 
Broadband Commission (Working group on broadband and gender) 2013, 
Doubling digital opportunities enhancing the inclusion of women and girls 
in the information society, ITU Unesco, http://www.broadbandcommission.
org/documents/working-groups/bb-doubling-digital-2013.pdf  (Accessed 
October 5, 2018)
Burwell, J 1997 Notes on Nowhere: Feminism, Utopian Logic, and Social 
Transformation . University of Minnesota Press: Minnesota119Extended Bibliography
Byerly, C 2012 ‘The geography of women and media scholarship’ in K. Ross (ed.) 
Handbook of Gender, Sex and Media , Wiley Blackwell:UK pp 3 - 19
Callaghan, D Helms, L & Jyotsna, S 1994 The Weyward Sisters: Shakespeare and 
Feminist Politics . Blackwell Publishing: UK
Callahan, V 2013, ‘Toward networked feminist scholarship: mindful media, 
participatory learning and distributed authorship in the digital economy’, 
Cinema Journal , vol. 53, no. 1, pp.156 – 163 
Calliy Udofia (ed.) 1987 Hand Book for African Journalists . (By 15 Leaders in African                    
Journalism) 2nd ed. World Press Freedom Committee
Calvo, K 2010 ‘Reconocimiento, Ciudadanía y Políticas Públicas hacia las Uniones 
Homosexuales en Europa’, Revista Española de Investigaciones Sociológicas, 129: 
37-59. 
Calvo, K. 2013 ‘Antes de que fuéramos familias: Mordazas, homosexualidad y debates 
en España, 1978-1995’ en ‘Las minorías sexuales en España (1970 -1995): 
discursos, textos y representaciones’, Rafael Mérida, ed. Barcelona: Icaria (27-47)
Calvo, K 2013 ‘Fighting for a Voice: the Spanish 15-M/Indignados Movement in Spain’ 
en Understanding European Movements: New Social Movements, Global Justice 
Struggles, Anti -Austerity Protest. Laurence Cox and Cristina Flesher Fominaya, eds. 
Londres: Routledge (pp 236 - 253)
Calvo, K 2014 ‘Post-Marriage LGBT Politics in Spain’, Reviews and Critical 
Commentary Available in http://councilforeuropeanstudies.org/critcom/
post-marriage-lgbt-politics-in-spain/  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
Calvo, K 2014 ‘Sexual Movements Without Sex? Sex-Talk in the Spanish Gay 
Liberation Movement’, en Hispanic (LGT) Masculinities in Transition. Rafael 
Mérida , ed. Nueva York y Berlín, Peter Lang (pp 13 - 30) 
Calvo, K 2014 Gendering Citizenship: Family Change, Political Culture and 
Gender Equality Policies in Spain . Feminismos 
Calvo, K Pichardo, J.I 2011 “Sexualities Transformed? Inside Visions of Sexual, 
Social and Political Change in Spain.” Edition of Special Issue, Sexualities: 
Studies in Culture and Society  14(5) 
Calvo, K & Trujillo, G 2011 ‘Fighting for love rights: Demands and strategies of the 
LGBT movement in Spain’, Sexualities: Studies in Culture and Society 14(5): 
562-580 120
120
Cameron, S 2003 ‘The political economy of gender disparity in musical 
markets’. Cambridge Journal of Economics , 27 (6), 905-917
Carlin, D 1992 Cather, Canon, and the Politics of Reading . University of 
Massachusetts Press: Amherst
Carter, C, Steiner, L & McLaughlin, L (eds) 2013, ‘Introduction: re-imagining 
media and gender’, in Routledge Companion to Media and Gender , 
Routledge: New York, pp 1-21.
Chadwick, W 1996 Women, Art and Society. Thames and Hudson: London 
Chaher, S (ed) 2014, Public policies on communication and gender in Latin 
America: the path ahead of us , Comunicación para la Igualdad : Defensoría 
del Público , Buenos Aires (English text: pp 98-192).
Collins, P 1998 ‘It’s All in the Family: Intersections of Gender, Race, and Nation’ 
Hypatia , 13 [3]; 62–82
Council of Europe CoE 2014, Gender equality and the media at national level: 
compilation of good practices from member states , Council of Europe, 
Strasbourg https://rm.coe.int/1680590557  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
Council of Europe CoE 2015, Handbook on the implementation of 
Recommendation M/Rec(2013)1 of the Committee of Ministers of the 
Council of Europe on gender equality and media , Council of Europe, 
Strasbourg
Crosby, FJ, Iyer, A, & Sincharoen, S 2006, ‘Understanding affirmative action’, 
Annu. Rev. Psychol ., no. 57, pp.585- 611
Davies, J and Smith, C 2000 Gender, Ethnicity and Sexuality in Contemporary 
American Film . Routledge: London 
Doria, A 2015, Women’s rights, gender and Internet governance , APC 
Issue Papers, https://www.apc.org/en/news/new-issue-paper-
women%E2%80%99s-rights-gender-and-internet-governance
Edstrom, M & Molster, R (eds.) 2014, Making change: Nordic examples of working 
towards gender equality in the media , Nordicom: Gothenburg
Edwards, A 2011 Violence against Women under International Human Rights 
Law.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 121Extended Bibliography
Erens, Patricia. 1990 Issues in Feminist Film Criticism . Bloomington and 
Indianapolis: Bloomington
European Institute for Gender Equality 2014, Women and the media: methods, 
tools and good practices: gender equality training , European Institute 
for Gender Equality, http://eige.europa.eu/rdc/library/resource/aleph_
eige000005844  (Accessed October 5 2018)
European Institute for Gender Equality 2016, Gender equality training: gender 
mainstreaming toolkit , European Institute for Gender Equality, http://eige.
europa.eu/rdc/eige-publications/gender-equality-training-gender-
mainstreaming-toolkit  (Accessed October 5 2018)
European Institute for Gender Equality 2017, What is gender mainstreaming?, 
European Institute for Gender Equality, http://eige.europa.eu/rdc/eige-
publications/what-gender-mainstreaming  (Accessed October 5 2018)
European Institute for Gender Equality EIGE 2013, Advancing gender equality in 
decision-making in media organizations: review of the implementation of 
the Beijing Platform for Action in the EU Member States , Women and the 
Media, http://eige.europa.eu/rdc/eige-publications/advancing-gender-
equality-decision-making-media-organisations-report  )Accessed October 
5 2018)
Fabe, Marylin. 2004 Closely Watched Films. Of Narrative Film Technique . 
Berkeley: University of California Press
Fields, A.W & Shelton, AL 2006,’ Individual skill differences and large-scale 
environmental learning’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition , vol.32, no. 3, pp 506 - 515. 
Freedman, J 2015 Gendering the international asylum and refugee debate . 
Palgrave: New York 
Freire, Paulo. 1971 Pedagogy of the Oppressed , Seabury Press: New York
French L 2018,’Women documentary filmmakers as transnational “advocate 
change agents”’, Interdisciplina  Journal,  http://www.revistas.unam.mx/
index.php/inter  (Accessed October 5 2018)
French, L 2014, ‘Gender then, gender now: surveying women’s participation in 
Australian     film and television industries’, Continuum: Journal of Media 
and Cultural Studies , Vol. 28, Issue 2, pp 188-200. http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/10304312.2014.888040  (Accessed October 5 2018)122
122
French, L 2015, ‘Does Gender Matter?’ Lumina: Australian Journal of Screen Arts 
and Business , No. 14, pp 139-153 https://www.academia.edu/37090294/
DOES_GENDER_MATTER_WOMEN_AND_AUSTRALIAN_FILM_AND_TELEVISION_
NOW  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
French, L 2015, ‘Media literacies for empowering females and reducing gender 
inequalities’ in Media in Support of Sustainable Development and a Culture 
of Peace , UNESCO, Jakarta, , pp 34-38. Available in hard copy an online at: 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002329/232923e.pdf  (Accessed 
October 5 2018)
Friesem, E 2016, ‘Drawing on media studies, gender studies, and media literacy 
education to develop an interdisciplinary approach to media and gender 
classes’, Journal of Communication Inquiry,  vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 370 – 390
Gallagher, A.T. 2010 The International Law of Human Trafficking . New York: 
Cambridge University Press
Gallagher, M 2008, ‘Feminist issues in the global media system’ in Leslie Shade 
& K. Sarikakis (eds) Feminist Interventions in International Communication: 
minding the gap , Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham.
Gallagher, M 2011, ‘Gender and communication policy: struggling for space’, 
in R. Mansell and M. Raboy (eds) The handbook of global media and 
communication policy , Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
Gergen, M.M.& Davis S.N. 1997 Toward a new psychology of gender. A reader.  
Routledge: New York
Gergen, M.M & Gergen, K.. 2012 Playing with Purpose: Adventures in Performative 
Social Science (Writing Lives: Ethnographic Narratives).  http://works.
swarthmore.edu/fac-psychology/900   
Gertseema, M (2014) ‘Gender mainstreaming in media and journalism 
education’, in Vega Montiel, A. Gender and Media: A Scholarly Agenda for 
the Global Alliance on Media and Gender . Paris: UNESCO / IAMCR. pp. 70-73.
Giles H 1993, News room management , Media Management Books, Detroit.  
Wicks, J. L et. Al 2016, Media management: a casebook approach , 
Routledge, New York
Global Media Monitoring Project - GMMP 2015, Global Media Monitoring Project 
-global report: International Federation of Journalists IFJ (2009) Getting the 
balance right: gender equality in journalism , IFJ, Brussels123Extended Bibliography
Golombisky, K 2002, ‘Gender equity and mass communication’s female student 
majority’, Journalism & Mass Communication Educator,  vol. 56, iss. 4, pp. 
53 – 66 
Gottfried, J & Shearer, E 2016, News Use Across Social Media Platforms 2016,  Pew 
Research Center, http://www.journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-across-
social-media-platforms-2016  (Accessed October 5 2018)
Grant, C and Kuhn, A eds. 2006 Screening World Cinema .  Routledge: London
Greene, Gayle. 1991 Changing the Story: Feminist Fiction and the Tradition , 
Indiana University Press: Indiana
Grenz, S., Kortendiek, B. , Kriszio, M. & Lother, A. 2008, ‘Gender equality programmes: 
recommendations of the 5th European Conference on Gender Equality in 
Higher Education 2007 at Humboldt-Univesitiit zu Berlin’ mainstreaming’ in S 
Grenz, B Kortendiek, M Kriszio & A Lother (eds), Gender equality programmes in 
higher education, VS Verl. für Sozialwiss, Wiesbaden, Germany, pp.209 – 211
Griffin, E. 2006 A First Look at Communication Theory . McGraw Hill: New York 
Gurumurthy, A 2004, Gender and ICTs , Bridge, http://www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/
sites/bridge.ids.ac.uk/files/reports/CEP-ICTs-OR.pdf  (Accessed October 5 
2018)
Gurumurthy, A, Singh, P, Mundkur, A & Swamy, M. (eds.) 2006, Gender in the 
information society: emerging issues , UNDP-APDIP ICT4D Series, Bangkok 
Halpern, DF 2012, Sex differences in cognitive abilities,  (4th edn.), Psychology 
Press: NY
Hannan, C 2003, ‘Gender mainstreaming: some experiences from the United 
Nations’, Gender mainstreaming – A way towards equality Conference , 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, Berne, 20 June, http://
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/news/speech2003/SwissGM_20Jun2003.
pdf (Accessed October 5 2018)
Haraway, D 2012 ‘The Persistence of Vision’ in Mirzoeff, N (ed.) The Visual Culture 
Reader  (3rd ed.) Routledge: London
Holmes,A, Fox, AB, Wieder, B, Zubak-Skees, C 2016, Rich people have access 
to high-speed Internet; many poor people still don’t , The Centre for 
Public Integrity, https://www.publicintegrity.org/2016/05/12/19659/rich-
people-have-access-high-speed-internet-many-poor-people-still-dont  
(Accessed October 5 2018)124
124
Hyde, JS 2014, ‘Gender similarities and differences’, Annual  Review of 
Psychology , vol. 65, no.1, pp 373-398. 
International Association for Media and Communication Research 2014, Media 
and gender: a scholarly agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender, UNESCO, http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-
information/resources/publications-and-communication-materials/
publications/full-list/media-and-gender-a-scholarly-agenda-for-the-
global-alliance-on-media-and-gender/  (Accessed October 5 2018)
International Women’s Media Foundation IWMF 2011, Global Report on the Status 
of Women in News Media, http://www.iwmf.org/our-research/iwmf-global-
report/  (Accessed October 5 2018)
ITU & Un Women 2015, Action Plan to Close the Digital Gender Gap https://www.
itu.int/en/action/gender-equality/Documents/ActionPlan.pdf  (Accessed 
October 5 2018)
Jenkins, Henry, et al. 2006 Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: 
Media Education for the 21st Century . Chicago: The MacArthur Foundation
Jenkins, H 2008 Convergence Culture. Where Old and New Media Collide . NYU 
Press: New York 
Jensen, H 2003 and 2005, ‘Gender equality and the multistakeholder approach: 
WSIS as best practices?’ in Drossou O. and Jensen, H. (eds). Visions in 
process II: The World Summit on the Information Society 2003-2005 , 
Heinrich Boll Foundation: Berlin, pp 53–61.
Jost, JT, Banaji, MR, & Nosek, BA 2004, ‘A decade of system justification theory: 
accumulated evidence of conscious and unconscious bolstering of the 
status quo’, Political Psychology , vol.25 no. 6, pp 881-919.
Kaplan, A (ed) 2000 Feminism and Film : Oxford readings in Feminism . Oxford: 
Oxford UP 
Kaplan, A 1983 Women and Film. Both Sides of the Camera . Oxon: Methuen. 
Keele, UP & Davis-Kimball, J & Behan, M 2003. Warrior Women: An Archaeologist’s 
Search for History’s Hidden Heroines . New York: Warner Books 
Kondra, X 2015 Gender and video games: How is female gender generally 
represented in various genres of video games?. Journal of Comparative 
Research in Antropology and Sociology . Volume 6 (1). 171-193 125Extended Bibliography
Krueger F 2005, Black, white and grey: Ethics in South African Journalism , 
Lansdowne: London
Kuhn, A 1982 Women’s Pictures: Feminism and Cinema . London: Routledge 
Kuhn, A 1985 The Power of the Image. Essays on Representation and Sexuality.  
Oxford: Routledge 
Lacey, Nick. 1998 Image and Representation. Key Concepts in Media Studies . 
New York: St. Martin’s 
Lanson, G & Stephens, M 1994 Writing and Reporting the News.  (2nd ed.) Oxford 
University Press: UK 
Laughey, D. 2007 Key Themes in Media Theory . New York McGraw-Hill. 
Lauret, Maria. 1994 Liberating Literature: Feminist Fiction in America . Routledge: 
New York 
Lawton, C A, Chrisler, JC, & McCreary, DR 2010, ‘Gender, spatial abilities, and 
wayfinding’ in JC Chrisler, & DR McCreary (Eds.), Handbook of Gender 
Research in Psychology , pp 317-341. Springer: New York
Lawton, CA 1994, ‘Gender differences in way-finding strategies: relationship to 
spatial ability and spatial anxiety’, Sex Roles , vol. 30, nos. 11- 12, pp 765-779. 
Le Jan, R 1995, Famille et pouvoir dans le Haut Moyen Age , Paris 
Levine, SC, Foley, A, Lourenco, S, Ehrich, S & Ratliff, K 2016, ‘Sex differences in 
spatial cognition: advancing the conversation’. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Review Cognitive Science , vol.7, pp 127-55. 
Littlejohn, S 2002 Theories of Human Communication . USA: Wadsworth Group 
Lourenco, ME 2016, ‘Gender equality in media content and operations: 
articulating academic studies and policy – a presentation’, Studies in 
Higher Education,  vol. 41, no.5, pp. 927 – 931
Maass, A, Suitner, C & Merkel, E 2013, ‘Does political correctness make (social) 
sense?’ in JP Forgas, O Vincze, and J Laszlo (eds ), Social cognition and 
communication , Psychology Press, New York, pp.331-346.
Made, P.A. (2009) Gender in media education: An audit of Gender in 
Journalism & Media Education and Training . Johannesburg: Gender Links 
http://genderlinks.org.za/shop/gender-in-media-education-an-audit-
of-gender-in-journalism-media-education-and-training/  (Accessed 5 
October 2018)126
126
Mainon, D & Ursini, J 2006 The Modern Amazons: Warrior Women on Screen , 
Limelight: New York 
Matthews, R 2008 Prostitution, Politcs and Policy . Routledge: New York 
Mayne, Judith 1993 Cinema and Spectatorship . Routledge: London  
Mcleish Robert 1999 Radio Production. A manual for Broadcasters (4th ed.) Focal 
Press: UK  
Mencía-Ripley, A. Schwartz, J. & Brondolo, E, 2015 Gender identity, interpersonal 
interactions, and ambulatory blood pressure. Interamerican Psychology  
Journal 49(2), 261-271.
Meneghetti, C, Zancada-Menendez, C, Lopez, L, Sampedro-Piquero, P, Martinelli, 
M, Ronconi, L& Rossi, B 2016, ‘Navigation and individual differences: The role 
of visuo-spatial abilities and working memory’, Learning and Individual 
Differences , vol. 49, pp 314-322.
Montefiore, Jan. 1994 Feminism and Poetry: Language, Experience, Identity in 
Women’s Writing . Pandora: London
Morley, L 2007, ‘Sister-matic: gender mainstreaming in higher education’, 
Teaching in Higher Education,  vol.12, nos. 5-6, pp.607 – 620.
Morna, CL & Shilongo, P 2004, ‘Mainstreaming gender into media education’, 
ECQUID NOVI , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 133-137.
Mulvey, L 1989 “Afterthoughts on ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’ 
inspired by King Vidor’s Duel in the Sun (1946)”. In Laura Mulvey, 1989 Visual 
and Other Pleasures , Indiana University Press: Bloomington, pp 29-38
Mulvey, L 1975 ‘Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’. In Movies and Methods. 
Vol. III: An Anthology . Ed. B. Nichols. The University of California: Berkeley,  
pp 303-15 
Munt, S 1994 Murder By the Book? Feminism and the Crime Novel . Routledge: 
London
North, L 2015, ‘The currency of gender: student and Institutional responses to the 
first gender unit in an Australian journalism program’,  Journalism & Mass 
Communication Educator , vol. 70 no. 2, pp.174 – 186.
North, L. (2010) ‘The Gender “Problem” in Australia Journalism Education’ 
(December 4). Available at SSRN:  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2015844  (Accessed 5 October 2018)127Extended Bibliography
O’Donnell, P 2006, ‘Journalism students and intergenerational change in 
journalism’, Australian Journalism Review , vol. 28 no. 1 pp. 23 – 42
Padovani, C  2018 ‘Gendering media policy research and communication 
governance’,  The Public Journal of the European Institute for 
Communication and Culture , vol 25, iss.1-2, pp. 256-64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1
080/13183222.2018.1423941
Padovani C. 2014, ‘Speaking truth to power about gender and communication: 
International and regional policy developments towards Beijing+20’, 
Feminist Media Studies , vol. 14, no. 2 
Padovani, C & Shade L (eds.) 2016, Special issue: ‘Gendering global media 
policy: critical perspectives on “digital agendas”’ , Journal of Information 
Policy , https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/jinfopoli.6.issue-2016  (Accessed 
5 October 2018)
Padovani, C 2014, ‘Gaps in media and communication governance: towards 
a gender-aware research and advocacy agenda’, in A. Vega Montiel (ed), 
Media and gender: a scholarly agenda for the global alliance on media 
and gender , Unesco Press, Paris:, Ebook available at: http://iamcr.org/
publications/special/media-and-gender  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
Padovani, C 2016, ‘Gendering the European digital agenda: the challenge of 
gender mainstreaming twenty years after the Beijing World Conference on 
Women’, Journal of Information Policy, vol. 6, pp.403 - 435 
Padovani, C. & Pavan, E 2016,’ Global governance of ICT: exploring online 
governance networks around gender and media’, Global  Networks , vol. 16, 
iss.3 pp 350 -371.
Park, YJ 2015, ‘Do men and women differ in privacy? Gendered privacy and (in) 
equality in the Internet’, Computers in Human Behavior , no. 50, pp.252-258.
Paseka A 2008, ‘Political will is not enough :results from the evaluation of a pilot 
scheme for implementing gender mainstreaming’ in S Grenz, B Kortendiek, 
M Kriszio & A Lother (eds), Gender equality programmes in higher 
education, VS Verl. für Sozialwiss, Wiesbaden, Germany, pp. 137 – 151.
Perreault, J 1995 Writing Selves: Contemporary Feminist Autography . University 
of Minnesota Press: Minnesota 
Place, J 1999 “Women in Film Noir”. In Women in Film Noir . Kaplan, A (ed.) 
London: BF. 128
128
Pollock, Griselda 1988 Vision and Difference. Femininity, Feminism and the 
Histories of Art.  Routledge: London 
Public Relations Institute of Australia (2016) Diversity and Inclusion Policy to 
tackle gender inequality. Available at: https://www.pria.com.au/priablog/
diversity-and-inclusion-policy-to-tackle-gender-inequity  (Accessed 5 
October 2018)
Rabe, L 2004, ‘Media education and training: towards en-gendered 
newsrooms’, ECQUID NOVI, vol. 25 no. 1, pp. 138-146. 
Radner, H & Stringer, R 2011 Feminism at the Movies. Understanding Gender in 
Contemporary Popular Cinema . Routledge: New York 
Ray, V2003 The Television News Hand Book. An insider’s guide to Being a Great 
Broadcast Journalist,  Macmillan: London
Reilly, N 2009 Women’s Human Rights , Polity Press: Cambridge 
Rich, C 2003 Writing and Reporting News . A Coaching Method 4th ed. Boston: 
Cengage Learning
Ross, K & Padovani, C (eds.) 2016 , Gender Equality in the Media: A Challenge for 
Europe, Routledge: New York
Ross, K. (2013) ‘Gender and media: a very short herstory’, in Simonson, P & Peck, 
J & Craig, R & Jackson, JP (eds.) Handbook of Communication History , 
Routledge: New York, pp 347-360.
Rush, RR, Oukrop, CE & Creedon, PJ (eds.) 2004, Seeking equity for women 
in journalism and mass communication education: a 30 year update, 
Lawrence Erlbaum, New Jersey
Sakelliou-Schultz, Liana. 1994 Feminist Criticism of American Women Poets: An 
Annotated Bibliography, 1975-1993 . Garland: New York 
Sarikakis, K & Shade, L 2008, ‘Revisiting international communication: 
approach of the curious feminist’, in K Sarikakis, K & L Shade (eds ), Feminist 
Interventions in International Communication , Rowman & Littlefield: Lanham
Sarikakis, K. & E. T. Nguyen (2009) ‘The trouble with gender: media policy 
and gender mainstreaming in the European Union’, Journal of European 
Integration , vol.31, no. 2, pp 201- 216.
Schmader, T, & Hall, W M 2014, ‘Stereotype threat in school and at work: putting 
science into practice’, Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences , vol. 1, no.1. pp 30-37.129Extended Bibliography
Schneider, Rebecca. 1997 The Explicit Body in Performance . London: Routledge 
Screen Australia 2018, Code of Conduct to Prevent Sexual Harassment https://
www.screenaustralia.gov.au/sa/screen-news/2018/04-03-code-of-
conduct-to-prevent-sexual-harassment   (Accessed October 5 2018)
Scott JW 1986, ‘Gender: a useful category for historical analysis’, American 
Historical Review , vol. 91, pp 1053-1075.
Sczesny, S, Formanowicz, M, & Moser, F 2016, ‘Can gender-fair language reduce 
gender stereotyping and discrimination?’ , in Frontiers in Psychology, vol.7, 25
Shohat, E & Robert S 1994 Multiculturalism and the Media . Routledge: London
Silverman, K 1983 The Subject of Semiotics . Oxford UP: Oxford 
Singley, C J. & Sweeney, SE (eds.) 1993 Anxious Power: Reading, Writing, and 
Ambivalence in Narrative by Women . SUNY Press: New York 
Smelik, Aneke. 2001 And the Mirror Cracked. Feminist Cinema and Film Theory . 
Antony Rowe: Chippenham 
Smith, Sidonie and Watson, Julia eds. 1992 De/Colonizing the Subject: The 
Politics of Gender in Women’s Autobiography.  University of Minnesota Press  
Spencer, SJ, Logel, C, & Davies, PG 2016, ‘Stereotype threat’ , Annual review of 
psychology , vol.67, pp 415-43.
Stam, Robert, et al. 1999 Nuevos conceptos de la teoría del cine. Barcelona, 
Buenos Aires, México: Paidós Comunicación 
Stapels, N et al 2016 The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and Sexuality 
Studies . Wiley Blackwell:  Malden 
Stokes, J 2003 How to Do Media and Cultural Studies . SAGE: Los Angeles
Stone, R 2015, Morality  and masculinity in the Carolingian empire , Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Sugiman T., Gergen K. J., Wagner W. & Yamada Y. 2008 Meaning in action. 
Constructions, narratives and social representations.  Springer: New York 
Sutton, R M 2010, ‘The creative power of language in social cognition and 
intergroup relations’ in H Giles, S Reid, & J Harwood (Eds.), Dynamics of 
intergroup communication  Peter Lang: New York, pp 105-115.
Thornham, Sue 2012 What if I Had Been the Hero? Investigating Women’s 
Cinema.  Palgrave MacMillan/BFI: LondonTrue, J, 2012 The Political Economy of Violence Against Women.  Oxford 
University Press: Oxford
UNHCHR 2010 ‘Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and 
Human Trafficking.’ Commentary , New York and Geneva: http://www.ohchr.
org/Documents/Publications/Commen 
United Nations. Office of the Special Advisor on gender issues and 
Advancement of Women 2002, Gender mainstreaming: an overview , United 
Nations, http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/pdf/e65237.pdf  (Accessed 
5 October 2018)
Unterhalter, E & North, A 2010, ‘Assessing gender mainstreaming in the 
education sector: depoliticised technique or a step towards women’s rights 
and gender equality?’, Compare, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 389 – 404
UN Women n.d., Concepts and Definitions  http://www.un.org/womenwatch/
osagi/conceptsandefinitions.htm  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
UNESCO n.d., Education and Gender Equality https://en.unesco.org/themes/
women-and-girls-education  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
UNESCO 2012 , Gender-sensitive indicators for media: Framework of indicators 
to gauge gender sensitivity in media operations and content ,  http://
www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/
publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/
gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-of-indicators-to-
gauge-gender-sensitivity-in-media-operations-and-content/  (Accessed 
5 October 2018)
UNESCO 2014, UNESCO Priority Gender Equality Action Plan 2014 – 2021 , UNESCO, 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002272/227222e.pdf  (Accessed 5 
October 2018)
UNESCO 2003 , UNESCO’s Gender Mainstreaming Implementation Framework: 
Baseline definitions of key concepts and terms , http://www.unesco.
org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/BSP/GENDER/PDF/1.%20Baseline%20
Definitions%20of%20key%20gender-related%20concepts.pdf  (Accessed 5 
October 2018)
Vega Montiel, A, Igualdad de Género y Comunicación y TIC  [Forum Gender 
Equality and Communication], Cuadernos de la Cooridacion de 
Humandades Universidad Nacional Automa de Mexico, 2018Verdonk, P, Benschop,YWM, De Haes, JCJM & Lagro-Janssen, ALM 2008, ‘Making 
a gender difference: case studies of gender mainstreaming in medical 
education’, Medical Teacher , vol. 30 no. 7,pp. 194 – 201
WACC & IFJ 2014, Resource kit for gender ethical journalism and media house 
policy : Book 1 conceptual issues http://whomakesthenews.org/articles/
learning-resource-kit-for-gender-ethical-journalism  (Accessed 5 October 
2018)
Women in Media n.d., Mates over merit? The Women in Media report- a study 
of gender differences in Australian media , Women in Media http://www.
womeninmedia.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/Mates-Over-Merit_full-
report.pdf  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
World Association for Christian Communication (WACC) and the International 
Federation of Journalists (IFJ) (2011) Learning Resource Kit for Gender-
Ethical Journalism and Media House Policy. http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-
single-view/browse/weiter/backpid/59/article/wacc-and-ifj-resource-kit-
to-strengthen-gender-ethical-journalism  (Accessed 5 October 2018)
Yang H 2016, ‘Transforming concepts into practices: mainstreaming gender in 
higher education, Asian Journal of Women’s Studies , vol.22, no. 4,  
pp. 392 – 413Higher education has to grapple with intense change in communications 
technologies, genres and business models - and with stubborn continuities in 
gender inequalities. 
This publication helps to navigate and transform the conundrum. It provides 
seven structured and practical modules, and a treasure trove of links to 
further resources. 
Ranging from representation issues through to advocacy, and including a 
preface by Margaret Gallagher, the book’s contents can empower its readers 
to advance gender equality in and through communications.
9789231 003202