CGD Policy Paper 138
February 2019Governing Big Tech’s Pursuit of 
the “Next Billion Users”
Ten years ago, only 6 percent of  the population in low-income and lower-middle-income 
countries had access to the internet. Today, nearly one in every three people there does. The 
rapid expansion of  internet access across the globe is a welcome development, but it raises 
new policy challenges. And while there is broad agreement in the development community 
on the importance of  getting digital policy “right,” too little attention has been paid to how 
policymakers in the developing world can best engage with the companies who dominate 
the digital landscape. As governments reassess their relationship with these companies, an 
increasing number are enacting policies that raise barriers to the cross-border flow of  data 
and put the largely global and open nature of  the internet at risk. In this paper, we review 
how internet use has evolved in the developing world over the last decade, with a focus on 
initiatives by big tech companies to reach the “Next Billion Users.” We then examine how 
concerns about data privacy, disinformation, and market concentration have manifested 
in lower-income countries and how policymakers have begun to respond. We close by 
considering ways the development community can support policymakers seeking to maximize 
the benefits of  an open internet while minimizing its risks.
www.cgdev.org
Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Fifth Floor
Washington DC  20036
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0 
license.Abstract
We are grateful to the people who took the time to review earlier drafts and provide their insights, 
including Masood Ahmed, Caroline Atkinson, Evelyn Douek, Alan Gelb, Kate Gough, Charles Kenny, 
Kay McGowan, Stela Mocan, Kyle Navis, Paul Nelson, Toby Phillips, William Savedoff, Charlotte 
Stanton, Priya Vora, An Wei Wang, and Richard Whitt. Any errors are solely our responsibility.
Michael Pisa and John Polcari. 2019. “Governing Big Tech’s Pursuit of  the “Next Billion Users”” 
CGD Policy Paper. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/
publication/governing-big-techs-pursuit-next-billion-usersMichael Pisa and John PolcariContents  
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 1 
1. Pursuing the Next Billion Users  ................................ ................................ ................................  3 
Facebook and Google Carry the Torch  ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
The Path Forward  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  11 
2. The Challenges Raised by Big Tech  ................................ ................................ ........................  13 
Data Privacy ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  13 
Disinformation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  15 
Market Concentration, Data, and Innovation  ................................ ................................ ....... 20 
3. A Better Path  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  23 
 
 
 1 Introduction  
When Senator Mark Warner warned Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg, Twitter CEO Jack 
Dorsey, and an empty chair representing Google that “the era of the Wild West in social 
media is coming to an end” at a hearing in September 2018, it reflected the extent to whi ch 
concerns about the role of big tech companies have shifted the debate in the United States from whether  these companies should be regulated to what form that regulation should 
take.
1 
Given the global reach of the largest US digital platforms, how Congre ss ultimately decides 
to regulate the industry will have profound implications outside of the United States. The 
choices made on Capitol Hill will not only affect how these companies operate abroad, but 
also shape the set of regulatory options available to policymakers in other countries, 
particularly in lower income ones that lack the economic heft necessary to influence large 
tech firms on their own.   
Ahead of the hearing, Warner’s office drafted a set of policy proposals for regulating social 
media and technology firms focused on three areas of concern: the challenge of protecting 
consumers in the digital age, the capacity of social media platforms to promote 
disinformation, and the risk that market concentration will stifle innovation.2 While the 
Warner  paper is exploratory in nature, it provides a good summary of the options Congress 
is most likely to consider moving forward.  
In this paper, we use these three areas of concern as a frame for exploring what the rapid 
growth of Big Tech in the developing world means for its policymakers grappling with how 
to maximize the economic and social benefits internet platforms provide while minimizing 
risks.  
In doing so, we recognize the hazard of lumping together countries with starkly different 
socioeconomic cha racteristics into a single “developing world” bucket. Certainly the online 
experience of a person in Zimbabwe, where a 1 GB monthly prepaid mobile broadband plan 
(the equivalent of a four hour chat on Skype) costs 33 percent of average income per capita, differs greatly from one in Egypt, where the same amount of data costs a hundred times 
less.
3 Likewise, policymakers in Malaysia, where 80 percent of the country has internet access 
and users spend an average of 8.5 hours online daily, face a different set of policy challenges 
than those in Eritrea, where only 1 percent of the population uses the internet.4  
However, we believe that considering the developing world as a distinct unit is useful for 
several reasons. First, with notable exceptions like China an d India, these countries have 
limited, if any, leverage over large internet companies, given their small size and low income 
per capita.5 As way of comparison, consider the European Union’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), which introduced sweepi ng changes to data privacy that the largest 
                                                      
1 US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Hearing: Foreign Influence on Social Media , September 5 , 2018.   
2 Warner, Mark. Potential Policy Proposals for Regulation of Social Media and Technology Firms . July 30, 2018.   
3 Alliance for Affordable Internet. Mobile Broadband Data Costs . September 2018.  
Confused.com. Data Usage Calculator .  
4 World Bank. Individuals Using the Internet (% of Population) .   
Hootsuite, We Are Social. Digital in 2018: World’s Internet Users Pass the 4 Billion Mark . January 30, 2018.  
5 Dean, Marissa, Jonathan Donner, Chris Locke. Financi al Inclusion in the Platform Era . September 11, 2018.  2 internet companies have chosen to comply with, often at great cost, because they are 
unwilling to forego the opportunity of doing business in the world’s second largest economy. 
In general, developing countries d o not provide the same commercial impetus.  
Second, because so many people in the developing world are relatively new to the internet 
and often have fewer tools at their disposal to cross -check information, they may be more 
easily exploited by efforts to m isuse their personal data and more susceptible to propaganda 
campaigns conducted online.  
Finally, although developing countries are equally if not more vulnerable to risks raised by 
digital platforms, little work has been done to consider how policymakers  there should 
approach these challenges.6 And while there is broad agreement in the development 
community on the importance of getting digital policy “right,” too little attention has been 
paid to how policymakers can best engage with the companies who dominate the digital 
landscape. It is therefore not surprising that, as the Pathways for Prosperity Commission has emphasized, “few developing countries have a clear approach to [the] foundational question of digital governance and even fewer, if any, have a clear approach to regulating digital 
design and user protection.”
7 
The desire by a growing number of governments to reassess how they engage with large tech 
companies combined with a lack of rigorous evidence about policy efficacy has resulted in a 
mishmas h of approaches —including outright bans, social media taxes, and data localization 
requirements —that endanger the (mostly) open nature of the internet. Many of these 
governments are also exploring ways to use the internet to support surveillance and stifle  
dissent, following the model provided by China.8  
Concerns about balkanization of the  internet  can be traced back to the mid -2000s  (for 
example, see Tim Wu’s 2004 blog), but the trend appears to have accelerated in recent 
years .9 The best way to confront this tendency  is to address the challenges that a more free 
and open internet presents.    
There is no one -size-fits-all solution to the concerns raised by society’s growing reliance on 
internet services, and governments will appro ach them differently based on the importance 
they place on values like privacy, transparency, and freedom. But the development 
community can help policymakers make more informed decisions in several ways, including 
by building evidence on the costs and benefits of different regulatory responses, creating an 
intellectual framework around the treatment and valuation of personal data, and laying the 
groundwork for global coordination efforts in areas where cross -country spillovers are most 
pronounced.  
We aim to inform these efforts first by reviewing how internet use has evolved in the 
developing world over the last decade, with a focus on initiatives taken by Facebook and 
Google to reach the “Next Billion Users.” In this section, we also emphasize the ways in 
                                                      
6 One exception is new work by the organization Future State , which is developing a “Data Empowerment 
Toolkit” aimed at helping policymakers develop data -sharing frameworks that prioritize the needs of users. A 
draft of the toolkit is available here. 
7 Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Digital Lives: Creating Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion . 2018.  
8 Freedom House. Freedom of the Net  2018. October 2018.  
9 Wu, Tim, The Balkanization of the Internet , August 17, 2004.  3 which internet users in the developing world have a qualitatively different experience online 
than their rich world counterparts. We then examine how concerns about data privacy, 
disinformation, and market concentration have manifested in the developing w orld and how 
policymakers have begun to respond. We close by considering ways the development 
community can support policymakers seeking to maximize the benefits of an open internet 
while minimizing its risks.  
 
1. Pursuing the Next Billion Users  
Ten years ago, only 22 percent (1.5 billion people) of the world’s population could connect 
to the internet and, of those, only 13 percent in lived in low - and lower -middle -income 
countries.10 Today, with almost half of the world online, nearly one in every  three people in 
the developing world has internet access.11 
Underlying this good news, however, is the more sobering reality that the ability to get 
online continues to vary across income lines: while over 75 percent of people in the United 
States and Euro pe have internet access, only 20  percent in sub -Saharan Africa and 26 
percent in South Asia do.12 The digital divide mirrors inequalities within countries as well, 
with the poor, elderly, and rurally located less likely to be connected. Women also have less  
access than men, especially in low -income countries.13  
The danger is that these already disadvantaged groups will fall even further behind those 
who participate in digital society.14 And because many of those who lack internet access live 
in poor and remote areas, they will be more difficult to reach and less profitable for 
companies to connect.15 
Internet use has spread in the developing world in parallel with three broader trends that are 
changing the digital landscape: the centralization of gatekeeping powers by a few large 
companies, the assertion of national regulation, and the rapid growth in use the of mobile 
devices.  
As online access has expanded globally, the nature of the internet has changed —moving 
further away from the decentralized ideal that Tim  Berners -Lee had in mind when he created 
the World Wide Web in 1989, to one in which our online experience is increasingly shaped 
                                                      
10 World Bank. Individuals U sing the Internet (% of Population) , High Income .   
World Bank. Individuals Using the Internet (% of Population), World .   
11 Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Digital Lives: Creating Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion . 2018. 
Throughout the paper, we use the term “developing country” to refer to countr ies that the World Bank defines 
as low - and lower -middle -income economies.  See footnote 2 8 for more detail on the World Bank’s income 
classification scheme.     
12 World Bank. Individual Using the Internet (% of Population) , Sub-Saharan Africa .  
World Bank. Individual Using the Internet (% of Population), US -EU.  
World Bank. Individual Using the Internet (% of Population), South Asia .  
13 International Telecommunications Union. ITU Facts and Figures 2017 . July 2017.  
14 Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Digital Lives: Creating Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion . 2018.   
15 International Telecommunications Union. Time Se ries of ICT Data For the World .  
 4 by a handful of large internet companies. For instance, in the United States, more than 50 
cents of every dollar spent on digi tal advertising goes to Google or Facebook, and more than 
one of every two dollars spent through online retail goes to Amazon.16 The same pattern of 
concentration holds in developing countries: for example, in a recent survey in Kenya, more than half of all mobile traffic was directed through applications owned by Facebook and Google.
17 
At the same time, national governments are inc reasingly asserting their right to regulate how 
internet companies operate in their jurisdictions. While national regulations aimed at reining 
in internet companies are not new, they have become more common and more restrictive.18 
Moreover, a growing number  of countries are emulating China’s authoritarian model of the 
internet, “where technologies of surveillance and identification help ensure social cohesion 
and security by combatting crime, terrorism, extremism, and deviance.”19  
The other sweeping change i s the increased use of mobile devices to connect to the internet. 
This is particularly true in low -income countries where the rapid uptake of mobile phones 
has enabled millions of people to connect to the internet for the first time  and where the 
poorest households are more likely to have access to mobile phones than to toilets or clean water.
20  
More than any other companies, Facebook and Google have successfully integrated their products and services across web and mobile applications, contributing to thei r dominant 
role in the global market. Today, Google operates domains in roughly 200 countries and 
territories, and offers services in over 100 languages. Estimates of the company’s market 
share in online search vary between 82 and 92 percent, and its Andro id operating system 
powers more than two billion devices worldwide.
21 
Facebook’s social network also spans the globe, with 2.3 billion monthly active  users 
worldwide and content available in roughly 100 languages.22 Over 70 percent of Facebook 
users live in Africa and Asia, and India recently surpassed the United States as the country with the most people on the platform (250 million).
23 WhatsApp, which Facebook acquired 
                                                      
16 Lunden, Ingrid. Amazon’s Share of the US E -Commerce Market is Now 49%, or 5% of All Retail Spend . Tech Crunch. 
2018.  
Ingram, Matthew. How Google and Facebook Have Taken Over the Digital Ad Industry . Fortune. January 4, 2017.  
17 Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Digital Lives: Creating Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion . 2018.  
18 An early example occurred in 2000 when French courts fined Yahoo! for allowing French citizens to purchase 
Nazi memorabilia on its online auctions. Lessig, Lawrence. Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace  Version 2.0.  Basic 
Books. December 2006.  
19 O’Hara, Kie ron and Wendy Hall. Four Internets: The Geopolitics of Digital Governance . December 2018.   
20 World Bank. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends . 2016.     
21 See: https://www.netmarketshare.com and http://gs.statcounter.com/search -engine -market -share  
Given that roughly 20 percent of the world’s internet users live in China, where Google is banned, these 
estimates should be treated with some skepticism.  
Popper, Ben. Google Announces  Over 2 Billion Monthly Active Devices on Android . May 17. 2017.   
22 Facebook Inc. Facebook Reports 3Q 2018 Results . October 30, 2018.  
23 Hootsuite, We Are Social. Digital in 2018: World’s Internet Users Pass the 4 Billion Mark . January 30, 2018.  
 5 in 2014, is the most popular messaging app in the world, boasting more than 1.5 billion 
monthly active users.24  
Because both companies derive most of their revenue from advertising (ads provide 98  
percent of Facebook’s revenue and 85 percent of Google’s), their profitability depends on 
increasing the number of their users or the revenue they ge nerate from each.25 Today, tech 
companies earn much more from their users in the developed world. For example, 
Facebook’s average revenue is $26.76 per user in North America, compared to only $1.86 in 
its “Rest of World” category, which captures users in Af rica, the Middle East, and Latin 
America.26 As a result, Facebook earns roughly 43 percent of it s revenue from the United 
States even though only 10 percent of its customers liv e there ( see figure 1 ).27 Google 
similarly earns about 46 percent of its revenue in the United States.28  
                                                      
24 Meola, Andrew. Whatsapp is the Most Popular Chat App in More Than Half the World . Business Insider. May 26. 
2016.  
25 Facebook Inc. Facebook Annual Report 2017 . 2017.  
Alphabet Inc.  Alphabet Announces Third Quarter 2018 Results . October 25, 2018.   
26 Facebook Inc. Facebook Q4 2017 Results . 2018.   
27 Facebook Inc. Facebook Q2 2018 Results . 2018. For a more detailed examination of Facebook’s revenue per user 
in the developing world, see Caribou Digital’s Paying Attention to the Poor: Digital Advertising in Emerging Markets . 
2017.  
28 Alphabet Inc. Alphabet Inc. Third Quarter 2018 Report . 2018.  6 Figure 1. Growth in Facebook’s users and revenues, by region  
 
 
Source : Facebook Annual Reports . 
The industry’s challenge is that the number of potential customers in the rich world not 
already online is rapidly dwindling. Tech companies have responded to this dynamic by 
shifting their focus to finding the “Next Billion Users” in lower -income markets.   011223
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Billions of UsersGrowth in Facebook's Monthly Active Users (MAU) by Region
MAU-US Canada MAU Europe MAU Asia MAU ROW
$0$5$10$15$20$25$30
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Growth In Facebook's Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) by 
Region
ARPU- US Canada ARPU Europe ARPU Asia ARPU ROW7 The “Next Billion Users” is a club with shifting membership. Figure 2  captures how the 
composition of each cohort has changed over time.29 In 2005, when the internet crossed the 
one billion user threshold, most internet users (62 percent) lived in high -income countries, 
while less than 10 percent lived in the developing world. The share of new users from 
developing countries rose to nearly a quarter in the second billion cohort (which took shape between 2006 and 2010) and to 47 percent as the third billion c ame online from 2010 to 
2015. Today, more than 65 percent of the roughly four billion people in the world without internet access lives in countries with a per capita GDP of less than $3,895 a year (i.e., countries classified by the World Bank as lower -middle income and low -income) (see figure 
3).
30
29 We use the World Bank’s income classification scheme, which groups countries into the following four income 
categories, based on annual gross national income (GNI) per capita, measured in US dollars: high -income (over 
$12,000), upper -middle -income ($3,896 to 12,055), lower -middle -income ($996 to $3,895), and low- income (less 
than $995). We use the term “developing country” to denote countries that fall into either the low -income or 
lower -middle -income categories.  
30 Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Digital Lives: Creating Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion . 2018.  1st Billion, 2005 2nd Billion, 2010 3rd  Billion, 2015Figure 2. Internet Users by the Billion
Users in low-income countries Users in lower-middle-income countries
Users in upper-middle-income countries Users in high-income countries8  
Source : ITU (2018) ICT Indicators Database, Pathways  for Prosperity Commission Analysis  
The rapid growth of internet access in the developing world that began earlier this decade 
coincided with efforts by the world’s largest tech firms to target lower -income markets by 
expanding the reach of networks and tailoring products to a more difficult operating 
environment and a different set of user needs. These differences include:   
• The predominance of mobile . As noted above, most users in the developing world access 
the internet through a mobile phone rather than a computer. In Kenya, for example, 
99 percent of all internet access is through mobile devices.31 As Google Vice 
President Caesar Sengupta notes, “most of the next billion users have never used a 
PC and may never use one. They don’t think of the internet as something you access 
with a mouse and a keyboard.”32 Smartphones are also becoming increasingly 
common. GSMA (Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association), the trade association of 
mobile network operators, projects that smartphone adoption in developing 
countries will exceed 60 percent by 2020.  
• Poor connectivity . Many internet users in the developing world still depend on 2G 
technology for internet access, even though it was not designed to handle data -
intensive applications. By 2020, nearly 70 percent of Southern Asia and over 40 
                                                      
31 Vota, Wayan. Mobile Data Subscriptions Account for 99 Percent of all Internet Access in Kenya . ICT Works. July 14, 
2011.  
32 Sengupta, Caesar. The Next Billion Users Are the Future of the Internet . Google. February 14, 2018.  
 14%
52%29%5%Figure 3. The Next Billions: Who Remains Offline?
Users in low-income countries Users in lower-middle-income countries
Users in upper-middle-income countries Users in high-income countries9 percent of Africa will still depend on 2G networks.33 As a result, connection speeds 
in the developing world are often dramatically slower than those in high -income 
countries. For example, it takes more than 25 times longer to download 1 megabyte 
(the equivalent of  one hi -res digital photo download) in Mali or Mauritania as it does 
in North America.34  
• High cost of data. Internet users in the developing world face a high cost of data 
relative to their income. The World Bank estimates that paying for a phone and data 
plan can cost customers in 15 African countries more than 20 percent of their monthly income. By comparison, Norwegians only need to spend 0.27 percent of 
their monthly income.
35 In addition, while most consumers in high -income 
countries enter into long -term contracts that provide virtually unlimited data, most 
people in the developing world purchase credit in advance and draw down their balance as they use data.
36  
Together these factors shape how people in the developing world use the internet. Because 
they pay such a high price to access data and do so “by the bit,” they are keenly aware of the 
monetary cost associated with every click they make.37 This leads to what Jonathan Donner 
of Caribou Digital has called a “metered mindset” that serves as a “looming,  persistent 
deterrent to surfing, web browsing, and effective use of the internet.”38  
Facebook and Google Carry the Torch  
Through their efforts to expand network access and create services that work well in low bandwidth environments, Facebook and Google have helped to expand internet use  in the 
developing world. We examine the broad contours of each companies’ strategies for 
reaching the next billion users below.  
Facebook  
Since 2010, Facebook has worked with telecom providers in many low -income countries to 
offer a bundle of applications (including a streamlined version of Facebook) designed to run on phones with low processing power, limited storage space, and in low bandwidth 
environments at no cost to consumers.  
Mark Zuckerberg explained the rationale behind this approach in a 2013 essay that launched Facebook’s Internet.org initiative.
39 In the essay, he argued that, although the cost of building 
and maintaining networks made it prohibitively expensive to provide full internet access to 
everyone in the world, a focused effort on reducing the cost of delivering data and building 
                                                      
33 Aeris. The Global State of 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G . 2015.  
34 Ashton, Mark. Wo rld Broadband Speed Interactive Map . Cable. July 10, 2018.   
Pinola, Melanie. How Much Data Do I Need? . Lifewire. November 12, 2018.  
35 Khokhar, Tariq. Where Are The Cheapest and Most Expensive Countries to Own a Mobile Phone? . World Bank. January 
13, 2016.   
36 Caribou Digital. Digital Access in Africa . 2016.  
37 Donner, Jonathan. After Access: Inclusion, Development, and More Mobile Internet . MIT Press. November 20, 2015.  
38 ibid 
39 Zuckerberg, Mark. Is Connectivity a Human Right? . Facebook. August 20, 2013.  10 more efficient apps would make it economically feasible to provide a set of basic online 
services for free to those who could not afford them. Mobile providers have been willing to 
zero-rate these services (i.e., provide them without charging customers for the data used) 
because it helps them attract new customers who may eventually choose to pay for full 
access to the internet.  
A key challenge for the program —and a major source of  the controversy surrounding it —
has been defining what services should be considered “basic” and therefore zero -rated. At 
the project’s outset, the applications offered were limited to those agreed on by Facebook 
and their telecom partners. However, critic s argued that the project violated net neutrality 
principles by giving zero -rated applications an unfair advantage over competitors and 
restricted users to operating in a “walled garden” that limited their ability to engage with the broader internet.
40 In response to these criticisms —and as part of the company’s failed 
campaign to bring the program to India —Facebook modified its approach in 2015 when it 
announced Free Basics , which provided an open platform that anyone can— submit a website 
to as long as it meets technical and participation guidelines. Notably, Facebook does not 
post ads on Free Basics .   
Unfortunately, these controversies have overshadowed Facebook’s work to develop technologies that make it easier to access the internet by bringing down the  cost of 
delivering data and building more efficient applications.
41 The company has released many of 
these technologies as open source software so developers can improve upon them.  
Today, Free Basics operates in 65 developing countries, including 30 in Africa and 11 in Asia, and Facebook claims that the project has helped almost 100 million people gain access to the internet who may not have done so otherwise.
 42 But skepticism about the zero -rating 
approach remains: in a 2016 study conducted by the Allia nce for Affordable Internet in eight 
developing countries, 82 percent of those surveyed said that they would prefer a free plan with a data limit but no restrictions on the websites and apps they could use to a zero- rated 
service.  
While Free Basics provid es services to people already in reach of telecom services, Facebook 
is also working on several speculative projects to expand access through projects under its Connectivity banner. These include high- altitude platform stations and satellites that “beam 
connectivity throughout the atmosphere” and the ARIES project, which seeks to extend 
mobile coverage to rural areas.
43 Facebook’s decision in June 2018 to end its much -
                                                      
40 Advox. Can Facebook Connect the Next Billion . July 27, 2017.  
Ahmad, Sohaib, David Choffnes, Zaid Ahmed Farooq, Krishna P. Gummadi, Amreesh Phokeer, Ihsan Ayyub 
Qazi, Rijurekha Sen. Inside the Walled Garden: Deconstructing Facebook’s Free Basics Program . October 28, 2017.  
Biddle, Ellery Roberts. The  More We Connect, the Better It Gets -For Facebook . New York Times. September 26, 2017.  
41 Ericsson, Facebook, Qualcomm. A Focus on Efficiency . September 16, 2013.   
42 Internet.org. Where We’ve Launched . 
Facebook , Inc. First Quarter 2018 Results Conference Call . April 25, 2018.   
43 Lardinois, Frederic. Facebook’s Terragraph and ARIES Antennas Bring Internet to Underserved Areas . Tech Crunch. 
2015.  
Facebook Connectivity .  
 11 publicized Aquila high -altitude drone project highlights the difficulty of developing new 
models for delivering connectivity.  
Google  
While Google also experimented with zero -rating in its short -lived Free Zone  project, its main 
avenue for attracting new users in the developing world has been the rapid expansion of the 
Android operating system, which it has supported by encouraging developers to design 
applications that meet the needs of users in emerging markets.  
This includes programs like Building for Billions,  through which Google advises developers on 
how to design products that reduce battery consumption and conserve data use.44 Recent 
examples of this approach are Android Go, a stripped -down version of the operating system 
designed to work on entry level smartphones; Files Go, an Android app that allows users to 
transfer files offline; and YouTube Go, which makes it easier for users to playback pre -
downloaded videos when offline.45  
Google’s most recent project to expand access is Google Station,  which  provides free high -
speed public Wi -Fi in select train stations in several developing countr ies. The project, which 
Google launched in 2016, now operates in more than 400 train stations in India, where more than eight million people use the service every month, and in a smaller number of stations in 
Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria, and Thailand.
46  
With the combination of Google Station and its suite of Go apps, Google has created a 
digital ecosystem that allows people unable to access the internet on their own to use data -
intensive applications and download large files that they can later use and share  offline. 
Unlike a zero -rating approach, this model provides users with an un- walled internet 
experience with the key limitation that they must have access to a participating station.  
Google has also launched several ambitious initiatives aimed at bringin g connectivity to 
those living in more rural and remote areas, including the highly publicized Project Loon, 
which uses high -altitude balloons to beam internet to users over a large area, and CSquared, 
which has laid hundreds of kilometers of fiber cable i n sub -Saharan Africa.47 
The Path Forward  
Reflecting their commercial imperative, Facebook and Google have focused their efforts in 
the developing world on populous countries with growing middle classes, such as India, Nigeria, Indonesia, and Brazil (for the moment, China remains off -limits). But their map of 
engagement continues to grow: for example, both Facebook and Google are working with 
                                                      
44 Google. Tools for Developers .  
45 Android. Introducing Android 9 Pie .   
Google. The Making of YouT ube Go .  
Googl e Play. Files by Google .  
46 Google India Blog. 400 Wi- Fi Enabled Train Station in India and Counting . June 7, 2018.    
47 Loon .    
CSquared .   
 12 partners to lay hundreds of miles of fiber optic cable in Uganda, Africa’s 10th most 
populous country.48  
These investments are paying off. Facebook’s highest growth markets are now India, 
Indonesia, and Vietnam, and Google reports that use of its Maps application grew by over 
50 percent in Indonesia, India, and Nigeria over the last year.49 These commercial gains are 
driving rapid growth in internet access acros s the developing world. In 2017, the number of 
internet users in Africa grew by 20 percent.  
Despite these gains, Facebook and Google have not yet realized significant revenue growth 
in lower -income countries. As Caribou Digital emphasizes in its report Pa ying Attention to the 
Poor, “digital advertising revenue is a function of economic activity, and for many developing 
countries, there simply isn’t enough consumer spending to attract substantial advertising revenues.”
50 To date, the internet giants have bee n willing to subsidize the services they 
provide in the developing world, in part because they value the data they collect there. 
Ultimately, however, that data must be put to commercial use to sustain their business 
models.51  
The Challenge of China  
As US tech companies advance their efforts to gain market share in the developing world, 
they face growing competition from Chinese tech firms Alibaba, Baidu, and Tencent, which have grown to massive scale under the protection of China’s Great Firewall and in a home 
market with more internet users than any other country. All three companies are now 
expanding operations in Africa and South Asia.
 52    
Unlike their Silicon Valley counterparts, the Chinese tech giants have evolved under the 
watchful eye of an auth oritarian government that uses its internet policy to support 
censorship and surveillance. The system now serves as a model for governments that want 
to create a similarly repressive internet regime, and Chinese officials have not been shy about 
sharing their expertise.53 According to Freedom House’s “Freedom on the Net 2018” report: 
“This year, Beijing took steps to propagate its model abroad by conducting large -scale 
trainings of foreign officials [in at least 36 countries], providing technology to authori tarian 
governments, and demanding that international companies abide by its content regulations even when operating outside of China.”
54  
China’s authoritarian model presents a critical threat to the mostly open nature of the global 
internet, and its growing popularity looms over any discussion of the future of internet 
policy in the developing world. We believe that the best way to limit the model’s appeal is to 
address head -on the challenges that a more free and open internet presents.  
 
                                                      
48 Wexler, Alexandra. Facebook Pushes Into Africa . Wall Street Journal. October 8, 2018.  
49 Facebook Inc. First Quarter 2018 Results Conference Call . April 25, 2018.   
50 Caribou Digital. Paying Attention to the Poor:  Digital Advertising in Emerging Markets . 2017.  
51 This point was made to us by Chris Locke, the Founder of Caribou Digital.  
52 The Economist Magazine. Chinese and US T ech Giants Go at it in E merging Markets . July 7, 2018.  
53 Sacks, Samm. Beijing Wants to Rewrite the Rules of the Internet . June 18, 2018.  
54 Freedom House. Freedo m of the Net  2018. October 2018 . 13 2. The Challenges Raised by Big Tech  
The rapid expansion of global internet access is a welcome development. But the provision 
of that access (which has some characteristics of a public good) by private actors inevitably 
raises questions for policymakers to consider, as doe s the gatekeeping power these 
companies have been entrusted with.  
Because internet users in the developing world often have a more limited internet experience than their rich world counterparts, the ways in which challenges related to data privacy, 
disinf ormation, and market concentration manifest there may differ. In addition, the more 
limited ability of policymakers in lower -income countries to exert influence over the internet 
giants suggests that policy responses may also diverge.   
In the next three s ections, we examine some of the concerns that the developing world’s 
growing reliance on large tech companies has raised and what policymakers are doing in response.  
Data Privacy  
Online commerce has become increasingly reliant on the use of personal data,  as 
technological advances have made it cheaper than ever to collect, store, and process digital 
information. At the same time, we conduct an ever -increasing share of our activities on 
digital devices, leaving behind a trail of data that internet companies  collect and analyze to 
develop a fuller picture of who we are, what we believe, and what we desire.  
Internet companies create detailed profiles of their users’ behavior and preferences by tracking their online activity, location settings, and social grap hs.
 They then use this 
information to personalize the services they offer us and appeal to advertisers eager to target their intended audiences. For example, Facebook allows advertisers to target potential 
customers using over a hundred profile characteris tics, from a person’s basic demographic 
information to the size of her home and whether she has an anniversary coming up in the 
next 30 days.
55  
Although predictions informed by user tracking can benefit consumers in a variety of ways 
(e.g., producing relev ant music or book recommendations, helping find the quickest route to 
a destination, detecting credit card fraud), these advantages come at a cost, as the increased 
use of personal data inevitably results in less privacy. Recent events like the Facebook/Ca mbridge Analytica scandal —in which data from 87 million Facebook users was 
improperly shared with a political consulting firm tied to the Trump campaign —highlight 
how the tacit bargain that consumers strike with digital platforms when they trade privacy for convenience can at times harm both them and society at large.
56 
There is now a substantial literature on how the “track and target” commercial model, 
sometimes referred to as “surveillance capitalism,” leaves consumers vulnerable to 
                                                      
55 Closers Café. Facebook’s Exhaustive List of Ad Targeting Options in One Legendary Infographic . September 18, 2017.  
56 Chang, Alvin. T he Facebook and Cambridge Analytica Scandal, Explained with a Simple Diagram . Vox. May 2, 2018.  
Wu, Tim. The Tyranny of Convenience . New York Times. February 16, 2018.  
 14 exploitation, as well as a growing catalogue of incidents in which internet companies or their 
affiliates have misused personal data in ways that harm the users who provide it.57  
Governments have responded to these concerns in different ways. The European Union has 
taken the to ughest approach on data privacy, partly in reaction to the legacy of government 
surveillance under the Nazi regime and during the Cold War. The GDPR, which went into 
effect in May 2018, sets stringent conditions on how companies use, transfer, and process 
data related to EU citizens. Among other provisions, the GDPR allows users to have their 
data erased (after meeting certain requirements) and gives them the right to request a 
portable copy of their data.58 
In contrast, the United States has taken an uneven and mostly hands -off approach to 
protecting online privacy that relies on “a patchwork of sector -specific laws and 
regulations.”59 US policymaker attitudes about regulating the sector appear to be shifting, 
however, based on a steady uptick in congressiona l hearings on the topic, the recent passage 
of California’s data privacy bill, and signaling from the Democratic Party that it intends to 
give consumer protection on the internet a higher priority.60 These steps are in line with 
recent polls that suggest mo st Americans are concerned about how internet companies use 
their personal data.61  
There is even greater variation in the developing world, where a few countries have taken a tough stance on data privacy while many others have given it scant consideration. As 
recently as 2017, more than 70 countries lacked data privacy laws, including 35 countries in 
Asia and 33 in Africa.
62  
South Asia provides a good example of the diversity of approaches. Some countries in the 
region, like India, Indonesia, and Vietnam, have drafted data protection laws that require 
firms to store data in servers physically located in their jurisdictions. Others, like Singapore 
and Malaysia, take a strict approach to the use of personal data but do not require it to be 
                                                      
57 Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civi lization . Jan 2018. 
PublicAffairs Books.  
Schneier, Bruce. The Public/Private Surveillance Partnership . Bloomberg. July 31, 2013.  
58 Informatio n Commissioner’s Office. Right to Erasure .  
Wikipedia. General Data Protection Regulation . 
General Data Protection Regulation. Notification of a Personal Data Breach to the Supervisory Authority . 
59 O’Connor , Nuala. Reforming the U.S. Approach to Data Protection and Privacy . Council on Forei gn Relations. January 
30, 2018.  
60 Klobuchar, Amy. Honest Ads Act . October 19, 2017.  
Swisher, Kara. Introducing the Internet Bill of Rights . New York Times. October 4, 2018.  
Dwoskin, Elizabeth.  Men (Only) At Work: Job Ads for Construction Workers and Truck Drivers on Facebook Discriminated 
on Gend er, ACLU Alleges . Washing ton Post. September 18, 2018.  
61 Rainie, Lee. Americans Complicated Feelings About Soc ial Media in an Era of Privacy Concerns . Pew Research. March 
27, 2018.  
Campaign for Accountability. New Polls Show Americans Want More Regulation of Tech Companies . June 26, 2018.  
Newton, Casey, Nick Statt, Michael Zelenko. The Verge Tech Survey . The Verge. October 27, 2017.  
Ipsos/Reuters. Facebook Poll 3.23.18 .  
62 Greenleaf, Graham. Global Tables of Data Privacy Laws and Bills (5th Edition 2017) .   
 15 stored  in local servers.63 Still others, like Cambodia and Laos, have no data privacy laws in 
place.64  
When considering their approach to data privacy, all countries must reckon with the EU’s 
GDPR for two reasons: first, because it represents the strongest approa ch to data privacy 
taken to date, and second because any company that provides goods or services to EU 
citizens must demonstrate an adequate level of protection for their personal data.65 The 
latter requirement is a source of concern to foreign companies that provide business process 
outsourcing (BPO) services to EU firms, many of which are based in tech -savvy developing 
countries like India, China, and Malaysia. The cost of complying with these requirements will 
depend on how EU regulators choose to impleme nt and enforce the law.  
A separate question is whether the GDPR is an appropriate model for data privacy in 
developing countries. Implementing a GDPR -like framework may be difficult for many 
countries, since the approach requires a high degree of legal an d technical capacity, as well as 
institutional arrangements to handle consumer dispute resolution, compliance monitoring, 
and enforcement.  
Although more countries are shifting to an approach like the GDPR, tech companies are 
unlikely to use it as the basi s for a global operating standard because of the costs involved. 
As a result, the data privacy landscape will remain fragmented, making it harder for low -
income countries that want to hold tech companies to strong privacy standards to do so. 
The one develo pment that could change this would be for the United States to enact a 
privacy framework like the GDPR, in which case tech companies could find it more economical to set a single operating standard for their global operations.   
Disinformation  
Using disinformation (i.e., the deliberate spreading of falsehoods) to sway public opinion or incite violence is not a new phenomenon. During the Rwandan genocide, Hutu “hate radio” stations helped mobs target members of the Tutsi minority by broadcasting their names, 
addresses, and license plate numbers.
66 Similarly, Serbian state -run media stoked the ethnic 
resentment that triggered the collapse of Yugoslavia by spreading “exaggerated and false 
messages of ethnically based attacks by Bosnian Muslims and Ca tholic Croats against the 
Serb people.”67  
But digital platforms have supercharged the effectiveness of propaganda by making it easier to target receptive audiences at scale and low cost. While Russia’s state -sponsored 
disinformation campaign in the United States has garnered the most attention, it is just one instance of a broader, global phenomenon.  
                                                      
63 Capri, Alex. Data Regulation --  Opportunities in the Red Tape . Nikkei Asian Review. December 5, 2018.  
64 Dela Cruz, Gie. Privacy and Data Protection Laws in Southeast Asia . Anteneo de Manila University. May 15, 2018.  
65 Curtiss, Tiffany. Privacy Harmonization and the Developing World: The impact of the EU’s General Data Protection 
Regulation on Developing Economies . Washington Journal of Law, T echnology, and Arts. Fall 2016.  
66 Power, Samantha. Bystanders to Genocide . The Atlantic. September 2001.  
67 Wikipedia. Propaganda During the Yugoslav Wars .    
 16 The best known and most egregious case is that of Myanmar, where anti -Rohingya 
propaganda posted on Facebook played a key role in fueling the violence that ha s forced 
more than 700,000 members of the ethnic group out of the country.68 The Myanmar military 
posted about two -thirds of this content, including a series of posts in which “the military’s 
intelligence arm spread rumors on Facebook to both Muslim and Bud dhist groups that an 
attack from the other side was imminent.”69 
Facebook’s lackadaisical response to the abuse of its platform in Myanmar has been well -
documented. Although the company received warnings about the propaganda as early as 
2013, it did not beg in to curb the behavior until the issue began receiving global attention in 
2017.70 In addition, the company employed only two Burmese -speaking content moderators 
until 2015 and did not ban pages connected to the military’s disinformation campaign until 2018, despite clear violations of the platform’s rules.
71  
The tally of incidents in w hich illicit actors have spread false information online to achieve 
political outcomes, sow discord, and incite violence continues to grow and most of these 
events are happening in the developing world.  
• In the Philippines, where 97 percent of Filipinos wi th internet access have a 
Facebook account, supporters of President Rodrigo Duterte have used the platform to spread false information about his political opponents, including fake 
pornographic images and unsubstantiated criminal accusations.
72 A recent stu dy by 
the University of Oxford’s Computational Propaganda Research Project estimated that Duterte’s staff spent $200,000 to hire workers to spread propaganda during his presidential campaign.
73  
• In Brazil,  where 120 million of the country’s 200 million residents use WhatsApp, 
false reports about fatal vaccine complications and government conspiracies posted on the app reportedly undermined  the government’s campaign to vaccinate people 
in the Amazon Basin against yellow fever .
74 In addition, a recent study by Brazilian 
fact-checking platform Agência Lupa found that more than half of the 50 most 
popular political images circulated in WhatsApp chat groups ahead of the 
                                                      
68 United Nations Human Rights Council. Myanmar: UN Fact -Finding Mission Releases Its Full Account of Massive 
Violations by Military in Rakhine, Kachin an d Shan States . September 18, 2018.  
 United Nations Human Rights Council. Rohingya Emergency .  
69 Mozur, Paul. A Genocide incited on Facebook, With Posts from Myanmar’s Military . New York Times. October 15, 
2018.  
70 Beech, Hannah. Across Myanmar, Denial of Ethnic Cleansing and Loathing of Rohingya . New York Times . October 
24, 2017.  
71 Facebook. Removing Myanmar Military Officials From Facebook . August 28, 2018.   
72Stevenson, Alexandra. Soldiers in Facebook’s War on Fake News Are Feeling Overwhelme d. New York Times. October 
9, 2018.  
Albda, Davey. How Duterte Used Facebook To Fuel the Philippine Drug War . Buzzfeed News. September 4, 2018.      
Ressa , Maria. Propaganda War: Weaponizing the Internet . Rappler. October 3, 2016.   
73 Bradshaw, Samantha and Philip Howard. Troops, Trolls and Troublemakers: A Global Inventory of Organized Social 
Media Manipulation . University of Oxford, Computational Propaganda Research Project.   
74 Molteni, Megan. When WhatsApp’s Fake News Problem Threatens Public Health . Wired. March 9, 2018.  
 17 presidential election were misleading (8 were completely false, 16 were real pictures 
used out o f context or related to distorted data, and 4 were unsubstantiated).75   
• In Sri Lanka, fake news posted in early 2018 stoked ethnic tensions between 
Buddhists and Muslims, leading to physical attacks, shops being destroyed, and 
mosques being burned down. The government eventually directed internet service 
providers to block social media platforms to stem the violence.76  
• In India, rumors spread for months about a child abduction ring, along with videos 
purporting to show kidnappings. Despite warnings from loc al officials that the 
rumors were false, mob attacks on suspected members of the ring killed at least nine 
people.77 Social media rumors related to child abduction have triggered similar 
attacks in Indonesia and Mexico.78    
• In Libya, “keyboard warriors” hav e used Facebook to help local militias target their 
rivals, including by providing coordinates for bomb attacks in at least one case.79  
Society’s growing exposure to disinformation is due in part to how the internet has changed 
the way we obtain information about news and politics. In the past, most people learned about current events through a “one -to-many” communication model, in which agents with 
some authority broadcast information to a mass audience. Today, however, virtually anyone 
can create and dist ribute content, and much of the information we receive is transmitted 
from “many -to-many” or “many -to-one.”
 80  
We also increasingly learn about current events through content shared by friends or 
members of like -minded groups, often without reference to it s source. Our personal 
connection or affinity with the sharer gives this information an air of credibility.81 And 
because information on newsfeeds, timelines, and chat groups is unique to each user, there is 
no public forum in which to debate and debunk fal se content. These factors make it easier 
                                                      
75 Benvenuto, Fabricio, Pablo Ortellado and Cristina Tardáguila. Fake News Is Poisoning Brazilian Politics. WhatsApp 
Can Stop It . New York Times. October 17, 2018.  
Becker, Clara, Fabricio Benvenuto, Natália Leal, Chico Maré s, Pablo Ortellado, Cristina Tardáguila. Só 4 das 50 
imagens mais compartilhadas por 347 grupos de WhatsApp são verdadeir as.   
76 Fisher, Max and Amanda Taub. Where Countries Are Tinderboxes and Facebook is a Match . New York Times. April 
21, 2018.  
77 Griffiths, James and Sugam Pokharel . India WhatsApp Rumors: Mob Kills Man in Latest Attack, 30 Arrested . CNN. 
July 16, 2018.  
78 Fisher, Max and Amanda Taub. Where Countries Are Tinderboxes and Facebook Is a Match . New York Times. April 
21, 2018.  
79 Walsh, Declan and Suliman Ali Zway. A Facebook War: Libyans Battle on the Streets and on Screens . New  York 
Times. September 4, 2018.  
80 Derakhsan, Hossein and Claire Wardle. Information Disorder: Toward an Interdisciplinary Framework for Research and 
Policy Making . Council of Europe. September 27, 2017.  
Helles, Rasmus and Klaus Bruhn Jensen. Speaking Into the System: Social Media and Many -to-One Communication. 
European Journal of Communication . 2017.  
81 American Press Institute. ‘Who Shared It?’: How Americans Decide What News to Trust on Social Media . March 20, 
2017.  
 18 for unfounded rumors to go “viral” and harder to determine the credibility of online 
information.  
The “track and trace” business model used by many digital platforms compounds this 
problem by making it easy for propagandists to find receptive audiences. As Dipayan Ghosh 
and Ben Scott argue,  “disinformation campaigns are functionally little different from any 
other advertising campaign” and the same data collection and analysis tools that make targeted advertising possible also enable “precision propaganda.”
82 Moreover, these tools are 
easy to use. One of the most striking aspects of the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign was how little technical capacity it required to conduct.  
While much of the focus  has been on social media platforms, text- messaging apps like 
WhatsApp, WeChat, and Viber pose an even greater challenge because their content is 
private and unregulated by platform operators, which means companies cannot monitor 
them or remove them for vi olating their policies. Although originally designed to support 
messaging between individuals or small groups, these apps have evolved to allow much larger discussions: WhatsApp now allows up to 256 people to participate in a chat group, 
while WeChat allow s 500. Some of these groups are a channel for a near constant stream of 
shared content, much of it of unknown origin.
83 In India, some WhatsApp users received as 
many as 1,000 messages per day attempting to influence their votes ahead of elections.84  
New in ternet users in the developing world are arguably more vulnerable to disinformation 
campaigns than their rich world counterparts because they are more likely to use only a handful of applications, which limits their ability to corroborate information. A re cent study 
of female mobile internet users in Kenya, India, and Indonesia by GSMA found that, while 
most of the women surveyed were proficient using applications they were familiar with, such 
as Facebook or WhatsApp, they struggled to use unfamiliar applic ations and search for new 
services online.
85 As a result, they “were unable to expand their mobile internet usage 
beyond the few applications they were already familiar with (which were often suggested to them by their social circle).”
 86 
Technology companie s are now scrambling to slow the spread of disinformation on their 
platforms. Over the last two years, Facebook has disabled billions of fake accounts and now 
has more than 7,500 content moderators.87 WhatsApp now limits the number of chat groups 
a user can  forward a message to at the same time to five, and is conducting an ad campaign 
in India urging its users to “share joy, not rumors.”88 For its part, Google is investing $300 
million over the next three years to “combat the spread of misinformation” and ha s adjusted 
                                                      
82 Ghosh, Dipayan and Ben Scott. Digital Deceit: The Technologies Behind Precision Propaganda on the Internet . New 
American Foundation. January 23, 2018. pg. 30  
83 WhatsApp to Limit ‘Forwards’ to 5 Users to Contain Rumors . Times of India. July 21, 2018.  
84 Bansal, Samarth, Krishna Pokharel, Newley Purnell, Bill Spindle. Think American Elections Are Bad? Indian Voters 
Get 1,000 Texts a Day . Wall Street Journal. May 15, 2018.  
85 GSMA. Accelerating Digital Literacy: Empowering Women to Use the Mobile Internet . June 6,  2015.  
86 ibid 
87 Sandberg, Sheryl. Testimony of Sheryl Sandberg Before the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence . September 
5, 2018.  
Madrigal, Alexis. Inside Facebook's Fast -Growing Content -Moderation Effort . The Atlantic. February 7, 2018.  
88 RT. WhatsApp Hits Indian TVs With Ads to Tackle Fake News After Chat Rumors Turn Deadly . December 3, 2018.  
 19 its ranking systems to give greater weight to “authoritative content.”89 In addition, YouTube 
has added information from Wikipedia and Encyclopedia Britannica to videos about popular 
conspiracy theories to provide alternative viewpoints.90  
The co mpanies are also working with civil society and third -party fact checkers to report and 
respond to false information online. This includes Projeto Comprova in Brazil, which 
brought together Brazilian media companies to report false claims that circulated online in the lead up to the 2018 presidential election.
91 
Due to the sheer amount of information available online, it is inevitable that most content 
moderation will be automated, and the sector is investing heavily in AI -based solutions to 
detect inappropr iate behavior. For these solutions to be effective, however, they need to be 
trained on a large body of natural language processing data, which is lacking for less popular dialects.
92 For that reason, an AI solution that works well in the United States may not in a 
country like India, with its 22 major languages and hundreds of local dialects. Effective 
content moderation also requires an understanding of regional and linguistic context, as a 
phrase that may seem innocuous to many can be a dog whistle for others.93 
When weighing what solutions to use, companies will need to determine how many 
resources they are willing to devote in countries where they are not profitable. For example, 
consider again the case of Myanmar, where civil society organizations called  on Facebook to 
address deficiencies in several areas, including its overreliance on third parties to flag 
content, the lack of a proper emergency escalation mechanism, reticence to engage local 
stakeholders around solutions, and a lack of transparency.94 In response to these and other 
criticisms, in mid -2018 Facebook created “a dedicated team across product, engineering and 
policy to work on issues specific to Myanmar,” conducted a human rights impact assessment, and announced that it would increase its number of Burmese -speaking content 
moderators to at least 100.
95 While Facebook arguably has a responsibility to address these 
shortfalls, improving in these areas requires substantial resources and it is an open question whether tech companies will always be willing to do so in countries where the potential for 
profit is low.  
Despite the initiatives taken by tech companies to reduce disinformation on their platforms, 
there is a growing belief among government leaders that the private sector cannot be left to 
                                                      
89 Shaban, Hamza. Google Announces Plan to Combat Spread of Disinformation . Washington Post. March 20, 2018.  
90 Newton, Casey. YouTube Will Add Information From Wikipedia to Videos About Conspiracies . The Verge. March 13, 
2018.  
91 First Draft. Our Field Work: Comprova .  
First Draft. Our Field Work: Crosscheck .  
92 Christopher, Nilesh. Facebook Fake News Clean -up Hits a Language Barrier . Economic Times. April 13, 2018.  
93 Allan, Richard. Hard Questions: Who Should Decide What is Hate Speech in an Online Global Community?  Facebook 
Newsroom. June 27, 2017.  
94 Letter brought to our attention by: Douek, Eveyln. Why Were Members of Congress Asking Mark Zuckerberg About 
Myanmar? A Primer . LawFare Blog. April 26, 2018.  
To view the l etter.  
95 Facebook. Update on Myanmar . August 2018.  
 20 address this problem on its own. As with data privacy, governments are taking different 
approaches to address the threat of disinformation, which has resulted in a mix of policies. 96  
Striking the right balance between effective regulation and protecting ci vil liberties will be an 
ongoing challenge.97 A recent report by the European Commission urges policymakers to 
eschew simple solutions like censorship in favor of a multidimensional approach that 
enhances the transparency of online news, promotes media and information literacy, and 
develops tools to empower users and journalists to tackle disinformation.98 
Perhaps the biggest challenge is that some governments enact policies ostensibly aimed at 
addressing disinformation that they then use to stifle dissent, l imit free speech, and attack 
journalists.99 Freedom House reports that at least 17 countries approved or proposed laws 
that would restrict online media in the name of fighting “fake news.”100 Additionally, many 
governments use propaganda themselves: the Unive rsity of Oxford’s Computational 
Propaganda Research Project found that in 2017 alone, political parties or governments in 48 
countries ran social media manipulation campaigns.101  
How governments approach the problem of disinformation ultimately depends on how they prioritize values like transparency and freedom of speech. Unlike in the area of data privacy, 
where global coordination around a harmonized approach could nudge policymakers in the 
direction of a regime that protects individ ual rights, national media policies are less likely to 
be influenced by economic considerations. For that reason, civil society organizations and journalists will continue to play the lead role in holding governments accountable for how 
they regulate onlin e communications.   
Market Concentration, Data, and Innovation  
In the past two years, the European Union has fined Google $7.7 billion for antitrust 
violations related to practices on its shopping platform and Android operating system.
102 By 
contrast, the US government has taken a hands -off approach as its largest tech firms have 
acquired potential competitors and promising start- ups by the dozen.     
But with attitudes about regulating the tech sector in the United States changing, so too are 
views on the risks of market concentration. The Warner paper reflects this shift, asserting 
                                                      
96 Funke, Daniel. A Guide to Anti- Misinformation Actions Around the World . Poynter. October 31, 2018.  
97 West, Darrell. How to Combat Fake News and Disinformation . Brookings Institution. December 18, 2017.  
98 European Commission. Final Report of the High Level Expert Group on Fake News and Online Disinformation . March 
12, 2018.  
99 Magdy, Samy. Egypt Says it Fights F ake News, Critics See New Crackdown . Associated Press. September 17, 2018.  
Amnesty International. Malaysia: Anti -Fake News Bill a Dangerous Crackdown on Freedom of Expression . March 29, 
2018.  
Gathright, Jenny. Kenya’s Crackdown on Fake News Raises Questions About Press Freed om. National Public Radio. May 
19, 2018.  
100 Freedom House. Freedom of the Net  2018. October 2018.  
101 Bradshaw, Samantha and Philip Howard. Challenging Truth and Trust: A Global Inventory of Organized Social Media 
Manipulation . University of Oxford, Computationa l Propaganda Research Project.  
102 Chee, Foo Yun. Europe Hits Google with Record$5 Billion Anti- Trust Fine, Appeal Ahead . Reuters. July 18, 2018.  
 21 that “the rise of a few dominant platforms poses key problems for long -term competition 
and innovation across multiple markets.”    
At first glance, worries ab out competitiveness appear to be less relevant for low -income 
countries, who are unlikely to produce firms that can compete with the global tech giants. 
But a growing number of governments in the developing world have expressed concern 
about their inabilit y to regulate these companies despite their outsized influence on 
economic and social outcomes.  
Large internet -based companies benefit from two interrelated barriers to competition: 
traditional network effects and access to a massive amount of customer da ta. Together, these 
factors create a self -reinforcing feedback loop: digital platforms become more useful as their 
number of users increases, and the more data they have, the better they can optimize 
services to attract more customers.103 Ongoing advances in  machine learning make this 
feedback loop even stronger and increase the value of data as a competitive difference -
maker. As Andrew Ng, former chief scientist at Baidu (and formerly at Google) notes, for 
internet companies “data is the defensible barrier, not algorithms.”104’ 
Because only a handful of internet companies are collecting most of the world’s data, the 
ability for other firms to develop data -driven innovations is limited. For this reason, much of 
the debate around market concentration has focused on how internet -based companies 
acquire and use personal data, and whether the data -for-services exchange that underlies the 
dominant online business model is conducted on fair terms.  
The Warner paper weighs several ways to lessen the competitive advantag e that large tech 
firms derive from their massive datasets. The least complicated solution is to increase 
transparency around how internet companies use the data they collect so consumers can make informed decisions. A more transformative approach would re quire platform 
companies to provide their users with a way to move, copy, or transfer their personal data. Such data portability requirements would, in effect, give users a property right over the 
personal data generated on digital platforms.  
Similarly, V iktor Mayer -Schonberger and Thomas Range have proposed a progressive data -
sharing mandate that would require every company above a certain size that collects and 
analyzes data to let other companies in the same market access an anonymized subset of that 
data.
105 Doing so, they argue, would encourage greater competition and spur innovation, 
since “if a wide variety of firms had access to market data, a firm’s competitive advantage 
would rest on its ability to extract insights, encouraging companies to develop smarter 
algorithms and analytics.”106  
Another idea gaining traction, at least in scholarly circles, is that platform companies should 
financially compensate their users based on the value of personal data they provide. This 
                                                      
103 Turck, Matt. The Power of Data Network Effects . Mattturck.com. January 4, 2016.  
The Economist. The World’s Most Valuable Resource is No Longer Oil, But Data . May 6, 2017.  
104 Lohr, Steve. Data Could Be the Next Tech Hot Button for Regulators . New York Times. January 8, 2017.  
105 Mayer -Schonberger, Viktor and Thomas Ramge. A Big Choice for Big Tech: Share Data or Suffer the Consequences . 
Foreign Affairs. September/October 2018.  
106 ibid 
 22 idea, first proposed by Jaron Lanier in 2013 and extended by Eric Posner and E. Glen Weyl 
in their book Radical Markets, holds that treating platform users as “data laborers” and 
compensating them as such would provide a new and potentially significant source of 
income for individuals and  improve the productivity of machine learning.107  
Leaving aside the counterargument that data is only valuable when combined with the means to derive insights from it, there are several hurdles that must be overcome before this vision can become a reality. This includes finding a way to estimate the worth  of disparate pieces of 
personal data whose value increases when it is combined with other data and tracking that 
value across multiple uses.  
Once these challenges have been met, there is still the question of whether treating data as 
labor would provide a meaningful economic benefit to users. As discussed above, the 
revenue that tech companies collect on a per customer basis is quite low even in rich 
countries and drastically smaller in the developing world (as a reminder, Facebook’s average revenue per u ser is $26.76 in the United States and Canada and $1.86 across countries in 
Africa, Middle East, and Latin America). Thus, the idea that “data labor has the potential to 
constitute a significant fraction of income” seems unrealistic, at least for the moment.
108 
But there are other reasons why governments may want to assert greater control over how 
tech companies use their citizens’ data. In his paper, “Data, development, and growth,” Berkeley Professor Steven Weber argues that countries locked into a role of “raw data supplier and consumer of imported value -added data products” will be bound to a lower 
growth path relative to countries where tech companies use data to create high value -added 
services.
109 For that reason, he argues that, “(unless there is a defin itive reason to believe and 
act otherwise) it will be better for countries to internalize significant parts of the data 
economy within their own borders.”110  
This perspective, which Weber calls “data nationalism,” discounts the benefit that 
consumers gain by using applications trained on a global dataset and the risk that tech 
companies may choose to withdraw services from countries that pursue overly burdensome requirements.
111 But this view is becoming increasing popular in the developing world, 
where more c ountries are using it to justify laws that place limits on how and where tech 
companies use the data their citizens provide.  
These restrictions vary in scope but generally require firms that collect data about a country’s citizens to store or process that  data within the country’s jurisdiction.
112 The growing list of 
developing countries with such “data localization” laws include China, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
                                                      
107 Lanier, Jaron. Who Owns the Future. Simon and Schuster. March 4, 2014.  
Posner, Eric and Glen Weyl. Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and Democracy for a Just Society . Princeton 
University Press. 2018.   
108 Goff, Leonard, Diego Jimenez Hernandez, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Jaron Lanier, Glen Weyl.  Should We Treat 
Data as Labor? Moving Beyond “Free” . American Economic Association Pap ers and Proceedings. May 2018.  
109 Weber, Steven. Data, Development, and Growth . Business and Politics. September 2017.    
110 ibid  
111 Weber is not the first to use the term “data nationalism.” See C hander, Anupam and Uyen P. Le.  Data 
Nationalism . Emory Law Journal. Vol. 64, No. 3, March 2015.  
112 Wikipedia. Data Localization .  
 23 Nigeria, and Vietnam.113 Kenya and India also have draft privacy bills that include data 
localization re quirements.114   
In the past, governments have justified such laws on the grounds that they enhance 
cybersecurity, aid domestic law enforcement, and protect their citizens’ privacy. But more 
recently they have cited concerns about staying competitive in a da ta-driven economy. For 
example, the committee that drafted India’s Personal Data Protection Bill argued that 
forcing firms to keep a copy of personal data provided by Indian consumers in the country 
would promote the growth of the country’s digital economy , noting that “the growth of AI 
is heavily dependent on harnessing data, which underscores the relevance of policies that 
would ensure the processing of data within the country using local infrastructure built for 
that purpose.”115  
Although more research on the effect of data localization laws on economic outcomes is 
needed, the arguments in their favor are generally unconvincing. Forcing companies to store 
data on local servers will not change where value -added processing takes place, while forcing 
companie s to process data locally would raise the cost of doing cross -border business, 
resulting in the same distortionary effects as other protectionist policies.116 The cyber 
security justifications for data localization are also doubtful.117 
 
3. A Better Path  
Gover nments cannot afford to forego the benefits that internet access and digital services 
provide to their citizens and economy, and it is precisely because these services are necessary 
that policymakers must minimize the risks associated with them.  
In response to the concerns about data privacy, disinformation, and market concentration 
discussed above, governments are reassessing their relationship with the global tech giants and, in many cases, enacting policies that raise barriers to the cross -border flow of data and 
put the largely global and open nature of the internet at risk.  
 
 
                                                      
113 Information Techn ology Industry Council. Data Localization Snapshot . January 19, 2017.  
Gnanasagaran, Angaindrankumar. Data Localization in Southeast Asia . The ASEAN Post. April 15, 2018.  
114 Frizell, Sabina. Kenya's Data Privacy Bill Could Harm the Economy . Counci l on Foreign Relations. November 20, 
2018.  
115 Committee of Experts under the Chairmanship of Justice B.N. Srikrishna. A Free and Fair Digital Economy: 
Protecting P rivacy, Empowering Indians . 2018.  
116 Baur-Yazbeck, Silvia. 3 Myths About Data Localization . CGAP Blog. August 21, 2018.  
Ahmex, Usman and Anupam Chander. Information Goes Global: Protecting Privacy, Security, and the New Economy in a 
World of Cross -Border Data Flows . International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD) and World 
Economic Forum, 2015.; UC Davis Legal Studies Research Paper No. 480. Available at Fraser, Erica. Data 
Locali sation and the Balkanisation of the Internet . SCRIPTed 359. December 2016.  
117 Cory, Nigel. Cross -Border Data Flows: Where are the Barri ers, and What Do They Cost?  Information Technology & 
Innovation Foundation (ITIF). May 1, 2017.  24  
While the  trend toward an internet that is increasingly fragmented by national regulation may 
seem inevitable, another path that preserves the benefits derived from an open internet while 
minimizing its risks remains possible. Taking it will require a comprehensive approach that 
includes the following elements:  
Greater leadership by the United States  
Because the United States is home to the world’s largest internet companie s, it benefits more 
than any other country from an open internet and finds itself in a natural position of 
authority. To date, however, it has largely ceded this authority by taking a hands -off 
approach towards regulating data -driven tech companies.  
As the United States has lagged, others have stepped forward with internet governance 
models aligned with their values. This includes the European Union, which has embraced an 
activist model that seeks to preserve individual privacy and market competition thr ough 
regulation, and China, which has sought to control the flow of information online and use 
digital tools to support surveillance.118  
The concern is that an increasing number of governments will emulate China’s repressive 
model. And while it may be naïve  to think that policymakers who find this approach 
appealing might be persuaded to choose a different path, this is the task at hand for those 
who seek to preserve an open internet that supports democratic rights.  
One possible counter is to increase the e conomic benefits associated with a more open but 
well-regulated governance model. For example, the United States could unlock significant 
economic gains if it pursued a data privacy regime that was similar enough to the GDPR to 
allow companies around the w orld to comply with both by taking the same measures. A 
country that takes a regulatory path that makes it harder for its companies to comply with 
EU-US privacy regulations would put itself at a competitive disadvantage, the magnitude of 
which would depend  on the size of the economic “bloc” using the US -EU approach.  
In this and other ways, the choices US policymakers make to regulate their own domestic 
internet companies will influence the decision set faced by policymakers in other countries. 
For this reas on, it is important to raise the awareness of US legislators about the risks that 
ineffective US regulation poses for democratic stability and economic growth domestically 
and worldwide.  
Better global coordination  
Global internet governance is usually asso ciated with the multi -stakeholder approach that 
evolved out of the communities that created the internet and later the web.119 While that 
approach has been successful in dealing with matters related to the internet’s technical 
                                                      
118 For a more detailed breakdown of different national approaches to data governance see McGowan, Kathleen, 
Priya Vora, Matthew Homer and Jonathan Dolan. Personal Data Empowerment: Restoring Power to the P eople in a D igital 
Age. Pathways for Prosperity Commission Background Paper Series; no. 11. Oxford, United Kingdom . 
119 Intern et Society. Internet Governance: Why the Multistakeholder Approach Works .  
 25 architecture, such as ICANN’s h andling of domain names, it has been unable to address 
socially contested issues.120  
In the absence of strong mechanisms for global coordination, sovereign nations have 
asserted control of internet regulation with little heed to the cross -border implication s of 
their policies. But the increasingly political and social nature of the debates around internet 
governance argue in favor of considering when global solutions may be appropriate. For that 
reason, the recent announcement by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe that Japan will 
develop a data governance track for this years G20 Summit was encouraging.121 
Some issues will be more amenable to global coordination than others. For example, how 
countries seek to rein in online disinformation campaigns (or use thos e campaigns to their 
advantage) will depend on how they prioritize values like transparency and freedom of 
speech. Global bodies are unlikely to be any more effective at influencing how governments 
deal with communications conducted online than they are at swaying national policies 
regarding freedom of the press.   
The rationale for global coordination is stronger in areas where cross -border spillovers are 
more immediate or where the efficiency gains from coordination are greater. Data privacy 
falls into th e latter category because harmonizing privacy standards could reduce the cost of 
compliance for globally active companies. While a government’s approach to data privacy 
will necessarily reflect its values, economic considerations will also be a factor, which raises 
the potential for global coordination.  
Informed policymaking  
There is broad agreement in the development community that getting digital policy “right” is an important prerequisite for growth. However, little attention has been paid to how govern ments should engage with the global tech companies whose services play an 
increasingly important role in their economies. One reason for this is the absence of a conceptual framework around the value of data, as reflected by the ongoing debate about 
whethe r oil or labor is the more useful historical analogue for data’s role in the digital 
economy.
122  
A more coherent theory of data’s economic value and a means to measure that value would 
help governments design more effective digital strategies. Developing such a framework will 
not be easy, however, as it will require finding ways to (1) estimate the wo rth of disparate 
pieces of personal data whose value depends on being combined with other data to produce 
useful information and (2) track the value of data across multiple uses.  
The good news is that technologists are now exploring new ways to enhance the 
transparency of this combinatorial process and give internet users more control over how 
their personal data is used.123 If successful, these efforts could make it easier to track how 
                                                      
120 Malcolm, Jeremy. How Do We Achieve an Open, Secure, Trustworthy, and Inclusive Internet? . Electronic Frontier 
Foundation. June 21, 2016.  
121 Speech  by Shinzo Abe at the World Economic Forum, January 23, 2019.  
122 This section draws extensively from points made to us by Toby Phillips, Head of Research and Policy, 
Pathways for Prosperity  Commission, University of Oxford.  
123 Ongoing initiatives in this area include Solid  and GLIAnet . 26 individual pieces of data flow through the digital economy and measure t heir value. 
Ultimately, it may even be possible to develop input -output tables for data like those used to 
account for value -added production in global value chains. This analysis could serve as the 
basis for better informed negotiation between governments  and internet companies.  
*** 
An open internet is a global public good that provides myriad social and economic benefits 
for its users. For that reason, preserving it should be a policy priority for the development community, as well as policymakers in the  developed world. While there is no guarantee that 
taking the steps outlined above would slow the trend towards a fragmented internet, they are necessary conditions for success.   