Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance
Growth prospects, market challenges and policy measures: evolution of mobile broadband in Pakistan
Muhammad Shehzad Hanif, Shao Yunfei, Muhammad Imran Hanif,
Article information:
To cite this document:
Muhammad Shehzad Hanif, Shao Yunfei, Muhammad Imran Hanif, (2018) "Growth prospects, market challenges and
policy measures: evolution of mobile broadband in Pakistan", Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, Vol. 20 Issue: 1,
pp.42-61, https://doi.org/10.1108/DPRG-04-2017-0014
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/DPRG-04-2017-0014
Downloaded on: 30 June 2018, At: 22:51 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 48 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 121 times since 2018*
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:178665 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication
Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
Growth prospects, market challenges and
policy measures: evolution of mobilebroadband in Pakistan
Muhammad Shehzad Hanif, Shao Yunfei and Muhammad Imran Hanif
Muhammad Shehzad Hanif
and Shao Yunfei are bothbased at the University ofElectronic Science andTechnology of China,Chengdu, China.Muhammad Imran Hanifis based at the AlfalahInstitute of Banking andFinance, BahauddinZakariya University,Multan, Pakistan.Abstract
Purpose –The paper aims to explore the long-term prospects of mobile broadband adoption in a
developing country. The supply-side and demand-side policy measures are recommended to counterthe challenges to broadband adoption.
Design/methodology/approach –Methodologically, this study uses document analysis to explain
secondary data including growth statistics, trade literature and previous scholarly research. Based onthe growth statistics of broadband and the informed market insights, the research discusses theprevailing market threats and recommends counter measures to improve the long-term prospects ofbroadband propagation.
Findings –The growth of mobile broadband is settling down in Pakistan due to various barriers like
cost, literacy, security and unavailability of local content. Collaborative efforts are required by thegovernment, the service providers and the people to enhance the adoption of broadband service andsecure economic beneﬁts of the broadband.
Practical implications –The research offers useful implications for managers and policymakers in
Asian and African developing countries; the policy measures discussed here may serve as guidelinesfor them in the design of their own policies regarding broadband supply and demand.
Originality/value –The study makes an effort to examine the broadband growth in a developing
country on the basis of both quantitative and qualitative aspects. The research endeavors to ﬁll the gapon the particular scholarship of research covering potential uptake of broadband services and theeffects of constraining elements to broadband adoption in a developing country.
Keywords Broadband, 4G, 3G, Barriers to broadband growth, Pakistan, Teledensity
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
The huge growth of mobile broadband has curtailed the ﬁxed broadband growth to mere
fractions, and there is no end. Powered by the integral features of portability, mobility anddevice and applications universality, the data enabled smart phone subscriptions areexpected to reach 6.1 Billion mark in 2020- a point in time where the smartphones will ﬁnallyoutnumber the active ﬁxed phone subscriptions around the globe (
Ingrid, 2015 ). A large
part of it is coming from the less mature markets in Asia Paciﬁc and Africa regions, whereasthe developed US and European markets have been witnessing steadier growth patternsfor mobile broadband subscriptions in recent past.
The era of ﬁfth generation mobile networks is fast approaching, and preparations are
already underway in the relatively developed and mature markets for testing of theadvanced air interface and software deﬁned networking to enable the core networkscompliance for upcoming 5G mobile standards. The new developments in 2017 wouldcall for collaborative approach between over-the-top players and conventionaloperators as the fall of traditional ﬁxed line telephony is getting even deeper and
Received 2 April 2017
Revised 20 August 2017Accepted 3 October 2017
PAGE 42 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1, 2018, pp. 42-61, © Emerald Publishing Limited, ISSN 2398-5038 DOI 10.1108/DPRG-04-2017-0014
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
steeper and extending the digital divide further until the governments in the developing
countries exercise the right strategies and plans for the provision of services to the lessdeveloped market sectors (
Developing_Telecoms_Trends_2017, 2017 ).
The role of government, insofar as a moderator, a facilitator and a regulator overseeing the
development and proliferation of broadband is well established; yet, the modes and meansof execution varies across the world (
Cava-Ferreruela and Alabau-Muñoz, 2006 ;Falch,
2007 ;Picot and Wernick, 2007 ;Belloc et al. , 2012 ). Although various researchers have
discussed the proliferation of broadband in developing countries from the perspective ofgovernment role play and the demand side and supply side measures and the need for adedicated national broadband plan (
Galperin et al. , 2013 ;Jain, 2014 ;Jayakar and Liu,
2014 ;Shin and Jung, 2012 ); yet, the particular scholarship of research covering the
potential uptake of broadband services and the effects of constraining elements tobroadband adoption in a developing country is relatively under-researched.
Drawing on secondary data sources, policy documents, trade literature, past research and
analysis of broadband growth statistics, this study endeavors to meet this gap by analyzingthe market potential of mobile broadband service in a developing economy. The studyfocuses on the launch, evolution and proliferation of broadband services in Pakistan anddemonstrate the growth trends of ﬁxed and broadband services. The numbers althoughbeing on the growing side, exhibit a slowdown. Reﬂecting on past research, informedmarket insights and the industry best practices the study takes into account the majorchallenges to broadband proliferation both from the supply and demand aspects and lendpolicy guidelines for the government, communication service providers (CSPs) and thesociety to leverage the full beneﬁts of information and communication (ICT) forthe well-being of the people and society. The study has important policy implications for thepolicymakers in other developing nations in Asia and Africa, where the mobile broadbandmarket is in nascent stages, and they are striving to adopt the digital life style and realizethe beneﬁts of ICT regime.
1.1 Key research questions
The mobile broadband services were only introduced in 2014 in Pakistan and the people
adopted the new 3G and 4G mobile broadband services very quickly; with a record growthrate of 345 per cent in the ﬁrst year (
PTA Annual Report, 2014-2015 ). With the launch of 3G
and 4G broadband mobile services in Pakistan, the era of digital life style has just begunwhich will bring in whole new opportunities and facilities for both internet and non-internetusers in Pakistan. According to ITU-MISR report-2016, Pakistan is one of the countrieswhere the telecom operators are offering the cheapest mobile cellular services. Theaverage PPP$ price is US$7.04 in Pakistan as shown below in
Table I (International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), 2016 ). Keeping in view the relatively saturated state of
Pakistan Telecom market where proﬁt margins are very low and the service providers arelooking for mergers (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 ), several key questions arise.
Table I Pakistan is one of the countries with cheapest mobile services PPP$, 2015
Top three regions with lowest mobile service Prices in PPP$ (MISR-ITU 2016)
Asia and Paciﬁc Europe AfricaCountry Price in PPP$ Country Price in PPP$ Country Price in PPP$
Sri Lanka 2.45 Estonia 4.67 Kenya 7.96
Bangladesh 4.14 Lithuania 5.59 Ethiopia 8.70
Iran 5.43 Latvia 6.84 Mauritius 9.18China 6.63 Austria 6.97 Namibia 9.54Pakistan 7.04 Cyprus 8.56 Nigeria 10.17
Source: ITU MISR Report (2016)
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 43
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
/c143How long will we continue with this rapid growth rate of mobile broadband service?
/c143How the CSP’s are going to survive in the competition era?
/c143How the CSPs will survive in the long term as the mobile broadband growth rates would
ultimately settle down?
/c143Are there any barriers due to which the broadband growth may suffer? What sort ofpolicy measures may be adopted by the government and the service providers tosupport the adoption of broadband services?
This study takes into account all these arising questions and discusses the broadband
telecom market in Pakistan at length, from its evolution to its latest growth trends, thepotential it has, the key obstacles to the growth and the measures to counter the obstacles.
We begin with an overview of the telecom market in Pakistan in Section 2 and further the
discussion with the evolution of broadband services in Pakistan in Section 3. The mobilebroadband services were launched in Pakistan in 2014. Prior to that, the internet users hadto rely on various alternatives like EvDO[
1] and WiMAX[ 2] wireless internet services which
had their own limitations. After a brief comparison of these wireless broadband internetservices in Section 4, we move on to the latest growth trends for ﬁxed, wireless and mobilebroadband services in Section 5, followed by a discussion about different survivalstrategies adopted by CSPs during this competition, in Section 6. Beyond this, thelong-term view is presented with a discussion on supply-side and demand-side factors,respectively, in Section 7 along with a deliberation on supply-side and demand-side policymeasures undertaken for broadband adoption. Section 8 concludes the discussion alongwith limitations and further research implications.
2. The telecom market in Pakistan
After the deregulation of the telecom sector in 2003, the market has shown promisinggrowth in the teledensity, the hallmark being the mobile penetration. According to theTelecom policy published by the Government of Pakistan in 2015, the mobile voice andbroadband services in Pakistan have shown promising growth trends over time whencompared to the growth of ﬁxed network penetration (
Table II ).
Compared to a teledensity of 3.60 per cent back in 2004-2005, the ﬁxed network
teledensity has actually declined to 3.42 per cent as per February 2015 statistics. Themobile penetration on the other hand has grown in big numbers from 8.30 per cent in2004-2005 to reach 73.23 per cent in February 2015. The mobile broadband teledensityhas jumped upto 5.54 per cent in less than one year of its launch in 2014, while the ﬁxedbroadband teledensity has been really sluggish in growth; showing a 6.69 per cent growthafter nine years of its launch in 2005-2006 (Pakistan Telecom Policy 2015).
Unlike the ﬁxed network which is over 99 per cent occupied by the incumbent state
operator Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd (PTCL), the mobile sector in Pakistanis being served by ﬁve cellular operators, namely, Mobilink (PMCL[
3]), Telenor, Zong
(CMPak[ 4]), Ufone and Warid telecom. The relative market share of each operator is shown
inFigure 1 (PTA Statistics, 2016 )
Table II Relative penetration of ﬁxed and mobile telecom services in Pakistan
Services Year 2004-2005 Years 2015 (February)
Fixed network 3.60 3.42
Fixed broadband N/A as service was launched in 2005-2006 6.69
Mobile 8.30 73.23Mobile broadband N/A as service was launched in 20014-2015 5.54
Source: Adopted from Telecom Policy 2015
PAGE 44 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
The mobile telecommunication sector is an emerging industry in Pakistan. There are more
than 90 million unique subscribers which account for almost 47 per cent of the totalpopulation. The digital divide in the country is still wide and analysis shows that by 2020,still 48 per cent of the population in Pakistan will remain unsubscribed to mobile broadbandtelecom services as illustrated in
Figure 2 .
In addition to the usual digital divide, the gender divide and the age divide also exist in
Pakistan. The use of internet is merely for communication and entertainment purposelimiting its utility as an established medium for education, health and other sectors of life(
ITU, 2016 ). As per statistics by PTA, the use of social media and search engine sites are
the favorites among internet users. Leading social media platform, Facebook is the mostpopular among Pakistani internet users, while Twitter and Instagram take the second andthird spots respectively (
PTA Annual Report, 2014-2015 , p. 74).
3. Evolution of broadband services in Pakistan
A glance at the landscape of cellular services in Pakistan reveals that after the auction oftwo new GSM licenses in 2004, the auction of 3G and 4G next generation mobile services(NGMS) was accomplished in 2014 as illustrated in
Figure 3 . In fact, Pakistan laggedFigure 1 Relative market share of mobile operators in Pakistan
Figure 2 Pakistan mobile market evolution
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 45
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
behind its neighboring countries in the launch of third generation and fourth generation
mobile broadband services ( Annabel, 2013 ). The auction for 3G new licenses was delayed
time and again on account of various aspects like investors readiness, regulatoryframework preparations, etc. (
The Express Tribune, Pakistan, 2012 ).
It merits mentioning here that the national broadband plan in Pakistan was announced as
early as December 2004 with its prime focus on ﬁxed broadband services since mobilebroadband was not commercially available to the people. The key milestone of the Nationalbroadband plan focused on increasing the DSL users, thus mandating the target of100,000 DSL broadband subscriptions all over the country within the ﬁrst year (broadbandpolicy 2004 Ministry of Information Technology, Pakistan).
The broadband adoption in the country however remained slow on account of various
factors like high price, quality and unavailability of mobile broadband service and thebroadband subscriptions remained well short of the target of half a million subscriptions in2010 (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
The launch of wireless broadband services provided some boost to broadband adoption;
yet, it failed to provide the realm of broadband e-services to the people. The necessarybreakthrough was provided by the launch of mobile broadband services after the NGMSspectrum launch, supported with the approval of a comprehensive Telecom policy in 2015.
3.1 Market opportunity for other broadband technologies
Since the 3G and 4G mobile broadband was not available until mid of 2014, the internet
users in Pakistan had to rely either on ﬁxed broadband services(DSL[
5], FTTH[ 6] or HFC[ 7]
technology) or on Wireless broadband services using other wireless technologies (EvDO,WiMax technology). The ﬁxed broadband services have been fairly less popular with thepeople. The ﬁxed broadband penetration has been around 1 per cent only, owing tovarious factors like high prices, limited choice of services (virtually no other landlineoperator exists apart from PTCL[
8]) and quality of service issues etc. The DSL services
have been widely regarded as corporate client services due to high subscription charges.The broadband technology share in
Figure 4 shows that even though the features like full
mobility and true broadband speeds were missing; the wireless broadband technologywas still able to retain the major chunk of internet customers in Pakistan (
PTA Annual
Report, 2013-2014 ).
3.2 EvDO – market leader of wireless broadband services
The wireless broadband market began to grow progressively after the launch of PTCL’s
EvDO wireless broadband service in 2009 and at the end of FY 2013-2014, it had capturedFigure 3 Landscape of cellular services in Pakistan
PAGE 46 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
almost 63 per cent of the broadband subscriber market of Pakistan as shown in Figure 4 .
The main reasons for the popularity of EvDO services being, the nation-wide availability ofservices, a broad range of EVO[
9] products and the multiple service offerings according to
needs and demands of customers by the incumbent operator PTCL. PTCL also launcheda bundle offer for their ﬁxed broadband subscribers, who could enjoy broadband wirelessEVO services for a nominal monthly fee in addition to the usual DSL monthly charges. Theother factors which contributed to the success of wireless broadband services were thegrowing trends of “on-the-go” internet and low-cost smart phone availability in the market(
PTA Annual Report, 2013-2014 ).
4. Launch of mobile broadband in Pakistan
The era of mobile broadband services however truly originated with the launch of the 3Gand 4G mobile services across the country in 2014. The NGMS spectrum for 3G and 4Gservices was auctioned by Pakistan Telecommunication Authority(PTA) in April 2014 andthree telecom operators, namely, Mobilink, Telenor and Ufone acquired the licenses for thethird generation 3G services, whereas CMPak acquired a license for both 3G and 4Gservices (
PTA Annual Report, 2014-2015 , p. 64).
As shown in Figure 5 , the overall broadband penetration which took six years to creep up
only to 2.07 per cent in 2014 soared to 8.97 per cent in 2015 due to the staggering 345 percent growth of mobile broadband service in just 12 months (
PTA Annual Report,
2014-2015 , p. 62). The market readiness for mobile broadband services was also
facilitated and complemented by the fact that EVO and WiMAX wireless services had beenin operation for past several years, and the people were already well aware of the pros andcons of the technology and various alternatives of “on-the-go” broadband services usingtheir mobile devices (
Ruchita and Karuna, 2016 ).
4.1 Substitution effect of mobile broadband services
The substitution effect of mobile broadband services was so powerful that the competitor
wireless mobile broadband services recorded a loss of over half a million subscriberswithin a year of the launch of NGMS mobile broadband (Ref-
PTA Report, 2014-2015 ). The
downward trend for EVO and WiMAX wireless broadband is likely to continue in comingFigure 4 Relative market share of various broadband technologies before launch of
3G and 4G technology
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 47
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
years, and the future market may see consolidation with even some players going out of
business completely or partially from the wireless broadband market.
The introduction of mobile broadband services in 2014 also marked the end of the market
leadership for PTCL in the broadband services sector. As shown in Figure 6 , PTCL in June
2014 was the leader in the broadband market with 80 per cent share, but it droppedvirtually to the last position in June 2015 with only 15.80 per cent of the market share. PTCLwas only ahead of Ufone; which is, in fact, a fully owned subsidiary of PTCL itself (
PTA
Annual Report, 2014-2015 , p. 64). This would be interesting to see how far PTCL can go in
the competition with limited mobility, as ultimately they would target rural area customersmore and compete with comparatively low-price services.
5. Broadband services: growth prospects ahead of 2016
Next to the land-sliding growth trend of broadband services, a ﬁerce competition wasahead as pointed out by the PTA, as the cellular operators were all set for a race to win andretain customers on the basis of network expansion and blanket coverage of 3G and 4Gservices, attractive packages and Quality of service (QoS) improvement andenhancements, which in turn would deﬁnitely be going to beneﬁt the customers (
PTA
Annual Report, 2014-2015 ,p .6 4 ; Gao and Raﬁq, 2009 ).
The rapid ﬁre growth trend for mobile broadband services in the very ﬁrst year was a
welcome news for the telecom sector of Pakistan. The overall growth trend of mobilebroadband is upwards also in 2016 as 3G and 4G mobile subscribers continue to growFigure 5 Broadband penetration in Pakistan
Figure 6 A comparison of the relative broadband market shares in Pakistan
PAGE 48 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
even for the second successive year. A deep dive into the broadband growth trends,
however, reveals some interesting outcomes. The statistics for mobile and ﬁxed broadbandfor the past three years, i.e. 2013-2014, 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 have been studiedseparately and the following sections discuss these in detail.
It may be noted that all the data used here has been collected from ofﬁcial resources, i.e.
from the PTA website instead of relying on individual operators’ websites to ensure fulltransparency and impartiality .
5.1 Growth trend of wireless broadband services
The big dip in the number of wireless broadband customers based on EvDO and WiMAX
technology, back in 2014-2015, is clearly showing the marked substitution effect after thelaunch of mobile broadband services in 2014 – illustrated in
Figure 7 . The wireless
broadband customers based on WiMAX or EvDO technology services have beenconverting to mobile broadband services, and this trend will continue further in comingyears. As per latest statistics in September 2016, the EvDO wireless subscribers havedropped below 1 million mark, while the WiMAX subscribers are facing a more criticalsituation as their service providers have started working on various alternatives like theclosure of business, a swap of services with EvDO or mobile broadband services (
PTA
Annual Report, 2015-2016 ).
5.2 Growth trend of ﬁxed broadband services
The subscriber growth trend of ﬁxed broadband service is also shown in Figure 7 along
with the subscriber growth trend of wireless broadband services based on the lateststatistics from PTA. Fixed broadband services using DSL technology seem to be the leastaffected by the launch of mobile broadband services which is understandable, as it isserving an entirely different market segment.
However, the numbers have started to decrease, and the customer churn continues as per
latest statistics reported by PTA in September 2016. This downward trend will continue,with the high-speed mobile broadband services gaining more popularity and acceptability.It will be interesting to see how the mobile operators target this segment with comparablebandwidth and price offerings and how PTCL comes up with the counter strategy to holdits customers back.
5.3 Growth trend of mobile broadband services
The mobile broadband statistics plot in
Figure 8 shows the growth trend during FY
2015-2016 based on monthly subscriptions. Unlike the statistics in the past year 2014-2015when there were reported ﬁgures of about 29 per cent growth rate on average, the highest
Figure 7 Growth trends for ﬁxed and wireless broadband services in Pakistan
(2013-2016)
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 49
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
growth rate of mobile broadband was observed in September 2015 which was 14 per cent.
It was 11 per cent in October 2015 and ever since the growth of mobile broadband startedslowing down. It started following a steadier pattern with every passing month – andultimately settled to be around 4 per cent in May 2016. The lowest growth of 3 per cent wasreported in April 2016.
Although it would be early to accept it as an established growth trend for the mobile
broadband services in Pakistan, this settling trend of mobile broadband services seems tobe not only surprising but also coming in ahead of time and usual expectations. It speaksvolumes about the overall maturity and near-saturation state of the telecom market inPakistan and should serve an alert to the decision-makers about the long-term prospectsof mobile broadband services in Pakistan.
This early downward trend of mobile broadband growth in Pakistan becomes plausible
altogether, as we try to visualize the actual size of our target market keeping in view thegender divide, the digital divide and the key factors of cost, literacy, privacy and contentrelevance. We must also not forget that the customer adoption of the mobile broadbandservices in the very ﬁrst year has been overwhelming – giving rise to a growth rate wellabove the normal. It would be really interesting to track this growth pattern more closely incoming years to establish it from the perspective of customer adoption, re-adoption andchurn factor.
6. Short-term measures: survival strategies during the competition
With the growth of ﬁxed broadband services already on a negative slope, the double-digitgrowth of mobile broadband in 2014 has also become steadier with each passing monthand during its second year, the current average growth rate stands at 7 per cent. Thegrowth of mobile broadband for the ﬁrst ﬁve months of the year 2016 is 5 per cent whichis even less.
This shows the early signs of a saturation stage after which the growth would probably
further slow down and revenue margins may further decline – so much so that theconsolidation phase would call for mergers and acquisitions where only the competitiveoperator will be able to survive in future (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 ,p .3 2 ; Chu et al. ,
2009 ). The cellular operators in Pakistan are working on various strategies to survive in the
competition.
6.1 Rapid network expansion
The CSPs are working on rapid deployment and expansion of the 3G and 4G mobile
broadband services all around the country. In less than 2 years of its launch in 2014, theFigure 8 The growth rate of mobile broadband is settling down in 2016
PAGE 50 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
mobile broadband service is now accessible to almost 75 per cent of the citizens ( GSMA
Report, 2016 ).
6.2 Affordable tariffs and customer-friendly packages
As already pointed out here that the mobile tariff plans being offered to customers in
Pakistan are one of the most economical in the world ( Measuring the Information Society
Report 2016-ITU ). Keeping in view the already set prices for wireless broadband services
in the market, every mobile operator has to offer multiple pre-paid and postpaid packageswith charging based on per second, per 20 s, per 30 s and per minute basis. Aggressivepromotion is on which include unlimited free on-net calls, free calling minutes for off-net andlandline calls and daily buckets for calls and data services. The effective price of a mobilecall in FY 2010-2011 which was Rs 1.68 per minute has substantially reduced to Rs 0.60 perminute-almost one-third of the last year’s price (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 ).
6.3 OPEX reduction
Along with the network expansion and aggressive marketing, all operators are also working
to cut operational expenditures by using modern and efﬁcient mechanisms for networkoperations. Installation of solar-powered back-up, fuel-efﬁcient power generators, networkand infrastructure sharing are some of the measures taken in this regard (
GSM Association,
2014 ;Awan et al. , 2016 ).
Side by side, the operators have also reverted to intermittent job-cuts and downsizing
practice to reduce the headcount. The employees have been offered severance plans forearly retirement (
Aamir, 2016 ;PTCL (Company Press Release), 2014 ).
6.4 Mergers/acquisitions
The prevailing state of competition in the telecom market of Pakistan has also forced the
operators to consider various consolidation options. Mobilink(PMCL) and Warid Telecomhave already ﬁled a case with the regulatory authority PTA for a merger. PTA has issued anNOC in this regard, and once all legal formalities are settled all assets and liabilities ofWarid telecom will be transferred to Mobilink (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 ).
In recent past, there has also been conﬁrmed news that Zong (CMPak) – the third largest
cellular operator in Pakistan which also carries the major share of 4G subscriber base, hasalso shown interest to purchase PTCL and Ufone from Etisalat. Several meetings were alsoheld in this regard, but till date no proceedings going on for it (
Telecomworkers, 2016 ).
7. Long-term measures: policies to support mobile broadband supply and
demand
The broadband diffusion in a country is a function of both demand and supply side factors
spread over a period of time. The supply side caters for the deployment of broadbandnetworks and services while demand side takes into account the acceptance and adoptionof the broadband service. The supply side measures incorporate policies and strategies forsupporting the deployment and access of the broadband services to all the unserved andunderserved areas while demand side measures deal with the barriers to adoption ofbroadband (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
The broadband diffusion is characterized more by the supply side factors at the moment
because of the services being in initial phase however as the market grows the long-termprospects will be more speciﬁcally determined by the demand side factors (
Belloc et al. ,
2012 ;Dias, 2012 ;Preston and Cawley, 2008 ;Shin and Kweon, 2011 ).
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 51
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
7.1 Challenges facing broadband supply and requisite measures
With the emergence of an all IP network regime, the networks and services are converging
very speedily and the traditional regulatory boundaries are becoming fuzzy. There is astrong case for transformation of the regulatory laws related to infrastructure sharing,service licensing and spectrum management (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ;PTA Annual Report,
2015-2016 ). The supply of broadband services in rural areas is another big challenge and
ask for measures such as coverage obligations, infrastructure sharing and public–privatepartnerships (
Houpis et al. , 2016 ).
The provision of broadband services to unserved and under-served areas is a major
challenge and the governments use various supply side measures to address the issue,e.g. lowering the cost for operators, providing support for market entry or the directinvolvement by public sector (
Kongaut, 2015 ;FSR, 2011 ;Belloc et al. , 2012 ). The supply of
broadband has been embedded as an obligatory service to Universal Access servicesunder universal service fund (USF) programs in majority of the countries (
Dymond, 2010 )
Keeping in view the various supply side challenges and the need for alignment with
demand side measures, a comprehensive long-term planning is required to set the targetsfor broadband development and diffusion along with implementation, control and fundingmechanism and devise a national level strategy which has a long-term view of thebroadband development with a focus on the growth pattern, progress-tracking, control andfollow-up measures; much similar to the programs and plans devised by countries such asBrazil, Colombia, Finland, France, Japan and Oman (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.2 Progress of broadband supply measures in Pakistan
Pakistan Government has also exercised various policy initiatives to ensure a progressive,
competitive and technology-intensive telecom market in the country. After the privatizationof the telecom market in 2003 and the launch of 2G mobile services in 2004, the nextmilestones came in the form of a National broadband plan 2004 and USF Policy in 2005.
7.2.1 National broadband policy 2004 and universal service fund policy 2005. Pakistan
announced its national broadband plan back in 2004 with an ambitious target of 0.1 M DSLcustomers in Pakistan within the ﬁrst year. Pakistan also announced the USF policy in 2005and used the USF fund subsidy for the deployment of broadband services throughout thecountry. However, the broadband uptake remained lower than projected ﬁgures. Thenumber of broadband subscriptions in Pakistan was only half of the target subscriptions in2007, while 2010 statistics were well short of the half million target (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
The launch of wireless broadband services helped the cause to some extent but the delaysin launch of 3G and 4G mobile broadband services remained a big hurdle in thebroadband access.
7.2.2 Next generation mobile services launch and Telecom Policy 2015. After several years
of slow-moving lackluster performance, the broadband prospects came to life with thelaunch of 3G and 4G mobile broadband ﬁnally in 2014. The deployment of 3G and 4Gservices is only the beginning, while the government has taken big strides to aid thedevelopment and diffusion of broadband services. In the wake of ongoing transformations
in the telecom and broadband sector, the Government of Pakistan has lately issued atelecommunications policy in 2015, based on the guiding principles of free and fairmarket-driven competition, technology-driven forward looking regulatory reforms which willensure accelerated digitization and universal access to all (Telecommunications policy,p. 6). Based on industry best practices and market requirements, the revised telecompolicy deals with the competition rules, pricing, spectrum management and infrastructurein a comprehensive manner; setting out both short-term and long-term policy frameworkaccordingly.
PAGE 52 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
The revised telecom policy also serves to provide guidelines for the USF programs to
promote the supply of basic telephony and broadband services to rural, unserved andunder-served areas of the country. The funding will be arranged from the revenues of alllicensed operators and the USF operators will also focus on the provision of communitybroadband services to promote the requisite electronic/mobile services, e.g. e/mgovernment, e/m banking and e/m education in all sectors. A national ICT research anddevelopment fund is announced to build and facilitate the ICT capacity building plans andprograms in the country.
7.2.3 Regulatory framework for mobile banking. One of the major landmarks achieved in
2016 is the issuance of the essential regulatory framework for mobile bankinginteroperability by state bank of Pakistan (SBP) and Pakistan Telecommunication Authority(PTA). The State Bank of Pakistan has mandated itself to equip the banking facility to 50 percent adult population by 2020 only with the help of branchless banking and digital paymentsolutions (
Aasil, 2016 ).
7.2.4 Digital Pakistan 2017 policy and reforms in public and private sectors. The
Government of Pakistan understands the importance of ICT as the key enabler ofsustainable economic development and technological revolution. The Government ofPakistan has recently circulated the Digital Pakistan Policy 2017. The policy recommendsvarious long-term measures like promoting the use of ICT in schools, youth and womenempowerment; promoting IT and software exports; establishing IT zones; incubationcenters and telecenters; and supporting the capacity building and skills enhancementprograms for women, young entrepreneurs and various e-commerce and e-governanceplans.
The federal and provincial governments are working on the computerization and
automation of their departmental processes and procedures to implement thee-government reforms. Several online facilities have been introduced under one roof byKPK Government and Punjab Government. Pakistan’s ﬁrst ever e-court has beenestablished in Rawalpindi this year (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 , p. 23).
Higher education commission in Pakistan has chartered the Virtual University of Pakistan
(VU) as the degree awarding institution in degree courses through distance and onlinelearning modes (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 , p. 24).
The mobile broadband has been at the heart of various health-care programs and schemes
such as dengue activity tracking system and disease surveillance system undertaken bythe health department at national and provincial levels. DoctHERs is a popularaward-winning app which enables the doctors to inspect the patient and prescribemedicine through a remote Web connection (
PTA Annual Report, 2015-2016 , p. 25).
With the widespread coverage and accessibility of 3G and 4G broadband services all
across Pakistan; the CSPs are working on myriad of steps towards better quality ofbroadband services and customer retention measures, the focus of the government andthe enforcement bodies is still on for more constancy on the supply side measures in termsof achievement of set goals and targets. The need is to move on further with supply-sidepolicies and also synergize them in accordance with the demand-side policies so as torecompense for the delays and slow uptake of broadband technology.
7.3 Challenges facing broadband demand and required measures
As already discussed, the demand side policies pledge to undertake measures to reduce
barriers to the adoption and use of broadband services. The past research has pointed outthat the demand gap for broadband arise out of three major factors, i.e. affordability,literacy and relevance, while the former being the dominant role player in the perspectiveof emerging countries (
Katz and Berry, 2014 ,Driving Demand for Broadband Networks and
Services , p. 14).
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 53
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
Countries such as Japan, South Korea, Ireland and Mexico have introduced several
programs focusing the housewives, school children and villagers, i.e. the segments ofsociety which have potentially lower demand for broadband services. Discounts andincentive offers to individual and group buyers are frequently supported in severalcountries which not only helps to create awareness among the public but also ensuresincrease in adoption of broadband service (
Jeanjean, 2010 ;Belloc et al ., 2012 ). However,
the choice of policy measures relative to broadband demand especially is inclined to beaffected by demographic and social settings of the country. Depending on various political,economic and technological facets, there is no universal approach available to guaranteethe adoption of broadband services (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.4 Progress of demand side measures in Pakistan
Despite all the measures taken for the supply of broadband services by the government, if
the people are not inclined to subscribe to broadband services, the gap on the demandside will remain unbridged, and the people will be deprived of the economic gains of ICTand broadband. The CSPs in Pakistan are aware of the fact that the success and survivalin broadband market will partly be determined by how well they are able to hold on toexisting customers, but it rests more on how they bring in more and more new customers –we mean the people who are still not using the broadband services.
According to
GSMA Report (2016) , the 48 per cent of population will still not be using
broadband mobile services by 2020. The way forward should be to get insight about theirpreferences, know about their apprehensions and take appropriate measures to addressthe issues due to which they are not using the broadband mobile services. The GSMAcustomer survey in 2016 illustrated in
Figure 9 ideally accounts for the barriers – the key
reasons for which people do not use mobile broadband services in Pakistan. The surveyhighlights four key problem areas with a further classiﬁcation of two sub-factors ranked onthe basis of response rate (
GSMA Report, 2016 ). The following discussion will address
these four major obstacles, i.e. cost, literacy, privacy/security and content relevance, indetail and will also recommend necessary guidelines for all elements of the digitalecosystem, i.e. the government, the regulator, the CSPs and also the society.
7.5 The cost/affordability barrier
Despite the fact that CSPs are offering very cheap call rates, the cost and affordability are
the prime factors which hinder the adoption of mobile services in Pakistan. Pakistan beingthe lower middle-income country and the majority of the population still rural, the povertystill runs rampant so the ﬁrst-time cost of a handset, the mobile SIM and the monthly mobileexpenses really make a costly deal to all those who are living below the poverty line.
Figure 9 Why people are not willing to use mobile broadband services in Pakistan
PAGE 54 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
According to recent GSMA study in 2016, the taxes on mobile phone service remain a key
barrier to affordability and network investments in the country. Over 30 per cent of the costof mobile ownership is accounted for by taxes, which is the third highest proportion in theworld. The impact on affordability maybe visualized with the fact the people have to payUS$22 per annum, just to own a mobile device in Pakistan; whereas half of the countrypopulation has an average income of less than US$2 per day (
GSMA Report, 2016 ).
7.5.1 High ratio of taxes on mobile service. The telecom sector in Pakistan has traditionally
been a big contributor to the national exchequer. The mobile customers are subject togeneral taxes (sales tax, federal excise duty and withholding taxes) which are higher formobile services as compared to other goods and services. According to a study, themobile sector contributes around 38 per cent of its revenue in lieu of the govt. taxes and theregulatory fee which is higher as compared to other countries (
PTA Annual Report,
2014-2015 ;GSMA Report, 2016 ). The State Bank of Pakistan also indicated that the heavy
taxation in the telecom sector is a major reason for slow adoption of mobile broadbandusage (
The Express Tribune, Pakistan, 2016 ).
Tables III and IVshow a breakdown of taxes applicable to mobile services and handset in
Pakistan. The sales tax (18.5-19.5 per cent) and withholding tax (14 per cent) ratios arehigher when compared to other sectors where on average the sales tax and withholding taxratios are 16 and 10 per cent, respectively (
PTA Report, 2014-2015 , p. 49).
7.5.2 Tax rebates brings more broadband subscriptions as well as higher revenues. The
introduction of subsidies and tax rebates induces a twofold impact, i.e. increase inadoption of broadband services and economic gains along with enhancement of the valueof broadband services with more and more subscriptions. Countries like Colombia,Sweden and China have introduced tax rebates on broadband devices and services tofacilitate the adoption of broadband services (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
The existing tax regime on mobile services in Pakistan needs to be revised as most of the
burden is shifted to the end customer – thereby raising the affordability and cost relatedconcerns. The heavy burden of taxes not only raises concerns on the demand side in theform of adoption of the service and de-adoption of the service but also affects the supply
Table III Taxes applicable on mobile services in Pakistan
Taxes applicable on mobile services
Tax %age
General Sales tax (Voice and SMS) 18.5-19.5
Withholding tax (Voice and SMS) 14
Sales tax (broadband) 19.5Witholding tax (broadband) 14Sales tax (mobile money) 19.5Withholding tax (mobile money) 14Sales tax (New SIM card) Rs.250 percard
Source: Adopted from
GSMA Report (2016)
Table IV Taxes applicable on mobile handsets in Pakistan
Tax applicable on mobile devices
Tax (%)
Sales tax Rs.300/1,000/1,500 depending on handset type
Value-added tax 3%
Income tax on imports 5.5%Custom duty Rs. 250
Source: Adopted from
GSMA Report (2016)
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 55
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
side of the broadband service as earned revenues per user are lower, thereby reducing the
incentives for investments in network deployment.
The government is urged to lower the mobile taxes to stimulate the adoption of mobile
broadband. The reduction in taxes will increase the mobile subscription which willultimately increase the tax revenue. According to an estimate if the SIM card tax isabolished, it will generate about half a million more subscriptions and if the tax rate onmobile service is made the same as on other goods and services another 2 million mobilecustomers would be brought into tax net with a broadband subscription increase by 0.67million (
GSMA Report, 2016 ).
7.5.3 Free laptops, bundled offers and low-cost used devices. The provision of wireless
broadband-enabled laptops at school, college and university level and to workers at ofﬁcelevel serves to bring the digital life style into the homes and ofﬁces without putting theburden of device prices on the end users.
Whereas the CSP’s bundled service offers have found credence in people, the open market
availability of refurbished and old laptops and mobile devices has gone a long way toincrease the adoption of broadband services in Pakistan. The access to social mediaplatforms and real-time interaction on the cyber world has the capacity to stimulate theadoption of broadband (
Beard et al. , 2017 ) and CSP’s in Pakistan are using this tool in the
form of “free Facebook” and other similar plans.
7.6 The literacy barrier
The second biggest barrier is the literacy concern, and it includes both the traditional
literacy and digital knowledge. The basic elementary and secondary education is the rightof everyone and improvement in literacy rate would enable the people to fully avail thebeneﬁts of ICT revolution. The government has already introduced computer education inthe elementary classes, but the major hurdle is to provide the education to all those whohave no or limited access to basic schooling.
7.6.1 Broadband as a means to promote education and digital literacy. The mobile
broadband services itself can be a tool for promoting literacy and basic education andawareness to the masses, particularly women (UNESCO-2015). It is the responsibility of thegovernment, the service providers and the literate people of the society to join hands andaccordingly plan and initiate schemes to promote literacy. The need is to bring it down tobasic units of our local government and promote digital/online class rooms and e-learningso that all those people who are unable to get a formal education may join such programsat their free will and available ﬂexible schedules.
ICT literacy problem is common in developing countries, as the normal feature phones
have traditionally been more popular as compared to smart phones (
Lia and Kenichi,
2016 ). Various countries such as Chile, Namibia, Philippines and Australia have enacted
programs for promoting basic IT and computer skills at the school level. The funding hascome through either public sector or with a partnership of public and private sectors. Theidea of community learning has been successfully implemented in Turkey through theestablishment of Community Access Centers at various public places like libraries, publicofﬁces, corporations and dedicated internet access centers (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.6.2 Digital Pakistan policy measures to promote digital literacy. The Government of
Pakistan has pledged to increase the public expenditure on higher education from 0.2 percent of GDP to 1.4 per cent of GDP in 2025 (
Vision Pakistan, 2025 ). The Digital Pakistan
2017 program has provided guidelines for promoting the formal and informal education inthe country through the use of ICT. The “ICT for girls” initiative will oversee theestablishment of women empowerment centers and IT labs in girls’ schools for impartingICT education to women across the country. The provision of m-education and e-learningfacilities as part of USF programs in schools and colleges of rural areas will serve to
PAGE 56 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
promote education and digital literacy in the country. The “human resource development
programs” and mass level ICT skill-building exercise through e-learning and classroomlearning would promote the young talent without the need to attend the class rooms. Theestablishment of incubation centers, technology parks and telecentres all across the
country would serve to bring synergy to academia, industry and public and private sectorsupport for various ICT projects and programs (
Digital Pakistan Policy, 2017 ).
To promote the ICT literacy and the digital knowledge, people should be encouraged to
use and experiment the things by themselves with little or no supervision. Free laptopsschemes for the students have been launched in past by the government. On similargrounds, the tablets and smart phones schemes bundled with internet packages may bea good support to spread the digital knowledge in the society.
The service providers may use this opportunity to introduce their brand to the people in far
ﬂung areas and help promote the formal and informal education. They have a very goodopportunity to sponsor the various literacy programs and education promotionalcampaigns by allowing the broadband internet facility and the required network andcommunication resources to remote areas of the country.
7.7 The security/privacy barrier
7.7.1 Security issue and the critical information infrastructure. The matter of security/privacy
is of prime importance, and in the developed world, this may well be ranked at the top ofchart. Although being related to the social and cognitive behaviors and somewhat complexin nature, but generally speaking, this is an indication how safe it is to surf the Web andshare one’s personal data freely.
The security and conﬁdentiality of the Critical Information Infrastructure, e.g. national grid;
national telecommunication networks; network operations centers and service operationcenters; and banking and ﬁnance systems, is a key factor to the success and stability ofbroadband networks (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.7.2 Complexity and scope of cyber crime and cyber security. The impact of cybercrime is
a global phenomenon, easily going beyond international boundaries; thus, collaborativeefforts and measures are required to tackle the security issues. The privacy and security ofthe personal data and the enterprise data has invited lots of attention, especially in thedeveloped world giving rise to debates about the right to collect and use of loads of databeing uploaded and shared online. There is a growing need for international cooperationto the enforcement of privacy laws much similar to Global privacy enforcement network byOECD nations and the APEC forum’s cross-border privacy enforcement arrangement (
Tim
and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.7.3 Measures to address security barrier. The efforts are needed to work on the general
awareness of the people and promote the positivity and convenience of the digital life style.General campaigns in print media, cable and TV media are good ways to level the publicopinion.
The Government of Pakistan has recently passed the cybercrime bill in 2016. The
much-needed legislature has raised mixed responses, but this is a big step to provide legalframework regarding security/privacy issues arising from the cyber world.
This problem of security and privacy concern will become bigger and even more complex
in coming years as more and more people adopt the digital life style and do transactionsmore frequently so end to end security and integrity to all the sensitive data will become theprime objective. An effective way is to learn from the industry best practices of internetsecurity and safety and provide an up-to-date shield to the subscribers against theunwarranted threats of the cyber world.
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 57
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
7.8 The content relevance barrier.
The right content for the right person is the need to tackle this barrier. The default language
of communication on the internet is English, but this may not be understandable for thepeople depending on their literacy level. Similarly, the text, speech and entertainment stufflike apps and video games developed in English may be of low interest to people. Peopleoften get attracted to the content; which is available in their local language and developedas per their local culture and norms (
Tim and Carlo, 2012 ).
7.8.1 Local language content in Pakistan. The creation and availability of content in the local
language is a matter far beyond the simple translation of content. This needs relevantadvanced levels of software programming and app-development skills. Under theguidelines of Digital Pakistan 2017 program, the government has reiterated the need forcontent development in local language using several measures like creation of text tospeech software for Urdu and other local languages, increased collaboration betweenacademia, industry and local technology associations and enriching the public websiteswith the support of national language.
The promotion of local software development and local app development would result in
more customized solutions according to our own local needs in various industry sectorssuch as banking, transportation, health and agriculture (
Digital Pakistan Policy, 2017 ).
7.8.2 Role of communication service providers in promoting local content. The service
providers need to target the customers based on their demographic variables and tastesand preferences and accordingly deliver the personalized services to the customers toinﬂuence the perceived beneﬁts (
Wang et al. , 2016 ).
CSP’s should focus on customization of their products and services and content delivery.
The SMS/help content may be offered to the customers in their local language as well andthe service/staff presentation at their support centers and customer hotline should focus oncustomer-friendly approach and attitude. All the necessary apps customized with locallanguage, and content may be packaged and provided to the customers free of chargewith bundled offers and also available for download.
The use of QR codes technology as a pull marketing tool is established in the mobile
advertising industry (
Watson et al. , 2013 ). It is widespread in other Asian markets such as
Korea and China. CSPs in Pakistan can make use of this technology to efﬁciently reach theintended target customers. The targeted content and delivery programs for teachers,doctors, farmers and other professionals will not only help address this barrier but also bindthe connectivity into a long-term exchange of ICT.
8. Conclusions, implications and limitations
The mobile teledensity in Pakistan has grown rapidly over the years in contrast to decliningﬁxed line telephony. The broadband propagation in Pakistan has been fairly slow due to lowrecognition of ﬁxed line broadband and delayed launch of mobile broadband services. Themobile broadband adoption rate has been phenomenal within two years of its launch in2014; however, a recent slowdown in the growth of broadband service is also noted. Theservice providers are reverting to various measures like job-cuts and mergers to survive thecompetition era.
The long-term prospects of broadband diffusion are heavily dependent on demand-side
policy measures. The major barriers to the use of broadband internet service are costfactor, security concerns, low literacy and relevance of content. A collaborative andinnovative long-term commitment is solicited on the part of the government, the CSPs andthe society to address all these barriers effectively to extend the broadband life style to allcitizens – especially those who are not using the broadband internet service.
PAGE 58 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
While focusing on the potential of mobile broadband, this study has discussed the
short-term and long-term prospects of mobile broadband adoption in a developing country.Informed from the knowledge of barriers to mobile adoption, the study recommends severalsupply-side and demand-side policy measures to address the propagation and adoptionof broadband services. The authors believe that the study has useful implications for thedecision-makers in planning and design of relevant programs for diffusion of broadbandservice especially in the developing economies.
This study is not without limitations; the ﬁrst one being that the analysis of broadband
propagation is based on number of subscriptions over a period of three years whichpresents a fairly simplistic view without taking into consideration the effect of adoption andde-adoption factor and the actual usage of the broadband services. The future studies mayexplore the growth trends with more details to ascertain the real ﬁgures. Second, theresearch has recommended several measures to support the broadband diffusion with littlediscussion on the relative comparison of these measures in terms of efﬁcacy and priority,another interesting area, recommended to be explored further by future research.
Notes
1. Evolution data optimized only is a wireless broadband technology for CDMA-based network.
2. Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access is a family of wireless communication standards
based on the IEEE 802.16 set of standards.
3. Pakistan Mobile Communications Limited 1st GSM operator in Pakistan. Its brand name is Mobilink.
4. China Mobile Pakistan is operating with a brand name of Zong.5. Digital subscriber line.6. Fiber to the home.7. Hybrid ﬁber coaxial.8. Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. The incumbent operator in Pakistan owned by Etisalat.9. PTCL launched its EvDO wireless broadband services with a brand name of “EVO”.
References
Aamir, A. (2016), “Mobilink-warid announce voluntary separation scheme for employees, 2016”,
available at: https://propakistani.pk/2016/10/21/mobilink-warid-announce-voluntary-seperation-
scheme-employees/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Aasil, A. (2016), “Branchless Banking Has Overtaken commercial Banks: SBP, 2016”, ProPakistani ,
available at: https://propakistani.pk/2016/12/16/branchless-banking-overtaken-commercial-banks-
sbp/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Annabel, S. (2013), “Pakistan might remain the only country in South Asia without 3G for a while
longer”, available at: http://qz.com/142923/pakistan-might-remain-the-only-country-in-south-asia-
without-3g-for-a-while-longer/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Awan, F.G., Ali, R. and Qureshi, S.A. (2016), “Energy conservation opportunities in telecom sector of
Pakistan”, Science International , Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 2483-2487.
Beard, T.R., Ford, G.S. and Stern, M.L. (2017) “Private solutions to broadband adoption: an economic
analysis”, Phoenix Center Policy Bulletin No. 38 , available at: SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract /H110052913113
Belloc, F., Nicita, A. and Rossi, M.A. (2012), “Whither policy design for broadband penetration?
Evidence from 30 OECD countries”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 36 No. 5, pp. 382-398, available
at:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2011.11.023
Cava-Ferreruela, I. and Alabau-Muñoz, A. (2006), “Broadband policy assessment: a cross-nationalempirical analysis”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 30 Nos 8/9, pp. 445-463, available at:
http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2005.12.002
Chu, W.-L., Wu, F.-S., Kao, K.-S. and Yen, D. (2009), “Diffusion of mobile telephony: an empirical studyin Taiwan”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 33 No. 9, pp. 506-520.
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 59
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
Developing_Telecoms_Trends_2017 (2017), available at: www.developingtelecoms.com/images/
reports/Developing_Telecoms_Trends_2017.pdf?isMambot /H110051(accessed 19 August 2017).
Dias, M.P. (2012), “Australia’s project for universal broadband access: from policy to social potential”,
First Monday , Vol. 17 No. 9.
Digital Pakistan Policy (2017), Ministry of IT and Telecommunication Government of Pakistan , available
at:www.moitt.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Dymond, A. (2010), Universal Service: The Trends, Opportunities, and Best Practices for Universal
Access to Broadband Services , Intelecon Research and Consultancy, Vancouver, available at: www.
inteleconresearch.com/pages/documents/OOCUR_Paper_Dymond_UAStoBroadband.pdf (accessed
19 August 2017).
Falch, M. (2007), “Penetration of broadband services – the role of policies”, Telematics and
Informatics , Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 246-258, available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2007.01.008
FSR (Florence School of Regulation) (2011), “Study on broadband diffusion: drivers and policies”, IRG:
Independent Regulators Group, following the terms of reference within IRG (11)11 issued on 31 May2011.
Gao, P. and Raﬁq, A. (2009), “The transformation of the mobile telecommunications industry in Pakistan: a
developing country perspective”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 33 Nos 5/6, pp. 309-323.
Kongaut, C. (2015), Ultra-fast Internet: Demand and Supply Dimension of Broadband Policy in the EU ,
Department of Technology Management and Economics, Chalmers University of Technology,Gothenburg, Sweden. ISBN: 978-91-7597-253-4.Printed by Chalmers Reproservice Gothenburg,2015.
Jeanjean, F. (2010), “Subsidising the next generation infrastructures: consumer-side or supply-side?”,
Info, Vol. 12 No. 6, pp. 95-120, available at:
https://doi.org/10.1108/14636691011086071
Galperin, H., Mariscal, J. and Viecens, M.F. (2013), “One goal, different strategies: an analysis of
national broadband plans in Latin America”, Info, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 25-38.
GSM Association (2014), “Warid Pakistan expects to save more than US$ 6 million per year after
trialling energy efﬁciency solutions, 2014”, Mobile Energy Efﬁciency , available at: www.gsma.com/
publicpolicy/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/ Case-study-Case-Study_Mobile-Energy-Efﬁciency-O
ptimisationv6.pdf (accessed 10 August 2017).
GSMA Report-2016, GSM Association (GSMA) (2016), “Country overview: Pakistan-a digital future”,
available at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/connected-society/country-
overview-pakistan-a-digital-future (accessed 19 August 2017).
Houpis, G., Serdarevic, G. and Vetterle, J., (2016), “Supply side measures for policy makers to promote
mobile broadband coverage”, 27th European Regional Conference of the International
Telecommunications Society (ITS) , Cambridge, 7-9 September 2016.
Ingrid, L. (2015), “6.1B smartphone users globally by 2020, overtaking basic ﬁxed phone
subscriptions”, available at: https://techcrunch.com/2015/06/02/6-1b-smartphone-users-globally-by-2
020-overtaking-basic-ﬁxed-phone-subscriptions/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) (2016), Measuring the Information Society Report
2016 –ITU , available at: www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2016/MISR20
16-w4.pdf (accessed December 2016).
Jain, R. (2014), “The Indian broadband plan: a review and implications for theory”, Telecommunications
Policy , Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 278-290, available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2013.10.005
Jayakar, K. and Liu, C. (2014), “The race between the dragon and the elephant: comparing China and
India’s national broadband plans”, Media International Australia , No. 151, pp. 180-190.
Katz, R.L. and Berry, T.A. (2014), Driving Demand for Broadband Networks and Services , Springer
International Publishing, Switzerland.
Lia, P. and Kenichi, I. (2016), “Digital divides and mobile Internet in Indonesia: impact of smartphones”,
Telematics and Informatics , Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 472-483.
Pakistan Vision-2025, 2014, Planning Commission, Government of Pakistan, available at: www.pc.gov.pk
Picot, A. and Wernick, C. (2007), “The role of government in broadband access”, Telecommunications
Policy , Vol. 31 Nos 10/11, pp. 660-674, available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2007.08.002
PAGE 60 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
Preston, P. and Cawley, A. (2008), “Broadband development in the European Union to 2012 – a
virtuous circle scenario”, Futures , Vol. 40 No. 9, pp. 812-821.
PTA Annual report (2013-2014), Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), 2014, available at:
http://pta.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
PTA Annual report (2014-2015), Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA), 2015, available at:
http://pta.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
PTA Annual report (2015-2016), Pakistan Telecommunication Authority(PTA), 2016, available at: http://
pta.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
PTA Statistics- (2016), Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA)2016, available at: http://pta.gov.
pk/(accessed 19 August 2017).
PTCL (Company Press Release) (2014), “PTCL announces its third VSS scheme, 2014, ProPakistani”,
available at: https://propakistani.pk/2014/11/06/ptcl-announces-third-vss-scheme/ (accessed 19
August 2017).
Ruchita, G. and Karuna, J. (2016), “Competition effect of a new mobile technology on an incumbent
technology: an Indian case study”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 40 No. 4, pp. 332-342.
Shin, D. and Jung, J. (2012), “Socio-technical analysis of Koreas broadband convergence network: big
plans, big projects, big prospects?”, Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 36 No. 7, pp. 579-593.
Shin, D. and Kweon, S.H. (2011), “Evaluation of Korean information infrastructure policy 2000-2010:
focusing on broadband ecosystem change”, Government Information Quarterly , Vol. 28 No. 3, pp. 374-387.
Telecomworkers (2016), “Zong Intends to Purchase PTCL & Ufone: Etisalat Conﬁrmed”, available at:
www.telecomworkers.com/ptcl/zong-intends-to-purchase-ptcl-ufone-etisalat-conﬁrmed/ (accessed 19
August 2017).
The Express Tribune, Pakistan (2012), “Investors asked for more time before 3G auction: PTA”,
available at: http://tribune.com.pk/story/347928/investors-asked-for-more-time-before-3g-auction-pta/
(accessed 19 August 2017).
The Express Tribune, Pakistan (2016), available at: https://tribune.com.pk/story/1030641/hungry-for-
revenue-sbp-blames-taxes-for-low-growth-in-broadband-usage/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Tim, K. and Carlo, M.R. (2012), Broadband Strategies Handbook , Coordinated by Telecommunications
Management Group, Inc., The World Bank, Washington, DC.
UNESCO- (2015), “Mobile phones & literacy: empowerment in women’s hands a cross-case analysis
of nine experiences”, United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, available at:
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002343/234325e.pdf (accessed 19 August 2017).
Wang, T., Duong, T.D. and Chen, C.C. (2016), “Intention to disclose personal information via mobile
applications: a privacy calculus perspective”, International Journal of Information Management , Vol. 36
No. 4, pp. 531-542.
Watson, C., McCarthy, J. and Rowley, J. (2013), “Consumer attitudes towards mobile marketing in the
smart phone era”, International Journal of Information Management , Vol. 33, pp. 840-849.
Further reading
Liu, C. (2016), “An evaluation of China’s evolving broadband policy: an ecosystem’s perspective”,
Telecommunications Policy , available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2016.10.003
Ministry of Information Technology, Government of Pakistan (2004), “Broadband policy 2004”,
available at: www.moitt.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Ministry of Information Technology, Government of Pakistan (2015), “Telecommunication policy 2015”,
available at: www.moitt.gov.pk/ (accessed 19 August 2017).
Corresponding author
Muhammad Shehzad Hanif can be contacted at: mshahzadhanif@yahoo.com
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
VOL. 20 NO. 1 2018 DIGITAL POLICY, REGULATION AND GOVERNANCE PAGE 61
Downloaded by INSEAD At 22:51 30 June 2018 (PT)
