“I’m not against online teaching, but what about
us? ”: ICT in Ghana post Covid-19
Michael Agyemang Adarkwah1
Received: 5 June 2020 / Accepted: 9 September 2020/
#Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
Globally, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is regarded as adependable vehicle for facilitating educational reform and development, a plat-
form for communication, and as a means to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goal Four (SDG 4). Since the enactment of the No Child Left Behind Act
(NCLB) and declaration of the SDG 4, many countries have opted to embracethe lifelong education for all by integrating ICT in teaching and learning at allschool levels. The Ghanaian Government ’s initiative to ensure “education any-
time anywhere for everyone ”by revolutionizing teaching and learning through
ICT has faced a lot of challenges and cri ticisms. The main mission of the Ghana
ICT for Accelerated Development (ICT4AD) in 2003 was to transform Ghana
into an information and technology-driven high-income economy through edu-
cation, but this goal is yet to be realized. In the wake of the COVID-19 which
has forced many countries and educationa l sectors to adopt online learning, there
is a need to discuss the effectiveness of online learning and barriers to online
learning in the developing contexts, and how to successfully integrate ICT inschools for online learning, especially rural schools where students ’educational
careers are in jeopardy because they benefit less from online learning. The paperidentifies critical factors that affect on line learning, recommends post COVID-19
strategies to promote e-learning for policymakers in education and the govern-
ment, and concludes with a conceptual model for emergency transition to e-
learning.
Keywords Onlinelearning .E-learning .ICT.ICTintegration .Distanceeducation .GhanaEducation and Information Technologies
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-020-10331-z
*Michael Agyemang Adarkwah
adarkwahmichael1@gmail.com
1Southwest University, No. 2, Tianzhu Street, Beibei District, Chongqing, China
1 Introduction
Online learning is hailed as an essential force in democratizing education (Jones 1997 ).
It is a way of opening education to populations who had restricted access because ofgeography, status or physical handicap (Carr-Chellman 2005 ). Khan ( 1997 )d e f i n e si t
as an innovative method to instruct students in remote areas, which involves all types of
learning that is done using the computer or other ICT resources. Since the term was first
introduced in 1995, it is used as an overlapping concept with blended learning, e-learning, online courses, and online or distance education (Singh and Thurman 2019 ).
The advancement of ICT has called for online learning as a feasible and economicallyappropriate means of extending quality higher education (Asunka 2008 ). The role of
ICT in education, specifically higher education, cannot be downplayed, it is beneficialfor teachers and students (Aljaraideh and Bataineh 2019 ). However, the challenge
associated with online learning is the access to ICT resources because online learning
thrives on the availability of ICT facilities (Arthur-Nyarko and Kariuki, 2019 ,b). There
is an uneven spread of access to ICT among different populations, households, andspaces because network is not the same everywhere (Lembani, Gunter, Breines,Tapiwa, & Dalu, 2019 ).
The significant role ICT plays in the development of any nation has called for
countries to produce ICT literate citizens (Crisolo, 2018 ). ICT has gained a solid
reputation in the education systems of both developed and developing countries(Law, Pelgrum, & Plomp, 2008 ). ICT in education can provide the twenty-first-
century skills needed to adapt and compete in this knowledge and information society
(Haji, Moluayonge, & Park, 2017 ). According to the authors, ICT in education
enhances student learning, provides education to students with no or limited accessto education, aid in facilitating the training of teachers, and enhances the skilledworkforce and promote social mobility. ICT is also considered as essential for qualityhigher education (Liebenberg, Chetty, & Prinsloo, 2012 ). ICT has the ability to
enhance learning, make a subject appealing, facilitate problem-solving, communica-tion, research skills, and decision-making process (Hong, 2016 ). Waluyo ( 2019 )a d d s
that ICT is a positive predictor of the academic achievement of students in mathemat-
ics, science, and reading. ICT also facilitates teaching and e-learning, which ultimatelyhave a positive effect on teaching, learning, and research activities.
A general assumption is that for Ghana to meet economic, social, and political global
demands, ICT should be prioritized. In light of this, The Ministry of Education ofGhana introduced the “one laptop, one student ”policy where 1,000 laptops were
dispensed to 30 schools (three schools in each region) across the country (EducationSector Performance Report, 2010 ). Another 60,000 laptops were also purchased to be
distributed to 2500 junior high schools (Education Sector Performance Report, 2012 ).
According to Amanortsu, Dzandu, & Asabere ( 2013 ), most of the government initia-
tives to ensure quality and accessible ICT education for all in Ghana has failed toachieve its goals. For example, Agyemang & Dadzie ( 2010 ) found in their study that a
policy statement for supplying ICT based-support for Distance Education (DE) learnerswere available but were yet to be implemented. The integration of ICT in teaching andlearning is still at the early stage in the education systems of most developing countries(Antwi, Bansah, & Franklin, 2018 ). Over a decade ago, Ghana introduced DE as a
means to provide learners with access to quality education and promote humanEducation and Information Technologiesresource development (Addah, Kpebu, & Kwapong, 2012 ). One of the major chal-
lenges in the Ghanaian education system is the inequality of educational resourceswhich includes usage of computers and other ICT materials (Buabeng-Andoh, 2012 ).
Antwi et al. ( 2018 ) mentioned that the provision of ICT in secondary schools for
learning is skewed towards schools categorized as premier ( “A”) schools and located in
urban areas. Also, at the primary level, provision of ICT is also skewed towards private
schools (Ayebi-Arthur, Aidoo, & Wilson, 2009 ). Governments should fund ICT
projects that emphasizes on the needs, capacities, perspectives, and aspirations of thegreater number of people living in rural areas (David, 2009 ). The main objective of the
study is to provide possible solutions for successful transitioning, implementation andsustenance of e-learning programs. The paper first identifies the e-learning challengesin the Ghanaian context based on respondent ’s views and then provide strategies for
smooth delivery of e-learning derived from extant literature The research questionsleading this investigation are; what are the perceived effectiveness of the online
learning, what are the perceived barriers to online learning and what are the perceived
strategies for a successful ICT integration in education for students who are unable topartake in e-learning process because of environmental and contextual factors related toICT in lieu of the COVID-19 crisis. There are limited studies that thoroughly examinesthe effectiveness of and barriers to the online learning, and identify critical contextu-alized factors to enhance online learning in developing countries like Ghana since theinception of the COVID-19.
2B a c k g r o u n dc o n t e x t
The Government of Ghana has invested several resources and initiated many promul-gated policies to ensure ICT is accessible to every student in Ghana because of its pivotalrole in education. The first governmental policy on ICT was the ICT for AcceleratedDevelopment (ICT4AD) in 2003 which outlined a framework that sought to transformGhana into an information and knowledge-driven ICT literate nation (Ministry of
Education, 2015 ). This policy was reviewed twice (in 2006 and 2008) until a revised
policy document was made available in 2009. The main goal of the revised version wasto facilitate the integration, utilization, and modernization of ICT in schools in Ghana. Itwas proposed that ICT should be integrated as a core subject, an elective subject, and asa teaching tool for all other subject areas. The policy highlighted that ICT access andliteracy is low in Ghana. One of the main goals of the 2007 educational reforms is toensure that all students in Ghana in the pre-tertiary institutions acquire basic ICT literaryskills (which also include the use of internet), and apply the skills in their studies and in
their daily activities (Mereku, Yidana, Hordzi, Tete-Mensah, & Williams, 2009 ). A
survey of 20 lecturers and 105 students in Accra Polytechnic revealed that access to ICTfacilities was inadequate, time to access ICT was inadequate, and there was little use ofICT software (Amanortsu, Dzandu, & Asabere, 2013 ). Another study in Ghana found
that 60% of the respondents teaching ICT in the early years of school had knowledgeabout ICT, and 67% of the teachers did not integrate ICT in their teaching (Asante,2014 ). Boni ( 2018 ) in his study concluded that both teachers and students in Ghana
lacked the efficacy and creativity in using ICT for teaching and learning. Mubashir-
Ahmed ( 2009 ) attributes the the challenges associated with ICT integration in GhanaianEducation and Information Technologiesschools to lack of internet access, lack of quality teachers, insufficient number of
computers, high cost of ICT gadgets, and lack of electric power in some communities.Another study in Ghana revealed that access to electricity is a major factor affectingonline learning in the country (Arthur-Nyarko and Kariuki, 2019 ,b). Despite the
unprecedented efforts by successive governments to ensure ICT is integrated in teachingand learning, the process have been fraught with a lot of challenges in Ghana, especially
in the rural areas. Ghana ranked 112th among 175 countries in the global ICT develop-
ment index in 2016 after being ranked 123rd in 2014 (International TelecommunicationUnion, 2014 ; International Telecommunication Union, 2016 ).
3 Statement of the problem
In lieu of the COVID-19 crisis, the government of Ghana announced the suspension of
all school operations both pre-tertiary and tertiary on March 15, 2020, as parts of the
efforts to stop the spread of the virus (Cromwell, 2020 ). The closure of universities and
schools have disrupted the learning of students and have deprived students opportunitiesfor growth and development (UNESCO, 2020 ). Digital learning emerged as an ultimate
response to the disruption in education due to the COVID-19 lockdown of schools.Since the lockdown, the government of Ghana has considered the possibility of initiat-ing online courses for students. Instead of been proactive in ensuring rigorous imple-mentation of online teaching and learning, the education system was stagnant until it
was prompted by the COVID-19 crisis. The Minister of Education, Matthew Opoku
Prempah announced that the Center for National Distance Learning and Open Schooling(CNDLOS) has rolled out an online platform that will make core content accessible to allstudents in the Senior High School (SHS) level. He further declared that the Ministryhad plans in place to broadcast more contents to the Junior High School (JHS) and upperprimary students. However, the National Union of Ghana Students (NUGS) has peti-tioned the government to halt all online academic activities launched in the universitiesacross the country (Anyorigya, 2020 ). The NUGS referred to the online learning as
“challenge-ridden online learning ”. The association cited inadequate bundle incentives
for schools (lecturers and students), lack of properly laid framework for the implemen-tation of online learning, and the plight of needy students who have been left out of theonline learning platforms because of their inability to settle school bills. Anotherconcern raised by the NUGS is the possibility of compulsory exams and assignmentson e-learning platforms that will disadvantage students who are unable to participate inthe online learning because of factors beyond their control. Online learning in Sub-Saharan Africa is a great challenge because it relies on the availability of ICT facilities
(Asunka, 2008 ). According to the UNESCO ( 2012 ), there is a gap between the
availability of ICT infrastructure and the capability of agrarian communities to integrateICT to boost the economy. Also, the report mentioned that African universities andteacher education institutions do not have the adequate ability to help integrate ICT inschools. With the limited access to ICT resources and institutional challenges in itsimplementation in Sub-Saharan countries such as Ghana, there is a need for thegovernment and education sectors across the country to address contextual and envi-ronmental difficulties faced by needy and rural school students who are excluded from
the e-learning platforms which are no fault of theirs.Education and Information Technologies4 Literature review
4.1 Effectiveness of e-learning program
E-learning is beneficial (Arthur-Nyarko and Kariuki, 2019 ,b), but its effectiveness is
contextualized (Lembani, Gunter, Breines, Tapiwa, & Dalu, 2019 ). Students from
developing countries score lower in online learning and are likely to withdraw from
the online courses compared to their colleagues in developed countries (Kizilcec &Halawa, 2015 ). In the US, a meta-analysis of existing data revealed that students
engaged in online learning performed better than those in face-to-face sessions whilestudents who blended online and traditional learning performed the best of all (TheCouncil of Independent Colleges, 2016 ). A student may be part of the online learning
but may not actively use the service or follow the tutor (Bean, et al., 2019 ).
4.2 Barriers to e-learning program
Barriers identified in literature include; high cost, inadequate infrastructure, lack of ICT
skills, rejection of e-learning by faculty members, and lack of accessibility to qualityinternet connection and electricity.
Start-up cost for online learning may be expensive (Queiros & de Villiers, 2016). The
high cost of purchasing ICT equipment affect the adoption of online learning (Sinha &Bagarukayo, 2019). Technology and gadgets needed to make learning effective may not
be cheap, affecting the online process negatively (Srichanyachon, 2014). Limited funding
can affect institutions from hosting online learning (Bean, et al., 2019). Online education
may cost more to develop and deliver than face-to-face courses (Turk & Cherney, 2016).
In Tanzania, 68% of teachers declared they lacked access to computer, while 73%
revealed they experienced low internet bandwidth (Mtebe & Raisamo, 2014 ). Teaching
and learning can take place at anywhere and at anytime with the help of ICT tools(Cradler & Bridgforth, 2002 ). Inadequate access to technology, studying materials and
computers can leave students marginalized and anxious, which affect the online
learning process (Queiros & de Villiers, 2016 ). Asunka ( 2008 ), he concluded that only
5 out of 22 students had access to computer and internet connectivity at home.
Lack of technology skills and inadequate b ackground experience with online learning
are constraints to online education (Olesova, Yang, & Richardson, 2011 ). Tutors ought to
have required advanced technological skills which sometimes require schools to hiretutors from outside companies who already have the skills (Bean, et al., 2019 ). Lack of
experience with online teaching is a barrier to organizing online education (Luongo,2018 ). Students who do not have prior knowledge and experience in online learning
sometimes also lack techni cal assistance and support systems (Srichanyachon, 2014 ).
According to Mtebe & Raisamo ( 2014 ), 63% of teachers engaged in online learning in
Tanzania lacked the skills needed to create or use online educational resources.
Most faculty members reject online learning as alien to them and are skeptical about
it (Bacow, Bowen, Guthrie, Lack, & Long, 2012 ). Some faculty members also consider
developing online courses as time consuming in comparison to traditional methods ofteaching (The Council of Independent Colleges, 2016 ). Hesitance by faculty members
to teach online courses and their lack of acceptance of online instruction is a perceived
barrier to online learning (Turk & Cherney, 2016 ).Education and Information TechnologiesSlow and unreliable network connections affect the quality of online learning (Bean,
et al., 2019 ). Instructions can be delayed as a result of poor internet connections
(Srichanyachon, 2014 ). In the study. Limited internet access which includes poor
internet connection and low speed demotivate institutions for pursuing online education(Sinha & Bagarukayo, 2019 ). Rural communities involved in online learning find it
difficult to fund and attract qualified teachers to instruct advanced courses (de la Varre,
Keane, & Irvin, 2010 ). Lack of internet access and computers in homes in rural areas
affect the progress of online learning (DePaul, 2020 ). Lack of constant supply of
electricity and internet access in rural communities also makes it difficult to assimilatethe online education process (Ivala, 2013 ).
4.3 ICT integration for e-learningIn education, ICT integration involves many interrelated factors such as curriculum,
teacher characteristics, training and development, infrastructure, organisational factors
like school leadership, school culture and supportive framework (Judge, 2013 ). ICT
integration concerns with the application of technology to aid student learn traditionalacademic subjects (Grabe & Grabe, 2007 ). According to the authors, successful ICT
integration has transformed communities and shaped their lives and thoughts. In 2005,the British Columbia Ministry of Education announced the integration of ICT in Kin-dergarten to Grade12 throughout the country to ensure that the education system remainsimportant and actively engage students (Birch & Irvine, 2009 ). Successful integration of
ICT in schools still face myriads of obstacles (Hew & Brush, 2007 ). Integration of ICT in
developing countries is still a challenge (Aksal & Gazi, 2015 ). One of the first steps to
ensure successful ICT integration is to consider the structural (availability of resourcesand classroom space, availability of ICT support and maintenance) and cultural (missionand vision of the school for ICT integration) elements of the school where ICT is beingintegrated (Tondeur, Devos, van Houtte, van Braak, & Valcke, 2009 ). Bingimlas ( 2009 )
outline some necessary steps to ensure successful ICT integration; provision of ICTresources (both hardware and software), training new pedagogical approaches to faculty
members resistance to change, provision of training courses on how to deal with new
gadgets and modern technologies, providing sufficient time for daily lessons, andprovision of continual reliable technological support. Sarkar ( 2012 ) lists the critical
elements for to be considered during the implementation of ICT in learning; leadershipissues, equitable distribution of ICT resources and sustainability, and financial issues.
5 Research method
The study adopted a qualitative method using a narrative inquiry approach to explorethe perceptions of students on online learning in Ghana and how to successfullyintegrate ICT in education to improve online learning for students, especially those inurban poor and rural areas in Ghana. In a qualitative study, a central phenomenon is theprocess, key concept or idea that is studied, and a researcher learns more fromparticipants through exploration (Creswell, 2018 ). Data was collected through inter-
views. A list of post-COVID-19 strategies was formulated from extant literature based
on respondents ’views.Education and Information Technologies5.1 Instrument
The researcher used a semi-structured interview guide comprising of a list of prepared
questions related to the research questions to conduct the interview. The instrument wasprepared based on recurring themes in extant literature and was screened for accuracyand validity by a researcher in Ghana. This allowed the researchers to ask open-ended
questions to ensure respondents give their broad perspective about the topic of the
study. Interviews allow a researcher to probe and get an in-depth meaning of thefeelings, perceptions and attitudes of participants (Gaffas, 2019 ).
5.2 Population and samplingAll tertiary students from urban poor and rural areas who took part in the online
learning in Ghana formed the target population. Fifteen (15) of the students were
randomly selected to be part of the study. Five (5) students were taken each from the
3 most cosmopolitan regions in Ghana (Greater Accra, Ashanti region, and Centralregion) to make up the total sample of the study. The student came from the univer-sities, teacher and nursing training schools in the country (Table 1).
5.3 ProceduresStudents from the tertiary institutions in Ghana who were taking part in the online
learning in Ghana were recruited to find answers to the research questions. An
introductory letter was sent to the randomly selected students about the purpose ofthe study and to seek their consent to be part of the study. After the consent of the studyrespondents were gained, the researcher scheduled an appointment with each of theparticipants to conduct the interview. All interviews were conducted in English usingthe“WhatsApp ”application.
5.4 Data analysis
The researcher transcribed the recorded interviews verbatim and the data was analyzed
into themes and sub-themes using the NVivo 11.0 software. The interviews were
Table 1 Demographic character-
istics of participantsPersonal Information Number
Gender
Male 9
Female 6Total 15
Educational level
University 10Teacher training 3
Nursing training 2
Total 15Education and Information Technologiesreplayed severally to ensure the accuracy of the transcription. The researcher used
pseudonyms for each of the participants to ensure confidentiality.
6 Results and discussion
Almost all the barriers associated with e-learning in literature reviewed earlier wereprevalent in the Ghanaian context (see Table 2). The findings of the interviews
conducted suggest that the online learning in Ghana is not effective enough and is alsofraught with a lot of challenges. The section concludes with innovative and some novelsolutions found in extant literature to the problems identified in the study and aconceptual framework for transitioning to e-learning.
6.1 Effectiveness of the online course
Most of the 10 students interviewed indicated t hat the online learning is the best alternative
approach to teaching and learning during this pandemic. However, because of its spon-taneous nature, and not an approach to education carefully thought of my school leadersand the government, they felt the online learning was not effective as they hoped for.
Social interaction An ample amount of the students felt the lack of student-student
interaction and teacher-student interaction neg atively affected the effectiveness of the course.
“Oh ok, personally, I think this online learning is not that effective. Let me take
campus for example, on campus you go for lectures, you meet the lecturer, youwill have this interaction, like face-to-face, so that makes you really comprehendwhat the lecturer is putting across, and aside that you even have the teachingassistants who are willing to help you understand or if you have any difficultythey are able address that issue. ”[Lucy —University]
Table 2 Qualitative themes
(categories) and sub-themes (sub-categories) of interview guide
responsesThemes Sub-themes
Effectiveness of the
Online course◦Social interactions
◦Student outcomes
◦Communication
◦Traditional versus Online approach
Barriers ◦Cost
◦Online platform
◦Study materials
◦ICT tools
◦Prior knowledge
◦Internet access
◦Electricity
ICT Integration ◦Education
◦Provision of ICT tools
◦Internet Bandwidth
◦Motivation
◦School leadership practicesEducation and Information TechnologiesStudent outcomes Only few of the students believed students ’outcomes in the online
learning would be better than the traditional approach. Many believed that the difficultywith internet access and network challenges will result in a negative effect on theoutcomes
“The student outcome of online learning as compared to the traditional approach
is very sad and heartbreaking. Let me take the quiz for example, you will take a
quiz online, and the system gets jammed, you ’ve really learnt, not that you didn ’t
learn, you ’ve really learnt, and you go, and you ’re able to answer the questions,
let me say if it is out of 20, you are able to get 15 or 10 correct, and then you getan F, it just saddens my heart ”[Ellen —University]
Communication Some of the students were of the view that sometimes communication
between teacher and students is not possible because the e-learning system can go off
for a while before it starts functioning.
“The intercommunication between lecturers and students is very poor. Commu-
nication is not good. You will be having a class, and then the network startsmisbehaving, meanwhile, the teacher is talking! How do you retrieve the wordshe has already said? What if the words he has said is the stepping stone tounderstand the next sentences? ”[Sandra —Nursing training]
Traditional versus online approach More than half of the participants interviewed
believed that the traditional approach to teaching and learning is more suitable forthem as compared to the online learning they were experiencing.
“Ok, What I can say is my university, for example, am reading Chinese and
political science, so with Chinese the lecturer is supposed to write down the
characters on the whiteboard for us to really eerrm know the stroke orders. Also,
there are instances that you need you need to even, eerrm for Chinese oral youneed to listen to the lecturer, like look at the lecturer ’s mouth, the expression that
she makes for you to be able to understand whatever she is saying. So I think Iprefer the marker-board because taking my course, for example, it really helps,yes.”[Ellen —University]
6.2 Barriers to online learning
Cost One of the major challenge mentioned by almost all of the participants was the
financial commitments they have to make to ensure they actively take part of thecourse. According to the students, the online method of learning was expensive than thetraditional approach to learning they experienced.
“Online learning is quite expensive. So far the has given us a data SIM which
gives us 1.5 gigabytes every month. But the problem is, this bundle is justEducation and Information Technologiessomething small. It doesn ’t get us anywhere. I remember my first zoom class was
not more than 30 minutes, and 400megabytes was already gone. ”
[Ted—University]
Online platform Persistently, the students lamented about the breakdown of the online
platform.
“With the accessibility to the online platform, I think with that is okay. Some-
times you log in, and the site just jams, so that really hurt and when you have quizto take, and you log in and the system jams and just log you out of the system. ”
[Paul —University]
Study materials The students believed that study materials were readily available to
download at any time.
“Oh okay, every course has its learning materials on the site provided they have
not given us already ”[Ted—University]
ICT tools A considerable amount of the respondents asserted that ICT tools were not
given to them prior learning. Every student had to get an ICT tool for himself/herself to
engage in the online mode of delivery.
“We use our own ICT tools, like phones and laptops. The school does not provide
us with ICT tools. If you don ’t have these ICT tools, you have to share that of a
friend. ”[Joe—University]
Prior knowledge Most of the participants had little exposure to online mode of learning
prior to their current online method of learning.
“Mmmm as for background knowledge I don ’t have much experience but per our
experience of sending messages through e-mail and using other platforms to senddocuments that is what helped us in using the online learning platform, since wecouldn ’t have an orientation on how to engage in e-learning. ”[Bright —teacher
training]
Internet access Accessing the internet was one of the major challenges students
mentioned.
“Good internet access is a huge challenge. So most of the students we
adopted that midnight is when we will log into the online learning site todownload and upload materials. It is effective as compared to the normal
day hours. However, this has affected our sleep ”[Paul —University]Education and Information TechnologiesElectricity There were mixed views on the availability of electricity for the online
learning. Some believed lack of electric power affected their learning while others
were okay with it.
“Hmmm electricity is another impediment. Recently our transformer got spoilt,
and it took almost two weeks for the local government to fix it. Meanwhile, testsand studies were ongoing. ”[Mercy —University]
6.3 ICT integration
Education Many students indicated orientation of teachers and students on ICT
for teaching and learning is integral for successful integration of online learningin schools.
“For me, I think it is not only students who have to be educated on e-learning. My
brother is not ICT teacher and has no special skills in ICT, but he is also supposed
to use online learning platforms. He likes to use social media than to use the
online platform for sending documents. ”[Ted—University]
Provision of ICT tools Some students called for the provision of ICT tools for schools
and students who can ’t afford the tools for themselves.
“The government should provide laptops to students in the middle or high school
so that by that the time the student comes to the tertiary level, he or she has a
laptop and can have access to many things online. ”[Joe—University]
Motivation The students believed the motivation of both teachers and students would
improve the online learning.
“Personally, I think the government should motivate teachers and students to
engage in the e-learning. E-learning can be effective when there is motivation.
The government can give allowances to teachers and reduce our school fees ”.
[Julius —University]
“We students in the rural areas have no joy in this online learning. The challenges are
too much. Electricity and internet access a re a major problem. If the government wants
ICT to be effective, all these problems should be solved. ”[Prince —Teacher training]
School leadership Students mentioned that school leaders should liaise with the gov-
ernment to improve the online learning. They believed school leaders could act as achannel for their voices to be heard.
“School leaders like principals and VC have to eerrm, we have open forum where
students bring their grievances on board, so as the SRC also take eerrm an activeEducation and Information Technologiesrole in presenting the pleas and plights of students the school authorities, they
also have to make the students ’grievances known to the government so that the
government can put the necessary measures in place to provide the tools that areneeded to help the teachers and the students as well. ”[Ellen —University]
6.4 Post Covid-19 strategies to promote E-learning
Providing electricity Solar power gadgets and human-powered electricity have
emerged as a promising solution to the increasing digital divide as a result of lack ofelectric supply (Wyche & Murphy, 2013 ). The authors states that although solar
photovoltaic –powered devices can charge mobile phones and some ICT gadgets for
e-learning, human-powered electricity are more preferable because human power isabundant worldwide. Human-powered electricity is when human activities such as
cranking (by hand) and pedalling (using the legs) are captured to turn a dynamo to
generate electrical charges for electronic applications. In Kenya, the researchers foundthe two models effective for providing micro-electricity for electronic devices. Jimba &Ogundele ( 2015 ) opined that solar power supply, biomass, standby power generators
and wind power supply are promising solutions to generating electricity for virtualclassrooms in Nigeria. According to the authors, this makes teaching and learningeffective without any disruption in power. Hamajoda ( 2018 ) is of the same view that
solar power supply and standby generators can facilitate e-learning by dealing with the
challenges associated with electricity in rural areas.
Fostering acceptance of e-learning Academics are often slow to embrace e-learning
but are required to adapt positively to changes resulting from technology (Flavell,Harris, Price, Logan, & Peterson, 2019 ), and one of the best ways to foster adaptive
learning of technology is to improve instructor and student self-efficacy (Solangi,Shahrani, & Pandhiani, 2018 ). Flavell et al. ( 2019 ) state that one of the ideal ways to
empower academics to be adaptive with e-learning is to engage them in recreational
activities such as reading on technological devices for pleasure, playing games, or using
social media. This makes users comfortable with the e-learning and also increases theirself-efficacy. Media literacy (such as the use of social media) can foster acceptance ofe-learning and increase digital literacy (Nowell, 2014 ). Collaborative e-learning also
promotes exchange of experiences and ideas among students, encourage students towork together, develop their academic competence, increase their self-efficacy, developtheir social skills and also fosters both their social and cognitive qualities for e-learning(Ngai, Lee, Ng, & Wu, 2018 ). A wide range of e-teaching and e-learning methodol-
ogies can be introduced to encourage both teachers and students to embrace e-learning
such as podcast and vodcast (Uren & Uren, 2009 ). Also, to ensure rapid acceptance of
e-learning, a clear pedagogical rationale for online teaching which is rooted in instruc-tor’s personal philosophy for teaching and learning should be communicated to
instructors (Donnelly and O'Rourke, 2007 ).
User-need analysis for adaptive e-learning Adaptive e-learning has to do with the
personalization of e-learning in accordance with individual user ’s knowledge and
behavior, and one way to ensure that is through user-need analysis (Agustini, 2017 ).Education and Information TechnologiesDevelopers of e-learning platforms need to perform a user-need analysis; they have to
take into account the learning styles of individual learners when creating, selecting, andevaluating e-learning platforms (Muhammad, Albejaidi, & Akhtar, 2017 ). According to
the authors, user needs can be solicited by employing mix techniques including directobservation, expert review, administering web-based and paper questionnaires, andinterviewing teachers and students. Online learning should be planned to meet the
learner ’s expectations (Hachey & Lachapelle, 2018 ). Alhabeeb & Rowley ( 2018 )a d d s
that identifying both student and instructor characteristics for e-learning is a criticalsuccess factor for e-learning, “success ”for one group does not necessarily connote
“success ”for another group. Learners on e-learning platforms should be thought of as
customers by making it easy to use, making effective use of learner ’s time, and it has to
be attractive and comfortable (Morrison, 2003 ). Leaner preferences and experiences are
integral for a flexible mode of e-learning delivery (Arthur-Nyarko and Kariuki, 2019 ,
b). Teacher ’s presentations and course materials for e-learning should also be prepared
based on students ’needs and learning styles (Osubor & Chiemeke, 2015 ).
Digital literacy of users The training of digital users is instrumental to ensure the
successful transition and integration of e-learning platforms (Muhammad, Albejaidi,&A k h t a r , 2017 ). Training has been recognized as having a positive influence on the
usage of e-learning systems (Solangi, Shahrani, & Pandhiani, 2018 ). Training is a
critical success factor for e-learning and should be provided for both learners andinstructors (Alhabeeb & Rowley, 2018 ). Professional development training programs
provide teachers with “hands-on ”activities, it is essential for them to develop ICT
competence and technological pedagogical content knowledge for twenty-first-centurylearning (Alt, 2018 ). Course facilitators should be trained on computer literacy and
application for effective e-learning (Jimba & Ogundele, 2015 ). One way to ensure
digital literacy for students is to embed digital literacy skills in the curriculum(Johnston, 2020 ). School leaders can ensure students develop their own skills by
supporting them during orientation activities on technology, peer learning, and encour-aging them to use personal technology (Sharpe & Benfield, 2012 ). Workshops and
training on ICT for e-learning are crucial for users especially teachers, for a flexibility
in online delivery (Forsyth, Pizzica, Laxton, & Mahony, 2010 ).
Infrastructure support Infrastructure and technical support that provides an opportunity
for teachers and students to adopt e-learning should be made available (Solangi,Shahrani, & Pandhiani, 2018 ). Availability of telecenters which are equipped with
computers and internet connectivity in a poor rural community can help in theintegration of ICT in developing countries (Avgerou, 2008 ). Research findings on
ICT in Ghana revealed that institutions engaged in online learning need technology
infrastructural support from the government, such as ICT devices (Arthur-Nyarko andKariuki, 2019 ,b). The “one student one laptop ”policy by the Ghanaian government
failed to realize its goal and was an expensive investment. Heeks ( 2008 ,2012 )a r g u e s
that mobile devices can now be used to surf the internet and create new content, it couldbe used as an alternative for poor households in accessing the internet for learningpurposes to defray the cost of expensive laptops, mobile technologies can be analternative. School leaders can lassie with the government to also establish e-learning
centers in the various tertiary institutions (Piña, Lowell, & Harris, 2018 ). The e-learningEducation and Information Technologiescenters may be staffed with professionals such as technology specialists, media,
administrators, and faculty support specialists who provide training support and train-ing for effective engagement with e-learning tools.
Funding Aside fees from students and government which are made available to
schools, institutions which are new to online learning can establish e-learning centers
and charge some type of fee (convenience fee) or online tuition rate (Piña, Lowell, &
Harris, 2018 ). Funds from the general student population and the government are often
claimed by other areas. According to the authors, students who prefer the flexibility oftaking online courses are willing to pay this extra fee. The institution can decide toaccess an online learning fee or a higher online tuition rate, which could serve as directsource of funds to e-learning centers on campus. It is near to impossible to reassignsuch funds to other areas. The institution receiving such funds would have the capacityto run e-platforms effectively.
Motivation Incentives and reward systems can motivate teachers and students to
engage smoothly in e-learning (O ’Doherty, et al., 2018 ). When teachers are rewarded
on the time spent instructing students on e-platforms, they are motivated to spend extratime and dedicate more efforts in instructing students. In a study conducted in Russia,students decision to engage in online courses was due to available incentives (Markova,Glazkova, & Zaborova, 2017 ). Incentives for teachers can be in the form of allowances
and compensation. Students can be provided with free WIFI or subsidized cost of
internet charge. This would encourage them to spend more time surfing for information
on the internet, downloading course materials and uploading assignments. The gov-ernment of Ghana can work with internet service providers in the country such as MTNand Vodaphone to provide internet access with high bandwidth to prevent them fromwithdrawing from e-platforms.
Supervision and evaluation An uninterrupted technical support is required from e-
learning users (teachers, students, and administrators) in addressing hardware and
software problems associated with the computer application (Muhammad, Albejaidi,
&A k h t a r , 2017 ). Rigorous supervision will help address glitches associated with e-
platforms to ensure its continual functional. IT personnel and e-platform administratorscan be assigned to monitor the progress of the online learning to identify and solve allhardware and software challenges. Academics involved in e-learning need assistanceon shifting from the conventional mode of teaching and learning to a virtual teachingand learning environment (Donnelly and O'Rourke, 2007 ). This assistance can be
provided by “e-champions ”and ICT skilled personnel hired by the school. The authors
mentioned that feedback of users on e-platforms are also essential for evaluating the
success of e-learning, and this can inform school leaders on what to include insubsequent workshops for e-learning users. Also, using data derived from users of e-platforms will help the administrators and designers of the e-platform on how tostructure the platform to meet students ’needs and the unique culture of the institution.
Blended learning Picciano ( 2009 ) define blended learning as a combination of both
online and face-to-face interaction. Response from the participants suggests that a
blended learning approach could help address the differences among students. PiccianoEducation and Information Technologiesalso mentioned that a blended learning approach could mitigate the challenge associ-
ated with geographical distance. Students who are far away from their institutions andprefer an online mode of delivery can learn from home through their e-learningplatforms while those who prefer the traditional face-to-face interaction can learn atthe classroom. Onguko ( 2014 ) believes that a blended mode of delivery is more ideal
for universities who are not yet ready for only online learning. The author indicated that
some universities in Kenya incorporated a face-to-face session in their virtual classes to
address some difficulties connected with online learning.
6.5 Conceptual model for emergency E-leaning course creating and submission
The model serves as a framework for universities and academic institutions for an
emergency transition to e-learning. This is adapted from Texas Tech University Health
Science Center El Paso (TTUHSC EP) in their response to rapid transition to e-learning
during the novel coronavirus pandemic (Mulla et al., 2020 ). Quality e-learning pro-
grams require time and unprecedented efforts to ensure successful implementation. Themodel suggests that for successful implementation and sustenance of e-learning pro-grams, school leaders must first inform faculty leaders about available resources andthe best method to ensure the transition; a simulation course should be created, facultystaffs need to be trained and assisted, as well as soliciting their feedback and sugges-tions; the course can then be submitted; an e-learning compliance committee (eLCC)
should be set up for peer evaluation and for acquiring copyright permissions to keep the
e-learning platform functioning (Fig. 1).
7 Theoretical and practical implications
The paper adds value to prior literature on ICT and online learning by first identifying
the challenges associated with online learning in the developing context like Ghana
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The study concluded by highlighting on some
practical strategies for the adoption and usage of online learning in institutions indeveloping countries new to online learning. Findings from the study suggest that the
Inform faculty about the 
institutional resources and best 
practices for transitioning to 
eLearningFaculty development (e.g. 
creation of crash courses, 
faculty training, technical 
support, video production, 
instructional design services, 
assessment suggestions, etc.)eLearning course submissioneLCC: 
Peer evaluation, compliance 
and copyright permissions
Fig. 1 An adapted conceptual model for creating and submission of e-learning course; Mulla et al. ( 2020 )Education and Information Technologiesonline learning in Ghana is fraught with a lot of challenges apart from high cost and
infrastructure (Asunka, 2008 ; Bean, et al., 2019 ; Cradler & Bridgforth, 2002 ;T u r k&
Cherney, 2016 ). To address the problem of cost, school leaders are encouraged to
establish e-learning centers which can generate funds solely for the purpose of onlinelearning. Also, the limited amount of electric supply for e-learning activities can bemitigated by using affordable solutions like solar power gadgets, biomass, and human-
powered electricity which are readily accessible in the country. Again, school leaders
are to employ recreational approaches like the use of social media and games toincrease the self-efficacy of students for online learning. Collaborative e-learning forteachers and recreational approaches are essential for fostering acceptance of e-learningby both faculty staffs and students. In addition, to effectively develop an e-platformtailored to the needs users, a user-need analysis has to be performed to know individualpreferences and need. The university administration also has to set up professionaltraining programs for teachers to improve their digital literacy. Courses needed to
improve students ’IT skills can be mounted during the first year at school or during the
few weeks of orientation. Moreover, because of geographical distance and individuallearning styles and behavior, a blended mode of delivery is preferable such thatstudents can choose either a face-to-face session or an online mode of delivery. Itwas also identified that the motivation of teachers and students is integral for smoothonline learning. School leaders should motivate teachers and students in the form ofincentives, allowances, free WIFI and subsidized cost of data bundle. The schooladministrators can laisse together with the government to employ mobile technologies
to replace the high cost of laptops. Furthermore, because e-learning often experience
hardware and software issues, school administrators should put in place a team ofexperts and technical resources for routine supervision and the evaluation of the e-learning program. Overall, findings of the study provide novel insights for educatorsand policymakers for the transition and usage of e-learning in the and post COVID-19pandemic.
8 Conclusion/Reccomendations for future research
Despite the significant investment of most low-income countries such as Ghana in ICT,challenges such as access to ICT, reluctance by both teachers and students to use ICT,network and electricity issues still persists in Ghana. In lieu of the online learningactivity taking place in most institutions in Ghana, the study revisits how ICT isfundamental to online learning and education in general. The principal objective ofthe study was identify possible solutions to some perceived barriers in e-learning and
ICT integration in Ghana. Findings from the study suggests that access to ICT
resources in Ghanaian schools is still a challenge. As a result, students perceived theonline learning is not effective. According to the students, although the online learningis a good initiative, they prefer the traditional approach as opposed to the onlinelearning, which is fraught with a lot of challenges. The lack of social interactions, poorcommunication, and poor students ’outcomes were associated with the perceived
ineffectiveness of the e-learning. The students cited a lack of ICT tools, internet,electricity as some of the barriers to online learning. Most of the students interviewed
did not have prior exposure to online learning or using ICT tools to study. The studentsEducation and Information Technologiesbelieved that orientation of both teachers and students on ICT for online learning,
motivation, and school leadership practices affect the integration of ICT in education.The usage of solar power gadgets, the establishment of e-learning centers, acquiringfunds from e-learning centers, adoptio n of blended learning, and providing
infrastructural support such as using mobile technologies to replace the cost ofprocuring laptops are some of the listed strategies for educators to consider. ICT
plays an integral role in education and the economy of any country, help in resolving
the barriers associated with online learning, and facilitates the successful integration ofICT in education to enhance online learning. Dessalegn & Dagmawi ( 2018 ) opined that
developed countries benefited from the integration of ICT in education, unlike devel-oping countries. The fact that higher education plays a vital role in the success ofstudents and countries but there is limited access in Africa, online learning can helpbridge this gap (Lembani, Gunter, Breines, & Dalu, 2019 ). It is therefore vital for
stakeholders in education to integrate ICT in education in Ghana, and implement
realistic and rigorous ICT policies to ensure effective online learning where the needs
of both urban, urban poor, and rural students are taken into consideration. The authorrecommend that future research examine the effectiveness, challenges of e-learning andICT integration in other contexts support their findings in literature with empiricalevidence using a quantitative approach with a large sample.
9 Limitations
The sample of the study is very small, which makes it difficult for generalization. Thestudy only focused on students ’perspectives of the online learning in Ghana without
including the voices of teachers instructing students. Also, the participants of the studywere only from tertiary institutions in Ghana without including pre-tertiary studentswho were also taking the part of the e-learning.
Acknowledgements The author sincerely expresses his special thanks to Professor Yu Zeyuan (Southwest
University, China), Robert Kyei (Nsawam Presby Basic School), and Edna Agyemang (University of Ghana).
References
Addah, K., Kpebu, D., & Kwapong, O. A. (2012). Promoting e-learning in distance education programs in an
African Country. InTech. Retrieved from http://www.intechopen.com/books/e-learning-long-distance-
and-lifelong-perspectives/promoting-e-learning-i n-distance-education-programmes-in-an-African-
country .
Agustini, K. (2017). The adaptive Elearning system design: Student learning style trend analysis. In 2nd
International Conference on Innovative Research Across Disciplines (ICIRAD 2017) (pp. 50-54). Atlantis
Press.
Agyemang, B. K., & Dadzie, P. (2010). Providing information communication technology support to distance
education students: A case of the University of Ghana, Legon. Turkish Online Journal of Distance
Education, 11 (3), 129 –145.
Aksal, F. A., & Gazi, Z. A. (2015). Examination on ICT integration into special education schools for
developing countries. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 14 (3), 70 –72.
Alhabeeb, A., & Rowley, J. (2018). E-learning critical success factors: Comparing perspectives from academic
staff and students. Computers & Education, (127), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.08.007 .Education and Information TechnologiesAljaraideh, Y., & Bataineh, K. A. (2019). Jordanian students ’barriers of utilizing online learning: A survey
study. International Education Studies, 12 (5), 99 –108.
Alt, D. (2018). Science teachers' conceptions of teaching and learning, ICT efficacy, ICT professional
development and ICT practices enacted in their classrooms. Teaching and Teacher Education, 73 ,
141–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2018.03.020 .
Amanortsu, G., Dzandu, M. D., & Asabere, N. Y. (2013). Towards the access to and usage of information and
communication technology (ICT) in polytechnic education. International Journal of Computer
Applications, 66 (1), 23 –33.
Antwi, S., Bansah, A. K., & Franklin, T. (2018). The information technology challenge in teaching senior high
school geography in Ghana. Issues and Trends in Educational Technology, 6 (1), 16 –37.
Anyorigya, D. A. (2020). COVID-19: Halt challenge-ridden online learning in universities –NUGS to
Government . Retrieved from citinews: https://citinewsroom.com/2020/04/covid-19-halt-challenge-
ridden-online-learning-in-universities-nugs-to-government/
Arthur-Nyarko, E., & Kariuki, M. G. (2019). Learner access to resources for eLearning and preference for
eLearning delivery mode in distance education programmes in Ghana. International Journal of
Educational Technology, 6 (2), 1 –8.
Asante, J. N. (2014). The state of ICT integration in the early years in Ghana schools. Literacy Information
and Computer Education Journal, 3 (1), 1751 –1757.
Asunka, S. (2008). Online learning in higher education in sub-Saharan Africa: Ghanaian University students'
experiences and perceptions. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 9 (3), 1 –
23.https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v9i3.586 .
Avgerou, C. (2008). Information systems in developing countries: A critical research review. Journal of
Information Technology, 23 ,1 3 3–146. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000136 .
Ayebi-Arthur, K., Aidoo, D. B., & Wilson, K. B. (2009). A study on the use of the internet in senior high
schools in the Cape Coast metropolis of Ghana. Ghana Journal of Education and Teaching, 8 ,1–16.
Bacow, L. S., Bowen, W. G., Guthrie, K. M., Lack, K. A., & Long, M. P. (2012). Barriers to Adoption of
Online Learning Systems in U.S. Higher Education. New York: Ithaka S+R. Retrieved from https://sr.
ithaka.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/barriers-to-adoption-of-online-learning-systems-in-us-higher-education.pdf
Bean, M. V., Aldredge, T., Chow, K., Fowler, L., Guaracha, A., McGinnis, T., et al. (2019). Effective
practices for online tutoring . Sacramento: Academic Senate for California Community Colleges.
Bingimlas, K. A. (2009). Barriers to the successful integraton of ICT in teaching and learning environments: A
review of the literature. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology, 5 (3), 235 –245.
Birch, A., & Irvine, V. (2009). Preservice teachers ’acceptance of ICT integration in the classroom: Applying
the UTAUT model. Educational Media International, 46 (4), 295 –315.
B o n i ,R .K .( 2 0 1 8 ) . The use of ICT for teaching and learning in senior high schools in Ghana: A study of
Nungua and Presbyterian, Teshie. Ghana: University of Ghana, Legon.
Buabeng-Andoh, C. (2012). Factors influencing teachers ’adoption and integration of information and
communication technology into teaching: A review of the literature. International Journal of Education
and Development using Information and Communication Technology, 8 (1), 136 –155.
Carr-Chellman, A. A. (2005). Global perspectives on E-learning: Rhetoric and reality . Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications.
Cradler, J., & Bridgforth, E. (2002). Recent research on the effects of technology on teaching and learning.
Retrieved from http://www.oten.info/conferences/jukes/research.pdf
Creswell, J. W. (2018). Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (5th ed.).
Los Angeles: SAGE.
Crisolo, N. A. (2018). Sharpening education through the use of information technology and communication
technology . SDO Quezon: Sta. Catalina National High School.
Cromwell, A. (2020). Education Ministry set to release online learning platform for Senior High Schools .
Retrieved from Myjoyonline: https://www.myjoyonline.com/news/national/education-ministry-set-to-
release-online-learning-platform-for-senior-high-schools/
David, N. (2009). The impact of ICT in rural education: Case study- Enugu state. Nigerian Journal of
Technology, 28 (2), 71 –79.
de la Varre, C., Keane, J., & Irvin, M. J. (2010). Enhancing online distance education in small rural US
schools: A hybrid, learner-centred model. ALT-J, 18 (3), 193 –205.
D e P a u l ,K .( 2 0 2 0 ) . Can online learning mitigate rural schools ’biggest challenges? Retrieved from https://
www.gettingsmart.com/2020/02/can-online-learning-mitigate-rural-schools-biggest-challenges/
Dessalegn, M., & Dagmawi, L. (2018). The promises and challenges of ICT-pedagogy integration in
developing countries: The case of Ethiopia. International Journal of Education, 1 (7), 6 –8.Education and Information TechnologiesDonnelly, R., & O'Rourke, K. C. (2007). What now? Evaluating eLearning CPD practice in Irish third-level
education. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 31 (1), 31 –40.https://doi.org/10.1080/
03098770601167864 .
Education Sector Performance Report. (2010). Accra: Ghana Ministry of Education.
Education Sector Performance Report. (2012). Accra: Ghana Ministry of Education.Flavell, H., Harris, C., Price, C., Logan, E., & Peterson, S. (2019). Empowering academics to be adaptive with
eLearning technologies: An exploratory case study. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology,
35(1), 1 –15.https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet2990 .
Forsyth, H., Pizzica, J., Laxton, R., & Mahony, M. J. (2010). Distance education in an era of eLearning:
Challenges and opportunities for a campus-focused institution. Higher Education Research and
Development, 29 (1), 15 –28.https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360903421350 .
Gaffas, Z. M. (2019). Students ’perceptions of the impact of EGP and ESP courses on their English language
development: Voices from Saudi Arabia. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 42 ,1–13.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jeap.2019.100797 .
Grabe, M., & Grabe, C. (2007). Integrating technology for meaningful learning . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Hachey, J., & Lachapelle, N. (2018). Trousse des Superhéros TÉLUQ : un outil pour les professeurs. In
Elearning Superheroes: A Professor ’sH a n d b o o k . Université TÉLUQ, Québec, Canada. Presented at
Online Learning Global Summit & EdTech Expo 2018, Toronto. Retrieved from https://www.teluq.ca/
superheros/
Haji, S. A., Moluayonge, G. E., & Park, I. (2017). Teachers ’use of information and communications
technology in education: Cameroon secondary schools perspectives. The Turkish Online Journal of
Educational Technology, 16 (3), 147 –153.
Hamajoda, A. F. (2018). Towards a topology for ICT & E-learning in Nigerian rural public primary schools.
Heeks, R. (2008). Priorities in mobiles-for-development research. Sweden: Proceedings of M4D 2008,
Karlstad University.
Heeks, R. (2012). Deriving an ICT4D research agenda. Journal of Information Technology, 27 (4), 339 –341.
https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2012.31 .
Hew, K., & Brush, T. (2007). Integrating technology into k-12 teaching and learning: Current knowledge gaps
and recommendations for future research. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55 (3),
223–252.
Hong, J. E. (2016). Social studies teachers ’views of ICT integration. Review of International Geographical
Education Online, 6 (1), 32 –48.
International Telecommunication Union. (2014). Measuring the information society —The ICT development
index . Geneva: International Telecommunication Union.
International Telecommunication Union. (2016). Measuring the information society —The ICT development
index . Geneva: International Telecommunication Union.
Ivala, E. (2013). ICEL2013-proceedings of the 8th international conference on e-learning: ICEL 2013.
Academic Conferences Limited.
Jimba, D., & Ogundele, M. O. (2015). Power and energy generation as a threat for developing virtual
classroom in Nigerian distance education. International Centre for Science, Humanities & Education
Research, 1 (2), 63 –69.
Johnston, N. (2020). The shift towards digital literacy in Australian university libraries: Developing a digital
literacy framework. Journal of the Australian Library and Information Association, 69 (1), 93 –101.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24750158.2020.1712638 .
Jones, G. R. (1997). Cyberschools . Englewood: Jones Digital Century.
Judge, M. (2013). Mapping out the ICT integration terrain in the school context: Identifying the challenges in
an innovative project. Irish Educational Studies, 32 (3), 309 –333.
Khan, B. (1997). Web-based instruction: What is it and why is it? In B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction
(pp. 5 –18). Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology Publications.
Kizilcec, R. F., & Halawa, S. (2015). Attrition and achievement gaps in online learning. In Proceedings of the
Second (2015) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale (pp. 57-66). ACM.
Law, N., Pelgrum, W. J., & Plomp, T. (2008). Pedagogy and ICT use . Dordrecht: Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4020-8928-2 .
Lembani, R., Gunter, A., Breines, M., & Dalu, M. T. (2019). The same course, different access: The digital
divide between urban and rural distance education students in South Africa. Journal of Geography in
Higher Education, 44 (1), 70 –84.https://doi.org/10.1080/03098265.2019.1694876 .
Liebenberg, H., Chetty, Y., & Prinsloo, P. (2012). Student access to and skills in using technology in an open
and distance learning context. The International Review of Research in Open Distance Learning, 13 (4),
250–268.Education and Information TechnologiesLuongo, N. (2018). An examination of distance learning faculty satisfaction levels and self-perceived barriers.
Journal of Educators Online, 15 (2), 1 –12.
Markova, T., Glazkova, I., & Zaborova, E. (2017). Quality issues of online distance learning. Procedia -
Social and Behavioral Sciences, 237 ,6 8 5–691. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2017.02.043 .
Mereku, D. K., Yidana, I., Hordzi, W., Tete-Mensah, I., & Williams, J. B. (2009). Executive summary:
Ghana-pan African report on technology integration. Ghana: University of Education, Winneba.
Retrieved from http://www.ernwaca.org/panaf/pdf/phase-1/Ghana-PanAf_Report
Ministry of Education. (2015). ICT in education policy. Accra.
Morrison, D. (2003). E-learning strategies: How to get implementation and delivery right first time. England:
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Mtebe, J. S., & Raisamo, R. (2014). Investigating perceived barriers to the use of open educational resources
in higher education in Tanzania. The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
15(2), 43 –65.
Mubashir-Ahmed, I. B. (2009). An assessment of the ICT situation in senior high schools in the upper west
region of Ghana. University of Capecoast, Ghana.
Muhammad, G., Albejaidi, F. M., & Akhtar, R. (2017). Challenges in development of eLearning systems in
higher education of the developing countries. London Journal of Research in Humanities and Social
Sciences, 17 (2), 13 –32.
Mulla, Z. D., Osland-Paton, V., Rodriguez, M. A., Vazquez, E., & Plavsic, S. K. (2020). Novel coronavirus,
novel faculty development programs: Rapid transition to eLearning during the pandemic. Journal of
Perinatal Medicine, 48 (5), 446 –449. https://doi.org/10.1515/jpm-2020-0197 .
Ngai, C. S., Lee, W. M., Ng, P. P., & Wu, D. D. (2018). Innovating an integrated approach to collaborative
eLearning practices in higher education: The case study of a corporate communication e-platform. Studies
in Higher Education, 44 (11), 1990 –2010. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2018.1482266 .
Nowell, S. D. (2014). Using disruptive technologies to make digital connections: Stories of media use and
digital literacy in secondary classrooms. Educational Media International, 51 (2), 109 –123. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09523987.2014.924661 .
O’Doherty, D., Dromey, M., Lougheed, J., Hannigan, A., Last, J., & McGrath, D. (2018). Barriers and
solutions to online learning in medical education –An integrative review. BMC Medical Education,
18(130), 1 –11.https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-018-1240-0 .
Olesova, L., Yang, D., & Richardson, J. C. (2011). Cross-cultural differences in undergraduate students ’
perceptions of online barriers. J o u r n a lo fA s y n c h r o n o u sL e a r n i n gN e t w o r k s ,1 5 (3), 68 –80.
Onguko, B. B. (2014). JiFUNzeni: A blended learning approach for sustainable teachers ’professional
development. The Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 12 (1), 77 –88.
Osubor, V. I., & Chiemeke, S. C. (2015). E-learning functional model: A technology-based teaching method
for providing access to sustainable quality education. African Journal of Computing & ICT, 8 , 127–132.
Picciano, A. (2009). Blending with Purpose: The Multimodal Model. Journal of Asynchronous Learning
Networks, 13 (1), 7 –18.https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v13i1.1673 .
Piña, A. A., Lowell, V. L., & Harris, B. R. (2018). Leading and managing e-learning: What the e-learning
leader needs to know . Gewerbestrasse: Springer Nature.
Queiros, D. R., & de Villiers, M. R. (2016). Online learning in a south African higher education institution:
Determining the right connections for the student. The International Review of Research in Open and
Distance Learning, 17 (5).
Sarkar, S. (2012). The role of information and communication technology (ICT) in higher education for the
21stcentury. The science probe, 1 (1), 30 –41.
Sharpe, R., & Benfield, G. (2012). Institutional strategies for supporting learners in a digital age. Enhancing
Learning in the Social Sciences, 4 (2), 1 –17.https://doi.org/10.11120/elss.2012.04020004 .
Singh, V., & Thurman, A. (2019). How many ways can we define online learning? A systematic literature
review of definitions of online learning (1988-2018). American Journal of Distance Education, 33 (4),
289–306.
Sinha, E., & Bagarukayo, K. (2019). Online education in emerging knowledge economies: Exploring factors
of motivation, de-motivation and potential facilitators; and studying the effects of demographic variables.
International Journal of Education and Development using Information and Communication Technology,
15(2), 5 –30.
Solangi, Z. A., Shahrani, F. A., & Pandhiani, S. M. (2018). Factors affecting successful implementation of
eLearning: Study of colleges and institutes sector RCJ Saudi Arabia. International Journal of Emerging
Technologies in Learning, 13 (6), 223 –230. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v13i06.8537 .
Srichanyachon, N. (2014). The barriers and needs of online learners. Turkish Online Journal of Distance
Education, 15 (3), 50 –59.Education and Information TechnologiesThe Council of Independent Colleges. (2016). High-tech or high-touch? Online learning and independent
higher education. Washington, DC. Retrieved from www.cic.edu/ResearchFuture .
Tondeur, J., Devos, G., van Houtte, M., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2009). Understanding structural and
cultural school characteristics in relation to educational change: The case of ICT integration. Educational
Studies, 35 ,2 2 3–235.
Turk, S. E., & Cherney, I. D. (2016). Perceived online education barriers of administrators and faculty at a
U.S. university in Lebanon. Creighton Journal of Interdisciplinary Leadership, 2 (1), 15 –31.
UNESCO. (2012). ICT-enhanced teacher standards for Africa (ICTeTSA) . Addis Ababa: UNESCO-IICBA.
UNESCO. (2020). COVID-19 Educational Disruption and Response . Retrieved from https://en.unesco.org/
covid19/educationresponse
Uren, M., & Uren, J. (2009). eTeaching and eLearning to enhance learning for a diverse cohort in engineering
education. Engineering Education, 4 (2), 84 –90.https://doi.org/10.11120/ened.2009.04020084 .
Waluyo, B. (2019). The effects of ICT on achievement: Criticizing the exclusion of ICT from World Bank ’s
education sector strategy 2020. Malaysian Online Journal of Educational Technology, 7 (2), 71 –87.
https://doi.org/10.17220/mojet.2019.02.005 .
Wyche, S. P., & Murphy, L. L. (2013). Powering the cellphone revolution: Findings from mobile phone
charging trials in off-grid Kenya. CHI '13: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems , (pp. 1959 –1968). https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466260 .
Publisher ’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.Education and Information Technologies