International Journal of Law and Management
Is data privacy a fundamental right in India? An analysis and recommendations from policy and legal
perspective
Sheshadri Chatterjee,
Article information:
To cite this document:
Sheshadri Chatterjee, "Is data privacy a fundamental right in India? An analysis and recommendations from policy and legal
perspective", International Journal of Law and Management, https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-01-2018-0013
Permanent link to this document:
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-01-2018-0013
Downloaded on: 22 January 2019, At: 09:23 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 0 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by emerald-srm:402646 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service
information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please
visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of
more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online
products and additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication
Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
*Related content and download information correct at time of download.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
Is data privacy a fundamental right in India? An analysis and 
recommendations from policy and legal perspective
1. Introduction
 
In recent days, collection of data of multipurpose nature has become ubiquitous. Data is being 
collected by Google for the users who are acquiring relevant knowledge by visiting the 
appropriate sites. Collection of data is also done by Facebook and it is left for sharing. Other 
organizations are also engaged in this affair. Data is used for marketing and to realize business 
behavior of the users which helps the companies to improve their business health. Of course, 
it is the duty of the companies to adopt Fair Information Principles and Policies. They are 
supposed to get the users informed before collection of their data (Baskerville 1973; Bellamy 
2000). Thus, though it is a fact that organizations adopt such principles for privacy protection 
policy, much is left for adoption of fair practices. The effect of privacy policy to protect privacy 
is growing globally (Casalo 2007). This practice of data protection system cropped up initially 
in Northern European countries.1 It spread over throughout the globe from early 1970s.2 Of 
course, initially this system started to protect non- sensitive data like data concerning to car 
ownership, number of children and so on.3 More the data flowing crossing the borders, more 
is the occurrence of breach of privacy including commission of financial fraud (Chang and Ho 
2006). For this, structuring proper policy in this context has become demand of the society. 
Very recently, huge number of debit and credit cards had been exposed by hackers who sold 
this stolen information of credit and debit cards data to people of different countries (Cranor et 
al. 2000). Social networking sites have become a fashion of the people around the globe for 
use connecting one man with other across the border even culminating chance of data leakage 
out of proportion. The data exchanged are stored on the servers and nobody has the knowledge 
as to where those servers are situated. Do we know where the main server of Facebook is 
situated? There has been occurrence of innumerable incidences where the intruders have 
accessed in some data of others resulting in unwanted compromise of privacy for millions of 
records. In this way, personal data are being hijacked. But, authorities initially did not focus 
attention to frame policy for protection of personal data. Rather, the authorities became sincere 
to fairness and reasonableness of data processing, it being a global scenario.4 Online culture 
has spread throughout the World and India is also a part of that. This has resulted in chance of 
data theft (Burkert and Herbert 1983). It helped for committing financial fraud. Information 
Technology is growing in India appreciably. Government sector is investing a lot for 
implementation of e-governance projects. Indian IT and services of IT industry are developing 
out of proportion. It is known that outsourcing industry currently is involved with $60 billion 
and is expected to reach $225 billion by 2020. This transformation is also increasing the threat 
of data leakage resulting in compromise in data privacy (Culnan and Pamele 1999). It is 
important to note that Indians are not individualistic with law. Individualism Index (IDV)5 is 
greater than Power Distance Index (PDI)6 as opined by Hofsted.7 Increase of commercial 
activities in India is depending on the reliance of personal information of the users. 
Governmental agencies depending on e-transaction are following standard guidelines for data 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
protection so that the consumers do not feel insecure to use this electronic platform. In cross 
border data flow, protection of data has become a much-discussed subject.8 Clients outside 
India are always expecting more security of their data (Costa, Luiz and Poullet 2012). They are 
wanting implementation of robust data protection policy to be adhered to by India so that they 
feel secured in outsourcing to India where there exist many reasons for getting advantages of 
outsourcing over other countries. This will be discussed later. 
By introduction of different enactments like Indian Telegraph Act, 1885; Indian Contract Act, 
1872; The Special Relief Act, 1963; The Public Financial Institutions Act, 1983; The Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986; The Credit Information Companies (Regulations) Act 2005 and I.T. Act, 
2000, attempts are made to address this situation. Very recently, IT (Amendment) Act, 2008 
has introduced the concept of “sensitive personal information” and has enacted to fix liability 
on “Body Corporate” for protecting the same. This policy has improved the protection 
mechanism a lot. We shall discuss this issue covering IT Act 2000 later. This amendment also 
has introduced procedures for protection of sensitive personal information. All these are needed 
for protection of privacy (Dammann et al. 1977). However, in this article we have taken a 
holistic attempt to discuss about meaning of privacy under different perspectives to have a 
vivid conception. We have also discussed how issues of privacy are affecting outsourcing 
business in Indian. Position of right to privacy in the Constitution of India has been discussed 
in different perspectives. It includes the power of Constitution for legislating data protection 
privacy laws under Article 246 including interpretation of entry 97 in List I. We have also 
discussed Article 248 of the Constitution of India (Gellert et al. 2013). We have also, in this 
article, discussed the Indian and Western Culture (Gonzalez et al. 2012) of conception of 
privacy including constitutional position of right to privacy as laid down in Part III of the 
Constitution of India. It includes explicit explanation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 
We have also touched judicial developments of privacy citing different case laws like cases of 
Gobinda, Malek Singh and so on. We have also discussed detail of I.T. Act, 2000 relating to 
issues of privacy. We have analyzed the full bench judgement of apex Court of India regarding 
issues connected with ‘right to privacy’ read with Articles of Part III of the Constitution of 
India. We have provided brief recommendations for extending and developing privacy 
protection policy mechanisms in India. At last, a meaningful and effective conclusion has been 
drawn.   
2. Privacy and Policy
There are many avenues in defining privacy. It depends on what approach one is following in 
defining privacy (Dlamini et al. 2009). The approaches are mainly structuralist approach, 
individualistic approach and integrative approach. Structuralist approach defines privacy in 
terms of social structure. It includes moral right or a legal right which helps one to restrict or 
to limit others in matters relating to access to some information or to some other persons. It has 
defined (Allen 1988) privacy as “Privacy denotes a degree of inaccessibility of persons, their 
mental status, and information about them to the senses and surveillance devices of others”. A 
researcher (Bok 1983) had the idea that privacy is related with secrecy. Bok defined privacy as 
“privacy is a condition of being protected from unwanted access by others”. It appears that 
structuralist approach argues that more we can keep individual information secret; more 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
privacy is ensured (Dutta and Mc Crohan 2002). Individualistic approach defines privacy as a 
measure to control ourselves as to how we can keep our personal information not divulged to 
others. Privacy has been defined (Westin 2003) as “claim of individuals, groups or institutions 
about them is communicated to others”. Privacy has also been defined (Decrew 1989) as 
“information control and control over decision-making”. Integrative approach defining privacy 
is associated with having right and interest. Privacy is defined in this context (Reiman 1976) as 
“an important interest in simply being able to restrict information about, and observation of 
myself regardless of what may be done with that information or the result of that observations”. 
From this definition given by Reiman, it is evident that this approach is a culmination of 
combination of structuralist approach and individualistic approach. From the knowledge of the 
above definitions in the light of integrative approach for defining privacy, it is seen that privacy 
may be construed to be an ingredient which contributes important value to the society (Eloff 
and Von Solms 2000). In India, the conception of privacy varies from individual to individual, 
from place to place according to system of the society. In some places of India, even, sense of 
privacy depends on gender. Women in some places of India do not like to appear before public 
keeping in seclusion observing ‘Purdah’.9 Purdah includes as opined by some judicial decisions 
as human morality and natural modesty. It should be confined in apartments only. So, holding 
‘Purdah’ is construed to be, in specific cases, legal in the sense of restricted privacy. 
3. Outsourcing, Data Protection and Privacy Policy
Many other developed countries like USA, EU and so on are now-a-days (Late 1990s) are 
found to have been engaged outsourcing their works to India and this has resulted in huge 
productions of jobs in India (Dietter 1994; Joseph et al. 2017). However, this outsourcing 
invariably is associated with operation of date transfer. Consequently, whenever by the other 
countries outsourcing is made to India; for protection of data of those countries against data 
theft, India must be very vigilant since otherwise the Indian people will lose jobs (Thomson et 
al. 2006; Featherman et al. 2010). In this context, consideration of the nature of data is to be 
properly attended. Not only that. What the purpose of the data is to be considered. How long, 
that is, with what duration the proposed operational procedure would last is also an important 
issue to be focused. Naturally, the legal perspective, in general and in specific zone, is required 
to be scrutinized (Zinser 2003). It is pertinent to mention here that when the countries who 
would outsource to India would focus attention on two things. They would focus on the issue 
as to how Indians are adhering to follow formal legal rules including procedural mechanisms 
regarding formal oversight associated with implementation of legislation. They would also 
want to be satisfied to see as to how professional rules, policies and measures embodied with 
security and privacy in protecting their so-supplied data are being dealt with by the Indians 
(Sequeira 2003; Solms and Solms 2004). If these are really and honestly complied with by the 
Indians to the respectable level of satisfaction of the countries who are outsourcing, they would 
unhesitatingly outsource to India and India would relish profound job-creation. This is very 
important and touchy issue for the Indians because Indians possess variety of regulatory culture 
so far as, systems, customs and other casual and information elements and policies are 
concerned circumscribing issues related with data protection (Foxman and Kileoyne 1993; 
Tryfonos et al. 2001). To gain the flavor of having matters outsourced to India by other 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
countries like USA and European Unions since these countries are concerned to cut cost by 
outsourcing their activities to third congenial countries where there exists cheaper workforce, 
India being a fittest choice should act in such a manner as outsiders do not feel that their data 
privacy would be at stake (Sloot 2014). Other developed countries choose India for outsourcing 
for many reasons. India has huge skilled, semi-skilled manpower. They are conversant in 
speaking, writing and understanding English in better way. India has a good educational system 
with general emphasis on mathematics and science helping to conceptualize the computer 
logic. Indians are comparatively capable of maintaining strong quality orientations. Indians are 
capable of working hands having, in addition, abilities to tactfully manage time zone 
differences for its unique geographical orientation. India has simple tax structure that has 
helped to place BPO/KPO industries in equal footings with IT enterprises. Judged from the 
above discussions, it is evident that India must have robust data protection policy for strict 
maintenance of data protection so that the countries outsourcing to India may not feel anxiety 
and risk regarding their data protection (Tripathi and Mishra 2000; Furnell 2006). Again, to 
discuss how data privacy is ensured in India, initially we are required to know the different 
aspects of Constitution of India regarding privacy right (Jackson et al. 2014) and the Indian 
policy for protection of data.
3.1 Preamble of the Constitution of India and Privacy
The Constitution of India in preamble defines India as a “Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, 
Democratic Republic”. The preamble was kept outside (exterior) of the Constitution of India. 
By the Supreme Court of India in Berubari Union case, in a unanimous decision Justice 
Gajendragadkar held inter alia that the preamble should be construed to be an important weapon 
and lever. It will open the original intention of the originator of constitution. Further it was held 
that the preamble can hardly impose any limitation. In Golak Nath case (Golak Nath v State of 
Punjab) the petitioner challenged the order of lower court where some lands of Golak Nath 
family were declared surplus under Punjab Security and Land Tenure Act, 1953. It was 
challenged ultimately in the Supreme Court of India under article 32 of the Constitution 
claiming such order denied the constitutional right to hold property under article 19(f) and 
19(g) and on the ground of violation of article 14 of the Constitution. Golak Nath also pleaded 
against inclusion of this State Act under Ninth Schedule. The Supreme Court of India left 
Parliament with no power to curtail fundamental right and hence ordered in favor of Golak 
Nath. Justice Wanchoo held inter alia that preamble can hardly control the unambiguous 
language of the recital of the Indian Constitution. But, the Kesavananda Bharati case 
(Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala) both these views of the justices have been rejected. 
Majority of the justices in this case held that preamble is a part and parcel of the Constitution 
of India. Question may crop up as to why in discussing data protection and privacy matters we 
are profoundly discussing about ‘Preamble’ of the Constitution. This is only because to inhale 
how our constitution is robust to uphold sense of values including privacy and its policy which 
cover entire part III of the Constitution of India, especially Article 21 of the Constitution of 
India. In the Kharak Singh case (Kharak Singh v State of UP) police officials used to have 
enquired the presence of the petitioner in his house even at night jeopardizing his privacy. The 
issue eventually went to the Supreme Court of India where it was held that privacy is to be 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
protected in terms of the Constitution of India but never at the cost of some greater issues and 
it was held that the case is not maintainable under article 32 of the Constitution of India. The 
privacy in that case was not given much importance with the help of the Constitution of India. 
However, recently the Supreme Court of India has given a historical judgement declaring right 
to privacy as a fundamental right under the Constitution of India. This will be discussed in later 
part when we shall discuss the full bench referral judgement, K.S. Puttaswamy and others v 
Union of India and others, of the apex court of India where full bench observed eventually 
privacy as a part of fundamental right. Though explicitly this has not been included in the 
constitution following procedure laid down in article 368 of the Constitution of India till date. 
To visualize the context of rigidity of the preamble of the constitution where the human rights 
are implicitly included, it is worth mentioning any unethical amendment made by process of 
Article 368 contravening very sense of feature of constitution declared void, Indira Gandhi v 
Raj Narain.
4. Data Protection and Competence for legalization 
4.1 Global Scenario for Data Protection Legislation 
In matters connected with the global scenario in Data Protection, it is seen that the different 
countries used to have followed two distinct models. They are European Model and American 
Marketplace Model. The former model is framed with the idea of right-based approach and the 
later follows sector-specific Data Protection laws. The European General Data Protection 
Regulation, 2016 (EU GDPR) is very stringent law. It gives safeguards to right to privacy and 
right to protection of personal data. For protection of personal data in US, there is no single 
National Law. In US Constitution, there is no provision for personal privacy explicitly. In US, 
different states used to have followed different Data Protection laws. In US, government and 
private approach covering Data Protection is different. Government follows Electronic 
Communication Privacy Act, 1986, The Right to Financial Privacy Act and so on whereas the 
affairs of private sector are controlled by Federal Trade Commission Act, The Finance Services 
Modernization Act. From both these EU and US laws, the Indian authorities got inputs and 
framed laws of Data Protection in Indian context.  
4.2 Data Protection and Indian Legislation 
We know in the Constitution of India, Part IX has given legislative power divided in the three 
lists, List I, List II and List III under article 246 of the Constitution of India. The lists are 
depicted in seventh schedule. The List I is called Union List, List II is called State List and List 
III is called concurrent list. The article 246 states “Subject matter of laws made by parliament 
and by the Legislatures of States:
(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make 
laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the seventh schedule (in this 
constitution referred to as the Union List).  
(2) Notwithstanding in clause (3), parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the legislature of any 
state also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matter enumerated in List III in 
the seventh schedule (in this Constitution referred to as “Concurrent List”). 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
(3) Subject to clause (1) and (2), the legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws 
for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the 
seventh schedule (in the Constitution referred to as “State List”).
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory 
of India not included [in a State] notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in 
the State List.”
The Article 248 states “Residuary powers of legislation 
(1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated 
in the concurrent list or State List. 
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in 
either of those Lists.”
Slight studies of List I, List II and List III show that the lists do not include powers of 
Parliament or States to legislate acts relating to data privacy and data protection. Then how 
those laws protecting data privacy can be framed?
The entries in the List I, List II & List III can be amended by the help of procedure envisaged 
in article 368 of the Constitution of India. But in that case such amendment is to be ratified by 
not less than one half of the state legislatives before it is placed before the President to get His 
assent. 
Again, if we focus our attention to entry No.97 of List I (Union List) it appears that it is written 
“any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax not mentioned in either 
of those Lists.” Such being the scenario, how it is possible by the Legislative authority to frame 
laws covering data protection? 
In H.S. Dhillon case, the Supreme Court showed the thoroughfare. It was held that if it is found 
that subject matter of a legislation hardly comes under the ambit of any entry depicted in List 
II or in List III, the Parliament can enact in terms of the residuary power laid down in article 
248 of the Constitution of India. It has also been explicitly confirmed in the case of Attorney 
General (for India) v Amrat Lal Prajivandas. In terms of the above discussions, it may be 
inferred that the Parliament is competent enough for framing legislation on the issues of privacy 
because this issue of privacy may be construed to be within other matter not contained in List 
II (State List) nor in List III (concurrent List) as is evident from the recital of entry 97 of List I 
and from the recital of article 248 of the Constitution of India.
5. Data Protection Policy and Legalization
To ascertain the features of data protection policy and to know the structure of regulations in 
matters relating with data protection issues for the Indians, a specific study is required to be 
conducted. There exists policies and regulations regarding data protection for the western 
countries. These may give an idea to the Indian authority to structure the policies and to frame 
regulations. However, a comparative study is needed to be conducted to conceptualize the 
reactions of Indian citizens and people of western countries as to how they behave in case when 
breaches of privacy occur. This will give food and inputs for the authorities to provide 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
comprehensive policies for data protection for Indian citizens and would give inputs 
appropriately for framing executable enactments to address protection of privacy for the Indian 
citizens.  
5.1 Background of Privacy of Indians and western people
Mellon University10 published a report on privacy perception by conducting surveys. This was 
conducted by School of Computer Science of that University. The repot highlighted that 
privacy of Indians usually covers conception of privacy in one’s private territory, that is, 
personal privacy.11 The survey found that a different perception of privacy is held by the people 
of non-western countries.12The survey shows that Indians are found to be more concerned in 
considering issue of privacy in a completely different dimension and they ascribe seriousness 
in protecting privacy sometimes even being unreasonably strict compared to the conception of 
western people.13 Thus, it can be inferred that a positive relationship exists among nationality, 
concern of people regarding privacy and naturally shape of regulations necessary through 
enactments.14Culture and privacy conception, rather variation of culture from country to 
country and extent of privacy concern count much in formulation of privacy protection policy 
to safeguard privacy. 15A new terminology is required to be imported for data protection in this 
modern cyberspace culture which is ‘technical culture’. This is because system of storying, 
exchanging data has undergone drastic change. It was never done before even in developing 
country like India.16 This introduction of new technology needed for framing policy and 
regulation in India for protecting privacy.17 It is also important to note that the policy, 
regulations, restrictions relating to privacy protection in US, Canada, Australia still target to 
cover affairs of privacy in public sector.18As I have already stated that Indians being under 
British rule for around long two hundred years had a fear always for framing new policies and 
enactments covering affairs of public concerning to privacy.19 The Indians gained from British 
rule procrastinating tendency to adopt for any system and this prolixity was found to have been 
removed by Indians in late 1990s and they focused more attention for reforms of policy and of 
legislation befitting with need of the society.20 Before we go deep into the core mechanism and 
analyze the regulations around Data Protection, it is very important to conceptualize the clear 
idea and perception relating to ‘Privacy in India’. The Indian culture is totally different from 
the customs and landmarks of Western World (Heringa and Kiiver 2012). Hence, to realize the 
sense of privacy in India, the culture and customs and practices of India are to be understood 
distinctly. These aspects play vital role when matters related with privacy in India are dealt 
with (Hofsted 1997; Budak and Rajh 2011). To realize this, we have here depended on two 
studies. These have been published by the ‘School of Computer Science of the Carnegie Mellon 
University’.  
The first survey includes on contacting for taking feedback from workforce with high-tech 
capabilities in India for having an idea of sense of data privacy by the people engaged in 
outsourcing paradigm (Kankanhalli et al. 2003; Geers 2010). 
The second survey conducted by P. Kumaraguru and L. Cranor has highlighted a 
comprehensive comparison between people of India and people of United States. It ventilates 
that there lies a huge gap regarding the sense of the word ‘Privacy’ between the people of India 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
and the people of United States. It is to note, despite need and pressure from society, the Indian 
authorities had shown a reluctance to adopt data privacy law.21
The Indians feel sense of privacy preliminary covering privacy of personal space and privacy 
of subjects. But the people of USA think of privacy surrounding privacy covering information, 
privacy associated with financial issues and privacy with theft of identity since it appears that 
48% of Indians are found concerned with privacy to home, privacy to physical space and 
privacy to living space. On the contrary, only 18% of USA people are concerned regarding 
privacy on these issues (Peltier 2002; Kolb and Abdullah 2009). 
It also appears that 89% of US people are concerned about data Security & Privacy but only 
21% of the Indian people are concerned regarding these aspects presumably for lack of 
awareness (Kruger and Kearney 2006). Thus, it is safely concluded that there exists a sharp 
difference in the matter of conception of privacy in India compared with the conception of 
privacy in western countries. 
6. Conception of Right to Privacy
Compared to western countries, it appears that Indians are found to be more privacy-cautious, 
but they’re not able to prioritize the issues. As a result, they attach more concern regarding 
infringement of privacy for flimsy issues (MaQingxiong and Pearson 2008). Besides, concept 
of privacy is individual-centric. What I think infringement of privacy, others might not think. 
Over-progressive persons sometimes say that they are free, they have no privacy as they have 
nothing to hide. It is an over exaggeration. The conception of privacy is associated with sense 
of information security culture (Martins and Eloff 2002). Owing to advancement of 
technologies, the coverage of infringement of privacy amplitude has been reduced because 
technicalities automatically protect privacy needing no human endeavor. Still, these technical 
challenges also sometimes threaten for privacy infringement (Osborne 1998; Ohkubo et al. 
2005). Thus, concept of right to privacy cannot be calibrated and measured as it has no standard 
being it to be dependent on the individual’s perception.   
6.1 Scenario referring to the Constitution of India
Before the Constitution of India was adopted having effect from 26th January 1950, the right to 
privacy of the citizens of India had not been guaranteed and legal status whatever meager might 
it be conferred to the citizens of India came into force after adoption of the Constitution. Prior 
to adoption of Constitution, the matter connected with protection of privacy was covered by 
criminal laws especially relating to property, dwelling house and imputation of un-chastity 
action to women. These were considered as punishable offence. At that time, the law of torts 
reportedly acted as a meaningful weapon to cover infringement of privacy concerning to 
property and so on. But, privacy, jeopardizing one’s name and fame, was hardly protected 
legally in the real sense of the term (Lynskey 2014). Even after adoption of the Constitution of 
India, there was no explicit guarantee of right to privacy in the Constitution of India. But, it 
contains protection of other rights implicitly mentioned in the text. The logic behind this 
formulation that the right explicitly mentioned in the text would have no value if other rights 
are not protected by implication.22 From Article 14 to Article 30, Part III of the Constitution of 
India embodied Fundamental Rights. However, several judicial decisions initially enticed the 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
right to privacy within the penumbra of the Constitution. The Article 21 of the Constitution of 
India envisages “no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to 
procedures established by law”. The last portion of this Article 21 ‘except according to 
procedures established by law’ is very important. Based on this Article, observations of the 
Supreme Court highlights inter alia that if any one while discharging of what they perceive to 
be their duties appears to have deprived other persons relating to their personal liberty, the 
person doing so should strictly observe the rules as prescribed. Thus, in brief, it may be 
construed that “personal liberty” has a meaning with wide connotation. It (personal liberty) 
means life is required to be free without being encroached by something which law does not 
permit. The elucidation of Article 21 gives a scope so that any law framed must possess 
prescribed procedure. The prescribed procedure should echo fundamental right conferred in 
Article 19 relating to a given scenario. The procedure must come out successful so far as acid 
test of Article 21 is concerned as cited in M.P. Sharma v Satish Chandra.  
Article 21 encompasses and covers human rights which are conceivable. The Article 21 has 
given in broad spectrum negative injunction in respect of a positive mandate allowing to do all 
things which would transform life living with dignity as cited in Maneka Gandhi v Union of 
India. In the Article 21, the word ‘deprived’ is to be interpreted in a very cautious way. It 
(deprived) cannot be construed to be “total loss” but it tantamount to any restriction or 
impediment on liberty. Now if we focus our attention in U.S. Constitution, we will see that it 
has mentioned the expression ‘due process of law’ while the Constitution of India made it a 
point ‘procedure established by law’. 
The US Courts in different judgements observed inter alia that if it is found that the law framed 
is not reasonable or fair or just, it should be construed the essential requirements of “due 
process” as envisaged should not be considered to have been satisfied (Symonides 2003). US 
Court observed that it should not be thought or taken for granted that ‘due process of law’ does 
not only render procedural safeguards but also it honestly protects an individual both from 
legislature and from executive. But the Indian Constitution is very vivid in this respect. It 
enjoins that there must be a law which is valid as cited in A.K. Gopalan v State of Madras. 
Supreme Court of India has classified Article 21 of the Constitution by issuing valuable 
guidelines and information covering sense of privacy. They are in brief mentioned here.  
Capital punishment does not violate Article 21 of the Constitution of India, even, foreigners 
should be provided with life protection and protection of liberty as laid down in this Article 21. 
Hanging order by court should not be construed to be infringement of this Article 21 which 
also gives protection to sexually harassed women when they are working in their workplaces. 
The delinquents not to be handcuffed if they have no chance to escape. Delay in implementation 
of hanging order by court would convert the punishment to life imprisonment as per Article 21 
of Constitution of India. Denial of medical help by a Government hospital or by a private 
hospital should be construed to be violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. For 
upliftment of legal education, Government is to permit and to fund private Law Colleges. 
Persons incapable of repaying any debt for valid reasons should not be imprisoned. Right to 
commit suicide is not covered by Article 21 of the Constitution of India but it is an offence in 
terms of section 309 of Indian Penal Code. For better works, the employees of public and 
private industries should be properly attended by the authority for improvement of their health. 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
Unauthorized telephone tapping is required to be considered as violation of Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India.
These guidelines given by apex court of India give many subordinate courts to deal with similar 
issues to adjudicate in a proper and calibrated way. Be it mention here, once again though right 
to privacy in the Indian constitution has not given absolute right, but case studies in Indian 
context show that right to privacy is encircled with a specialty compared to other rights in 
Indian constitution.23
6.2 Judicial Developments Connecting Privacy Policy in India
There are many judicial decisions which have dealt with matters related with privacy. The 
decisions covering areas of privacy also have put balance about other rights. Some of the 
examples are given below. 
(a) People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) v Union of India
It was held by Supreme Court that telephone tapping by Government U/S.5(2) of Telegraph 
Act, 1985 violates Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Court held that right to privacy should 
be considered under Article 21 read with Article 17 of International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1966. 
(b) Gobinda v State of M.P.
The Supreme Court of India observed that claims covering Privacy-Dignity are to be 
scrutinized with care and it would be denied when it will be seen that a countervailing interest 
appears to be superior. 
(c) Malak Singh v State of P & H
It was held by the court that in the name of surveillance over habitual offenders, bad characters 
by the Police, the privacy of a citizen should not be infringed U/A 21 & U/A 19(1)(d) of the 
Constitution of India.
(d) Puran Mal v Director of Inspection (Investigation) of Income Tax, New Delhi
It has been held that when evidence has been collected by the help of illegal search, the 
evidence cannot be discarded on the ground of infringement of privacy because it does not 
include any specific fundamental right to privacy. (It is submitted that this example appears to 
have weakened the force of right to privacy since evidence collected through a process of 
search which is not legal).  
(e) State of Punjab v Baldev Singh
In searching a person, provisions enjoined U/S.50 of Criminal Procedure Code is mandatory. 
But the Court did not hold that though the evidence collected through searching not following 
procedure U/S.50 of Criminal Procedure Code would be considered impermissible evidence. 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
(f) V. S. Kuttan Pillai v Ramkrishnan
The Court held that general warrant connecting searching and then seizing documents would 
not be construed to have violated right to privacy even it is found that the searching did not 
produce effective results because of counter availing interest of State. 
(g) People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) v Union of India
Through publication of details of criminal activities and assets of a candidate, one cannot say 
that it violates right to his privacy since right of the candidate to divulge his criminal 
antecedents and assets to the electorate is superior compared to the desire of secrecy of the 
candidate contesting in election.  
(h) Sharada v Dharmpal
In a divorce proceeding, medical examination was essential. The Court held that such 
examination is not violative of right to privacy because its necessity was a public policy which 
is superior over the private interest.
(i) District Registrar and Collector v Canara Bank
The Court struck down Sec.73 of Indian Stamp Act 1899 [Amendment by Andhra Pradesh Act 
(Act 17 of 1986)] which did put a bar for searching for documents in private premises and to 
seize those documents without disclosing the reasons for such search and seizure on the ground 
of privacy protection. The Court did it because protection of privacy is not allowable which 
would be part of public records and records of Courts.
(j) R. Rajagopal v State of Tamil Nadu
The petitioner published autobiography of Auto Shankar. State ordered to stop that on the 
ground of privacy violating Article 21 of the Constitution of India. But the Court held that 
petitioners have a right to do so. The Court held that if going beyond that the petitioners did 
publish his life story of that person, the petitioners would invade the privacy and liable for legal 
consequences. The Court stated – “A citizen has a right to safeguard the privacy of his own, 
his family, marriage, procreation, motherhood, child bearing and education among other 
matters. None can publish anything concerning the above matters without his consent – 
whether truthful or otherwise and whether laudatory or critical. If he does so, he would be 
violating the right to privacy of the person concerned and would be liable in an action for 
damages”. 
(k) A v Hospital B
A doctor disclosed an incurable physical ailment of a person to some persons who happen to 
be relative of another person with whom he was to be married. It was held by the Court that it 
does not amount to infringe privacy. In another case P v Hospital Q, the Court held that it is 
not a bar by a healthy person to marry one knowing her fact of illness.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
7. Privacy policy and the Information Technology Act, 2000
7.1 Background
In this section we will discuss and deal with provisions of Information Technology Act, 2000 
relating to that part which mainly deals with privacy in a broad spectrum with policy 
regulations covering the protection of privacy. This Information Technology Act, 2000 (I.T. 
Act) is presented usually as a Data Protection Act. This Act received assent of on 5th June 2000 
and has been acted upon with effect from 17th October 2000. Its target is to regulate I.T. 
activities in India covering all aspects. Framing of Information Technology Act was 
necessitated to accelerate regulations covering security for e-commerce and for this a legal 
infrastructure was needed to be framed. This may ensure security, safety, privacy in electronic 
transactions, for use of digital signature for authentication of electronic records and to place 
before the world regarding growing power in I.T. It also projects the role of government in 
matters relating to safeguard and to promote I.T. activities in India keeping pace with other 
countries.  
Thus, I.T. Act covers and controls e-commerce and e-governance activities with the help of 
introduction of series of rules concerning with digital signature, electronic-form information, 
computer related crimes and their protections, damages caused in the source of computers, 
legal thoroughfare to prevent breach of confidentiality and protecting unwanted viewing of 
pornography. Some experts highly have spoken in favor of this enactment since it has brought 
a regime in the data protection ambience in e-governance and e-commerce sectors including 
ceaseless use of on-line activities enriching e-commerce culture (Goodhue and Straub 1991). 
7.2 Concept of Personal Data
In I.T. Act, 2000, data has been defined U/S.2(o) of I.T. Act, 2000. But it is very interesting to 
note, this enactment appears to be significantly silent in defining “Personal Data”. Very recital 
of the definition of ‘Data’ would construe that the definition has been knitted focusing attention 
mainly on cybercrimes. However, it is opined by some experts in this line that this I.T. Act has 
taken a sincere attempt to provide safeguard in data protection. In the subsequent studies we 
will try to discuss the pros and cons of the provisions of this I.T. Act, 2000 keeping in mind 
always that this Act has hardly defined what is meant by “personal data” in Section 2 of the 
I.T. Act, 2000. It is pertinent to mention here the exact recital of the definition of ‘Data’ as 
enjoined in Section 2 of I.T. Act, 2000. It envisages “a representation of information, 
knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions which are being prepared or have been prepared in 
a formalized manner, and intended to be processed, is being processed or has been processed 
in a computer system or computer network and may be in any form (including computer 
printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched cards, punched tapes) or stored in the 
memory of the computer”. It is worth mentioning here that no court in India has yet recognized 
general right to protection of personal data.24Its enforcement became tough though there has 
been self-regulation for the protection of data relating to software industry by NASSCOM.25 
However, how I.T. Act, 2000 has covered it, is discussed below. 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
7.3 Enactments covering Data Protection in I.T. Act, 2000
Cyber breach and contravention include unauthorized access to computer, computer network, 
computer resources of various nature and computer system; alteration in unauthorized way, 
deletion of data or otherwise, addition, alteration, medication, destruction of data in computer, 
duplication or transmission of date and so on. It jeopardizes interest of concerned person and 
for its protection, the I.T. Act, 2000 has dealt with in Chapters IX and XI and some of the 
salient sections of these chapters are considered as ‘backbone’ covering strict and meaningful 
data protection measures. 
The Sections 43 and 43(A) deals with imposition of penalty for causing damages to the 
computer or to the computer system. These sections practically deal with liability of civil nature 
when data theft takes place, when unauthorized digital copying takes place, when unauthorized 
downloading and extraction of data by unscrupulous person/s take place, when unauthorized 
use of cookies and so on occur. 
Section 66 helps to give protection to computer code sources. Besides, this Section deals with 
matters concerned with hacking and as such, this provision is commonly termed as the data 
protection section during legal mechanism for protection of data from the unscrupulous 
person/s. This provision has given much protection towards confidentiality of data. If anyone 
saves very important, confidential and personal data in computer in his personal e-mail and if 
any other person without having consent accesses in the said document/s, it tantamount that 
this access has breached the provision and the party is held liable under this section. 
Section 72 deals with provision of penalty for causing breach and violation of confidentiality 
as well as privacy. This section envisages 
“Any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred under this Act, rules or 
regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic record, book, register, 
correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person 
concerned discloses such electronic record book, register, correspondence, information, 
document or other material to any other person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with 
both”.
It appears that this section only provides a provision covering having consent of the concerned 
person though with limited scope. This section when read between the lines can be said that it 
is also, strictly speaking, has been able to provide adequate level of protection so far as 
protection of “personal data” is concerned. It is interesting to note from the literature of this 
section (Section 72) that it appears to have confined and covered itself relating to acts and 
omissions of those persons having conferred with powers envisaged under this Act. As this 
Section has given powers to some authorities, it can be said that number of controller of data 
is limited. 
It has been noted that provisions of I.T. Act, 2000 could not deliver full proof personal data 
protection policy and as such some of the relevant sections dealing with the data protection 
have been assessed on recommendation of the expert committee constituted in terms of 
notification No.9(16)/2004-EC dated 07.01.2005. It is worth-mentioning here that one of the 
considerations for amendment was to “consider and recommended suitable legislation for data 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
protection (privacy) in the Information Technology Act, 2000”. On such recommendation in 
this context Section 43, 66 & 72 were amended on the score of “data protection and privacy”. 
Insertions through amendments were made and new amended sub-sections and proviso were 
introduced which are Section 43(2), Explanation (v), Explanation (vi), Section 66(a), (i), (ii), 
(iii), 66(b), (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) & (v) with explanations. Slight glimpse over amendments 
highlights that amendment of section 66 has taken a holistic attempt to criminalize conducts 
with considerably wide amplitude. The amendments imported the idea to synchronize the 
provisions of Indian Penal Code. and Criminal Procedure Code. and it is seen that such 
amendments have been made inhaling sense of provisions of the European Convention 
covering Cyber Crime. 
The sense of privacy is associated with sense of security and security has been dealt within I.T. 
Act, 2000. However, slight scrutiny transpires that so far as security coverage is concerned as 
envisaged in I.T. Act, it is more aligned to focus appropriate attention on issues connected with 
transactions of commercial nature compared to those required for “personal data” protection. 
What is more that provisions of I.T. Act, 2000 is found lacking to ensure that personal data 
would be allowed to be processed only from the proper consent or instruction from the 
controller. 
It is, as such, seen from the above discussions that I.T. Act, 2000 is trying to cover full proof 
security for protection of privacy and framing of such provisions has full endorsement in terms 
of Article 248 of the Constitution of India which has been discussed in the earlier section of 
this article.  
8. Analysis of full bench judgement of apex court in India 
So far as judgement of nine judge referral bench of the Apex Court of India is concerned 
regarding constitutional status of right to privacy, it transpires that the judgement containing 
long 547 pages, delivered on 24 August 2017, has stressed values of dignity and liberty in 
dealing with the constitutionality of right to privacy. Covering spatial, decisional and 
informational peripheries, the bench very effectively mentioned the legal system prevalent in 
USA and in UK and other western countries, so far as issues of privacy are concerned. The 
judgement may be construed to be a vital and meaningful comprehensive document to 
synthesize how there exists needs of protection of privacy in the azure of Indian jurisprudence. 
The judgment also dealt with the issues of privacy corresponding to flow of data in this digital 
era. Jurisprudence of fundamental rights protected in Part III of the Constitution of India has 
been effectively classified in this valued judgement. It will be discussed here how Constitution 
guards the right to privacy in the light of this judgement as it has delivered an emphatic 
endorsement circumscribing constitutional right to privacy.
8.1 Data Privacy Policy of India and Source of Privacy
In the name of data privacy, it is very confusing to note what is meant by privacy protection? 
What do we want to protect? What is protected and what is not protected. Accurate answers to 
these questions are very difficult to extract. In this digital era, data flow is there, and its 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
management is needed so that they are not misused. The said judgement has also dealt with 
these issues. The protection of data is required to be ensured as it would otherwise infringe the 
privacy which, as opined by the referral bench, amounts to encroach Article 21 of the 
Constitution of India. In the judgement, the apex court dealt with the issue as to where this right 
to privacy can be appropriately placed in the literature of the Constitution of India. In this 
judicial proceeding in the apex court, the Attorney General mentioned that previously two 
benches in two separate cases did not observe that privacy is a fundamental right, that is, in the 
case of M.P. Sharma v Satish Chandra and Kharak Singh v State of UP. However, the full 
bench scanned the decisions of these two cases which helped them to decide the issue of privacy 
as these two cases acted as a source of thinking the issue of privacy in a larger bench as these 
two judgements were issued in smaller bench.  
8.2 Privacy, Dignity and Liberty
Article 21 of the Constitution of India deals with right to life and liberty. In dealing with this 
issue in the full bench, Chondrachud J referred the judgment of Kesovananda Bharati v State 
of Kerala and relying on that it was observed that since preamble is a part of the Constitution, 
dignity is an important feature which provides a calibrated scheme for protection to individuals 
since it was further observed that Article 21 of the Constitution envisages “right to live and 
liberty” impliedly includes “right to live with dignity” and the apex court further registered 
opinion that “privacy is a postulate of human dignity itself”. Moreover, the apex court also 
cited decision of U S Court where it was observed that life means ‘more than mere animal 
existence’, Munn v Illionoss, and basing on this, the apex court opined inter alia “… Liberty 
has a broader meaning of which privacy is a sub set…”. The apex court also cited another 
observation of Supreme Court, ADM, Jabalpur v Shivkant Sukla where it was observed that 
privacy is a natural right. Practically, as opined by Rurth Gavism (1980) that privacy consists 
of complex combination of three isolated features like- security, anonymity and solitude. 
9. Recommendations from privacy policy perspective 
Public and private authorities are required to work in tandem for ensuring protection of privacy 
as well as for safeguards of personal data. Now to execute such data protection mechanism, all 
the stakeholders including Government, policy and law-making authorities, industries and 
regulating bodies and organizations dealing with outsourced data are to work in close liaison. 
There should not be any obstruction which might inhibit the flow of process for ensuring 
privacy protection in all respects. The following recommendations might be of paramount 
importance for the concerned stakeholders. 
9.1 Government Initiatives 
Information Technology Act, 2000 should be made more specific having précised provision 
for punishment to the delinquents for commission of data infringement. In the definition of 
“Body Corporate” as envisaged in Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008, there is 
need to include all Governmental agencies responsible for ensuring data protection to bring 
transparency. Ceaseless efforts are supposed to be made by establishing national eco system 
for safeguard of data (Hone and Eloff 2002) with greater investment for framing appropriate 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
data policy (Hu and Dinev 2005). Arrangements of proper training are being ensured for the 
end users for getting appropriate results to achieve protection of privacy. 
9.2 Duties of the Policy and Law-making authorities
The projects adopted are to be processed sagaciously adhering proper privacy policy including 
enforcement of existing data protection regulations in force for collection, storage and 
processing of data. There is need to develop proper culture among the end users. This is 
instrumental for protection of data in the real sense of the term. The law-making authorities 
must be keeping themselves updated concerning to latest technological advancement connected 
with data flow mechanisms so that any untoward situation may be effectively combated to 
avoid any dire consequence of cybercrimes. 
9.3 Duties of Industries and Regulatory bodies
Practices of industries are to be controlled providing standard processes to ensure protection of 
data with prescriptions for proper remedies to the end-users in case they become victim of data 
privacy infringement. Close relation is to be made with the Governmental authorities to know 
about their privacy protection policies to follow those strictly. Then commission of 
infringement of privacy would not occur. The regulatory bodies are to be always on their vigil 
over the industries to watch if the industrial authorities are following the prevailing concerned 
regulations, strictly and honestly. 
9.4 Outsourcing Issues
The Indian enterprises dealing with imported data of foreign companies should follow 
acceptable privacy policies to bring confidence on the foreign companies who are outsourcing 
the works to their Indian counterparts. The Indian enterprises working with outsourcing issues 
should train their employees properly so that they are sincere in dealing with important and 
sensitive data so outsourced. The authorities of Indian companies should arrange to use 
automated devices for protecting outsourced data so that the foreign companies outsourcing 
their work may have confidence over the Indian companies which would help growth of job 
creation. 
10. Conclusion 
Throughout this article so far, we have discussed how in India privacy of data is protected 
including the issue of non-availability of specific definition of “personal data” in Indian 
jurisprudence causing more reliance on different judicial decisions for interpreting the causes 
when personal data breach alleged to have taken place. We have also discussed how 
fundamental rights envisaged in Part III of the Constitution of India explicitly did not nurture 
the right to privacy. We have discussed how different observations and orders of different 
constitutional benches, under such situation when there is absence of explicit birth of right to 
privacy as fundamental right in the Constitution of India, gave much food for extending 
protection of privacy. Besides, needing the demand of the society on the modern online 
environment; taking support from the observation of the Supreme Court of India in the case of 
Dhillon; the Information Technology Act, 2000 was framed in terms of having residuary power 
envisaged in the Article 248 of the Constitution of India for such enactment in absence of 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
explicit empowerment available from the recital of entry 97 of list I (Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India), to address the menace of data theft in the cyber platform. Criticisms are 
also there owing to unavailability of definition of “personal data” in the recital of section 2 of 
I.T. Act, 2000 and to keep such data breaches in check, penal provisions have been enjoined 
by amending I.T. Act, 2000 in 2008 [I.T. (Amendment) Act 2008]. All these have been 
discussed in detail. Eventually by the interference of the apex court of the country, referral full 
bench was established to adjudicate if right to privacy may be construed to be fundamental 
right. The referral full bench in its long 547 page judgement explicitly discussed the provisions 
of the Constitution of India along with the privacy policy of India as well as those existed in 
US, UK and other western countries and fell back upon the Article 21 of Constitution of India 
wherein right to life and liberty was guaranteed as fundamental right including lending the 
recital of the preamble of the Constitution of India declared part of the Constitution in 
Kesavananda Bharati case and eventually declared the “right to privacy” as a fundamental right 
without conferring this right to be absolute. This Article also has provided some 
recommendations for adopting proper privacy policy in different sectors. However, in this 
society, where every citizen; so, to say; possessing a mobile, uses internet rendering the society 
as internet society, it is now not possible to go back to the traditional processes of conducting 
commercial activities and judged from this argument, it is inevitable that Big data flow can 
hardly be kept in check. This would, as already stated, enhance the occurrence of data breaches 
endangering the privacy of the concerned citizens and as such, it has become high time to 
formulate robust privacy policy to arrest and to reduce data theft. For this, it would have been 
better had the authorities focused appropriate attention to arrange to amend the Constitution of 
India appropriately by the help of mechanism enjoined in Article 368 of the Constitution of 
India to explicitly include “right to privacy” as an absolute fundamental right in Part III of the 
Constitution of India. It would have curtailed scope of judicial litigants to escape through the 
jargons of complex judicial contradictory words to hoodwink the authorities concerned for 
coming out successful even after commission of data-breach offences. Besides, the clear and 
specific definition of “personal data” is also required to be included in the relevant Acts 
including I.T. Act, 2000 so that none can get unnecessary chance and scope to interpret the 
meaning of “personal data” in their own thinking for having improper gain.  
Notes
1. It is based on: Bart van der Sloot, do data protection rules protect the individual, and should 
they? An assessment of the proposed General Data Protection Regulation, International 
Data Privacy Law, 4 (2014).
2. Frits W. Hondius, Emerging Data Protection in Europe (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 
1975) and Herbert Burkert, Freedom of Information and Data Protection (Bonn: 
Gesellschaft für Mathematik und Datenverarbeitung, 1983). 
3. Advisory Committee of Secretary on Automated Personal Data Systems, Records, 
Computers and the Rights of Citizens (1973).
4. See, Allan F. Westin & Michael A. Baker, Databanks in a Free Society: Computers, 
Record-keeping and Privacy. New York: The New York Times Book, 1972.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
5. The Individualism Index used to have measured the extent to which a society can 
emphasize individual rights compared to collective goals. (I.T. Act 2000).
6. “Power distance” can be interpreted as the way through which a culture advances and 
accepts inequality, prestige, wealth and power. (See Hofstead Geert, 2001).
7. Hofstede Geert developed many cultural values to assess difference in culture among 
societies identifying five isolated dimensions of human behavior which are: (a) 
individualism/collectivism (b) long-term or short-term orientation (c) power distance (d) 
uncertainty avoidance (e) masculinity/femininity. (See Hofstead Geert. (2001), Cultures’ 
consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across 
nations).
8. Debate took place about this topic. Reference has been made to the reviewers regarding 
this contribution. First Reviewer opined in the European Union, protection of data is 
connected directly to the right to private life. The progressive acceptance of personal data 
protection is an issue of top most relevance. It took place primarily in European Union law 
through a connection to the right in respect for personnel life. Second Reviewer took a 
opposite view. The second reviewer argues that data protection right was gradually 
disconnected from the privacy right. Several statements on data protection also suggest 
that it was seen like something which could hardly be occupied by privacy right.
9. By “Purdah” we mean curtain. It is an established practice of dissuading women from 
being observed by outside men. This assumes two ramifications: (a) Segregation of the 
sexes physically (b) necessity for women to conceal their form. Purdah exists in various 
shapes in Islamic world. Among Hindu women, usually things are not so. (see Basaiv v 
Hasan Raza Khan [1963] AIR Allahabad 340 (India). 
10. Ponnurangam Kumaraguru and Lorrie F. Cranor, Privacy in India: Attitudes and 
Awareness, Workshop on privacy enhancing technologies, Dubrovnik, Croatia.
11.  Regarding cultural policy of privacy, Kumaraguru and Cranor referred to the deficiency 
of a privacy concern among family members involved in family business. There exists a 
specific amount of personal and general information traded between organizations 
involved in trading.
12. The concept of privacy in Thailand appears to be ‘collective’ and not individual. Buddhism 
which is obeyed by people of Thailand hardly recognize human beings possessing the right 
to privacy. The word privacy has separate cultural realization. From a Chinese perspective, 
privacy is hardly seen and construed as an ‘intrinsic good’ but taken as instrumental good. 
The Chinese do not think privacy as necessary but, consider it important. (see Krishna 
Kitiyadisai. 2005. Privacy Rights and protection: Foreign Values in Modern Thai 
Context).
13. Process of handling and collecting data has been controlled by the Government agencies 
through organization of debates, regarding policies and by legislation though there is less 
involvement of private sectors. It has been mostly done in political angle. 
14. Milberg and Westin noted that countries with ‘no privacy regulations,’ were associated 
with lower information privacy concerns, and countries having moderate regulatory 
structures were concerned with higher levels of concern. (see Alan Westin, Privacy and 
freedom, 1967)
15. Different culture is supposed to receive and explain information differently irrespective of 
the universal concepts that all people would share. It is also a fact that one should not 
expect that identical information may not give rise to same realization.
16. A fundamental list of technologies which have impact on privacy are: RFID, location 
identification technologies with GPS, smart cards, technologies associating data mining 
and surveillance including biometrics. 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
17. Outsourcing industries of India are expected to earn considerable revenues to the tune of 
$ 50 billion within 2018. It is also expected for providing employment covering 2 million 
workers with in 2018. In India the industry involved it outsourcing has developed to the 
tune more than 30% every year for 5 years with effect from 2016. (see Financial Express, 
29 Jan 2008). 
18. The privacy framework of United States consists of special laws including constitutional, 
regulatory, common law and statutory laws. Besides, there are sectoral laws which control 
and govern personal data which are most sensitive. 
19. In India, ironically there is no system that a provision being obsolete would automatically 
be done away with. It would appear in the law books for ever unless they are categorically 
declared as repealed. It appears that based on reports of Law Commission of India, some 
of the legislations have been declared repealed which have become defuncted. It is 
observed also still in the book of laws there is existence of some laws coming from the 
British Regime though they are not in function.
20. The new economic policy of 1991 containing sense of liberalization brought in an 
electrified reconfiguration in the scenario of Indian economy. Emphasis has been given to 
focus much stress on contribution of private sector. Now, intervention of the Government 
was found limited only to that extent which was justified. (see Jagdish N. Bhagwati. 1993. 
India in transition: Freeing the Economy).
21. India still has not adopted a law which clearly governs protection of personal data and 
during late 1990s, the sense of data protection came on the surface culminating thereby 
eventually introduction of I.T. Act, 2000 though it did not categorically interpret the 
meaning of “personal data”. 
22. The judiciary system of India is thoroughly independent. The Supreme Court in India is at 
its apex. It has been a key feature that the Supreme Court possesses in the system of India’s 
democracy highest judicial place right from its existence. This apex court always plays a 
vital role for protection of individual rights enshrined under part III of the Constitution of 
India where basic individual rights have been given protection as fundamental rights. (see 
Constitution of India, Articles 19-35).
23. The argument is supported by two important cases where infringement of privacy occurred 
in India. The first case is concerned with scandal case of DPS MMS where in the CEO of 
Baazee.com and Avnish Bajaj was imprisoned for six days as ordered by Delhi court. The 
case was focused not on the breach of privacy but on the alleged illegal distribution of 
MMS chip. The second case was involved taking video footage of an actor snapped by an 
agency of media compromising privacy in taking that video footage. The actor was 
aggrieved as he thought that his privacy was infringed but ironically, he could not 
substantiate a case in the court of law.  
24. The debate involving data protection as well as data privacy in India considerably grew 
up consequent upon offshore outsourcing by the oversees organizations to the Indian 
counterparts. Had such outsourcing cases not taken place, the India would perhaps never 
have been worried much about protection of data.  
25. India’s software service industry is supervised by NASSCOM for establishing the 
prevailing regulation established Data Security Council of India (DSCI) for ensuring 
maintenance of data privacy and data protection for the outsourcing industries. 
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
References
Alexander Zinser. 2003. “International data transfer out of European Union:The adequate level 
of Data Protection,” Journal of Computer & Information Law 21(4): 547-550. 
Allen, A. 1988. “Uneasy Access: Privacy for women in a Free Society,” Rowman & Littlefield 
Totowa, 30:226.
Baskerville, R. 1993. “Information Systems Security Design Methods: Implications for 
Information System Development,” ACM Computing Surveys, 25(4): 375-414. 
Bellamy, C. 2000. The politics of public information systems. In G. D. Garson. Handbook of 
Public Information Systems. New York: Marcel Dekker. 3: 85-98.
Bok, S. 1983. Secrets: On the ethics of Concealment and Revilation. Panthcon Books, New 
York, NJ. 
Burkert, Herbert. 1983. Freedom of Information and Data Protection. Bonn: Gesellschaft für 
Mathematik und Datenverarbeitung. 
Casaló, L.V., Flavián, C. and Guinaliíu, M. 2007. “The role of security, privacy, usability and 
reputation in the development of online banking,” Online Information Review 31(5): 583-
603.
Chang, E.C., and Ho, C.B. 2006. “Organizational factors to the effectiveness of implementing 
information security management,” Industrial Management and Data Systems 106 (3): 
345-361. 
Costa, Luiz and Yves Poullet. 2012. “Privacy and the regulation of 2012,” Computer Law & 
Security Review, 28(3): 254-262. 
Cranor, Lorrie Faith and Paul Resnick. 2000. “Protocol for automated negotiations with buyer 
anonymity and seller reputation,” Netnomics 2 (1): 1-23.
Culnan, Mary, J., and Pamcle, K. Armstrong. 1999. “Information Privacy Concern, Procedural 
Fairness and Impersonal Trust: An Empirical Investigation,” Organization Science 10(1): 
104-115.
Dammann, Ulrich, Otto Mallmann and Spiros Simitis. 1977. Data Protection Legislation: An 
International Documentation: Engl.–German: eine internationale Dokumentation = Die 
Gesetzgebung zum Datenschutz. Frankfurt am Main: Metzner.
Decrew, J. 1989. “The Scope of Privacy in Law and Ethics,” Law and Philosophy 5(2):145-
173. 
Dieter, F. 1994. “A Security Framework for Information System Outsourcing,” Information 
Management and Computer Security 2(4): 3-8. 
Dlamini, M.T., Eloff, J.H.P. and Eloff, M.M. 2009. “Information Security: the moving target,” 
Computer & Security 28 (3/4): 189-198. 
Dutta, A. and McCrohan, K. 2002. “Management's role in information security in a cyber 
economy, California Management Review,” 45 (1): 67-87.
Eloff, M. M. and Von Solms, S. H. 2000. “Information security management: an approach to 
combine process certification and product evaluation,” Computers & Security 19(8): 
698–709.
Featherman, M.S., Miyazaki, A.D., and Sprott, D.E. 2010. “Reducing online privacy risk to 
facilitate e-service adoption: the influence of perceived ease of use and corporate 
credibility,” The Journal of Services Marketing 24(3): 219-229. 
Foxman, E.R. and Kilcoyne, P. 1993. “Information technology, marketing practice, and 
consumer privacy: ethical issue,” Journal of Public & Marketing 12: 106-119.
Furnell S. 2006. “Malicious or misinformed? Exploring a contributor to the insider threat,” 
Computer Fraud and Security 9(1): 8 –12.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
Geers, K. 2010. “The challenge of cyberattack difference,” Computer Law and Security 
Review, 26(3): 298-303.
Gellert, Raphael and Serge Gutwirth. 2013. “The legal construction of privacy and data 
protection,” Computer Law & Security Review 29(5): 522-530.
Gonzalez Fuster, Gloria and Raphael Gellert. 2012. “The fundamental right of data protection 
in the European Union: in search of an uncharted right,” International Review of Law, 
Computers & Technology 26(1): 73-82.
Goodhue, D. L. and Straub, D. W. 1991. “Security concerns of system users: A study of 
perceptions of the adequacy of security,” Information & Management, 20(1): 13-27.
Heebe, N.L. and Cark, J.G. 2007. “A model for predicting Haecker Behaviour,” Journal of 
Information System Security 3(3): 3-20. 
Heringa, A. W. and Philipp Kiiver. 2012. Constitutions compared: an introduction to 
comparative constitutional law. Cambridge: Portland.
Hofsted, G. 1997. Culture and Organizations: Software of the mind. USA: McGraw-Hill 
Education, 3rd edition.
Hone, K. and Eloff, J. H. P. 2002. “Information security policy—What do international security 
standards say,” Computers & Security 21(5): 402–409.
Hu, Q., and Dinev, T. 2005. “Is spyware and Internet nuisance or public menace?”, 
Communications of ACM 48(8): 61-67. 
Jackson, Vicki C. and Mark Tushnet. 2014. Comparative constitutional law. St. Paul: 
Foundation Press.
Jelena Budak and Edo Rajh. 2016. “Citizens’ Privacy Concern: Does National Culture 
Matter?”, Joint Conference of SurPRISE, PRISMS and PACT, Australia Academy of 
Science, Vienna 11-12. 
Joseph N. and Abubaker H. 2017. “Exploring the impact of outsourcing on organizational 
performance,” Journal of Global Operations and Strategic Sourcing 10(3): 362-387. 
Kankanhalli, A., Teo, H. K., Tan, B.C.Y., and Wei, K.K. 2003. “An integrated study of 
information system security effectiveness,” International Journal of Information 
Management 23(2):139-154. 
Kolb, N. and Abdullah, F. 2009. “Developing an information security awareness program for 
a non-profit organization,” International Management Review 5(2): 103-107.
Kruger, H.A. and Kearney, W.D. 2006. “A prototype for assessing information security 
awareness,” Computers and Security 25(4): 289-296. 
Lynskey, Orla. 2014. “Deconstructing data protection: the ‘added-value’ of a right to data 
protection in the EU legal order,” International and Comparative Law Quarterly 63(3):569-
597.
Ma Qingxiong, Johnston, A. C. and Pearson, J. M. 2008. “Information security management 
objectives and practices: A parsimonious framework,” Information Management and 
Computer Security 16(3): 251-270.
Martins, A. and Eloff, J.H. P. 2002. Information security culture, IFIP/SEC2002. In: Security 
in the information society. Boston: Kluwer Academic 203–214.
Ohkubo, M., Suzuki, K. and Kinoshita, S. 2005. “RFID privacy issues and technical 
challenges,” Communications of the ACM 48(9): 66-71.
Osborne, K. 1998. “Auditing the IT security function,” Computers & Security 17(1): 34-41.
Peltier, T. 2002. “How to build a comprehensive security awareness program,” Computer 
Security Journal 16(2): 23-32.
Reiman, J. 1976. “Privacy, intimacy and personhood,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 6(1): 26-
44.
Rurth Gavison. 1980. “Privacy and the Limits of Law,” Law Journal 89: 421-437.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
Sequeira, D. 2003. “Intrusion Protection Systems: Security: Silver Bullet?”, Business 
Communication Review 36-41.
Sloot, Bart van der. 2014. “Do data protection rules protect the individual and should they? An 
assessment of the proposed General Data Protection Regulation,” International Data 
Privacy Law 4(4): 307-325.
Solms, B. Von and Solms, R. Von. 2004. “The ten deadly sins of information security 
management,” Computers & Security, 23(5): 371–376.
Symonides, Janusz. 2003. Human rights: international protection, monitoring, enforcement 
Paris: UNESCO Publication. 
Thomson, K.L., Von Solms, R., and Lauw, L. 2006. “Cultivating an organizational information 
security culture,” Computer Fraud and Security 6(10): 7-11. 
Tripathi, B., & Mishra, J. 2000. “Protective Measures in E-commerce to deal with security 
threats arising out of social issues – A framework,” International Journal of Computer 
Engineering & Technology, 4(1): 46-53. 
Tryfonas, T., Kiountouzis, E., and Poulymenakou, A. 2001. “Embedding security practices in 
contemporary information systems development approaches,” Information Management 
and Computer Security 9(4):183-197. 
Westin, A. 2003. “Social and Political dimension of privacy,” Journal of Social Issues 59(2): 
431-453. 
Cases Cited
A K Gopalan v State of Madras [1950] SCR 88.
A v Hospital B [1999] AIR SC 495.
A.D.M, Jabalpur v Shivkant Sukla [1976] SCR 172.
Attorney General (for India) v Amrat Lal Prajivandas [1994] AIR SC 2179. 
Berubari Union Case and Others v Unknown [1960] AIR SC 845.
District Registrar and Collector v Canara Bank [2005] 1 SCC 496.
Gobinda v State of Madhya Pradesh [1975] 2 SCC 148.
Golak Nath v State of Punjab [1967] AIR SC 1643.
Indira Gandhi v Rajnarayan [1975] AIR SC 2299.
Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala [1973] AIR SC 1461.
Kharak Singh v State of UP [1963] AIR SC 1295.
K.S. Puttaswamy and others v Union of India and others [2012] SC WP (Civil) No. 494. 
M. P. Sharma v Satish Chandra, District Magistrate, Delhi [1954] AIR SC 300.
Malak Singh v State of Punjab and Haryana [1981] AIR SC 760.
Maneka Gandhi v Union of India [1978] AIR SC 597.
Munn v Illionoss [1877] 94 US 113.
P v Hospital Q [2003] AIR SC 664.
P. Sharma v Satish Chandra [1954] AIR SC 30.
People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) v Union of India [2003] AIR SC 2363.
People’s Union for Civil Liberties PUCI v Union of India [1997] 1 SCC 301.
Puran Mal v Director of Inspector (Investigation) of Income Tax, Delhi [1974] AIR SC 348.
R. Rajagopal v State of Tamil Nadu [1995] AIR SC 254.
Sharada v Dharmpal [2003] AIR SC 3450.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
State of Punjab v Baldev Singh [1999] AIR SC 2378.
The Union of India v H.S. Dhillon [1972] AIR SC 1061.
V.S. Kuttan Pellai v Ramkrishnan [1980] AIR SC 185.
About the author
Sheshadri Chatterjee is a PhD Research scholar at Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India 
and acted as a management consultant practitioner in several Multinational Companies. 
Academically he is from engineering, management and legal background. He has completed 
Master of Technology from Jadavpur University, Kolkata, and Master of Business 
Administration from Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi and master’s in law from National 
Law University Delhi. Sheshadri is also a certified project management professional, PMP 
from Project Management Institute (PMI), USA, Certified Professional of Cyber Laws from 
Indian Law Institute Delhi, and have completed PRINCE2, OGC, UK and ITIL v3 UK.
Downloaded by Tulane University At 09:23 22 January 2019 (PT)
