REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION  
TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM
PROPOSING A NEW INTERNATIONAL DIGITAL COUNCIL  
FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
A CONCEPT NOTE
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Rome, 2020REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION  
TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
PROPOSING A NEW INTERNATIONAL DIGITAL COUNCIL  
FOR FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
A CONCEPT NOTERequired citation:
FAO. 2020. Realizing the potential of digitalization to improve the agri-food system: Proposing 
a new International Digital Council for Food and Agriculture . A concept note . Rome.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal or development status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or 
boundaries. The mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not 
these have been patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by 
FAO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
The views expressed in this information product are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily reflect the views or policies of FAO.
© FAO, 2020
Some rights reserved. This work is made available under the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence 
(CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO;  
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/legalcode ). 
Under the terms of this licence, this work may be copied, redistributed and adapted for non-
commercial purposes, provided that the work is appropriately cited. In any use of this work, 
there should be no suggestion that FAO endorses any specific organization, products or services. 
The use of the FAO logo is not permitted. If the work is adapted, then it must be licensed under 
the same or equivalent Creative Commons licence. If a translation of this work is created, it 
must include the following disclaimer along with the required citation: “This translation was 
not created by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). FAO is not 
responsible for the content or accuracy of this translation. The original [Language] edition shall 
be the authoritative edition.”
Disputes arising under the licence that cannot be settled amicably will be resolved by 
mediation and arbitration as described in Article 8 of the licence except as otherwise provided 
herein. The applicable mediation rules will be the mediation rules of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules  and any arbitration will 
be conducted in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).
Third-party materials.  Users wishing to reuse material from this work that is attributed 
to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, are responsible for determining whether 
permission is needed for that reuse and for obtaining permission from the copyright holder. 
The risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-owned component in the work 
rests solely with the user.
Sales, rights and licensing. FAO information products are available on the FAO website  
(www.fao.org/publications ) and can be purchased through publications-sales@fao.org. Requests 
for commercial use should be submitted via: www.fao.org/contact-us/licence-request . Queries 
regarding rights and licensing should be submitted to: copyright@fao.org .iii
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi
1 INTRODUCTION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1 Background and rationale  ................................................................... 1
1.2 Digitalization as part of the solution to global agri-food challenges  .......................... 2
1.3 Opportunities, risks and challenges for digital food and agriculture  .......................... 3
1.4 A glance at international fora where digital technologies and their  
 governance are debated  ..................................................................... 5
1.5 The need for focusing on agriculture and digital technology in the context  
 of governance  ................................................................................ 7
2  THE DIGITAL COUNCIL – PROPOSED SCOPE AND FUNCTION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.1 Vision, mission and principles  ................................................................ 9
2.2 Roles and activities  .......................................................................... 10
3 NATURE, COMPOSITION AND OPERATING MECHANISMS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1 Nature  ...................................................................................... 13
3.2 Composition and operating mechanisms  .................................................. 14
3.3	Work	flows	and	methods  ................................................................... 15
3.4 Funding strategy  ............................................................................ 16
3.5 Monitoring and evaluation  .................................................................. 16
REFERENCES    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The global agri-food system continues to face 
considerable challenges in being able to provide enough 
food of adequate quality to feed an ever-growing, 
aging, and migrating population. The world is also 
changing at a fast pace with the emergence of an array 
of technologies. Digital technologies offer unique 
opportunities for improving food production and trade, 
especially to smallholder farmers, and in helping to 
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. 
This concept note has been produced in response to 
a request by 74 agriculture ministers and high level 
representatives from international organisations in 
January 2019 during the Global Forum on Food and 
Agriculture (GFFA). It proposes the creation of a new 
body, an International Digital Council for Food and 
Agriculture, to enhance international cooperation and 
the exchange of ideas and experiences across borders, 
creating synergies and avoiding duplication of efforts. 
It will strive to keep pace with rapid developments in 
digitalization, working with new digital tools and the 
highest expertise available. In line with this, it will help 
to tackle challenges of food security, hunger, health, 
inclusiveness and sustainability in the agri-food system 
at national, regional and international levels.With this approach, the Digital Council would 
provide structured and strategic agricultural policy 
recommendations on digitalization to governmental 
and non-governmental actors, and strengthen 
international cooperation in agri-food systems 
to identify the challenges and possible solutions. 
Examples of activities include the organization of 
international fora to share best policy practices, and 
promoting interaction among farmers associations 
from different countries and between national- and 
international-level stakeholders. 
The scope and function of the proposed Digital 
Council are summarized herein for consideration by 
government ministers, international organization 
members, donors and other stakeholders. It was noted 
among all stakeholders involved in the process of 
producing this concept note that the proposed Digital 
Council would have significant impacts on increasing 
the positive benefits of digitalization in the food and 
agriculture sector, contributing to improving rural 
livelihoods and local economies.viACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The present document is the result of an open 
and inclusive consultation with approximately 
355 stakeholders from more than 100 organizations 
having actively contributed to its development. The 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) is especially grateful to the speakers 
and panellists who gave their generous time to share 
experiences and expertise during the consultation 
process. Their contributions to discussions and 
recommendations were invaluable. 
An agency-wide technical clearance process 
facilitated a comprehensive technical review by many 
technical experts in FAO who contributed during 
the consultation process and supported finalizing 
this concept note: Nevena ALEXANDROVA-
STEFANOVA, Ayla AL OLWANI, Carlo BRAVI, 
Henry van BURGSTEDEN, Renata CLARKE, 
Anne CONESTABILE, Edona DERVISHOLLI, 
Abebe HAILE GABRIEL, Dejan JAKOVLJEVIC, 
Raimund JEHLE, Mohamed MANSSOURI, 
Danilo PIAGGESI, Selvaraju RAMASAMY, 
George RAPSOMANIKIS, Laurent THOMAS, 
Maximo TORERO CULLEN, Nikola TRENDOV, 
Samuel VARAS, Anping YE and Meng ZENG.
In addition, we would like to acknowledge the 
nine co-publishing agencies whose numerous 
colleagues from different technical units and 
departments provided valuable technical comments 
and input to the document: African Development 
Bank (AfDB; Olukemi AFUN-OGIDAN, 
Bouchaib BOULANOUAR and Martin FREGENE), 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD; Constanza DI NUCCI and Thouraya TRIKI), International Telecommunication Union (ITU; 
Doreen BOGDAN-MARTIN, Hani ESKANDAR 
and Reinhard SCHOLL), Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD; Ken ASH, 
Gwendolen DEBOE, Emily GRAY and Marie-
Agnès JOUANJEAN), Technical Centre for Agricultural 
and Rural Cooperation (CTA; Benjamin ADDOM 
and Michael HAILU), World Bank Group (WBG; 
Astrid JAKOBS DE PADUA and Julian LAMPIETTI), 
World Food Programme (WFP; Samuel GRINDLEY 
and Enrica PORCARI), World Organisation for 
Animal Health (OIE; Jean-Philippe DOP and Jean-
Jacques SOULA), and World Trade Organization 
(WTO; Lee Ann JACKSON and Ulla KASK).
We are grateful to the regional, national and country 
advisers, experts and working groups who shared 
their data, provided valuable insights and conducted 
the analyses presented in this report. Numerous 
officials of development banks, government agencies, 
international organizations, non-governmental 
organizations and civil societies also contributed to 
this concept note.
We would like to thank the representatives of 
governments who shared their information needs and 
provided thoughtful views and feedback as end-users.
This document was initially prepared with the 
support of Deloitte, whose representatives facilitated 
and incorporated all the comments received from all 
interested stakeholders during the consultation process.
This work was made possible by the financial 
contribution of the Federal Republic of Germany.1
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background and rationale
The world is facing changes that are profoundly 
impacting the environment and every aspect of human 
life. Currently, out of the 7.7 billion people in the world, 
588 million live in extreme poverty (World Data Lab, 
2019), 820 million suffer from hunger, and 2.5 billion 
suffer some form of micronutrient deficiency (FAO, 
IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, 2019). The population 
is also growing, aging and migrating to cities, affecting 
agricultural production and the demand for food. This 
is reshaping the way that market chains work, but is 
also reshaping the world around us because of the 
overexploitation of natural resources and a potentially 
catastrophic degradation of land, alongside the effects of 
climate change on the world’s food security. Furthermore, 
inequalities, discrimination, and violations of human 
rights, including the right to adequate and safe nutrition, 
add to the impacts, especially on smallholder farmers. 
Against this backdrop, the agri-food system is in 
dire need for innovative solutions, and one identified 
approach is through digitalization. The agri-food system 
has undergone changes that have increased efficiency 
and profitability to levels previously unattainable. 
Still it lags in terms of digitalization that could play 
an increasingly important role in achieving the global 
goal of improving food security and rural livelihoods. 
Digitalization boosts connectivity in the agri-food system 
and reduces inefficiencies, with the Internet providing 
access to technical information, and stimulating 
cooperation and connection across the value chain. 
‘Big data’ offers insights for improving productivity 
and decision making through real-time alerts, such as 
when coping with natural disasters. Open sharing of 
information also helps to increase transparency and trust 
between otherwise disparate stakeholder groups in the 
global agri-food system.
But, digitalization can also have important drawbacks. It 
may increase digital divides across the system and cause 
workforce displacement, which are important issues, 
especially where agriculture is the primary source of 
employment. Misuse of digitalization is an added threat 
in terms of data protection, data ownership, privacy rights and cybersecurity. Digitalization can also make 
it harder for smallholder farmers as they struggle to 
compete with new technologies that can even cause price 
rises by increasing market concentration.
With regards to digitalization and the agri-food 
system, multiple issues need to be examined including 
requirements for policymaking and regulation, limited 
access to finance and digital skills among some actors, 
and the need to overcome existing digital divides which 
are limiting access to infrastructure and information. 
In line with this, a new element in the international 
landscape is considered essential to work on these issues, 
to support nations on their digital and policy pathways as 
they strive to adapt and use digital solutions that target 
farmer needs and facilitate stakeholder collaboration. 
In January 2019, 74 agriculture ministers and high-
level representatives from international organizations 
assembled for the 11th Berlin Agriculture Ministers’ 
Conference, on the occasion of the Global Forum for 
Food and Agriculture (GFFA), which had a specific focus: 
‘Agriculture goes digital – Smart solutions for future 
farming’. One conclusion of the event was a request to the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO): “to draw up, in consultation with stakeholders 
(AfDB, CTA, IFAD, ITU, OECD, OIE, WB, WFP and 
WTO) a concept for considering the establishment of an 
International Digital Council for Food and Agriculture 
that will advise governments and other relevant actors, 
drive the exchange of ideas and experiences and 
consequently help everyone harness the opportunities 
presented by digitalization” (GFFA, 2019, p. 6).
In response, FAO reviewed existing global digital 
agriculture governance architecture, mapped 
existing institutions and strategies, and undertook 
a gap analysis and needs assessment concerning 
the establishment of an international framework for 
digitalization. Results indicated that there is currently 
no existing framework specifically mandated to focus 
on the identified gaps and able to complement existing 
initiatives. Given the significant challenges faced and 
the opportunities that innovation and digitalization 
offer, creating such a framework appears to be vital for 
supporting the development of a more efficient and REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE2equitable global agri-food system that would help in 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
The review and assessment resulted in this concept note 
for a proposed International Digital Council for Food and 
Agriculture (called hereafter the ‘Digital Council’) that 
could support agri-food system stakeholders to maximize 
their potential through digitalization. The concept note 
explains the importance of fostering digitalization in 
the agri-food system to respond to current and future 
challenges at the global level. It also proposes roles and 
pillars of action to ensure that the Digital Council will 
be inclusive, equitable and effective. It would involve 
and engage with agents and stakeholders from diverse 
industries and stages along agri-food value chains, with 
two defined roles. First, it would advise on policy and 
best practices through recommendations and guidelines, 
to support governments as they create new policy 
frameworks, ensuring coordination and consistency 
of initiatives among countries. Second, it would act as 
a coordination hub to strengthen linkages between 
all stakeholders and carry their voices in international 
processes. 
The proposed Digital Council would have a dynamic and 
adaptable structure to maximize effectiveness, inclusivity 
and efficiency by bringing together diverse perspectives 
from different actors in the system. Five units are 
proposed:
1 . Inter-governmental Representatives’ Group – 
government-nominated representatives with 
experience in the agri-food system, to set the Digital 
Council’s priority agenda and monitor progress. 
2 . Advisory Committee – experienced representatives 
of international organizations and scientific/technical 
organizations (to be agreed), to provide strategic 
consensus-based advice. 
3 . Working Groups – established by the Advisory 
Committee on an ad hoc basis to solve specific 
technical problems and produce recommendations for 
the Inter-governmental Representatives’ Group. 
4 . Online Multistakeholder Forum – professionally 
experienced stakeholders from the private sector, civil 
society, government, academia, farmer associations, 
small enterprises and others, to participate and 
contribute to Digital Council activities. 
5 . Coordination Unit – managed by a supporting agency 
to provide operational, administrative, technical and 
communications support and advocacy within its 
programme budgets. In January 2020, it is expected that participating 
agriculture ministers at the next Global Forum for Food 
and Agriculture will make a decision on whether to 
endorse this concept note. If so, FAO and partners will 
immediately initiate the process to establish the Digital 
Council, including finalizing the operating mechanisms 
with which it will function, and staffing. Subject to 
approval, the Digital Council will be formalized, and a 
first meeting of the Inter-governmental Representatives’ 
Group will determine the Digital Council’s initial agenda. 
Its mission and objectives are complementary to those 
of FAO, which has the infrastructure, networks (e.g., the 
e-Agriculture Community of Practice) and global reach 
that could effectively contribute to the activities of the 
Digital Council. 
1.2 Digitalization as part of the 
solution to global agri-food 
challenges
Digital technologies, services, products, and skills are 
transforming modern economies and entire systems of 
production, management, and governance (Brennan 
and Kreiss, 2014). The endless possibilities of such 
technologies will only multiply by breakthroughs such as 
blockchain, AI, robotics, IoT, 3D printing, biotechnology, 
immerse reality and quantum computing, fuelled by 
lowering costs and the increased ability to generate, 
collect and analyse data. Digitalization also opens up 
new opportunities for entrepreneurs through access to 
global markets (UNCTAD, 2017).
 zDigitalization  – the use of digital technologies 
and data as well as their interconnection which 
results in new or changes to existing activities 
(OECD, 2018).
 zDigital transformation  – (i) an ongoing process 
affecting society on a global scale, and (ii) the way 
in which society has changed since the emergence 
of ICT (Matt, Hess and Benlian, 2015).
The private sector is providing the digital tools for this 
transformation, while developing and rapidly deploying 
new or modified business services. But different 
industries are not responding in a homogenous way 
and speed to digitalization, due their culture, dynamics 
and available skills. As sectors face different needs, 
they adopt a variety of market forces to drive digital 
transformation, and many are only just embarking on 
their own complex digital transformation journeys. 
Industries with the highest technological maturity, 
such as the telecommunication and technology sectors, REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE3
have benefited most from a high level of available skills, 
making them today’s frontrunners, with a score of 50 
out of 100 in 2018. With the worldwide adoption of 
mobile devices and the growth of the Internet, telecom 
companies in particular are changing rapidly, providing 
other sectors and society as a whole with an enabling 
environment that can support larger-scale digitalization 
across sectors. 
However, the success of digital transformation requires 
the active involvement and collaboration of many 
different stakeholders. While it is predominantly used 
in a business context by large international companies, 
it also impacts governments, public sector agencies 
and other organizations involved in tackling societal 
challenges such as rural livelihoods, youth employment 
and women’s empowerment, by leveraging existing and 
emerging digital technologies. In particular, public–
private partnerships can spark a cultural shift towards an 
environment of joint action and broader inclusive change 
where technology acts as an enabler and accelerator for 
digital transformation.
The agri-food system has undergone a series of 
revolutions. The first agricultural revolution started 
around 10 000 BCE, leading to the world’s first 
settled societies and civilizations. From the 1800s, 
mechanization sparked ‘the Green Revolution’, where 
from the 1960s the development and widespread 
adoption of more resistant crop varieties and use of 
agrochemicals led to massive increases in the production 
of the main global staple crops. The new ‘digital 
agricultural revolution’1 offers new opportunities through 
the availability of highly interconnected and data-
intensive computational technologies (Schwab, 2016), 
from increasing productivity through data-driven support 
to decision making and reducing transaction costs across 
agricultural production and distribution chains.
However, the agri-food system lags other sectors in 
adopting digitalization. One reason is individual and 
often smaller farms are more reluctant to adopt new 
digital technologies than large farms. Yet, smallholder 
farmers play a vital role as they account for 80 percent of 
global food production (FAO, 2014). Investing in digital 
technologies tends to be expensive and comes with risks 
that are often too great for smallholder farmers, but 
within reach for producer association, cooperatives or 
other consortiums. 
1 “Digitalisation for agriculture (D4Ag) is the use of digital 
technologies, innovations, and data to transform business models 
and practices across the agriculture value chain...” (Tsan et al ., 2019, 
p. 5).Venture capital funds are investing in the digital 
agriculture revolution, facilitating its diffusion, but 
the agri-food system is still attracting less than other 
industries. Between 2010 and 2015, investments in 
financial technology grew at 65 percent annually, 
reaching a value of USD 22 billion, while investments 
in digital agriculture grew much less and reached only 
USD 4.6 billion. Moreover, considering assets, usage 
and labour in digital fields, agriculture is the worst-
performing industry (Gandhi, Khanna and Ramaswamy, 
2016).
Digitalization in the agri-food system clearly has the 
potential to play an increasingly important role in 
achieving global food security and improving livelihoods 
especially in rural areas. The Digital Council could help 
unleash the potential that digitalization has, to transform 
the people’s lives and enable them to escape the poverty 
they have faced for generations.
1.3 Opportunities, risks and 
challenges for digital food and 
agriculture
Digitalization can boost the connectivity of all the 
actors in the agri-food system, and reduce inefficiencies 
and barriers in different ways. With stable access to 
the Internet, farmers can receive and share technical 
information even internationally, improving productivity, 
resilience and access to markets. In this sense, 
digitalization can allow different actors along the agri-
food value chain to cooperate in a sustainable agro-
ecosystem. Mobile technologies and web-based devices 
also connect farmers to supply chains, giving access 
to higher quality seeds and fertilizers that can boost 
production and quality (Townsend et al., 2019 ), and also 
enable them to sell directly to consumers, maximizing 
profitability by avoiding intermediates. 
Big data analytics, IoT and sensors for example, can help 
to collect real-time data and perform advanced analytics 
on crops to provide farmers and other value chain actors 
with insights and access to data to inform decision-
making and improve productivity with real-time alerts 
and weather forecasts to better adapt and be resilient to 
the effects of climate change. 
Technologies such as blockchain can improve the 
traceability of food, reducing food waste and increasing 
transparency and trust across the value chain. Deep 
learning, machine learning and artificial intelligence 
(AI) can help with advanced crop management, disease 
detection, species recognition, and water, soil and REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE4forestry management that can improve food security. 
Digital solutions may also become indispensable to 
improving the accuracy of monitoring, reporting and 
validation of climate mitigation measures in agriculture 
and land use.
Digitalization can also play an important role in 
educating farmers on how to utilize the opportunities 
these innovations bring. Such accessible technologies can 
support smallholder farms in improving their resource 
management and contribute to them becoming more 
competitive. In addition, this can lead to a stronger 
inclusion of youth by creating more appealing digital 
jobs in rural areas, and preventing the migration of rural 
youth to cities.
However, digitalization can also create risks. The first 
is the digital divide across the agri-food system and 
particularly between modern and subsistence farming 
that is growing quickly as a result of innovation. 
Although the cost of implementing digital technologies 
has fallen greatly over time, subsistence farming in 
developing and emerging economies remains unable to 
take full advantage of the opportunities due to a weak 
infrastructure, inequitable access, high cost, lack of 
skills and limited capital. In addition, the introduction 
of robotics and AI could cause workforce displacement 
unless workers adapt their know-how and specialize in 
new tasks. This can create significant problems in rural 
areas where the agri-food system remains the primary 
source of employment and the skills needed to exploit the 
positive potential of digitalization are lacking.
The protection of personal and private data and how data 
are shared remains an element of concern, and it must 
be recognized as a potential threat for all stakeholders. 
Digitalization often implies large use of data, which 
requires adequate protection with privacy standards and 
security barriers to safeguard users. Advancements such 
as precision agriculture use connected devices which may 
be exposed to cyber threats, as third parties could access 
sensitive data, steal resources and destroy equipment 
if cybersecurity shields are not properly implemented 
(CISA, 2018). 
Big data and applications of AI may have a significant 
impact on farm management and could result in shifts 
in agricultural output and input markets in terms of 
concentration and potential market power. Wider uptake 
of big data and analytics could potentially have an impact 
of farm structures in currently unexplored ways (Wolfert 
et al., 2017). 
To maximize opportunities and minimize risks, the agri-
food system should address four key gaps: policymaking and regulation, the economic and gender gap, the skill 
gap, and reducing the ‘digital divide’.
Policymaking and regulation.  Governments and 
policymakers play a primary role in creating the enabling 
environment needed for digitalization, ensuring 
transparency, security, equality and efficiency of 
financing systems. Some existing policy instruments have 
a broader scope that do not include digital agriculture. 
Similarly, there are policies linked to technology 
development of value to rural and urban areas, but that 
do have a rural agri-food perspective. Nevertheless, 
data management, standardization and regulations 
are challenges that should be proactively addressed at 
policy level by governments. Additionally, today’s digital 
tools are often based on the availability of big data. To 
translate the information into valuable insights, actors 
are often required to share a large amount of data with 
third-party providers, raising risks of data ownership 
and privacy, especially for those less able to defend their 
interests such as smallholder farmers. In general, the lack 
of transparency and trustworthiness around issues such 
as data ownership, privacy and liability are contributors 
to the range of challenges, mainly a lack of trust on 
digital technology applications, currently experienced 
in many sectors (Wiseman et al., 2019). Therefore, the 
need emerges for a strong regulatory policy framework 
adhered to by all, but led by governments to create a safe 
and level playing field for the sector.
The economic and gender gap.  The cost of implementing 
digital technology for farming has fallen over time, but 
subsistence farming still remains far from benefiting 
from this trend due to limited availability of capital, 
which limits the affordability of new technologies. This is 
creating a potential economic gap, also between high-
income countries with a mobile and Internet network 
coverage of more than 90 percent of the population, when 
in low-income countries it is only around 50 percent 
(World Bank Group, 2019a), and women and other 
disadvantaged groups have even lower access. 
The skill gap. This affects the diffusion of digital solutions, 
which must ensure the inclusion of everyone in the 
digital revolution, particularly rural communities. Data 
literacy is one of the main barriers the sector faces, so 
even when connected, farmers may not be sufficiently 
educated or empowered to take advantage of the new 
wealth of information. Therefore, education remains the 
key to access the new digital jobs that technology will 
bring, especially in rural areas.
Reducing the ‘digital divide’.  Assuring equitable access to 
digital infrastructure is essential, and adopting available 
technologies must be a priority as the gap between REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE5
modern and subsistence farming is growing. Smallholder 
farmers in developing countries have limited access 
to skills, information and open data, that is slowing 
the development of agricultural entrepreneurship and 
a sustainable digital ecosystem. This is also opening 
up digital shortfalls such as a lack of localized content 
for new digital services, and limited access to local 
information and services in terms of availability, 
affordability, awareness, ability and agency (Roberts and 
Hernandez, 2019).
Consequently, the need for a new element in the 
landscape of international initiatives emerges, one able 
to tackle the above-mentioned gaps and address the 
most pressing needs of the agri-food system through 
digitalization. 
1.4 A glance at international 
fora where digital 
technologies and their 
governance are debated
As with the inception of the Internet, digital technologies 
have developed around a culture of cooperation, 
involving the private sector, international institutions, 
academia, and governments. Governance issues 
involving digital infrastructure development, connectivity 
and inclusion, data ownership, privacy and ethics, 
but also the emphasis on specific sectors, including 
agriculture, are being shaped by multistakeholder 
approaches, including through international processes.
Being increasingly interconnected in an expanding 
digital web, such an approach reflects the need for 
enhanced cooperation – based both on multilateralism 
and multistakeholderism – that involves governments 
and a diverse spectrum of other stakeholders such as 
civil society, technologists, academics and the private 
sector (Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital 
Cooperation, 2019). 
Within this approach, stakeholders should address the 
social, ethical, legal and economic impact of digital 
technologies and develop governance instruments, such 
as formal and informal rules, guidelines, standards 
and norms, to maximize the benefits and minimize 
the negative impacts of digital technologies across 
sectors, thus ensuring that they can contribute towards 
sustainable development globally. 
Such governance instruments are discussed, debated 
and developed in fora convened by the UN and other 
international organizations and, in this way, reflect the collective view and consensus of their membership 
on the issue at hand. These processes facilitate debate, 
convergence of views and coordination of actions at the 
global level. International organizations often initiated 
such collective processes by producing voluntary 
guidelines that were later considered for broader 
endorsement.2
For example, the World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS) was initiated in 2003 by the UN to create 
an evolving multistakeholder platform to discuss ICT 
issues and achieve a common vision for an inclusive and 
development-oriented global information society. WSIS 
included governments, international organizations, 
Internet and technical communities, non-profit 
organizations, the private sector and civil society. 
In 2003, WSIS developed the Geneva Declaration of 
Principles that emphasized the importance of the ethical 
dimensions of the information society, viewing ICTs as 
an avenue of progress with respect to the realization of 
human rights and fundamental freedoms (WSIS, 2003a). 
The Geneva Plan of Action identified 18 areas of activity 
(or Action Lines), including agriculture (Action Line C7 
ICT Applications: e-Agriculture), on which governments, 
civil society, businesses and international organizations 
could work together to achieve the potential of ICTs for 
development (WSIS, 2003b). 
In 2005, WSIS set out a working definition of Internet 
governance as the development and application by 
governments, the private sector and civil society, in 
their respective roles, of shared principles, norms, rules, 
decision-making procedures, and programmes (WSIS, 
2005). WSIS also mandated the establishment of the 
Internet Governance Forum (IGF) under the auspices 
of the UN, and initiated the process towards enhanced 
cooperation and the implementation of the Geneva Plan 
of Action.3
2 For example, the Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investment 
developed in 2010 (UNCTAD et al , no date) provided the basis for the 
debate, and endorsement in 2014, of the Principles for Responsible 
Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems (CFS, no date)..
3 The WSIS+10 High Level Event in 2014 provided an opportunity 
for a 10-year review of progress on the implementation of the 
Geneva and Tunis outcomes. The High Level Event reiterated the 
commitment on the Geneva Plan of Action of 2003 and the Tunis 
Agenda	of	2005	(WSIS,	2003b,	2005)	and	recognized	significant	
progress, but also underlined challenges. The Action Lines of the 
Geneva Plan of Action were enhanced (including the Action Line 
related	to	agriculture)	in	order	to	reflect	technological	progress	
in ICTs and the rapid growth of Internet. In terms of governance, 
WSIS+10 called for encouraging people-centred and inclusive 
governance models, the development of national ICT policies, 
e-strategies and regulatory frameworks that enable sustainable 
development. WSIS+10 Statement on Implementation of WSIS 
Outcomes and the WSIS+10 Vision for WSIS Beyond 2015 (WSIS, 
2014). See also the overall review of the implementation of the WSIS 
outcomes (UNGA Resolution 70/125; UN General Assembly, 2016), 
which recognized the necessity of holding this Forum on an annual 
basis and called for a close alignment between WSIS and the SDGs. REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE6Since 2005, a series of WSIS-related events have 
been held on an annual basis, rebranded as the WSIS 
Forum hosted by the ITU. This global multistakeholder 
platform facilitates the implementation of the WSIS 
Action Lines for advancing sustainable development, 
represents the world’s largest annual gathering of 
the ‘ICT for development’ community and provides 
a mechanism for coordination, information and 
knowledge exchange, and sharing of best practices.4 
In follow up to the outcomes of the UN General 
Assembly Overall Review of the Implementation of 
WSIS Outcomes (Res. A/70/125) and with the adoption 
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (Res. 
A/70/1), the WSIS Forum is constantly evolving and 
strengthening the alignment between the Geneva Plan 
of Action and its Action Lines and the SDGs.
With Internet governance being such a controversial 
issue, WSIS in 2005 requested the UN Secretary-
General to convene a new forum for multistakeholder 
policy dialogue. As a platform for discussions, the 
IGF brings various stakeholder groups to the table 
to exchange information and share good practices. 
While the IGF may not have decision-making 
mandates, it informs and inspires those who do. 
It facilitates a common understanding of how to 
maximize Internet opportunities and address risks 
and challenges (IGF, no date). For example, IGF 
has provided a working framework on how human 
rights should be interpreted to apply to the Internet 
environment, and the Internet policy principles that 
must be upheld in order to create an environment 
that supports human rights to the maximum extent 
possible.5
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is 
the leading United Nations agency for information and 
communication technologies. As the global focal point 
for governments and the private sector, ITU’s role 
in helping the world communicate spans three core 
4 The Forum is co-organized by ITU, UNESCO, UNCTAD and UNDP, 
in close collaboration with all WSIS Action Line co-/facilitators and 
other UN organizations (UNDESA, FAO, UNEP, WHO, UN Women, 
WIPO, WFP, ILO, WMO, ITC, UPU, UNODC, UNICEF, UNIDO, UNITAR, 
UNHCR and UN Regional Commissions). See, for example, Council 
Working Group on the WSIS (2016).
5 The Charter of Human Rights and Principles for the Internet covers 
the whole spectrum of human rights drawing on the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and other covenants that make up 
the International Bill of Human Rights at the United Nations. See 
Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition and IGF (2014).sectors: radiocommunication, standardization6 and 
development. Within its mandate on ICT development, 
ITU was the lead organizing agency of the WSIS 
in 2003 and 2005 and organizes the annual WSIS 
Forum. ITU plays a significant role in implementing 
the relevant parts of the WSIS outcomes and the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It provides 
support to policymakers and regulators through 
sharing best practices in digital transformation, 
and discussing recommendations for standards and 
regulations that can shape fair, transparent and 
non-discriminatory digital economy environments 
worldwide (ITU, 2017). 
For example, since 2000 the ITU Global Symposium 
for Regulators (GSR) has brought together heads of 
national telecom/ICT regulatory authorities from 
around the world to share their views and experiences 
on the most pressing regulatory issues, and discuss and 
adopt regulatory best practice guidelines (ITU, no date 
b). Such collaborative recommendations for regulatory 
approaches respond to the changing technology 
environment and address the continuing need for 
secure and reliable ICT infrastructure, affordable access 
to and delivery of digital services, maintaining trust in 
ICTs, thus promoting digital transformation. In 2014, 
the GSR adopted regulatory best practice guidelines 
to protect consumer interests while ensuring a level-
playing field for all players (ITU, 2014). In 2019, the 
GSR discussed best practice guidelines to fast forward 
digital connectivity to allow all to participate in the 
digital economy and benefit from digital transformation 
(ITU, 2019).
ITU also provides a neutral platform for government, 
industry and academia to build a common understanding 
of the capabilities of emerging digital technologies 
such as AI and the need for technical standardization 
and policy guidance. For example, the AI for Good 
Global Summit discusses and formulates strategies to 
ensure trusted, safe and inclusive development of AI 
technologies and equitable access to their benefits. AI 
technologies will be central to the achievement of the 
6 The ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
develops international technical standards (known as ITU-T 
Recommendations)	that	act	as	defining	elements	in	the	global	
infrastructure of ICTs. ITU follows a contribution-led, consensus-
based approach in which countries and companies are afforded 
equal	rights	to	influence	the	development	of	technical	standards.	
For example, ITU Standardization Study Group 20 (SG20) focuses 
on Internet of Things technologies (IoT). The deployment of IoT 
technologies is expected to connect an estimated 50 billion 
devices to the network by year 2020, impacting nearly every aspect 
of our daily lives. SG20 develops international standards to enable 
the coordinated development of IoT technologies, including 
machine-to-machine communications and ubiquitous sensor 
networks. See ITU (no date a).REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE7
SDGs by capitalizing on the unprecedented quantities 
of data now being generated on many aspects of human 
behaviour (ITU, 2020). 
UNESCO provides a space where norms and values 
related to AI are debated in international conferences 
that explore the linkages between these technologies 
and education, gender and livelihoods. The conferences 
include high-level representatives from UNESCO 
Member States, and they consider the benefits and 
challenges of AI within the context of inequity in access 
to knowledge and research and in representation of the 
full diversity of cultural expression. Discussions focus 
on the universal aspects of AI, its ethical dimensions, 
and ways to ensure that the human-centred and ethical 
design of AI principles and frameworks is rooted in 
international cooperation.7 
In addition to direct financial assistance and analytical 
work, the World Bank leverages its convening power 
to pool knowledge and resources from a vast array of 
public agencies, experts, innovators, private companies, 
and investors. The World Bank’s Digital Development 
Partnership (DDP) brings together public and private 
sector partners to foster the creation and implementation 
of digital development strategies. For example, DDP 
supports the ICT Africa Regulatory Watch Initiative 
(ARWI) in West Africa to assist ECOWAS member states 
to undertake regulatory and policy reforms and address 
some of the main market failures (World Bank Group, 
2019b). 
A challenge for privacy is the expanding use of big 
data – data that are subject to complex automated 
discriminatory technologies, and that can classify 
users and customers into categories according to their 
preferences, income, ethnicity, political views and other 
sensitive characteristics. The UN Global Working Group 
on Big Data for Official Statistics (UNGWG ) was created 
in 2014, as an outcome of the 45th meeting of the UN 
Statistical Commission. UNGWG provides strategic 
vision, direction and coordination of a global programme 
on big data for official statistics, including indicators 
for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The 
UNGWG also fosters practical use of big data sources 
for policy implementation, and offers advice in building 
public trust in their use by the private sector (UN GWG 
for Big Data, 2020). The United Nations Development 
Group (UNDG) has set out general guidance on data 
7 For an overview of UNESCO’s ROAM principles (of human Rights, 
Openness, Accessibility and Multi-stakeholder participation, 
assessed by the Internet Universality Indicators) as applied to AI, 
see UNESCO (2019). privacy, data protection and data ethics on big data for 
achievement of the 2030 Agenda.8 
Since 1998 the OECD has had a substantive work 
programme on the digital economy, with particular 
emphasis on data privacy, digital security, and the 
structural change wrought by these technologies across 
the economy and society. This policy work is supported 
by the development of international statistical standards 
and corresponding databases. The OECD has convoked a 
series of ministerial meetings on the digital economy – in 
Ottawa in 1998, Seoul in 2008, and Cancun in 2016 – that 
have led to important Declarations on Authentication 
for E-Commerce, the Protection of Privacy on Global 
Networks, and the Future of the Internet Economy. 
Most recently the OECD Going Digital project analysed 
the impact of the digital transformation across a range 
of policy domains including trade, taxation, energy, 
education, health, agriculture, and transportation. Going 
Digital established an integrated policy framework for 
the digital transformation, based on the seven pillars 
of access, use, innovation, labour, trust, society and 
markets. This work recognized the importance of data as 
a new resource that would affect virtually all sectors of 
the economy. 
OECD recommendations on the digital economy 
also provide important policy guidance. The OECD 
Principles on Artificial Intelligence (AI) promote AI that 
is innovative, trustworthy, and respects human rights 
and democratic values. They were adopted in May 2019 
by OECD members and are the first such principles 
signed up to by governments. Beyond OECD members, 
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Malta, Peru, 
Romania and Ukraine have also adhered to the AI 
Principles, with further adherents welcomed. In June 
2019, the G20 adopted human-centred AI Principles that 
draw from the OECD AI Principles.
1.5 The need for focusing on 
agriculture and digital 
technology in the context of 
governance
The e-Agriculture Community of Practice (CoP) was 
established in 2007 as a response to recommendations by 
the 2003 World Summit on the Information Society and its 
8 UNDG entities include FAO, IFAD, ILO, IOM, ITU, OHCHR, UNAIDS, 
UNCTAD, UNDESA, UNDP, UNECA, UNECE, UNECLAC, UNEP, 
UNESCAP, UNESCO, UNESCWA, UNICEF, UNIDO, UNFPA, 
UNHABITAT, UNHCR, UNODC, UN OHRLLS, UNOPS, UN OSAA, 
SRSG/CAC, UN Women, UNWTO, WFP, WHO and WMO.REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE8Geneva Plan of Action (Action Line C7 ICT Applications: 
e-Agriculture). FAO, the UN Agency assigned to lead the 
development and subsequent facilitation of ICT activities 
on agriculture, engaged various stakeholders at all levels 
leading to this global CoP, where people from all over the 
world exchange information, ideas, and resources related 
to the use of ICTs for sustainable agriculture and rural 
development.9 The objective of e-Agriculture is to serve 
as a catalyst for institutions and individuals in agriculture 
and rural development, to share knowledge, learn from 
others, and increase awareness about the vital role of 
ICTs in empowering rural communities, improving rural 
livelihoods, and building sustainable agriculture and food 
security. 
The e-Agriculture CoP focuses on knowledge exchange 
between UN agencies, governments, universities, 
research organizations, NGOs, farmers’ organizations, 
the private sector, and the wider community. This 
exchange is based on the collection and dissemination 
of best practices in digital agriculture, a constructive 
dialogue facilitated by a forum series, and capacity 
development through webinars and short paced learning 
courses (FAO, no date a). 
Since 2005, FAO and the e-Agriculture CoP participate 
in the WSIS Forum that provides a platform to track 
the achievements of the WSIS Geneva Plan of Action 
and related Action Lines. In 2014, on the basis of a 
report provided by FAO, the WSIS+10 High Level Event 
reviewed progress on the C7 Action Line e-Agriculture, 
underlining a number of future challenges, including ICT 
application content, capacity development, gender and 
diversity (Kolshus et al., 2015).
Within the WSIS Forum, agriculture and digital 
technology is discussed in special sessions co-organized 
by FAO, ITU and other organizations. However, the 
scope is very broad with discussions reflecting the 
collective will of the global community to use ICTs as a 
means to implement the SDGs and targets. This focus 
on agriculture will highlight the innovative use of digital 
technologies in the sector and how they can contribute to 
improving livelihoods of farmers, increase nutrition and 
food security, reduce poverty, and provide solutions to 
better adapt and mitigate the effects of climate change. 
9 The	CoP	counts	over	13 000	members	from	170	countries	and	
territories. This membership is made up by several organizations, 
and government departments, but also by individual stakeholders 
such as information and communication specialists, researchers, 
farmers, students, policy makers, business people, development 
practitioners and others. Issues related to the governance of digital technologies 
cut across many economic sectors, activities, business 
and countries, and at the same time they are important to 
agriculture. Indeed, digital technologies cut across areas in 
which policies are shaped by different institutions. Global 
collaboration is central to harnessing digital technologies 
for growth and development and multistakeholder 
platforms, such as the World Summit on the Information 
Society and the Internet Governance Forum that have 
been established to address digital governance issues 
through a structured and inclusive approach. 
For addressing the impact of digital technologies that are 
specific to agriculture, a mechanism is needed to facilitate 
dialogue between all stakeholders in the food system on 
the economic, social, environmental and ethical effects 
that digital technologies could have on the sector; on 
farms, business, consumers, the environment and the 
society as a whole. Such a multistakeholder discussion 
would create a common understanding on these impacts 
but would also result in the development of general 
principles and guidelines that can support governments to 
maximize the benefits and minimize the negative impacts 
of digital technologies on the sector. Currently, there is 
no such inclusive and multistakeholder process in which 
issues in the area of digital technology and agriculture 
are discussed and possible solutions and governance 
instruments are debated. 
This discussion should also be carried to appropriate 
digital technology governance fora where voluntary 
guidelines and norms are developed to enhance 
awareness on issues specific to agriculture and include 
related solutions regarding guidelines, standards and 
norms. For example, discussions on the impact of AI 
on agriculture and related voluntary principles that can 
ensure sustainable agricultural development through 
AI applications could be presented in ITU’s AI for Good 
Global Summit. This would ensure that agriculture is 
reflected in the discussions and the consensus on AI 
general guidelines, standards and norms. The proposed 
International Digital Council for Food and Agriculture 
could fulfil the above roles, and could significantly 
contribute to the challenges facing the agri-food system 
in line with the proposals of the UN Secretary-General’s 
High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation. REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE9
2  THE DIGITAL COUNCIL 
– PROPOSED SCOPE 
AND FUNCTION
2.1 Vision, mission and 
principles
VISION
The International Digital Council for Food and 
Agriculture aims to become a key actor to support 
governments and other stakeholders in the agri-food 
system to maximize their potential in using digitalization 
to increase production, productivity and sustainability in 
an inclusive and equitable manner and to help achieve 
the SDGs.
MISSION
The Digital Council will engage actors in the agri-
food system across sectors and competences, to 
consolidate, enhance and promote digitalization in the 
sector, leveraging on the advantages while focusing on 
closing socio-economic divides. As a multistakeholder 
mechanism, the Digital Council will drive the exchange 
of ideas and deliver to its stakeholders knowledge and 
inputs to improve livelihoods, boost the quality and 
safety of agricultural products, increase employment, 
entrepreneurial opportunities, digital literacy and 
skills, support sustainable and animal welfare-oriented 
production, facilitate trade, and mitigate the effects of 
climate change. In particular, depending on the need, 
it will work on specific topics in support of national 
governments in four different ways.
 zIdentify the potential of digitalization for making 
agriculture more efficient, sustainable and better able 
to improve rural livelihoods, but also its unintended 
economic, social, environmental and ethical negative 
impacts.
 zWork closely with existing mechanisms such as 
the e-Agriculture Community of Practice on issues 
related to farmer access to digital technologies, 
enabling stakeholders but especially smallholder farmers, women and youth, to access and benefit 
from digital technologies.
 zFacilitate dialogue between all stakeholders and 
build trust on digital technologies through discussing 
appropriate voluntary guidelines and other principles 
to maximize the benefits and minimize the negative 
impacts of digital technologies on agriculture.
 zEffectively link with existing international fora 
where digital technology issues are discussed, 
and strengthen the awareness of the international 
community on issues related to agriculture. 
PRINCIPLES
The Digital Council will respect key principles that 
were developed in compliance with the Sustainable 
Development Agenda by gathering the inputs of different 
stakeholders from within the UN system. The Digital 
Council will work in a fully inclusive and transparent 
way, embracing diversity, balancing representation from 
stakeholder groups active in the agri-food system, with 
a particular focus on rural communities, indigenous 
peoples, marginalized groups, women, youth and the 
very poor. 
It will also make digital food and agriculture solutions 
available and affordable, especially for farmers, women 
and youth in rural communities, and ensure that 
technology is used in fair and ethical ways that consider 
the rights of the most vulnerable. This means being 
impartial to geography and technological solution areas 
when setting the agenda, and prioritizing efforts that 
offer the greatest potential acceleration in the adoption 
of digital food and agriculture. Activities will build 
on broader normative and operative commitments at 
national and international levels, such as the SDGs and 
the principles for digital development. But the Digital 
Council’s operating mechanism will also have the 
autonomy to make strategic decisions free from political REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE10or donor pressure. The Digital Council will ensure that all 
acts are legally compliant, standardized and transparent, 
and ensure that staff are adequate, accountable and 
transparent.
A flexible, efficient and practical organization will achieve 
results within the shortest time and the lowest effort, 
exploiting digital technologies to the greatest extent, 
avoiding excessive physical meetings, and digitalizing 
decision-making processes. Additionally, initiatives will 
work toward solutions that have the broadest reach and 
applicability to target beneficiaries, are rooted in market 
principles and based on end-user needs, and that have 
the greatest potential for scaling out.
2.2 Roles and activities
To support governments and drive the exchange of ideas 
and experiences to harness the opportunities presented 
by digitalization, as requested by the Global Forum for 
Food and Agriculture 2019 Communiqué, the Digital 
Council will focus on two main roles. These are, first as 
a policy adviser to produce research-based guidelines, 
recommendations and best practices for governments 
regarding policy frameworks, and ensuring coordination 
and consistency of initiatives among countries. The 
second role would be as a central knowledge and 
coordination hub, to collate, validate and disseminate 
information and skills throughout the sector. The 
Digital Council will also pay special attention to avoid 
duplication of efforts with existing initiatives. It will focus on specific topics and regions and deal with individual 
mandates as circumstances require, focusing on where 
international cooperation is most urgent. In doing so, 
benefits are expected in the short term by providing 
solutions to farmers, and in the medium to long term 
by contributing to policy alignment at international and 
regional level. Depending on financial support and the 
success achieved, the Digital Council may progressively 
expand its activities.
POLICY ADVISER
The Digital Council will identify the potential of 
digital technology in agriculture and will support 
governments and international processes in developing 
guidelines, principles and regulatory frameworks that 
take digitalization into consideration. Regarding the 
technical, social and political challenges the sector is 
facing, the Digital Council will offer an agenda-setting 
mindset. It will analyse the potential impacts, risks and 
benefits of developments and make recommendations 
at international level, noting specific contexts and 
existing gaps. By providing consistent and tailored 
inputs, activities will contribute to harmonizing policies 
and common approaches to setting guidelines and 
standards. Policy advice will also cover employment, 
youth opportunities and skill development in educational 
curricula related to agri-food systems as they become 
more digital. Additionally, it could provide benchmarks 
about successful policies that promote investments in 
rural infrastructure and technologies, especially for 
smallholder farmers.
Figure 1:  Proposed roles of the Digital Council in the agri-food system
Knowledge
Digital Council
Farmer 
communities 
and 
smallholder 
farmersPrivate sector Civil societyAcademia 
and research 
institutesInternational 
organizationsOther 
stakeholdersGovernments
= Policy adviser (Role 1) = Knowledge hub (Role 2) = Coordination hub (Role 2)REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE11
KNOWLEDGE COORDINATION HUB
The Digital Council will facilitate dialogue, based 
both on multilateralism and multistakeholderism that 
involves governments and a diverse spectrum of other 
stakeholders such as civil society, academics, and the 
private sector. In doing this, the Digital Council will be 
built on existing structures such as the e-Agriculture 
Community of Practice and will further strengthen 
the linkages between international organizations that 
focus on food, agriculture, and rural development with those organizations and processes that work on digital 
technology, such as ITU and WSIS. The Digital Council 
will be mindful of its goal to close digital, geographical 
and gender divides, and to benefit those who lag 
behind due to a lack of digital infrastructure, financial 
capabilities or digital literacy. Perhaps the greatest effort 
of the Digital Council in terms of knowledge can be 
through providing access to basic digital technologies 
and solutions to rural communities.13
3 NATURE, 
COMPOSITION 
AND OPERATING 
MECHANISMS
3.1 Nature
FAO is an optimal candidate to become the supporting 
organization for the Digital Council. In fact, the 
mission and objectives of the Digital Council and FAO 
are complementary and will mutually contribute to 
their respective effectiveness. Also, compared to other 
international organizations, it is considered that FAO 
would provide the best workforce expertise with the 
required knowledge to support this project. Moreover, 
FAO has relevant infrastructures and networks (such 
as the e-Agriculture network) that could contribute to 
the activities of the Digital Council. Finally, FAO has a 
wide international reach, relying on a strong network 
of governments, international organizations and other 
partners. 
To maximize effectiveness and inclusion, the Digital 
Council will have a flexible, consensual and voluntary 
coordination mechanism supported by a United Nations 
agency, though it would not be an autonomous legal 
entity. It will operate as an open and neutral platform 
that brings together the views from different actors, with 
all decisions guided by the principle of consensus. The 
operating mechanism would provide the Digital Council 
with a framework that maximizes efficiency and avoids 
duplication, while considering its key principles, to be 
inclusive, neutral, accessible, autonomous, accretive, 
efficient, ethical and scalable. The Digital Council will 
seek alignment and knowledge sharing with other 
digitalization initiatives within the United Nations 
Innovation Network (UNIN) and agencies with a 
significant track record of digital innovations. Also, the 
operating mechanism will guarantee transparency to 
ensure the full adhesion and participation of member 
countries.The operating mechanism is designed to enhance 
collaboration among organizations and national and 
international initiatives actively working on agri-food 
issues and development, as identified through a mapping 
analysis. The Digital Council could also add value 
through involvement in ad hoc Working Groups, where 
organizations can contribute and share. In addition, 
the knowledge hub will rely on a website platform, 
such as the e-Agriculture platform coordinated by FAO, 
Figure 2:  Proposed operating mechanism of the 
Digital Council
Inter-governmental  
Representatives’ Group
Coordination Unit
Advisory CommitteeMulti-stakeholder 
Forum
Ad hoc Working GroupsREALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE14to gather information and contributions of all actors, 
enhancing their mutual knowledge and collaboration. 
This website will focus exclusively on individual topics 
covered by the agenda of the Digital Council to avoid 
duplication. The participation of non-state actors will be 
subject to the requirements laid down in the Guidelines 
on Cooperation between the United Nations and the 
Business Community, and the supporting agency’s 
policies and guidelines for collaboration with the private 
sector, academia and the civil society.
3.2 Composition and operating 
mechanisms 
All five proposed units will be staffed according to the 
rules and procedures of the respective United Nations 
agency, to ensure a fair geographical distribution of 
members, adequate qualifications, gender-balance and 
appropriate duration. 
1 . Inter-governmental Representative’s Group  – 
composed of government officials nominated by 
member governments, selection to follow three 
principles. The Group will ensure that all regions 
of the world are represented, will be based on the 
proven expertise of its members, and will be gender 
balanced. There will be 12 members/delegates plus 
one Chair and one Vice Chair: two from Africa, two 
from Asia, two from Europe, two from Latin America 
and the Caribbean, two from the Near East, and 
two from North America and the Southwest Pacific 
region (FAO, no date b). The Group will set the 
Digital Council’s priority agenda, and will have the 
responsibility to create, review, amend, and approve 
policies, budgets, and strategies. It will also assess the 
overall effectiveness and performance of the Digital 
Council, recommend improvements to the initiative, 
and maintain financial and legal accountability within 
the hosting entity’s existing frameworks.
2 . Advisory Committee  – This unit guarantees the 
involvement of international organizations and 
relevant scientific/technical entities and will help 
to avoid the duplication of efforts and strategies 
within the broader digital agri-food development 
ecosystem. Members will be nominated by the 
Inter-governmental Representative’s Group, being 
some 25 experienced stakeholders representing 
international organizations and scientific or technical 
entities divided approximately as follows: 10–12 
from international organizations, 10–12 recognized 
technical, social and political experts in digital 
food and agriculture, and 3–6 other stakeholders, 
with 1–2 each from agriculture, the private sector and civil society. Further stakeholders will be also 
involved via the online Multistakeholder Forum. 
The following international organizations will 
have permanent seats in the Advisory committee: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), World Bank Group (WBG), African 
Development Bank (AfDB), International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD), Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
World Trade Organization (WTO), International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), World Organisation 
for Animal Health (OIE), World Food Programme 
(WFP), and Technical Centre for Agricultural 
and Rural Cooperation (CTA). The Advisory 
Committee will serve as the key conduit between 
the Digital Council and the broader ecosystem, 
with an overarching objective of ensuring that 
activities are both consistent and complementary 
to existing international efforts. The Advisory 
Committee will support the Inter-governmental 
Representatives’ Group by suggesting the agenda, 
assessing the impacts of digitalization, and developing 
recommendations and guidelines. 
3 . Ad hoc Working Groups  – These will identify and 
solve technical problems on specific topics and help 
the Advisory Committee in formulating technical 
recommendations for the Inter-governmental 
Representatives’ Group. Each Working Group will 
be composed of experts on the specific focus area. 
Each Group must have representation from the 
private sector (e.g. mobile operators, digital food and 
agriculture service providers, etc.), academic and 
research institutes, and farmer associations, among 
others. The numbers involved can vary but will 
not exceed 10 members. Members of the Advisory 
Committee will also be involved in Working Groups, 
bringing skills and guidance on Digital Council topics. 
In addition to team members, each Working Group 
is expected to have a leader with relevant experience 
and significant knowledge of the United Nations, 
to avoid duplications of efforts and to leverage on 
existing activities and projects, and a co-leader with 
similar knowledge and experience from the same 
organization as the leader especially when a Working 
Group topic is very specific, or can also be from 
another organization. Specific roles will be decided by 
the Inter-governmental Representative’s Group, and 
roles of a Working Group could include the gathering 
of evidence about the problems and needs the Group 
was created for, and to design and propose a solution 
based on high-quality evidence and that is scalable to 
the greatest extent allowed by the specific situation. 
Working Group operations will be run through digital 
platforms and digital collaborative tool. Meetings REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE15
will be virtual, and members will work through a 
collaboration platform to edit documents and prepare 
reports.
4 . Online Multistakeholder Forum  – open to 
everyone based on a subscription, with at its heart, 
professionally experienced stakeholders from the 
private sector, civil society, governments, academia, 
farmer associations and other non-state actors, 
who will participate in, and contribute to, the 
activities of Digital Council. Donor organizations 
can also send observers. It will ensure inclusivity, 
effectiveness and provide a bottom-up information 
flow, and members will be involved at various levels 
to provide suggestions and advice electronically 
and remotely. Youth organizations are especially 
welcome to participate, as they can provide important 
perspectives in addressing the needs of the future 
generation of farmers and actors throughout the 
whole agri-food system. Main activities and tasks 
of the Multistakeholder Forum include submitting 
information, delivering opinions on the Advisory 
Committee’s recommendations, and responding to 
questions raised by the Advisory Committee.
5 . Coordination Unit  – This will provide day-to-
day operational and administrative support to the 
Digital Council’s activities, in addition to technical 
support. It will be entirely managed by the supporting 
UN agency under its mandate and institutional 
framework, and within its programme of work 
and budget. Accordingly, the day-to-day activities 
supporting the Digital Council will be undertaken 
in line with the supporting UN agency’s rules, 
procedures and policies. The Coordination Unit would 
be strictly technical in nature, leaving all political 
decision-making to be cleared through the Council.
The United Nations supporting agency will play a 
facilitative and coordinating role, supporting the 
implementation of activities under the umbrella of 
the Digital Council, organizing relevant meetings 
and undertaking activities to advance the mission 
and objectives of the Digital Council. It will provide a 
full time administrator for the Coordination Unit and 
managerial and executive leadership and experience 
in the field, along with personnel who would work for 
the Digital Council. The supporting agency would also 
provide training and support; office space, meeting 
rooms and a dedicated website; IT, financial, legal 
and administrative services such as procurement, 
management of financial contributions, conclusion of 
personnel arrangements, etc.; and mobilization and 
management of funds in accordance with financial 
regulations, rules and procedures. The four main work areas of the Coordination Unit 
would be coordination, operation, engagement and 
monitoring. Coordination:  to facilitate the coordination 
of the Digital Council, e.g. by facilitating meetings. 
Operation: to be responsible for the website platform and 
the implementation of policy and technical coordination 
functions, adding reliable and trustworthy data sources, 
and making the platform user friendly and accessible, 
especially to smallholder farmers. Engagement:  
to engage stakeholders using the Knowledge and 
Coordination Hub Engagement Platform, to facilitate, 
coordinate and engage with communities for better co-
creation, co-designing and knowledge sharing to make 
all Digital Council activities transparent, inclusive and 
sustainable. Monitoring:  to evaluate and monitor all 
activities, and to produce and publish projects reports.
3.3 Work flows and methods
The governance of the Digital Council will have a 
flexible and regionally balanced operating mechanism 
structure, enhancing international cooperation, avoiding 
duplication, creating synergies, and allowing swift 
decisions to keep pace with the rapid development of 
digitalization. The Digital Council will invite input from 
a large variety of stakeholders, assuring a wide inclusion 
in terms of contribution and participation in all activities, 
and member countries can propose specific themes 
to be analysed and further developed when relevant. 
Decision-making processes can also be shared between 
different Coordination Units. The Inter-governmental 
Representatives’ Group is the operating mechanism, 
but decisions will rely strongly on inputs from the 
Multistakeholder Forum and the Advisory Committee, 
with the Coordination Unit facilitating processes as 
follows. 
1 . The Inter-governmental Representatives’ Group takes 
decisions on a given topic according to the agenda 
(e.g. securing data governance for agriculture).
2 . The Coordination Unit provides the Multistakeholder 
Forum the possibility of presenting existing studies, 
empirical reports and other information on the chosen 
topic, and will publish them on the Digital Council 
website e.g., best practices on data governance, studies 
that highlight major risks for smallholder farmers 
on data property, or suggestions on best technology 
solutions for data sharing.
3 . The topic then passes to the Advisory Committee, 
who after an impact assessment, proposes 
recommendations, establishes Working Groups as 
appropriate, draws on additional information, or REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE16requests another international organization to add 
their expertise.
4 . The Advisory Committee presents the draft (e.g. of 
guidelines).
5 . The Coordination Unit organizes an online 
consultation in the Multistakeholder Forum, and 
analyses the outcome.
6 . The Advisory Committee prepares a final draft, 
incorporating views from the Multistakeholder 
Forum.
7 . The final draft is submitted to the Inter-governmental 
Representatives’ Group for adoption, which makes 
amendments as required, and formally adopts a final 
version.
8 . The Coordination Unit shares the final version on the 
website and via other digital tools.
Meetings, information exchange and discussions will be 
conducted digitally as much as possible, adopting more 
advanced practices such as online collaboration over 
time. This will include virtual and physical meetings  
and collaborative platforms  to exchange experiences 
and collaborative on project related issues, with a key 
element being the Multistakeholder Forum, an online 
platform to crowdsource contributions and knowledge 
from a broad participation of users. In addition, the Digital Council website will be based on strong user 
experience and usability to assure inclusiveness for all. 
The Digital Council will post all publications online, and 
its annual reports will summarize the strategic objectives 
and activities undertaken to achieve them. 
3.4 Funding strategy
The financial arrangements supporting the operations 
of the Digital Council still need to be developed. As far 
as the costs of a proposed FAO Coordination Unit are 
concerned, it is hereby suggested that FAO would cover 
such costs based on available resources, with additional 
costs to rely on voluntary contributions. Following 
adoption of the concept note, a more comprehensive 
funding strategy will be agreed, and that may include a 
multidonor trust fund or other mechanisms. All funds 
will be administered in accordance with FAO’s financial 
regulations, rules and procedures.
3.5 Monitoring and evaluation
The Digital Council will be subject to the scrutiny of 
established internal and external oversight bodies of 
the supporting organization. A thorough monitoring 
mechanism will be put in place and lessons-learned 
exercises will be regularly undertaken. The Council’s 
operations, effectiveness, and results will be evaluated 
five years after its official launch.REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE17
REFERENCES  
Brennen,  S. & Kreiss, D. 2014 (8 September). 
Digitalization and Digitization. In: Culture Digitally  
[online]. Brea, California [Cited 10 January 2020]. 
http://culturedigitally.org/2014/09/digitalization-and-
digitization . 
CFS. No date. Responsible Investment in Agriculture 
and Food Systems. In: CFS: Committee on World Food 
Security  [online]. Rome, FAO [Cited 10 January 2020]. 
http://www.fao.org/cfs/home/activities/rai . 
CISA. 2018 (3 October). Cybersecurity Threats 
to Precision Agriculture. In: Department of 
Homeland Security: CISA  [online]. Washington, DC 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.us-cert.gov/
ncas/current-activity/2018/10/03/Cybersecurity-
Threats-Precision-Agriculture .
Council Working Group on the WSIS. 2016. [5] WG-
WSIS-30-05 - WSIS Action lines and SDGs (WSIS- 
SDGs Matrix) - Linking WSIS Action Lines with 
Sustainable Development Goals. In: ITU [online]. 
Geneva [Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.itu.int/
md/S17-WSIS30-C-0005/en . 
FAO. No date a. E-agriculture. In: FAO: Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  [online]. 
Rome [Cited 10 January 2020]. http://www.fao.org/e-
agriculture . 
FAO. No date b. Title. In: FAO: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations  [online]. Rome 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. http://www.fao.org/unfao/
govbodies/gsbhome/council/council-election . 
FAO. 2014. The State of Food and Agriculture: Innovation in 
family farming . Rome. 139 pp. (also available at http://
www.fao.org/3/a-i4040e.pdf ).
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP & WHO. 2019. The 
State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 
2019. Safeguarding against economic slowdowns and 
downturns . Rome, FAO. 214 pp. (also available at 
http://www.fao.org/3/ca5162en/ca5162en.pdf ). 
Gandhi, P., Khanna, S. & Ramaswamy, S. 2016 
(1 April). Which Industries Are the Most Digital 
(and Why)?. Harvard Business Review  [online]. 
[Cited  10 January 2020]. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0004570 . 
GFFA. 2019. Global Forum for Food and Agriculture: 
Communiqué 2019: “Agriculture Goes Digital – 
Smart Solutions for Future Farming”, In: Global 
Forum for Food and Agriculture  [online]. Berlin [Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.gffa-berlin.
de/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/GFFA-2019-
Communique.pdf .
IGF. No date. About the IGF. In: IGF Internet Governance 
Forum  [online]. Geneva [Cited 10 January 2020]. 
https://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/tags/
about .
Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition 
and IGF.  2014  (August). The Charter of Human 
Rights and Principles for the Internet . Fourth edition. 
Geneva, UN Internet Governance Forum. 33 pp. 
(also available at https://www.ohchr.org/
Documents/Issues/Opinion/Communications/
InternetPrinciplesAndRightsCoalition.pdf ). 
ITU.  No date a. Study Group 20 at a glance. In: ITU 
[online]. Geneva [Cited 10 January 2020].  https://
www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/about/groups/Pages/sg20.aspx . 
ITU. No date b. Previous GSRs and Best 
Practice Guidelines. In: ITU [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Regulatory-Market/Pages/bestpractices.aspx . 
ITU. 2014. GSR14: Best practice guidelines on consumer 
protection in a digital world. In: ITU [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020].  https://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Conferences/GSR/Documents/GSR2014/
BestPractices/GSR14_BPG_en.pdf . 
ITU. 2017. Buenos Aires Declaration. In: ITU [online]. 
Geneva [Cited 10 January 2020].  https://www.itu.int/
md/D14-WTDC17-C-0117/en . 
ITU. 2019. Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR) 
2019 Best Practice Guidelines: “Fast forward digital 
connectivity for all”. In: ITU [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Conferences/GSR/2019/Documents/GSR19_
BPG_V2_E.pdf . 
ITU.  2020. AI for Good Global Summit  [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. https://aiforgood.itu.int . 
Kolshus, K., Pastore, A., Treinen, S. & Van der 
Elstraeten , A. 2015. E-agriculture 10 year Review 
Report: Implementation of the World Summit on 
the Information Society (WSIS) action line C7: ICT 
Applications: e-agriculture . Rome, FAO.  67 pp. (also 
available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4605e.pdf ). 
Matt, C., Hess, T. & Benlian, A. 2015. Digital 
Transformation Strategies. Business & Information 
Systems Engineering , 57(5):  339–343.REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTE18OECD. 2018. Going Digital in a Multilateral World . Report 
of the Meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial 
Level, Paris, 30–31 May 2018. Paris, OECD Paris. 
102 pp. (also available at https://www.oecd.org/going-
digital/C-MIN-2018-6-EN.pdf ). 
Roberts,  T. & Hernandez, K. 2019. Digital Access 
is not Binary: The 5’A ’s of technology access in 
the Philippines. Electronic Journal of Information 
Systems in Developing Countries , 85: e12084 [online] . 
[Cited  10 January 2020]. https://doi.org/10.1002/
isd2.12084 . 
Schwab,  K. 2016. The Fourth Industrial Revolution . 
Geneva, World Economic Forum.
Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on 
Digital Cooperation . 2019 (June). The Age 
of Digital Interdependence : Report of the UN 
Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital 
Cooperation [online]. New York, United Nations. 
[Cited  10 January 2020]. https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/
DigitalCooperation-report-for%20web.pdf . 
Townsend, R., Lampietti, J., Treguer, D.,  
Schroeder, K., Haile, M., Juergenliemk, A., 
Hasiner, E., et al . 2019 (April). Future of Food: 
Harnessing digital technologies to improve food system 
outcomes . Washington, DC, World Bank Group. 40 pp. 
(also available at https://tinyurl.com/y647qqf5 ). 
Tsan, M., Totapally, S., Hailu, M. & Addom, B.K. 2019. 
The Digitalisation of African Agriculture Report 2018–
2019 . Wageningen, Netherlands, CTA.  238 pp. (also 
available at https://tinyurl.com/u68w8n3 ). 
UNCTAD. 2017. Information Economy Report 2017: 
Digitalization, Trade and Development . Report 
UNCTAD/IER/2017/Corr. Geneva, United Nations. 
111 pp. (also available at https://unctad.org/en/
PublicationsLibrary/ier2017_en.pdf ). 
UNCTAD, FAO, IFAD & World Bank. No date. 
The Principles for Responsible Agricultural 
Investment (PRAI). In: United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development  [online]. Geneva. 
[Cited 10 January 2020].  https://unctad.org/en/Pages/
DIAE/G-20/PRAI.aspx . 
UNESCO. 2019. Steering AI and Advanced ICTs for 
Knowledge Societies  [online]. Document number  CI/
FEM/2019/PI/1. Paris. [Cited 10 January 2020]. https://
en.unesco.org/system/files/unesco-steering_ai_for_
knowledge_societies.pdf .
UN General Assembly. 2016 (1 February). Resolution 
adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 
2015 : [without reference to a Main Committee 
(A/70/L.33)] 70/125: Outcome document of the high-
level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall 
review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society. New 
York, United Nations. 14 pp. (also available at https://
www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/70/125 ). 
UN GWG for Big Data. 2020. BigData UN Global 
Working Group. In UN Statistics Division  [online]. 
New York. [Cited  10 January 2020]. https://unstats.
un.org/bigdata . 
Wiseman, L., Sanderson, J., Zhang, A. & Jakku, E. 2019. 
Farmers and their data: An examination of farmers’ 
reluctance to share their data through the lens of the 
laws impacting smart farming . NJAS - Wageningen 
Journal of Life Sciences , 90–91(2019): 100301 [online]. 
[Cited  10 January 2020]. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
njas.2019.04.007 . 
Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C. & Bogaart,  M-J. 2017. 
Big Data in Smart farming – A Review. Agricultural 
Systems , 153: 69–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agsy.2017.01.023 .
World Bank Group. 2019a. Future of Food: Harnessing 
digital technologies to improve food system outcomes . 
Washington, DC. 40 pp. (also available at https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/31565 ). 
World Bank Group. 2019b.  Digital Development 
Partnership Annual Review 2018: Moving the needle – 
digital technologies becoming a driver for development . 
Washington, DC. 52 pp. (also available at http://
pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/225781554301401135/
DDP-Annual-Review-2018-Final-Web.pdf ). 
World  Data  Lab. 2019 (May). World Poverty Clock  
[online]. Vienna [Cited 10 January 2020]. https://
worldpoverty.io .
WSIS. 2003a (12 December). Declaration of Principles: 
Building the information society: A global challenge 
in the new Millennium. Document  WSIS-03/
GENEVA/DOC/4-E. In: ITU [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020]. https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/
docs/geneva/official/dop.html . 
WSIS.  2003b (12 December). Plan of Action. 
Document  WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/5-E. In: ITU 
[online]. Geneva [Cited 10 January 2020].  https://
www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/geneva/official/poa.html . 
WSIS.  2005 (18 November). Tunis Agenda for the 
Information Society. Document  WSIS-05/
TUNIS/DOC/6(Rev.1)-E. In: ITU [online]. Geneva 
[Cited 10 January 2020].  https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/
docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.pdf . 
WSIS. 2014 (June). WSIS+10 High-Level Event (09-13 June 
2014, Geneva): WSIS+10 statement on implementation 
of WSIS outcomes and the WSIS+10 vision for WSIS 
beyond 2015 . Geneva, ITU.  48 pp. (also available at 
https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/documents/HLE.html ). REALIZING THE POTENTIAL OF DIGITALIZATION TO IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM 
A CONCEPT NOTEwww.fao.org/e-agriculture/
Contact
Information Technology Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
CIO-Director@fao.org  / digital-innovation@fao.org
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00153 Rome, Italy
www.fao.org CA7485EN/1/01.20