 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 76  
 
Spatial|Data Justice : 
Mapping and Digitised 
Strolling against Moral Police 
in Iran  
 
AZADEH AKBARI  
 
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  and Canada’s 
International Developme nt Research Centre  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
   
 Table of Contents  
 
Abstract  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ..........................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ...........................  3 
B1. Data Justice  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 3 
B2. Spatial|Data Justice  ................................ ................................ .........................  4 
B3. Compulsory Hijab and Surveillance of Women  ................................ ...............  6 
B4. Against Spatial|Data Injustice  ................................ ................................ .........  8 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ .............................  10 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ..............................  11 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ . 13 
E1. Recommendations  for Future Research  ................................ ........................  14 
 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  16 
Acknowledgements  ................................ ................................ ..............................  19 
About the Author  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 19 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
1 
 Spatial|Data Justice : 
Mapping and Digitised Strolling against 
Moral Police in Iran  
 
Azadeh Akbari  
Heidelberg University  
 
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Through a case study of women’s resistance against the moral police in Iran, this paper 
contends  that claims to data justice cannot be investigated unless they are situated in 
broader political frames. Whilst the current literature uses a single axis analysis of data 
justice as well as conceptual tools that are appropriated for democratic power relations, this 
research positions data justice in a matrix of injustices in an un equal  and un democrati c 
political apparatus.  
 
The paper scrutinises the intersection of data and spatial injustice in Iran by analysing the 
way traffic camera  footage is used against female drivers with improper veiling. Considering 
compulsory hijab and policing of it as a spat ial injustice that limits and disturbs women’s 
access to public places, the case study examines ways of resistance that address 
spatial|data injustice : firstly, a mobile phone application called Gershad that uses collective 
mapping to pin moral police patr ols on maps by users;  secondly, a social media campaign 
called White Wednesdays that encourages women to film and share their public strolls 
without hijab, their confrontations with religious pro -regime people, and videos of singing, 
dancin g and cycling in  public spaces.  
 
Using Fraser’s theory of “abnormal justice”, this research draws attention to particularities 
of each case of data justice ; taking into account the intersections of socio -political axes of 
injustice in different layers of local, regional a nd global analysis. The paper offers a 
“situated” analytical framework  by bringing in space as an inquisitive component and moves 
from a sole discussion of data justice to a more intersectional study of spatial and data 
justice combined. Participation in “small data ” projects is introduced as one resistance 
strategy against injustices of big data systems, fulfilling the principle of “parity of 
participation ” to achieve justice , especially in u ndemocratic political contexts.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
This paper is written as part of a collection of case studies on urban data, inequality and 
justice in the global South. On its journey to apply a lens of data justice to urban data, this 
case study has taken a step back to engage itself critically with a broader questi on, ‘can any 
claim to data justice be studied without addressing its intersection with other forms of 
injustice?’ In doing so, this case study has immediately exposed itself to immense political 
questions and therefore conceptualises a framework for data  justice ( section B.1) based on 
Fraser’s theory of abnormal justice (Fraser 2008) . According to this theory, the first criteria 
for achieving justice, namely distribution, recognition, and representation cannot be 
discussed when a group of people are deprived from participation in “authorized contests 
over justice” (Fraser 2008, 408) . Hence, this research puts t he question of  data  justice firstly, 
inside a political agenda and secondly, in intersection with other forms of injustice.  
 
As a case study of such formulation of data justice this paper a nalyses the way traffic 
camera  footage is used in Iran to criminali se women w ho drive without proper hijab. T his 
paper posits compulsory hijab as a form of spatial injustice (Soja 2010)  as it affects women’s 
freedom o f movement, their feeling of security and meaningful participation in social life. 
Spatial|Data Justice is then introduced as a way to examine the intersection of these two 
forms of justice (section B.2) providing a short introduction to the history, chall enges and 
contestations over the issue of hijab in Iran. The essay then proceeds to a more detailed 
discussion of surveillance of women and its interrelations to issues of spatial|data justice 
(section B.3) and aims to contribute to the shortcoming of surv eillance studies’ literature by 
addressing surveillance of women as a large group of population. Section B.4 introduces two 
case studies of resistan ce against spatial|data justice:  firstly, a mobile phone application 
called Gershad that uses collective map ping to pin moral police patrols on maps by users ; 
secondly, a social media campaign called White Wednesdays that encourages women to 
film and share their public strolls without hijab, their confrontations with religious pro -
regime people, and videos of si nging, dancing and cycling in public spaces.  
 
Using thematic analysis m ethod s (section C), some of the recurring themes in  Gershad’s 
twitter account and also videos posted on the White Wednesdays’ campaign’s Instagram 
account are explored. The findings of this analysis (section D ) demonstrate strong 
connections between hijab activism, spatial justice and wider political agend as. Here, these 
two small data projects are portrayed as a possible way to tackle the injustices in larger data 
sets. Finally, the paper recommends integration of other forms of injustice as an axis of 
analysis in studying data justice (section E). Taking a political and critical approach to data 
justice, this case study aims to draw attention to the inadequacy  of any discussion on data 
justice without its situatedness  in a broader political framework, and recommends a 
scrutiny of data justice in an interse ctional matrix of injustice s with different layers of local, 
regional and global analysis . 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
3 
 B. Background  
 
B1. Data Justice  
With the unbelievable speed of developments in the field of data technologies and their 
significant impact on the transformation o f our lives, debating data justice is timely if not 
late. Several studies have focused on ways that could make data ethically just, such as 
making machine learning fairer by mitigating discrimination without collecting sensitive data 
(Veale and Binns 2017) , preventing biases in educational data mining (Ben Shahar 2017)  or, 
excavating representations of minorities and outliers in big data (Welles 2014) . Although a 
significant effort, other academic enquiries  take a more holistic approach and situate data in 
already -existing discourses of  justice. Heeks and Renken (2018 ) divide approaches to data 
justice into three categories of ‘instrumental data justice’ to ensure fair use of data, 
‘procedural data justice’ to ensure fair handling of data, and ‘distributive rights -based 
justice’ to ensure rights of privacy, access, ownership and representation. Although these 
approaches clarify incidents of injustice in data systems, they do “not encompass the social 
structur es which at least partly determine data uses, processes, distributions, and rights” 
(Heeks and Renken 2018 , 96). 
 
The authors then define structural data justice as “the degree to which society contains and 
supports the data -related institutions, relations and knowledge systems necessary for 
realisation of the values comprised in a good life” (Heeks and Renken 2018, 96 ). Albeit they 
immediately recognise the importance of defining what a good life means, the discussion 
around it stops at the recogn ition of the problem. Similarly, existing data justice discourses 
emphasise more on the individual level of justice. For example , an ecosystemic approach 
based on Sen’s capabilities theory defines data justice based on three pillars of visibility, 
digital (dis)engagement and countering data -driven discrimination (Taylor 2017)  and hence 
provides universal answers to a particular question. Taylor develops her model by asking, 
“What are good governance principles for the use of big data in a democratic cont ext, and 
who should be responsible for determining them?”  (Taylor 2017, 10) ; a question that brings 
about a completely different set of answers if asked in an undemocratic context. This paper 
then aims to elaborate on the political aspects of data justice by situating itself in the 
context of critical data studies (Dalton and Thatcher 2015)  and by shedding “light on 
political struggles and social processes that prece de artefacts… [r]evealing the political and 
social interests embedded in technology”  (Silva 2007, 175) . 
 
In such critical approach es to data justice, surveillance is understood as a n “active social 
process”  (Jiwani 2015)  that upholds social structures. Such disciplinary roles could also be 
assigned to data systems. Johnson argu es that databases have a normalising function and 
theorises “data systems as disciplinary surveillance” (Johnson 2014, 268) . He shows for 
example how educational databases of students’ performance are used to cut 
underperforming progr ams and affect educational choices of students or the financial funds 
available to them. Although his observations are made in a democratic context to achieve 
‘information justice’ through open data (Johnson 2014) , his observations can be well used in 
undem ocratic environments. Other researcher s have highlighted the relation between data -
driven governance and broader social justice agendas (Dencik, Hintz, and Cable 2016, 1)  but 
their work covers mainly activists resisting government surveillance at user level and does Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
4 
 not include surveillance on large groups of people. Regardless, the aforementioned research 
recognises the urgency to “examine the ideological basis of data -driven processes, situating 
this form of governance within a political agenda  […] scrutinis[ing] the interests  and power 
relations  at play in ‘datafied’ societies that enfranchise some and disenfranchise others”  
(Dencik, Hintz, and Cable 2016, 9) . 
 
In order to include the above -mentioned political aspect in conceptualising data justice, this 
study uses the concept of ‘abnormal justice’ (Fraser 2008) . The theory of abnormal justice  
argues that the ‘what’, the ‘who’, and the ‘how’ of justice remain disputed in our time. 
Consequently, there is no shared understanding of “what justice claimants c an look like 
(individuals or groups, fellow citizens or all human beings), the substantive focus of justice 
claims (economic redistribution only, or other ontologically different forms of redress), 
which social divides possess injustice (e.g., nationality,  ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality), 
and the agencies and scales of arbitration and redress (state or non -state actors, territorial 
or supraterritorial bodies)” (Cinnamon 2017, 612 -3). In order to achieve justice under such 
circumstanc es, Fraser defines “the normative principle of parity of participation. According 
to this principle, justice requires social arrangements that permit all to participate as peers 
in social life”  (Fraser 2008, 405) . She then identifies three main obstacles of justice in an 
“ordinary -political” way (Fraser 2008, 407 ), as distribution, recognition, and representation. 
These obstacles were also addressed in one way or the other in the studies on data justice 
mentioned above. The  outstanding difference i s, however, Fraser’s reflection on the milieus 
that make justice realisable, acknowledging the fact that, “in order to apply the principle of 
participatory parity to first -order questions of distribution, recognition, and representation, 
one must be able t o jump to the next level, where the frame itself is in dispute”  (Fraser 
2008, 407) . Fraser introduces then a new level of “metapolitical injustice” comprehending 
“injustices of misframing. Such injustices occur when a polity’s boundaries are drawn in such 
a way as to wrongly deny some people the chance to participate at all in its authorized 
contests over justice”  (Fraser 2008, 408) . 
 
B2. Spatial|Data Justice  
In addition to integration of political dimensions to any discussion of justice, this paper 
argues that data justice cannot be fully comprehended unless in an intersection with othe r 
forms of injustice. Data justice has been discussed in conjunction with other social agendas, 
such as development (Heeks and Renken 2018 ), economic just ice (Newman 2015) , legality 
of surveillance (Cinnamon 2017) , etc.  In a more metapolitical level,  following Fraser’s 
formulation of justice, this case study takes an intersectional approach (Cho, Crenshaw, and 
McCall 2013)  to data justice in conjunction with spatial justice. This claim is based on 
understandi ng two basic principles: that “the political organization of space is a particularly 
powerful source of spatial injustice”  (Soja 2009, 3) , and that “a focus on data justice is […] 
not only on the justness of data practices [but also on] the biases and inequalities baked 
directly into data”  (Cinnamon 2017, 622) . It is needless to say, that the same set of data 
could have been studied through the lens of, for exampl e, class discrimination against poor 
cyclists that act as messengers and food deliveries in metropolitan Tehran and their income 
is extremely depend ent on breaking traffic rules. In the current case study, the spatial 
aspect is only one axis of the matrix of injustices that shape the debated data injustice.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
5 
 In his book Seeking Spatial Justice , Edward Soja (2010) offers a detailed chronological study 
of the concept of spatial justice in works of different geographers, but majorly focuses on 
the ‘right to th e city’ in works of French philosopher Henri Lefebvre (Lefebvre 1968)  and 
Marxist geographer David Harvey (Harvey 2003) . Lefebvre’s transformative formulation of 
space as reflective ‘and’ constructive of social relations, changed the way ‘space’ was 
understood, and scrutinised the social organisation of space in capitalist times (Lefebvre 
1991) . The formerly mentioned authors all emphasise the “socio -spatial dialectic [meaning 
that] the spatial shapes the social as much as the s ocial shapes the spatial”  (Soja 2009, 2). In 
order to shed some light on the concept of ‘spatial justice ' in a more concrete and action -
oriented approach, this paper follows the propositions of the Journal of Spatial Justice , a 
pioneer in publishing in the  field: 
“I. There are two cardinal forms of spatial injustice:  
A. The involuntary confinement of any group to a limited space – segregation, 
ghettoization – the unfreedom argument.  
B. The allocation of resources unequally over space – the unfair resources argument.  
II. Spatial injustice is derivative of broader social injustice – the derivative argument.  
III. Social injustices always have a spatial aspect, and social injustices cannot be addressed 
without also addressing their spatial aspect – the spatial r emedies argument.  
IV. Spatial remedies are necessary but not sufficient to remedy spatial injustices – let alone 
social injustice – the partial remedy argument.  
V. The role of spatial injustice relative to social injustice is dependent on changing social, 
political, and economic conditions, and today there are trends that tend both to decrease 
and to increase the importance of the spatial – the historical embeddedness argument”  
(Marcuse 2009, 3) . 
 
According to the above -mentioned formulation of 
spatial justice, this paper frames compulsory hijab 
as an issue of spatial injustice, which deprives 
women, fully or partially, from accessing public 
spaces  (Justice for Iran 2014) , limits their freedom 
of movement, affects their feeling of security and 
well-being in public (Gould 2014)  and gravely 
restricts their participation in different aspects of 
social life. On 22 June 1980, just a year after the 
victory of Iranian revolution, w omen were banned 
from entering  governmental and public service 
buildings without hijab (covering of their hair and 
body) (Shojaie 2014) . Women’s demonstrations 
against compulsory hijab did not receive any 
support from their former comr ades (Sedghi 2007)  
and their voices got lost in the revolutionary haze 
of the days. With the invasion of Ira q in September 
1980 and beginning of an 8 -year gruelling war, the 
issue of hijab seemed even more irrelevant. Finally 
in 1983 and with the ratification of  the Islamic 
Punitive Law in the Iranian Parliament, not having 
proper hijab in all public places was considered an 
Figure  1. “im properly veiled women 
cannot enter” a warning that should be 
visibly hung at the entrance of any space 
with public access. Photo from Mohyeddin 
(2005) . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
6 
 offence punishable with 74 lashes (Justice for Iran 2014, 12) . The punishment was later 
changed i n 1997 to 10 -60 days of imprisonment or a fine (ibid, 14).  
 
From the violent suppression of women’s largest rally against compulsory hijab on 8 March 
1979 to the legal and social establishment of controlling women’s clothing in the years 
afterwards, street  patrols of “revolutionary committees” played an important role in 
harassing women who were deemed not properly covered (Kar 2017) . By the ratification of 
the new Islamic Punitive Law and disbanding of committees in 1993 (Justice for Iran 2014, 
13), police forces were then legally required to arrest women who disobeyed the 
compulsory hijab law. This commenced police surveillance of women in all public spaces  of 
Iran until today. In addition to patrolling public spaces such as parks, streets and public 
transportation, every university, hospital, government office, public service bureau, 
shopping mall and similar is staffed to control women’s clothing (see Figure 1).  In 2005, 
special police forces called “Guidance Patrol” [Gasht -e-Ershad] were installed to observe 
compliance with compulsory hijab code (Erdbrink 2014) . The Guidance Patrols  aim mainly to 
bar improperly veiled women from entering public spaces and increase the risk of defiance. 
For example, in Tehran1, arrested women are transferred to the Bureau against Social 
Corruption, part of the Police Forces for Social Security. There,  their photos are taken and 
their personal information is archived. Arrested women should fill up forms about their 
psychological well -being and then wait for family members to bring them proper clothes. 
Before leaving the police station, they have to dest roy their ‘bad’ clothes with scissors. If a 
woman resists at any stage of the process or repeats the ‘crime’ frequently, a legal case will 
be made and she would be sent to the courts of law.  
 
B3. Compulsory Hijab and Surveillance of Women  
Taking the politi cal aspect of spatial|data justice into account unfolds another important 
interrelation. After the controversial presidential elections in 2009 and the subsequent 
uprising, CCTV cameras became compulsory in cafes, universities and even kindergartens. 
Traff ic control cameras mushroomed in big cities and although it was publicly announced 
that police and security forces could only have access to footage of these cameras upon 
judicial request, it was revealed in 2015 that the entire country’s urban CCTV camera s 
transmit their footage to the headquarters of Special Police Forces, who are mandated to 
deal with insurgency (Voice of America Persian Service 2015) . Using data gathered through 
traffic cameras for other purposes soon proved useful in controlling women’s hijab.  
 
In continuation with strict control of women’s clothing in public spaces, as of June 2017, 
women who do not properly cover their hair whil e driving are legally prosecuted and their 
cars are impounded (Mizan News Agency 2017) . In December 2017 twitter users reported 
that ‘improper hijab’ wa s being captured on traffic cameras ( see Figure 2). Just a day after 
the reports, the head of traffic polic e denied the rumours (Tasnim News 2017) . Amid such 
denials, improper hijab fines and impounding of cars is so customary that legal consultation 
websites publish step by step guides for women who receive text messages with a code 
14/15 as a warning  for improper hijab in a vehicle (Bidbarg Legal Consultancy 2018) . It is not 
clear if the ‘crime’ is spotted by a guidance patrol or a CCTV/traffic camera. As mentioned 
                                                      
1 There are many documented  accounts o f women who have been arrested by the Guidance Patrols, see for 
example, (Pardis 2011)  (M 2015)  (Bidarzani website 2015) . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
7 
 before, the government actively 
uses the footage of t raffic cameras 
in tackling political dissent. It is 
therefore not unexpected that 
similar methods would be used 
against women. By doing so, the 
traffic data is not solely gathered to 
facilitate road safety and traffic 
control but also it gathers, classifie s 
and uses data for other purposes, 
such as surveillance, sorting, 
disciplining and punishing women.  
 
Surveillance of specific groups inside 
a bigger population has been long a 
subject of study in the field of 
surveillance studies. Surveillance 
has even been considered “as a 
means of social sorting”  (Lyon 2003, 
8). This sorting function ha s been 
studied in a variety of areas such as 
database marketing targeting 
specific cate gories of consumers 
(Gandy 1993) , colonialism (Sa’di 
2012), race (Browne 2015) , using 
heteronormative paradigms for 
justification of the ‘ war on terror ’ 
(Puar 2007) , etc. However, this 
paper focuses on sorting practices that not only reflect the already existing discriminatory 
power relations but also consolidate them through surv eillance. The overlapping of two 
fields of gender studies and surveillance studies had not received much attention until 
recently.  In 2009, some of the main  researchers in the field of surveillance studies stated 
firmly that, “surveillance studies needs ge nder and sexuality”  (Ball et al. 2009) . Such need 
has resulted in more thorough examination of surveillance apparatuses through the lens of 
gender and race (Van der Meulen and Heynen 2016)  (Dubrofsky and Magnet 2015)  but the 
research remain s overwhelmingly in the global N orth.  
 
The current literature on the subject could be rough ly divided to three categories:  
a) Surveillance that specifically targets women, for example voyeuristically through CCTV 
cameras in public urban spaces (Koskela 2002) , monitoring the appeal of cocktail 
wait resses in casinos (Bayard de Volo 2003) , controlling strip pers not to get any 
unreported tips (Egan 2004) , limiting women’s activity in outdoor recreational parks 
(Wesely and Gaardner 2004) , etc.  
b) Surveillance that is built on other unequal power relations, for example surveillance of 
African American young women and their fear of sexual harassment by police officers 
(Brunson and Miller 2006) , violence ag ainst women and the contradictory role of 
surveillance in prevention of violence and control by case workers (Campbell 2000)  
Figure 2. The Tweet reads, “This is not a milk or bread queue. 
All these people are at Moral Security Police station because 
the driver of their car has had improper hijab. Recently  
improper hi jab is being captured on CCTV cameras on the 
roads” (Azarpey 2017) . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
8 
 (Gordon 2000)  (Mason and Magnet 2012)  or how shel ters f or victims of domestic 
violence  tailor their services in a way that excludes some racial categories or 
undocumented immigrants (Smith 2015) , surveillan ce of non -gender -normative bodies 
(Conrad 2009)  (Beauchamp 2009)  or exclusion of transgender people from state -issued 
birth certificates (Moore and Currah 2015) . 
c) Surveillance as a gendered practice, for example how surveillance systems “operate on 
ideals of masculine control at a distance and as a result enforce a masculinization of 
space and practice”  (Monahan 2009, 299) , or how surveillance expands the male gaze 
(Van der Meulen and Heynen 2016) . 
 
In continuation to the above -mentioned studies, this paper examines not only the 
surveillance of female drivers by a strictly controlling and oppressive male gaze, but also 
investigates the “masculinisation of sp ace” (Koskela 2002)  through surveillance. The afore -
mentioned concept was coined to explain that the installation  of CCTV cameras, not only 
does not prevent harassment of women, but also contributes to masculinisation of space, 
since most of the camera room operators are men. Taking this concept to a context that 
women’s public presence is severely controlled through law, police forces and, surveillance, 
gives it new meanings and effects.  
 
Consequently, here , surveillance is unders tood as a n infraction  of “social justice”, that sorts 
“people into categories, assigning worth or risk, in ways that have real effects on their life -
chances (Lyon 2003, 1) . Therefore, this paper studies compulsory hijab not only as 
surveillance of women but also as a way of producing public space that is not tolerant 
towards specific female bodies. It must be noted here that  compulsory hijab is only one of a 
number of  legal freedoms that Iranian women lost after the revolution. The Iranian 
progressive family law was one of the first laws that were abolished after the 1979 
revolution, leaving married women with no rights to educ ation, work, and travel. Other 
patriarchal laws prohibited women to work in occupations that were deemed masculine 
such as being a judge, pilot, president, etc. As clearly reflected in the definition of spatial 
justice, ‘justice’ in such situation s cannot be achieved with just spatial remedies. Social 
justice and consequently spatial justice require a strong political will for change.  
 
B4. Against Spatial|Data Injustice  
As mentioned earlier in this paper, resistance against compulsory hijab dates back to th e 
first months after the 1979 revolution in Iran. Although the resistance initially had a legal, 
political and rights -based approach, after the violent suppression of demonstrations and 
arresting, torture and execution of political activists, resistance ag ainst compulsory hijab 
was transformed to ongoing everyday acts of resistance, which focused on intentional 
improper veiling, e.g. putting on makeup, leaving hair out, wearing short or tight clothing, 
etc. These everyday strategies have been the subject of  numerous studies and popular 
journalism (for academic examples see (Sedghi 2007) , (Bayat 2010)  and (Sadeghi 2010) ). 
Following a global trend, urban governance in Iran is on the path to digitalisation and many 
government services are now delivered through electronic systems. These governmental 
systems work based on large databases that gather, classify, summon and archive data. The 
data gathered through traffic cameras refl ects the already existing spatial injustice against 
women and as a result, in addition to the old resistance strategies, there are new trends of 
resistance that take a data approach.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
9 
  
Small data has been contemplated as a 
tool of justice that would go beyo nd the 
usage of data by others and would 
concentrate on how individuals, groups 
or communities use data for themselves 
“in order to live the life they value”  
(Heeks and Renken 2018, 95 ). In a 
structural view, small data is theorised 
through data intermediary organisations, 
“as channels through which citizens can 
influence the balance  of 
representation/privacy and the nature of 
data ownership and access  … important 
determinants of the constitution and 
distributive benefits of information value 
chains”  (Heeks and Shekhar 2019, 1008 ). 
In a more networked view and with a 
political understanding of data systems, 
small data initiatives by groups of 
people , who are  themselves aff ected by 
data injustices are rather considered as 
active resistance . This case study 
examines two different small data 
projects that aim  to tackle the issue of 
Spatial|Data injustice.  
 
Although surveillance of such a large 
group of people seems practically  impossible, in 2013 three million women received 
“injunctions” through police patrols in Tehran for their improper hijab (Gershad n/a)  . In 
2017, 207,000 women undertook written promises to correct their behaviour, while 18,000 
women were sent to court (ibid.). In response, an anonymous group of activists created 
“Gershad2”, a collective mapping application that allowed users to pin mora l police patrols 
on the map ( see Figure 3). The application soon attracted younger tech savvy women and 
men that helped each other avoid prosecution and aggre ssive police behaviour.  
 
Another recent development is the White Wednesdays’ campaign that encoura ges women 
to walk in public spaces without headscarves, film the walk and possible confrontations, and 
post it on social media  (https://www.instagram.com/masih.alinejad ). The videos have 
caused heate d national debates and the number of anonymous participants is growing by 
the day. The White Wednesdays’ campaign stands not only as a claim to physical space but 
also occupies digital space by publishing its own narrative of how space should be organised 
justly. The videos also act as returning the gaze of surveillance and its normalising effect on 
women that have been systemically controlled, surveilled and criminalised. In doing so, 
although they do not gather data as systematically as a mapping applicat ion such as 
                                                      
2 Literally means going around moral police patrols  
Figure . 3: Screenshot of Gershad’s map of Tehran 
(Spiegel Online 2016)  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
10 
 Gershad, they protest the unjust collection of women’s data by using the same tool as the 
authorities: their cameras. Though the identification of police officials or documentation of 
the aggressive behaviour of pro -regime passer s-by is not col lected in a data system per se, 
the White Wednesdays’ campaign succeeds in highlighting the disciplinary power of 
surveillance and the intersection of spatial and data justices.  
 
C. Methods  
 
In order to shed light on the concepts introduced in this paper, and the interrelation 
between them, the case study uses thematic analysis of Gershad’s twitter account, and 
videos posted on the White Wednesdays’ campaign’s Instagram account. The tweets from 
Gershad’s twitter account, in the year preceding 25 May 2019, were downloaded and after 
cleaning, coded and categorised based on their content. Also, the last 300 videos of White 
Wednesdays’ Instagram, preceding 25 May 2019, were coded and categorised.  
 
Braun and Clarke (2006, 79)  define thematic analysis as “a method for identifying, analysing 
and reporting patterns (themes) within data”. In this research, hijab activism and different 
modes of resistance against policing of women’s clothing, have been considered as  key 
themes. Other themes were understood in relation to the key themes. Thus , the thematic 
analysis has been conducted in a ‘theoretical’ manner, meaning that the themes identified 
“tend to be driven by the researcher’s theoretical or analytic interest”  (Braun and Clarke 
2006, 84) . 
 
Therefore, driven by the theoretical framework of abnormal justice, general political 
commentary at the level of “metapolitical injustice” (Fraser 2008, 408)  has been coded as a 
them e. Following the paper’s understanding of intersectional justice, other instance s of 
injustice, such as activism on labour rights, teachers’ unions, violence against women, 
religious minorities, etc. have been coded as relevant themes. The other thematic codes 
mainly cover the obj ectives and functions of the application or the social media campaign.  
Additionally, this paper has analysed the social media posts on a semantic level and has not 
taken a discourse -analysis approach, as the limited scope of this case study does not allow a 
more detailed study of the reasons behind the formation of the specific messages posted on 
social media. All the themes and subsequent categories will be discussed in detail in the 
following section.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
11 
 D. Findings  
 
This paper has introduced the concept of spatial|data justice in order to put emphasis on 
the intersection of data justice with other forms of justice, when justice is envisaged in a 
broader political framework. Such intersecti ons, overlaps, associations and references 
between spatial justice – here the case of compulsory hijab – data justice and the general 
political situation  can be clearly demonstrated through the thematic analysis of two main 
resistance trends against compul sory hijab. A thematic analysis of Gershad’s tweets ( see 
Figure 4 ) shows a major involvement with the application’s main purpose as a collective 
mapping tool with 56% of the posts dedicated to sharing the location of guidance patrols in 
Tehran. Together wi th location maps in other towns (8%) and, guidelines, technical 
information and update alarms (11%), 75% of the twitter activities address the pursuit of 
the application itself. Eight percent of the tweets tackle the issue of compulsory hijab by 
debating n ews, interviews, official statements, and public policies. The rest of the tweets 
(16%) contribute to the more general political discussions in Iran, specifically those that 
question the undemocratic nature of ideological imposition on people, such as poli ce 
violence against people who publicly eat or dri nk during the month of Ramadan.  
 
Such overlap between resistance to different forms of policing is also clear in the 
application’s recommendation of anti -proxy technologies. Since the application was filter ed 
by the Iranian authorities, t he app developers regularly shared  free ant i-proxy applications 
for their users, but as off April 2019 the anti -proxy settings are integrated into the 
application configurations. Although such technologies would enable users  to benefit from 
the application , they also pave the way for users to circumvent the strict policing and 
control of the cyber space3. Gershad, as a small data project, not only challenges the spatial 
injustice against women but also provokes resistance aga inst other forms of injustice by 
confronting the strict control and policing that affect the daily life of Iranians. In doing so, 
the application goes beyond a mapping experience and targets the political foundations that 
are used to justify policing.  
 
                                                      
3 Reporters Without Borders listed Iran as one of the 15 enemies of the Internet in 2016  (Reporters Without 
Borders 2016) . 
56%
16%11%8%8%1%
Map- Tehran
General Commentary
App Info
Map- Other Cities
Commentary on Hijab
Anti-Proxy
Figure 4 . Thematic analysis of tweets by Gershad Application  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
12 
 Such a political engagement is 
even more observable in the 
videos posted on the Instagram  
account of the founder of White 
Wednesdays’ campaign. As 
portrayed in Figure 5 , the most 
frequent them e in these videos is 
the commentary on general 
politics and a harsh critique of 
the socio -economic 
circumstances of Iranians. The 
campaign also takes a solid 
stance in advocating women’s 
right to public spaces by 
frequently posting videos of 
women dancing, singing or 
cycling in public spaces – which 
are all forbidden. Although hijab 
is being frequently discussed as 
women’s right to choose their 
clothing, the links to spatial 
injustice are evident. Here, the 
right to the city entails more 
substantial political elements, 
which problematises the 
dominant discourses on female 
bodies, women’s role in the family and society and their public engagements. Consequently, 
issues of prohibiting women to enter football stadiums or to compe te in international sports 
events addresses simultaneously other forms of discrimination in conjunction with spatial 
justice. Harassment in public spaces and acid attacks also emerge as themes that highlight 
not only women’s lack of access to public spaces  but also the violence they experience 
trespassing the established boundaries.  Among the videos of women’s confrontation with 
people opposing their hijab -free strolling, most videos depict confrontations with religious 
people. The videos demonstrate a larg er ongoing debate at the public level about the 
religious justifications of ideological organisation of space. Most of the videos in this 
category are hashtag ged with “my_camera_my_weapon,” accentuating the act of resistance 
by reciprocating the violence w ith returning the gaze.  
 
Figure 5 . Thematic analysis of the videos of the White 
Wednesdays’ campaign’s Instagram account  
01020304050607080
general politics, socio-economic well-being
strolling without hijab
hijab activism
hijab politics and debates
women singing dancing cycling
confrontation with pro-hijab people
other socio-political activism
personal
acid attacks
harassment in public places
international campaigning
exchange with activists
women's sport
confrontation with police
international politics
women's rights75
47
29262423
1918
10 9985543Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
13 
 The interconnections 
between the identified 
themes could be better 
illustrated by clustering 
the similar themes into 
larger categories ( see 
Figure 6 ). Although 
hijab -related activism –
including videos of 
women strolling without 
hijab, their 
confrontation with 
police, and religious or 
pro-regime people, and 
news and updates about 
arrested activists  – 
constitutes the larger 
body of Instagram posts, 
the specific coverage of other resistance movements – including workers’ unions, teacher 
unions, religious minorities, etc  – comprise a considerable percentage of all the Instagram 
posts. The interrelation between activism against compu lsory hijab, political resistance and 
spatial justice are clearly demonstrated in the way this small data project links these 
concepts together. The immediate reference to larger political frameworks could also be 
observed in the way the campaign represent s itself at an international level to not only draw 
support for its activities, but also to put more pressure on the Iranian government to change 
its practices of systematic discrimination against women.  
 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
This paper has theor ised data justice by using the theory of ‘abnormal justice’ (Fraser 2008) 
with the recognition that justice cannot be formulated when specific groups of people have 
no chance/right to participate in “authorized contests over justice” (Fraser 2008, 408). By  
applying the principle of ‘parity of participation’ (Fraser 2008, 407) in order to recognise a 
situation as potentially bearing the possibility of justice, the Fraserian conceptualisation 
instantaneously exposes its political nature. Therefore, I have arg ued that data justice, as an 
instance of justice, cannot be scrutinized without considering the political framework that 
encompasses  it. Such understanding of justice challenges the current literature on data 
justice that mainly focuses on democratic power  relations. As th is paper series pinpoint s the 
issue  of data justice in the global S outh, it proves necessary to situate questions of data 
justice also in less - and un -democratic settings. Furthermore, a political understanding of 
data justice cannot be co mplete, if it is not situated in intersection with other instances of 
injustice. In this case study, the overlap between spatial and data justice is explored but 
other research  can incorporate  other axes of analysis.  
 
After developing a theoretical framework for spatial|data justice, the paper has specifically 
examined the aforementioned concept in regards to a case study in Iran. The extreme 
implementation of compulsory hijab regulations against women is defined as a case of 
Figure 6 . Thematic clusters of the videos of the White Wednesdays’ 
campaign’s Instagram account  
41.4
32.616.25.74.1
Hijab-related activism
Links to other
movements
Women's presence in
public space
Personal
International politicsManchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
14 
 spatial justice, since it regulates, bars and controls women’s access to public spaces. Hen ce, 
the usage of traffic camera  footage to punish female drivers with improper veiling is treated 
as a mishandling of data – a data injustice  – but also only  meaningful in conjunction with 
another form of inju stice:  spatial injustice. This critical intersectional approach to data 
justice is fully reflected in two examples of resistance against spatial|data injustice.  The first 
example, Gershad, is an applicati on that uses  collective mapping to locat e moral  police 
patrols  and the second example is a campaign that encourages women to reclaim the public 
space by strolling without hijab and recording possible reactions and confrontations. A 
thematic analysis of the  social media posts b y both projects demonstrate not only a strong 
interconnection with other forms of activism  but also a manifest stance against 
undemocratic political systems. Such references to political issues reveal an underlying 
interrelatedness of discourses of justice , including those on data justice.  
 
Drawing from the case study of Iran, this paper  develops an intersectional political approach 
to data justice that situates the issue in a matrix of injustice within a broad political 
framework. Although such a matrix of injustice  might seem less chaotic  in a democratic 
political framework , especially  in countries of the global North,  a closer look would reveal 
hidden  intersections. Furthermore, as data justice cannot be limited to a specific platform ’s 
data polices, it also cannot be contained in a country’s approach to data and privacy rights. 
This paper argues that an intersectional political approach to data justice, as an analytical 
tool, could be employed in variety of contexts. In the next secti on, some possible research 
projects  are discussed  that would apply analytical tools conceptualised based on this case 
study. Additionally, although here a small data vs. big data approach has been introduced as 
a possible resistance strategy against data injustice, each case of data injustice would 
necessitate a different analysis of resistance alternatives based on its situatedness in the 
matrix of injustices within  a political framework . 
 
E1. Recommendations  for Future Research  
 
Spatial|data justice as a concept with an intersectional approach to data justice could 
contribute to any research in this area that has a spatial component. For example, research 
on informal settlements that analyse the right to the city for marginalised groups of citizens 
in conjunction with data -related issues could apply spatial|data justice as an analytical tool. 
Such research could include surveillance of crime in slums, informal settlements’ mapping 
failures, collective mapping of ne ighbourhoods and many other research areas that 
specifically investigate ‘space’.  
 
A political intersectional approach to data justice could also include other  forms of injustice. 
This paper has tak en space as an axis of analysis  but other notions are imme diately 
imaginable . Even in this paper’s exact case, ‘class’ could be considered as an analytical 
dimension , when it comes to  motor cycle messengers  in Tehran , that earn their living by 
minimis ing the time of a journey between two points in a city stretchin g to 1748 km2 
through constantly break ing traffic laws . These messengers  fall prey to the extensive 
network of CCTV cameras  while economic circumstances and the low quality of state  
delivery  services gravely affects their observance of traffic rules . Other broader examples 
could be drawn in different levels of analysis . There is  for example  a massive amount of 
research  on the treatment of undesirable bodies  (homosexual, queer, transgender, Muslim, Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
15 
 veiled, poor, etc .) in European immigration systems4. The biometric and immigration data 
that is being collect ed on such bodies cannot be considered in a sheer discourse of data 
justice, since in order for a body to be the subject of such gathering of data, one must first 
belong to an undesirable category. Eu ropean passport holders that enter the UK  for 
example , do not even pass through such strict regimes of control. Here, doing justice to data 
justice necessitates an intersectional approach ; an approach that  cannot be even  
contemplate d without positioning th e question in the wider political framework of 
European immigration policy and  socio -historical dimensions of such policies.  
 
This case study also aims to open the discussion to a more detailed and deeper level of 
analysis of intersections of data justice.  Here, thematic analysis has been used to 
demonstrate the interconnections between different instances of injustice, but other 
qualitative methods might have provided the case study with other conceptions of how 
these links are formed and maintained. For e xample, a discursive analysis of the social 
media posts could have shed light on the diversity of apprehensions of justice. Exploring and 
coding the social media content without emphasising one specific form of injustice, here 
spatial injustice, might have  also brought about other interesting intersections using 
grounded theory.  
 
Other fundamental considerations on  ‘power’ and ‘social structure’ could also change the 
analytic direction of this case stud y’s question and might lead to  disparate  theoretical 
discussion s of data justice. One example is not to dichotomise power to “power of agency – 
“power to” – […and] structural power – “power over” (Heeks and Renken 2018, 97 ) and 
rather treat power in a Foucauldian framework arguing that “power is everywhere” and 
“comes from everywhere”  (Foucault 1998, 63) . What would such an understanding of 
power mean for an intersectional analysis of data justice?  Another thread  of thought could 
be followed in theorising data systems (Kitchin and Lauriault 2018)  or surveillance (Haggerty 
and Ericson 2000)  as an assemblage containing a “multiplicity of heterogeneous objects, 
whose unity comes solely from the fact that these items function together, that they “work” 
together as a functional entity”  (Patton 1994, 158) . Using assemblage theory could also 
affect how resistance to intersectional data injustice is formulated, which includes not only 
the state as the hegemonic power in establishing surveillance discourses but also “a number 
of other agen ts, such as users, civil society, regional and international flows, technological 
advancements, things and code” (Akbari and Gabdulhakov 2019) . 
 
Finally, as claims to data justice canno t be addressed without referring to political 
dispositions, research on data justice is also not exempt from  such political repercussions. 
As a feminist activist and academic, writing about compulsory hijab without strong feelings 
is a cumbersome exercise.  It is also a fine political line to walk since the issue of hijab is by 
far not a local issue, but an international tool to criticise the political foundations of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. The controversy caused by the meeting between Masih Ali nejad, 
the founder of White Wednesdays’ Campaign and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo (Radio 
Farda 2019)  is a bitter reminder that losing the political perspective in alleviating one case of 
injustice, can bring about  other  forms of  injustice , if not  more violence, war and insecurity.  
                                                      
4 One almost comprehensive directory of s uch research could be found in a European Commission policy 
review titled, “ Research on Migration:  Facing Realities and Maximising Opportunities ” (King and Lulle 2016)  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
16 
  
References  
 
Akbari, Azadeh, and Rashid Gabdulhakov. 2019. Platform surveillance and resistance in Iran 
and Russia: The case of Telegram. Surveillance & Society  17 (1/2): 223 -231.  
Azarpey, Majid. 2017. Twitter . 
https://twitter.com/majidazarpey/status/941914487635918849 . 
Ball, Kirstie, Nicola Green, Hille Koskela, and David J. Phillips. 2009. Editorial: Surveillance 
studies needs gender and sexuality. Surveillance & Society  6 (4): 352 -355.  
Bayard de Volo, Lorraine 2003. Service and surveillance: Infrapolitics at work among casino 
cocktail waitresses. Social Politics  10: 347 -376.  
Bayat, Asef. 2010. Life as Politics: How Ordinary Peop le Change the Middle East . Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.  
Beauchamp, Toby. 2009. Artful concealment and strategic visibility: T ransgender bodies and 
U.S. state surveillance after 9/11. Surveillance & Society  6 (4): 356 -366.  
Ben Shahar, T. H. 2017. Educational justice and big data. Theory and Research in Education  
15 (3): 306 -320.  
Bidarzani website. 2015. Women's Experience of Guidance Patrols. Bidarzani . 
http://bidarzani.com/20614 . 
Bidbarg Legal Consultancy. 2018. Improper Hijab Fine for Female Drivers. Bidbarg Legal 
Consultancy . https://bit.ly/2UFGDle . 
Braun, Virginia, and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative  
Research in Psychology  3 (2): 77 -101.  
Browne, Simone. 2015. Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness . Durham: Duke 
University Press.  
Brunson, Rod K., and Jody Miller. 2006. Gender, race, and urban policing: The experience of 
African American youths.  Gender & Society  20 (4): 531 -552.  
Campbell, Jacquelyn C. 2000. Promise and perils of surveillance in addressing violence 
against women. Violence Against Women  6 (7): 705 -727.  
Cho, Sumi, Kimberle Williams Crenshaw, and Leslie McCall. 2013. Toward a field of 
intersectionality studies: Theory, applications, and praxis. Signs: Journal of Women in 
Culture and Society  38 (4): 785 -810.  
Cinnamon, Jonathan. 2017. Social injustice in surveillance capitalism. Surveillance & Society  
15 (5): 609 -625.  
Conrad, Kathryn. 2009. Surveillance, gender and the virtual body in the information age. 
Surveillance & Society  6 (4): 380 -387.  
Dalton, Craig M., and Jim Thatcher. 2015. Inflated granularity: Sp atial ' Big Data' and 
geodemographics. Big Data & Society  2 (2): 1 -15. 
Dencik, Lina, Arne Hintz, and Jonathan Cable. 2016. Towards data justice? The ambiguity of 
anti-surveillance resistance in political activism. Big Data & Society  3 (2): 1 -12. 
Dubrofsky, Rachel E., and Shohana Amielle Magnet  (eds.) . 2015. Feminist Surveillance 
Studies . Durham: Duke University Press.  
Egan, R. Danielle. 2004. Eyeing the scene: The uses and ( re)uses of surveillance cameras in 
an exotic dance club. Critical Sociology  30: 299 -319.  
Erdbrink, Thomas. 2014. When Freedom Is the Right to Stay Under Wraps. The New York 
Times . https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/ 08/world/middleeast/when -freedom -is-
the-right -to-stay-under -wraps.html . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
17 
 Foucault, Michel. 1998. The History of Sexuality: The Will to Knowledge . London: Penguin.  
Fraser, Nancy. 2008. Abn ormal justice. Critical Inquiry  34 (3): 393 -422.  
Gandy, Oscar H. 1993.  The Panoptic Sort: A Political Economy of Personal Information . 
Boulder: Westview Press.  
Gershad. n/a. About Us. Gershad . https://gershad.com/#about . 
Gordon, M. 2000. Definitional issues in violence against women: Surveillance and research 
from a violence research perspective. Violence Against Women  6 (7): 747 -783.  
Gould, Rebecca. 2014. Hijab as commodity form: Veiling, unveiling, and misveiling in 
contemporary Iran. Feminist Theory  15 (3): 221 -40. 
Haggerty, Kevin D., and Richard V. Ericson. 2000. The surveillant assemblage. British Journal 
of Sociology  51 (4): 605 -622.  
Harvey, David. 2003. The right to the city. International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research  27 (4): 939 -941.  
Heeks , Richard, and Jaco Ren ken. 2018 . Data justice for devel opment: What would it me an? 
Information Development  34 (1): 90 -102. 
Heeks, Rich ard, and Satyarupa Shekhar. 2019 . Datafication, development and marginalised 
urban communities: An applied data justice framework. Information, Communication 
& Society  22 (7): 992 -1011 . 
Jiwani, Yasmin. 2015. Violating in/visibilities: Honor killings and interlocking surveillance(s). 
In Feminist Surveillance Studies , edited by Rachel E. Dubrofsky and Shoshana Amielle 
Magnet, 79 -92. Durham: Duke Uni versity Press.  
Johnson, Jeffrey Alan. 2014. From open data to information justice. Ethics and Information 
Technology  16 (4): 263 -274.  
Justice for Iran. 2014. 35 Years of Hijab in Iran; Extensive Violation of Womens' Rights. 
Justice for Iran.  https://justice4iran.org/wp -content/uploads/2014/03/Hijab -report -
Final -FA.pdf . 
Kar, Mehrangiz. 2017. How We Were Veiled?. Shahrvand . 
https://shahrvand.com/archives/85738 . 
King, Russell, and Aija Lulle. 2016. Research on Migration: Facing Realities and Maximising 
Opportunities. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.  
Kitch in, Rob, and Tracey P. Lauriault. 2018. Toward critical data studies: charting and 
unpacking data assemblages and their work. In Thinking Big Data in Geography: New 
Regimes, New Research , edited by Jim Thatcher , Josef  Eckert and Andrew  Shears , 3-
20. Lincol n: University of Nebraska Press.  
Koskela, Hille. 2002. Video surveillance, gender, and the safety of public urban space: 
'Peeping Tom ' goes high tech? Urban Geography  23 (3): 257 -278.  
Lefebvre, Henri. 1968. Le Droit à la Ville. Paris: Anthropos.  
---. 1991. The Production of Space . Oxford: Blackwell.  
Lyon, David  (ed.). 2003. Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk, and Digital 
Discrimination . London: Routledge.  
M, Maryam. 2015. A Day Spent with Guidance Patrol. Iran Wire . 
https://iranwire.com/fa/features/2266 . 
Marcuse, Peter. 2009. Spatial justice: Derivative but causal of social injustice. justice spatiale 
| spatial justice  1: 1-6. 
Mason, Corrine, and Shoshana Magnet. 2012. Surveillance studies and violence against 
women. Surveillance & Society  10 (2): 105 -118.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
18 
 Mizan News Agency. 2017. Legal Cases for Improperly Veiled. Mizan News Agency . 
https://bit.ly/2Kz6l68 . 
Mohyeddin, Samira. 2005. Personal Websi te. http://www.samiramohyeddin.com/2005/08/ . 
Monahan, Torin. 2009. Dreams of control at a distance: Gender, surveillance, and social 
control. Cultural Studies ↔ Critical Methodologies  9 (2): 286 -305.  
Moore, Lisa Jean, and Paisely Currah. 2015. Legally sexed: Birth certificates and transgender 
citizens. In Feminist Surveillance Studies , edited by Rachel E. Dubrofsky and Shohana 
Amielle Magnet., 58 -78. Durham: Duke University Press.  
Newman, Nathan. 2015. Data Justice: Taking on Big Data as an Economic Justice Issue. Data 
Justice Organization.  
Pardis, Sara. 2011. Report on Tehran's Guidance Patrols. Kalame . 
https://www.kaleme .com/1390/08/12/klm -79151/ . 
Patton, Paul. 1994. Metamorpho -logic: Bodies and powers in a thousand plateaus. Journal 
of the British Society for Phenomenology  25 (2): 157 -169.  
Puar, Jasbir K. 2007. Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism in Queer Times . Durha m: 
Duke University Press.  
Radio Farda. 2019. Pompeo Tells Iranian Rights Activist Of U.S. Support. Radio Farda.  
https://en.radiofarda.com/a/pompeo -meets-with -alinejad -and-voices -us-
support/29752266.html . 
Reporters Without Borders. 2016. The 15 Enemies of the Internet and Other Countries to 
Watch. Reporters Without Borders . https://rsf.org/en/news/15 -enemies -internet -
and-other -countries -watch . 
Sa’di, Ahmad H. 2012. Colonialism and surveillance. In Routledge Handbook of Surveillance 
Studies , edited by Kirstie Ball, Kevin D. Haggerty and David Lyon, 151 -158. London: 
Routledge.  
Sadeghi, Fatemeh. 2010. Bypassing Islamism and feminism: Women’s resistance and 
rebellion in post-revolutionary Iran. Revue Des Mondes Musulmans Et De La 
Mediterranee  128: 209 -228.  
Sedghi, Hamideh. 2007. Women and Politics in Iran: Veiling, Unve iling, and Reveiling . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Shojaie, Mitra. 2014. How Hijab Became Compulsary After The Revolution?. Deutsche Welle 
Persian . https://p.dw.com/p/1B2j8 . 
Silva, Leiser. 2007. Epistemolo gical and theoretical challenges for studying power and 
politics in information systems. Information Systems Journal  17: 165 -183.  
Smith, Andrea. 2015. Not -Seeing: State surveillance, settler colonialism, and gender 
violence. In Feminist Surveillance Studie s, edited by Rachel E. Dubrofsky and Shohana 
Amielle Magnet., 21 -38. Durham: Duke University Press.  
Soja, Edward W. 2009. The city and spatial justice. justice spatiale | spatial justice  1: 1-5. 
---. 2010. Seeking Spatial Justice . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
Spiegel Online. 2016. Neue App: So warnt Gershad die Iraner. Der Spiegel Online . 
https://www.spiegel.de/fotostrecke/gershad -app-fotostrecke -134500 -4.html . 
Tasnim News. 2017. The Head of Traffic Police Denied the Rumours on Improper Hijab Fines. 
Tasnim News . https://bit.ly/2v20Nqb . 
Taylor, Linnet. 2017. What is data justice? The case for connecting digital rights and 
freedoms globally. Big Data & Society  July-December: 1 -14. 
Van der Meulen, Emily, and Robert  Heynen  (eds.) . 2016. Expanding the Gaze: Gender and 
the Politics of Surveillance . Toronto: U niversity of Toronto Press.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 76  
19 
 Veale, Michael, and Reuben Binns. 2017. Fairer machine learning in the real world: 
Mitigating discrimination without collecting sensitive data. Big Data & Society  July-
December (1 -17). 
Voice of America Persian Service. 2015. Spe cial Police Forces Have Access to CCTV Cameras. 
Voice of America Persian Service . http://m.ir.voanews.com/a/iran -police -
camera/3115271.html . 
Welles, Brooke Foucault. 2014. On minorit ies and outliers: The case for making Big Data 
small. Big Data & Society  April -June: 1 -2. 
Wesely, Jennifer, and Emily  Gaardner. 2004. The gendered ' nature ' of the urban outdoors: 
Women negotiating fear of violence. Gender & Society  18: 645 -663.  
 
Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institut e with additional financial support from Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . 
 
About the Author  
Azadeh Akbari is a PhD candidate at the Department of Human Geog raphy, Heidelberg 
University. Her research  uses Iran as a case study to investigate  the links between  
surveillance and spatial justice in physical and virtual spaces in undemocratic contexts.  
Azadeh  holds a n MSc in Gender Research from the London School of Economics and has 
been a journalist and activist for many years. Her PhD project is funded by the Hans Böckler 
Foundation of the German Trade Unions.  