• F I N A N S E  I  P R A W O  F I N A N S O W E  •
 
51 •Journal of Finance and Financial Law  •
Czerwiec /June  2020 ● vol. 2(26): 51–62 
STATE POLICY OF CONS UMER PROTECTION IN T HE 
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SE RVICES MARKET IN UKR AINE  
Sophia Lobozynska  
The Faculty of Economics, Ivan Franko L’viv National University (Ukraine)  
ORCID:  http://orcid.org/0000 -0001 -5483 -6864   
Iryna Skomorovych  
The Faculty of Economics, Ivan Franko L’viv National University (Ukraine)  
ORCID : http://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -8574 -6770  
Ulyana Vladychyn  
The Faculty of Economics, Ivan Franko L’viv National Uni versity (Ukraine)  
ORCID : http://orcid.org/0000 -0002 -6916 -6688  
Abstract  
The rapid development of digital financial technologies in Ukraine leads to the emergence of new 
risks and to significant consumers ’ losses in the financial market. The aim of the study is to develop 
strategic directions of state policy of consumer protect ion in the digital financial services market 
considering the best world practices and features of the financial system of Ukraine.  
System scientific analysis was used to study the possibilities of implementing international quality 
standards for digital f inancial services in Ukrainian legislation. The method of statistical analysis of 
data was used to form the imperial basis of the study.   
Based on the global experience and taking into account the peculiarities of Ukrainian  fintech 
market the state policy  should consist of three strategic directions: 1) create a system of legal 
regulation of the mechanism of protection of consumers ’ rights of digital financial services; 
2)introducing a risk -oriented approach to regulating the digital financial services de livery process
to consumers; 3) strengthening of digital financial literacy and public awareness.  Such state policy 
will form a reliable system of consumer protection in the digital services market in Ukraine . 
Keywords : financial consumer protection, digital financial services and products, public policy 
for consumer protection of digital financial services . 
JEL Class:   D18. https://doi.org/10.18778/2391-6478. 2.26.04 
 
52 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
INTRODUCTION  
The financial technology market (Fintech) is one of the fastest growing and holds 
leading positions in the dynamic s of its development in terms of both financial 
performance and number of users. Experts from different countries note that over 
the past five years, the number of users of financial technologies has been 
increasing by 15 –20% annually [ Private financial .. , 2018, access 1.02.2020] . 
Moreover, the distribution of Fintech products occurs in different consumer 
segments. Most of Fintech users no longer imagine their usual day without the use 
of technology. Thus, every third inhabitant of a large city (about 1 million 
inhabitants) uses more than two Fintech services on average daily. Experts 
estimate the spread of financial technology in Ukraine at 50%  [Fintech. Guide…, 
2018 , access 10.02.2020 ].  
A key factor driving the development of the financial technology m arket is 
the development of the Internet and digitalization. If at the beginning of the path 
of its development the market of financial technologies was limited to receiving 
payments and electronic money, now at the present time the most widespread is 
received by a number of services: P2P consumer lending, P2P property lending, 
balance sheet consumer lending, donation -based crowdfunding, demand deposits, 
saving accounts, P2P mobile payments, foreign exchange and remittances, 
cryptocurrency wallets, cryptocu rrency exchange and trading, wealth and assets 
management, personal financial management, P2P insurance, usage -based 
insurance, robo advisors and etc.  
Financial digital products and services bring significant benefits to 
a consumer. They reduce the value o f a financial product, promote financial 
inclusions, help people to avoid extra commissions, save time for consumers, 
improve personal financial management, and increase well -being. However, 
digital financial services (DFS) carry significant risks, such as : insufficient 
security of systems while storing personal data, disability of systems that impede 
access to funds, inconvenient interfaces that increase the number of erroneous 
transactions, insufficient liquidity of providers of DFS, lack of guarantees of  
a returning money accumulated in non -bank financial institutions accounts, digital 
fraud and more. This creates new challenges for financial regulators in the form 
of a state regulatory policy for the protection of consumers of digital financial 
services.  
The main purpose of research  is to develop approaches for state policy for the 
protection of consumers of digital financial services in Ukraine, considering the 
high-level principles for digital financial inclusion and their practical application 
in the f ield of protection consumer rights in DFS.  
 
  
 
53 
 State Policy of Consumer Protection … 
 
1. THE RESEARCH METHODOL OGY  
To study the current situation of the development of the digital financial services 
market in Ukraine the method of statistical data analysis was applied. The sources 
of data were mat erials from international consulting agencies, the Ukrainian 
Association of Fintech and Innovation companies, the National Bank of Ukraine, 
VISA company, Agency for International Development, (USAID). The 
systematic scientific analysis of the existing dome stic legal field in the given 
direction was used in the development of conceptual foundations of the policy of 
protection consumers of digital financial services, and the prospects of 
harmonization of Ukrainian legislation with international standards were  
explored. When using the method of analogy, analysis and synthesis, and the 
method of theoretical generalization the strategic vectors of construction of the 
mechanism of consumer rights protection in DFS in Ukraine were developed.  
2. THE RESEARCH RESULTS  
The digital financial services market is booming in Ukraine. There are several 
reasons for this. So, as of 2019, the proportion of people using the Internet was 
65%, the penetration rate of smartphones was 70%, the coverage level of 3G and 
higher was 62%  [Ukrainian Institute…, 2020, access 2.02.2020] . The Internet and 
its speed in Ukraine are constantly improving, also because of reducing the cost 
and increasing the access, especially in the mobile Internet. Continuous 
investments and support for high -speed internet contributes to the development 
and use of fintech services and products in the country.  
The level of penetration of financial services is increasing every. The 
proportion of people aged 15+ who had an account with a financial institution was 
63% (22.5 million), 49% had a debit card, 39% used a card to make a purchase, 
29% – used the internet to pay bills or make payments, 18% used the internet to 
access a financial account in 2017 [Fintech. Guide…, 2018, access 10.02.2020] . 
The share of non -cash transactions in the total volume of payment card 
transactions increased from 25.0% in 2014 to 49.7%  at the end of September 2019  
[Strategy of development.., 2020 , access 10.02.2020 ]. 
The transition to digital finance is happening at a tremendous speed. In these 
circumstances, digital financial product and service providers have prioritize 
customer needs. Internet and mobile banking have significantly increased the 
number of banking transactions provided through these systems. Ukrainian banks 
offer to use smartphones not only to pay for goods and services, but also to receive 
payments. Innovative ban ks provide clients with multichannel service in 24/7 
mode ( „State Savings Bank of Ukraine”, „PrivatBank”, „UkrSibbank” and  
 
54 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
others). It became possible for Ukrainian consumers to apply for a loan through 
ATMs and SMS. Several direct credit platforms (P2P) h ave been launched. The 
technology of contactless payments is actively used by consumers. MasterCard, 
PayPass and Visa payWave allow to perform transactions simply by lifting 
a plastic card to the terminal. Electronic wallets are actively used when a paymen t 
is made in a point of sale.  
The level of penetration of financial services continues to grow rapidly owing 
to the support of the development of state -level fintech market. Thus, in 2018, 
financial sector regulators have included the development of fintec h as one of the 
priorities in the Comprehensive Program for the Development of the Financial 
Sector of Ukraine until 2020. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine has identified 
the financial technologies and cashless payments as a strategic direction in the 
Concept of Development of the Digital Economy and Society of Ukraine for 2018  
–2020. In April 2019, the National Bank of Ukraine established an Expert Council 
on communication with innovative companies wishing to work in the financial 
market [Comprehensive Program…, 2018 , access 15.03.2020 ].  
According to an analytical study of the Ukrainian Association of Fintech and 
Innovation Companies there are more than 100 fintech companies operating in 
Ukraine, most of which have emerged in the last three years. Finte ch providers 
work in the following areas: payments /money transfer – 38, mobile wallets – 22, 
digital /neobanks – 8, technology and infrastructure – 36, consulting /analytical 
systems – 26, personal and consumer lending – 10, business lending – 5, insur tech 
– 6, cybersecurity /anti-fraud – 11, regtech  – 5, personal finance /wealth management  
– 6, digital comparison tool – 3, legaltech – 4 [Catalogue of fintech…, 2019 , 
access 8.02.2020 ]. 
The rapidly growing consumer interest in Fintech products and the lack of 
a regulatory framework for regulating financial intermediaries in the face of 
implementing of innovative technologies and developing of new Fintech services 
with significant risks necessitate the creation of conceptual frameworks of state 
policy fo r  protection of digital financial services users.  
In January 2020, the National Bank of Ukraine, the National Securities and 
Stock Market Commission, the National Commission for the State Regulation of 
Financial Services Markets, the Ministry of Finance o f Ukraine and the Deposit 
Guarantee Fund of Ukraine approved the Strategy for the Development of the 
Financial Sector of Ukraine until 2025 (Further – FSDU Strategy -2025).  
The Strategy -2025 contains 5 key areas for the development of the financial 
sector, in particular: financial stability , macroeconomic development , financial 
inclusion , development of financial markets , innovative development 2019  
[Strategy of development.. , 2020, access 10.02.2020 ]. In order to understand how 
the system of consumer protection in the digital financial services market will be  
 
55 
 State Policy of Consumer Protection … 
 
formed, it is necessary to elaborate on such strategic directions of FSDU Strategy - 
-2025 as financial inclusion and inn ovation development.  
It is significant that state regulators are giving due priority to financial 
inclusion by increasing the accessibility and using of financial services. The main 
priorities for realization state policy in this way are: drafting and impl ementing 
the Financial Inclusion Strategy; creating conditions for development of remote 
distribution channels of financial services; creating the infrastructure to provide 
financial services in remote territories; conversing payments to the state to 
elect ronic channels; improving a regulatory framework to enhance effectiveness, 
competition and security of electronic payments in the financial system; 
accessibility of financial services for people with special needs.  
In such circumstances, the protection of consumers of digital financial 
services should be ensured through the introduction of new models of remote 
identification and verification of the client, the creation of a mechanism for access 
of financial institutions to customer identification data in st ate registers (eKYC), 
regulation of the use of different types of electronic signatures of clients of 
financial institutions.  
National regulators have identified increasing consumer protection in the 
financial services market as an important strategic obje ctive of financial inclusion. 
To ensure this, state financial regulators have planned to complete such tasks : 
developing and introducing a regulatory framework for supervising the financial 
sector participants; ensuring transparency of information on commi ssion and 
payments charged on services of banks and nonbank financial institutions, as well 
as payments guaranteed to the bank depositors and respective maturities; 
expanding the D FS participants and guaranteed deposits, gradual increase in the 
deposit gua rantee amount in banks; improving means for disclosing information 
by financial institutions to customers, including prior to entering into agreements. 
The fulfillment of these obligations will allow to form the basis for safe use of 
financial services, in cluding digital ones.  
Low financial literacy in Ukraine is another challenge for financial 
authorities.  The Financial Literacy Index the method of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) reached 11.6 points out of 21, 
which is one of the lowest in the world [Financial literacy…, 2019, access 
15.03.2020 ]. To remedy the current situation, financial regulators have committed 
by 2023 to focus their efforts on : creating a single communication platform (web -
site) with useful insight on types and use of financial services; holding awareness 
raising campaigns for different demographic groups; opening the Information and 
Communications (Center in National Bank of Ukr aine – Money Museum); 
implementing special programs for training expertise and skills in fintech for 
different groups of the general public.   
 
56 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
The state strategic policy in the field of „Innovative development ” includes 
the following tasks for realization du ring 2020 –2025 : devising and implementing 
the FinTech development strategy in Ukraine; introducing means for applying 
artificial intelligence and machine learning in finances (KYC, AML, combating 
fraud, personalized financial products, forecasting risks ba sed on analysis of bank 
transactions, etc.); developing the framework for identifying customers using 
biometric data; introducing regulation for circulation and use of digital assets in 
Ukraine;  introducing the framework set out in EU GDPR (General Data Pr otection 
Regulation) for finance [Strategy of development.., 2020, access 10.02.2020 ]. 
Concerning the increasing demand for digital financial products and services, 
the outlined strategic areas need to be detailed in terms of protecting the rights of 
consu mers of digital financial services. The basis for the development and 
implementation of the Digital Consumer Financial Consumer Protection Strategy 
in Ukraine should be High -Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion (DFI 
Principles).  
The DFI Princi ples were produced in 2016 by the Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion. The DFI Prіncіplеs are focused on the nееd to provide the 
financially еxcluded and undеrsеrved with hіgh -qualіty and approprіаte financial 
products and servіces and the potential  to usе digital technologies to achieve this 
goal, where possible. The DFI Principles also rеcognize the nееd to actively 
balance the promise of digital innоvation with the nеw risks that rapidly evolving 
technology introduces . There are 8 DFI Principles ( Table 1). 
 
Table 1. G20 High -Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclu sion  
Number  Title  Explanation  
Principle 1  Promote a Digital Approach to 
Financial Inclusion  Promote digital financial services 
as a priority to drive development 
of inclusive financial systems, 
including through coordinated, 
monitored, and evaluated national 
strategies and action plans.  
Principle 2  Balance Innovation and Risk 
to Achieve Digital Financial 
Inclusion  Balance promoting innovation to 
achieve digital financial inclusion 
with identifying, assessing, 
monitoring and managing new 
risks.  
Principle 3  Provide an Enabling and 
Proportionate Legal and 
Regulatory Framework for 
Digital Financial Inclusion  Provide an enabling and 
proportionate legal and regulatory 
framework  for digital financial 
inclusion, taking into account 
relevant G20 and international 
standard setting body standards and 
guidance.   
 
57 
 State Policy of Consumer Protection … 
 
Number  Title  Explanation  
Principle 4  Expand the Digital Financial 
Services Infrastructure 
Ecosystem  Expand the Digital Financial 
Services Infrastructure Ecosystem 
Expand the digital financial 
services ecosystem  – including 
financial and information and 
communications technology 
infrastructure  – for the safe, 
reliable and low -cost provision of 
digital financial services to all 
relevant geographical areas, 
especially underserved rural areas.  
Principle 5  Establish Responsible Digital 
Financial Practices to Protect 
Consumers  Establish a comprehensive 
approach to consumer and data 
protection that focuses on issues of 
specific relevance to digital 
financial services.  
Principle 6  Strengthen Digital and 
Financial  
Literacy and Awareness  
 Support and evaluate programs that 
enhance digital and financial 
literacy in light of the unique 
characteristics, advantages, and 
risks of digital financial services 
and channels.  
Principle 7  Facilitate Customer 
Identification for Digital 
Financial Services  
 Facilitate access to digital financial 
services by developing, or 
encouraging the development of 
customer identity systems, products 
and services that are accessible, 
affordable, and verifiable and 
accommodate multiple needs and 
risk levels for a  risk-based 
approach to customer due 
diligence.  
Principle 8  Track Digital Financial 
Inclusion Progress  
 Track progress on digital financial 
inclusion through a comprehensive 
and robust data measurement and 
evaluation system. This system 
should leverage new sources of 
digital data and enable stakeholders 
to analyze and monitor the supply 
of – and demand for  – digital 
financial services, as well  as assess 
the impact of key programs and 
reforms.  
Source: G20/OECD (201 6) High -Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion . 
   
 
58 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
It is very important to consider the provisions of Principle 2 : Balancing 
Innovation and Risk to Achieve Digital Financial Inclusion, Principle 5 : Establish 
Responsible Digital Financial Practices to Protect Consumers and Principle 6 : 
Strengthen Digital and Financial Literacy and Awareness for creating a national 
system of protection consumer rights in a digital age. A detaile d explanation of 
these provisions and practical recommendations of implementing them into 
national strategies for policy makers are disclosed in the G20/OECD (2018) 
Policy Guidance on Financial Consumer Protection Approaches in the Digital Age 
and G20/OECD  (2018) INFE Policy Guidance Digitalisation and Financial 
Literacy . 
Policy Guidance on Financial Consumer Protection Approaches in the Digital 
Age helps policy makers with establishing responsible digital financial practices 
to protect cоnsumers and build trust and cоnfidence in dіgital financial services, 
by establishing a tailored approach to financial consumer protection that focuses 
on issues of specific relevance to dіgital financial services [Policy Guidance on 
Financial…, 2018 , access 10.03.2020 ]. 
Policy Guidance Digitalisation and Financial Literacy aims to identify and 
promote effective initiatives that enhance digital and financial literacy in light of 
the unique characteristics, advantages, and risks of digital financial services and 
channels, t o support their evaluation and dissemination, and to promote a 
responsible and beneficial development of digitalisation by building trust in the 
acquisition and use of digital financial services by the financially excluded [Policy 
Guidance Digitalisation…,  2018 , access 25.03.2020 ]. 
Based on the analysis of the global experience of building a consumer rights 
protection mechanism in the digital services market and taking into account the 
peculiarities of the development of the fintech market in Ukraine, the s tate policy 
should be directed to the following three strategic directions: 1) create a system of 
legal regulation of the mechanism of protection of consumers ’ rights of digital 
financial services; 2) introducing a risk -oriented approach to regulating the digital 
financial services delivery process to consumers; 3) strengthening of digital 
financial literacy and public awareness.  
The priority measures in creating a system of legal regulation of the 
mechanism of protection of consumer rights of digital finan cial services should 
be: 
1) development of a legal mechanism for the protection of monetary funds 
accumulated in non -prudentially regulated service providers (financial 
companies, mobile operators  and others ); 
2) creation of a legal basis for testing new innovat ive financial products and 
services, as well as business models in simplified mode (with the central bank to 
create a „Sandbox ” communication platform);   
 
59 
 State Policy of Consumer Protection … 
 
3) development of the legal basis for regulating the activity of P2P credit 
platforms, crowdfunding and op erations with virtual assets;  
4) establishing on a legislative level the rules of us ing open API for all 
financial market participants;  
5) development of rules of formation of unified databases and protection of 
information, determination of the order of exchang e of information between 
databases;  
6) creation of an effective mechanism for the out -of-court settlement of 
disputes, in particular to develop legal regulation of alternative mechanisms such 
as mediation, arbitration, financial ombudsman;  
7) improving the insti tutional structure of the DF S consumer protection 
system, by setting up specialized consumer rights protection departments within 
the structure of each financial regulator and developing an effective mechanism 
for the exchange of information on consumers r ights protection DFS with a view 
to further improving of legal regulation;  
8) development of a comprehensive Consumer Rights Protection Strategy in 
the digital financial services market and an action plan for its implementation.  
When adopting a risk -oriented approach in regulating process of providing 
digital financial services to consumers, financial authorities should focus on the 
following aspects of activities:  
1) establishing requirements for the provision of complete and truthful 
information on innovative d igital financial products, including commissions and 
tariffs, conditions of use of the service, the procedure for reporting to the 
consumer on the conducted transactions, disclosure of the procedure of consumer 
actions in conducting mistaken transaction an d system outage;  
2) upgrading and expanding the infrastructure of the retail payment system 
and open banking platforms, which will provide secure access to banks, non - 
-banking financial institutions and new payment service providers;  
3) the widespread use of gove rnment channels for the distribution of digital 
financial services with an adequate system of personal data protection;  
4) enhancing security measures for the storage, unauthorized use, disclosure, 
modification and destruction of personal data; providing only  the information 
required to complete a particular online transaction or to receive  electronic 
services;  
5) improvement of work of authorized bodies for control over compliance 
with the legislation on protection of personal data and protection of information  
in information networks;  
6) protect consumers from misuse of digital product and digital crime; 
encourage of DFP providers to create user -friendly interfaces that reduce the 
likelihood of mistaken transactions;   
 
60 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
7) development and implementation of new innovativ e methods of analysis 
of financial digital technologies for risk assessment, including cybercrime 
scenarios; for SupTech and RegTech to facilitate the faster, more efficient and 
effective enforcement of regulatory requirements by financial market participa nts; 
8) establishing the cooperation with the private sector and risk assessment 
experts to promptly identify and evaluate the risks of digital financial services, to 
ensure the creation of an ecosystem that monitors these risks and helps to 
minimize them;  
9) the establishment of internal departments in the financial institutions for 
the examination of consumer complaints and the obligation for them to formulate 
and report on the received complaints to the body responsible for protection of 
consumer rights DFS; 
10) development of an effective mechanism for compensation of losses to 
DFS consumers in case of illegal activity of FDS providers;  
11) providing support to consumers in identifying dependency on online 
lending and clarifying the procedure for repayment of overdue debts.  
An important element in the formation of the consumer protection system in 
digital age is the provision of an adequate level of financial and technological 
knowledge in the population. This can be achieved by:  
1) creating high -quality digital literacy education programs that shape the 
knowledge, understanding and confidence of consumers in using digital financial 
services (eg . online games for financial management training; digital income and 
expense tracking tools; interactive educational programs). Su ch financial literacy 
education programs should be continuous and tailored to target groups (teachers, 
school students, college students, retirees, journalists, judges);  
2) use of digital (video, social networks, messengers, e -mail) and non -digital 
(posters, newspapers) channels to inform consumers about the features, benefits, 
costs of using digital financial services and means of financial security;  
3) providing quality and uninterrupted customer support (24/7 call center, 
online chat bot, websites, social media) with simple and accessible instructions 
for correct action in any given situation, including the complaint mechanism.  
By implementing appropriate measures to protect the rights of consumers of 
digital financial services, state regulators of the fina ncial market will be able to 
start the process of transformation of legal regulation of the market of digital 
financial services, which will allow in the future to prevent uncontrolled situations 
due to increased impact of financial and operational risks, and to promote 
a reasonable balance between abidance of security and decentralization and 
ensuring of confidentiality and scale when providing digital financial services to 
consumers.  
 
  
 
61 
 State Policy of Consumer Protection … 
 
CONCLUSIONS  
The rapid development of technology has significantly infl uenced the 
transformation in the financial sector of Ukraine, which has contributed to the 
emergence of new digital financial products and services. On the one hand, such 
products bring several benefits to the clients, and on the other – cause new risks. 
Thus, there is a need to improve the state policy of regulating the sphere of 
financial technological services. The formation of such policy should be in line 
with the EU Directives and OECD principles on open banking, protection of 
privacy and security of personal data when consuming digital financial services, 
creating a competitive environment by setting standard requirements for providers 
to enter the digital financial services market, ensuring the guarantees of security 
of the preservation of monetary c lient money, compliance with anti -money 
laundering and terrorist financing legislation. In such circumstances, the quality 
standards of digital financial services will be raised and a robust system of 
consumer rights protection in Ukraine will be formed.  
REFERENCES  
Catalogue of fintech companies in Ukraine in 2019 , https://map.fintechua.org  [access 15.03.2020].  
Comprehensive Program for Development of the Financial Sector of Ukraine until 2020 , 
https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/v0 391500 -15 [access 15.03.2020].  
Financial literacy, financial inclusion and financial well -being in Ukraine. Research results. 
USAID Financial Sector Transformation Project June 2019 , http://www.fst -ua.info/wp -
content/uploads/2019/06/Financial -Literacy -Surv ey-
Report_June2019_ua.pdf?fbclid=IwAR2AlpnG Nn8big9d0_v6YEhNBwL  [access 
15.03.2020].  
Fintech and consumer protection: A Snapshot ,  https://www.nclc.org/images/pdf/cons -
protection/rpt -fintech -and-consumer -protection -a-snapshot -march2019.pdf  [access 
17.02.2020].  
 Fintech in Ukraine: Trends,  Market Overview and Catalogue , 
https://www.slideshare.net/UNITCity/fintech -in-ukraine -2018 -ukrainian -language  [access 
15.03.2020].  
 FinTech, RegTech and SupTech: What They Mean for Financial Supervision / Toronto 
Leadership Centre , http://res.torontocentre.org/guidedocs/FinTech%20RegTech%20 
and%20SupTech%20 -
%20What%20T hey%20Mean%20for%20Financial%20Supervision.pdf  [access 15.03.2020]. 
Fintech.  Guide , 2018 , https://aequo.ua/publication/Insights/infographic_report_fintech_guide 
_2018/  [access 10.02.2 020].  
G20/OECD (2011) Task Force on Finan cial Consumer Protection , 
https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial -education/g20 -oecd -task-force -financial -consumer -
protection.htm  [access 15.03.2020].  
G20/OECD (2016) High -Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion , 
http://www.oecd.org/g20/G20 -OECD -Policy -Guidance -Financial -Consumer -Protection -
Approaches -digital -age.pdf  [access 10.03.2020].   
 
62 
 Sophia Lobozynska, Iryna Skomorovy ch, Ulyana Vladychyn  
 
G20/OECD (2018) INFE Policy Guidance Digitalisation and Financial Literacy , 
http://www.oecd.org/finance/G20 -OECD -INFE -Policy -Guidance -Digitalisation -Financial -
Literacy -2018.pdf  [access 15.03.2020].  
IT Ukraine from A to Z // IT Ukraine report/ Ukraine Digital News: , 
http://www.uadn.net /files/ua_hightech.pdf  [access 5.02.2020].  
OECD (2018), G20/OECD Policy Guidance on Financial Consumer Protection Approaches in the 
Digital Age , https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial -education/G20 -OECD -Policy -Guidance -
Financial -Consumer -Protection -Digital -Age-2018.pdf  [access 15.03.2020].  
OECD/INFE  (2012) High -level Principles on National Strategies for Financial Education , 
https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial -education/OECD -INFE -Principles -National -
Strategies -Financial -Education.pdf  [access 15.03.2020].  
Private financial technologies as a tool for sustainable business development in Russia and 
Kazakhstan. Trends in the market of financial technologies , Deloitte Research Center in the 
CIS, 2018 , https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ru/D ocuments/research -
center/Chastnye -finansovye -tekhnologii -kak-instrument -ustojchivogo -razvitiya -biznesa -
Rossii -Kazahstane.pdf  [access 1.02.2020].  
Strategy of development of the financial sector of Ukraine until 2025 , 
https://bank.gov.ua/admin_uploads/article/Strategy_FS_ 2025.pdf  [access 10.02.2020].  
Ukrainian Institute of the Future „Ukraine -2030E – a country with advanced digital economy ” 
https://strategy.uifuture.org/kraina -z-rozvinutoyu -cifrovoyu -ekonomikoyu.html#6 -2-3 
[access 2.02.2020].  
 
 
Przyjęto/Accepted: 5.06.2020  
Opublikowano/Published: 30.06.2020  