PERSPECTIVE
published: 08 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2019.00027
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 1 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Editedby:
JaneThomason,
UniversityofQueensland,Australia
Reviewedby:
CarlosSantiso,
Inter-AmericanDevelopmentBank,
UnitedStates
BethKewell,
UniversityofExeter,UnitedKingdom
*Correspondence:
RaúlZambrano
raul@ictdegov.org
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
BlockchainforGood,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinBlockchain
Received: 23May2019
Accepted: 09December2019
Published: 08January2020
Citation:
ZambranoR(2020)TamingtheBeast:
HarnessingBlockchainsinDeveloping
CountryGovernments.
Front.Blockchain2:27.
doi:10.3389/fbloc.2019.00027Taming the Beast: Harnessing
Blockchains in Developing Country
Governments
RaúlZambrano *
IndependentResearcher,InternationalDevelopmentExpert, NewYork,NY,UnitedStates
Amidpressingdemandstoachievecriticalsustainabledeve lopmentgoals,governments
in developing countries face the additional complex task of embracing new
digital technologies such as blockchains. This paper devel ops a framework
interlinkingdevelopment,technology,andgovernmentins titutionsthatpolicymakersand
development practitioners could use to address such a conun drum. State capacity and
democraticgovernanceareintroducedasdriversintheover allanalysis.Withthisinhand,
blockchain technology is revisited from the perspective of governments in the Global
South, identifying in the process key traits and proposing a new typology. An overview
of the status of blockchain deployments in the Global South f ollows, complemented
by a closer look at country examples to distill trends, patte rns and risks. The paper
closes with a discussion of the ﬁndings, highlighting both c hallenges and opportunities
forgovernments.Italsoprovidesbasicguidancetodevelop mentpractitionersinterested
in enhancing current programming using blockchains as an en abler.
Keywords: blockchains, developing countries, public good s, sustainable development, digital government, state
capacity, democratic governance, ICTD
INTRODUCTION
Thelast30yearshavewitnessedalongwaveofalmostunstoppab ledigitalinnovation.TheInternet
led the way rapidly giving birth to the World Wide Web that prove d to be a game-changer on a
globalscale.AwidevarietyofInternet-basedapplicationss uchase-commerceande-government,
to name a few, saw the light soon thereafter. By the end of the ﬁ rst decade of this century, mobile
technologies and social media were already an integral part o f the digital landscape. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning underwent a somewhat une xpected renaissance while Bitcoin
anditsunderlyingtechnology,blockchain,wereloudlywel comedasthenewkidsontheblock.
With few exceptions, developing countries have been recipient s of the latest technological
innovations—designed and produced for the most part by indust rialized countries. Adopting
and adapting the latest digital incarnations have been under taken by both private and public
initiativesintheGlobalSouth( CozzensandThakur,2014 ).Almostinparallel,globaldevelopment
agendassuchasthe2000MilleniumDevelopmentGoals(MDGs)and, since2015,theSustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) established a series of targets tha t all UN member states agreed to
achieve by 2030. Juggling these two seemingly independent age ndas has been challenging for
developing countries, especially for those where socio-econ omic and political gaps are the largest
andﬁscalandotherkeyresourcesarerelativelyscarce.
Countries in the Global South are by now familiar with the inc essant demands for change
propelled by the various so-called “digital revolutions.” Ma ny national and even regionalZambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
governments have taken action in one way or another to
harness the potential beneﬁts of new digital technologies. W hile
pilots and on the ground digital initiatives pushed by the
private sector and international donors have proliferated sin ce
the late 1990s, governments in many countries, reacting at a
slow pace, focused mostly on policy and strategy development.
Initially, countries designed and endorsed national Infor mation
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for Development
strategies ( Rahman, 2001 ). By the beginning of this century,
complementary or standalone e-Government strategies gaine d
traction and provided the public sector with a roadmap
to modernize the state sector, improve its eﬃciency and
responsiveness, and scale-up the provision of public goods and
basicservices( Ndou,2004 ).
While a few industrialized nations are already working on
this, today not one single developing country has developed a
national blockchain strategy. In contrast, several countr ies from
the Global South have already completed Artiﬁcial Intelligen ce
strategies ( Dutton, 2018 ). Nevertheless, developing countries
became the preferred test-beds for many of the ﬁrst Bitcoin an d
blockchaintechnologypilots,startingin2015( Zambrano,2017 ).
History is thus seemingly repeating itself by following the us ual
cycle of innovation diﬀusion in developing contexts ( Zanello et
al.,2016).Here,blockchaintechnologyhasnotmadeadiﬀerence
whencomparedtoprevious“digitalrevolutions.”
Within this context, this paper develops a conceptual
framework to explore how governments and the public sector
in developing countries1can eﬀectively harness blockchain
technologytotacklekeydevelopmentchallenges.Thepaperﬁrs t
presentsananalyticalframeworkthatbringstogethertechn ology,
development and state capacity. It then presents an overview
of blockchain technology from that perspective and delimits it s
scope accordingly. The third section reviews the current sta tus
of research on blockchains and development and blockchains i n
governments, complemented by an examination of relevant on
thegroundexamples.Thepaperthenpresentsadiscussionofthe
proposedframeworkandresearchﬁndings.
The focus of this paper is on blockchain technology as
a generic platform that could help achieve international and
national development goals endorsed by governments. The
monetary and ﬁnancial implications of the technology are thu s
notpartoftheanalysis.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
While the links between development and ICTs have been vastly
explored as shown below, introducing state capacity into the
equationaddsanewdimensionthatdelimitstheroleofthepub lic
sector and showcases the relevance of democratic governanc e in
theoveralldevelopmentalprocess.
1For the purposes of this paper, developing countries are not assumed to b e a
monolith. Instead, the concept includes nation-states that are a t various stages
of development as measured for example by the World Bank country income
or lending categories, or the UNDP human development index, among oth ers.
Furthermore, development is a moving target as countries can and should travel
across the various development categories in the medium-term, with some even
transferringintotheindustrialized-countryteam,eventually.Sustainable Development
While much older than ICT for Development (ICTD), the
development ﬁeld has changed dramatically in the last 30 years .
Economic growth, usually equated with economic development ,
ruled unchallenged in the early years and used standard metri cs
such as GDP to gauge progress. While some metrics are
still widely used today, challenges to the traditional econ omic
development approach started to emerge ﬁrst in the 1970s when
environmental considerations and impact were brought to the
forefront( Meadowsetal.,1972 ).
By the end of the 1980s, the concept of sustainable
developmentwascoinedbytheBrundtlandCommissionrunning
under the auspices of the United Nations ( World Commission
and on Environment Development., 1987 ). This led to the 1992
United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, where member
states agreed to the implementation of Agenda 21 ( United
Nations,1994 ).UNmeetingstotakestockontheimplementation
oftheagendatookplaceevery5yearsafteritsapproval.
The 2000 Millennium Declaration and ensuing MDGs
complemented Agenda 21 but focused primarily on poverty
reduction, gender equality, and health pandemics ( United
Nations, 2000 ). Finally, the SDGs brought together Agenda 21
and MDGs under one single umbrella. Unlike its predecessor,
the SDGs are universal and thus suited for all countries, bot h
developed and developing ( United Nations, 2015b ). However,
the number of goals, targets, and indicators grew almost
exponentially. The SDGs comprise 17 goals, 169 targets,
and232indicators2.
Many of the goals and targets set by the MDGs were not
reached in many developing countries ( United Nations, 2015a ).
Moreover, they included a set of targets and indicators calli ng
for increased ICT access and diﬀusion. The SDGs, on the other
hand, mainstreamed technology into several of the many targ ets
established ( Janowski, 2016 ) while largely avoiding using the
ICT acronym in the ﬁnal list of goals, targets, and indicators
(UnitedNations,2015c ).
Sustainable development is deﬁned as the intersection of
three core pillars: economic growth, social inclusion, and
environmental protection. The concept is usually represented
usingaVenndiagram,wherethevariousintersectionsarela beled
with unique names. Conspicuously absent here is governance ,
which is also a cross-cutting pillar that interacts with the o ther
three. Nevertheless, the SDGs directly highlight its import ance
via Goal 17 which explicitly addresses core governance issue s
such as institutional building, the rule of law, participation ,
transparency,andaccountability.
Given recent claims that blockchain is an “institutional
technology”( Davidsonetal.,2017 ),governancemustbeplacedat
thecoreforassessingthepotentialimpactofdigitaltechnol ogies
suchasblockchainsonsustainabledevelopmenteﬀorts.
State Capacity
Asgovernmentsarethemainfocusofthispaper,introducingth e
issueofstatecapacityisfundamental.
2Nine indicators are used more than once for diﬀerent targets thus increasing the
overalltotalto241.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 2 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Recent research shows that state capacity played a key
role in the achievement of the MDGs targeting poverty
reduction ( Asadullah and Savoia, 2018 ). Countries with
low state capacity were less successful than those that
were better equipped with capable institutions to support
the provision of public goods. Moreover, a higher state
capacity also helped sustain the gains made in the medium-
term, whereas those with weaker capacity were prone to
short-termreversals.
Thefactthatthereisnouniversalconsensusonadeﬁnitiono f
statecapacityisjustareﬂectionofitsmultidimensionalch aracter
and complexity (e.g., Hau, 2012 ). For the purposes of this paper,
however, state capacity is deﬁned by the following traits (bas ed
onSavoiaandSen,2015 ):
1.Institutional capacity : Capacity to design and implement
development policies and programs, including the provision
of public goods, as well as the legal capacity to sustain the
rule of law in the long run. A professional and qualiﬁed civil
service, along with “rules of the game” for public institutio ns
foreﬃcientandtransparentrunningarepartoftheequation.
2.Fiscal capacity : Capacity to capture ﬁnancial resources in a
sustained fashion via taxation and other sources including
externalones.
3.Infrastructuralcapacity: Abilitytocarryoutinstitutionaland
ﬁscalresponsibilitiesinalltheterritoriesundertheirco ntrolof
the state. Includes Weber’s well-known state monopoly over
themeansofviolenceormilitarycapacity.
From a governance perspective, three issues are pertinent.
First, distinguishing between state capacity and political r egimes
is essential. Strong states are frequently seen as a proxy
for authoritarian or non-democratic regimes. However, mos t
Westerndemocracieshavestateswithhighcapacity,whilema ny
non-democratic regimes operate with little to no institutio nal
development ( Tilly, 2007a ) thus having to use force and
repressiontosupportexistingregimes.
Second,democraticgovernanceregimescanonlybesustaine d
over the long haul if a high capacity state is in place. Indeed,
“democracy is a verb” ( Tilly, 2007b ), which is saying that such
a political regime is not stationary but rather the locus of
dynamic contention among diﬀerent sets of actors and groups.
De-democratizationprocessescanindeedtakeplaceashasinf act
occurred in the last 20 years throughout the world. The rise of
populism, nationalism and some forms of proto-fascism in this
periodprovidesthenecessaryevidence.
Finally, states also need to have the necessary capabilities
to harness new technologies, especially new ones such as
blockchains and Artiﬁcial Intelligence that have a relativ ely high
degree of complexity. This capacity, however, is not limited
to technical knowledge, which is important, but also demands
institutional capacity to develop successful policies and su pport
on the ground initiatives, directly or indirectly via third parties,
includingtheprivatesector.
However, the same technologies that help provide basic
public goods to vulnerable and excluded populations can also
be used to support de-democratization processes. This is theconundrum that developing countries must address as they
deploydigitaltechnologies.
All in all, state capacity is both a means to achieve
development goals and a development goal in itself, particularl y
if resilient and long-term democratic regimes are part of the
coregoals.Nevertheless,statecapacityhasrarelybeenconsi dered
when studying the links between ICTs, development, and
governments(e.g., EstevezandJanowski,2013 ).
ICTs and Development
ICT for Development
The ﬁeld of ICT for development (ICTD) has been around for
almost40years( Walsham,2017 )andcontinuestoevolve.While
several competing theories and schools of thought have alrea dy
emerged ( Zheng, 2015 ), the ﬁeld still faces three critical and
interconnected challenges. First and perhaps most obvious, i s
the link between ICT and development which boils down to
the question of how exactly do ICTs foster development ( Heeks,
2010; Zheng et al., 2018 ). It is regularly assumed that digital
technologiesautomaticallyaccomplishthis,regardlessof howthe
latterisdeﬁned.
Thesecondandcloselyrelatedtotheformeristhelackofsol id
evidenceontheactualimpactofICTsindevelopmentalprocesse s
(Foster and Heeks, 2014; Brown and Skelly, 2019 ). Estonia and
South Korea are cited as examples of success but they are more
the exception than the rule. Finally, the ﬁeld has a bias towar d
technology and infrastructure ( Gomez, 2013 ). This is perhaps
best reﬂected by the marked emphasis placed on the “digital
divide”combinedwithconcurrentglobalcallsforconnectin gthe
nextbillionusers( Andreasson,2015 ).
From a practitioners perspective, these three core challenges
are closely related. Access to digital technologies automa tically
empowerspeoplewhocanthentakemattersintotheirownhands
andpropelhumanandsustainabledevelopmentinthemedium-
term. Measuring impact is thus based on metrics centered on
accesstoanduseofthenewtechnologies( ITU,2016 ).
Any resemblance with a trickle-down theory of digital
development is not coincidental. Furthermore, current evid ence
does not provide support for such a theory. In eﬀect, the rapid
evolution of digital technologies such as the Internet and s ocial
media,haveyetmakeadentondevelopmentaccordingtorecent
research ( Comin and Mestieri, 2018 ). The same goes for mobile
technologiesthathavespreadgloballyatanunprecedentedpace3.
For the purposes of this paper, ICTs are instead deemed to
beenablersof development processes ( Zambrano and Eymann,
2014). ICTs have the potential to amplify existing programs
and initiatives, bring new solutions to old problems and fost er
democraticgovernanceandinstitutions.Suchpotentialsho uldbe
harnessed by local actors and institutions who acting in con cert
canbringpositivechangeforward.Ontheﬂipside,newICTsal so
generatenewchallengesthatmightdemandattention.
3It is essential to distinguish here between ICTD and the ICT se ctor. The latter
has grown exponentially since the late 1990s and propelled economic growt h in
industrialized countries ( McKinsey, 2011 ). Countries such as India, South Korea,
Taiwan and China have also been able to successfully develop relativ ely large
ICTsectors.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 3 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Blockchain technology squarely falls into this framework b ut
also goes beyond the digital divide and connectivity approach es.
Blockchains work as long as people are connected but, unlike
otherdigitaltechnologies,arenotdestinedtopromoteincr eased
accesstotheInternetandclosethedigitaldivide.
ICTs in Government
The implementation of development agendas at all levels is in
itself a challenge for developing countries where state capac ity
is incipient. Adding new technologies to the equation might
complicatemattersmore.
On the other hand, developing country governments should
not attempt to drive development agendas on their own. Here,
the distinction between private and public goods is crucial4. In
the case of private goods and services , the private sector, big and
small, should take the lead. Governments should have adequa te
institutional, legal, and infrastructural capacity to ensu re this is
possible and, if market failures are pervasive, create incent ive
mechanismstoattracttherequiredcapitalandhumanresourc es.
Nevertheless, governments should take the helm to guide the
modernization of the public sector and the universal provisio n
of public goods. The former is the entry point to increase state
capacity, in a sustained manner5. The latter, which depends to a
largeextentonstatecapacity,ﬁllsdevelopmentgapsthatfall right
into the purview of government. Governance provides a third
pillar. State modernization and public goods service provisio n
should be designed and implemented within a democratic
governance framework where the rule of law, participation,
transparency, and accountability are core drivers that perme ate
allofsociety.
Digital Government
Developing countries are no strangers to the deployment and
use of digital technologies within governments. Over 20 yea rs
ago, E-government appeared in the scene and rapidly spread to
mostcountries.Asmentionedabove,manydevelopingcountri es
ended up designing e-government strategies. Despite repeate d
failures(Heeks,2005 ),initiativesdidnotﬁzzleout.Furthermore,
the concept has evolved since, from e-Government to e-
Governance, Transformational Government, Lean Governmen t,
Open Government, Smart Government, Digital Government,
and Intelligent Governments, among others ( Janssen and
Estevez,2013;Millard,2018 ).
This paper uses digital government broadly deﬁned as public
investments on ICTs to modernize the public sector, increase
state capacity, and scale-up the provision of public goods.
For developing countries where democratic regimes prevail,
bringing into the equation the democratic governance approac h
mentioned above is critical. In this context, the net outcom e of
successful ICT investments in public institutions should no t be
limited to access, eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. More relevant a re
the strengthening of democratic institutions where transpa rency
and accountability shine the most and citizen and stakehold er
engagementbecomespartofdailylife.
4Asdiscussedin Zambrano(2017) .
5Butnotnecessarilyanincreaseinstatesize.Figure1presents the three pillars of digital government and
itsinterconnections.
For developing country democracies, the key entry point is
engagement with stakeholders to deﬁne policy agendas, ident ify
keychallenges,andprioritizeinterventions.Governments should
then be able to identify the public entities that need to
be involved according to existing legal mandates. Allocatio n
of public resources is then ﬁnalized and changes in the
provision of selected public goods should eventually improve.
Stakeholders can then provide feedback and demand changes
andimprovements.
Sequencingbetweenthesepillarsisalsoessential.Forexample ,
governments cannot start implementing e-service delivery if
they have not ﬁrst developed adequate internal ICT and human
capacity,andupdatedormodernizedexistingbusinessprocesse s.
However, nothing is preventing governments from starting
with service delivery or ignore the co-creation phase and the
engagementwithstakeholders.
While the diagram emphasizes the “e” aspect of each pillar,
thecyclecanalsotakeplacewithouthavingICTsineachofthe m.
This is especially true for the participation and service deliv ery
pillars. Instead, a multichannel approach is most suited in many
cases,particularlyincountrieswhereICTpenetrationislow and
povertyisstillpervasive.
This is a critical caveat as, in principle, where binding
consultation is institutionally required, governance inst ances
should be in place for stakeholder participation to have any
meaningful impact on policies and agenda setting, regardless of
thesizeofthe“digitaldivide.”
CHARACTERIZING BLOCKCHAIN
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR
The truth machine ( Casey and Vigna, 2018 ). The trust machine
(The Economist, 2015 ). The Internet of value ( Tapscott and
Tapscott,2016 ).Thesearesomeofthenamescoinedbydiﬀerent
authors, academic and pundits to capture the complexity of
the technology in one phrase. While catchy, they fall short
from elucidating the beneﬁts of the technology from a public
sectorperspective.
Almost 10 years after its birth, publication after publicatio n
continues to explore ways to explain the inner workings of
the technology to the average person (e.g., Williams, 2019 ).
Technologydiﬀusiondoesnotdependontheleveloftechnology
comprehensionbythepublic( Kapooretal.,2014 ).
In this section, blockchain technology is characterized fr om
theperspectiveofthepublicsectorindevelopingcountries,usi ng
the conceptual framework presented in the previous section as
aguide.
Revisiting Blockchain, Again
Ablockchainisa digitalledger supportedbythesmartintegration
of three existing technologies: peer-to-peer (distributed)
networks; cryptography; and consensus algorithms. Blockchai n
technology complexity stems in part from the fact that its
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 4 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
FIGURE 1 | The pillars of digital government.
supporting technologies have been hanging out at the fringes o f
theglobalnetwork.
While the concept of digital raises little doubt, the same
cannotbesaidabouttheledgernatureofblockchains.Despit ethe
increasing popularity of spreadsheets, accountants are perhaps
the group most familiar with ledgers as they continuously us e
them for business purposes. In that world, ledgers are analog or
digital books where a series of transactions, mostly credit s and
debits, are sequentially recorded. Not surprisingly, some h ave
suggestedthatblockchainsareindeedaformoftripleaccoun ting
(Simoyama et al., 2017; Taylor, 2017 ). Being that as it may, the
key point here is that blockchains are not part of the relationa l
databasetechnologyfamily.Blockchainsarethusnotdesig nedto
storebigdata,forexample.
Moreover, and unlike traditional accounting ledgers,
blockchain technology provides an open avenue for
skilled users to write native computer code. Developing
applications that operate within the platform or interact
with external sources and resources is thus a key feature.
Usually presented under the umbrella of smart contracts,
programming in blockchains is not limited to them, as
discussedbelow.
The underlying peer-to-peer or distributed network should
not be confused with a decentralized one. Although the terms
are used as synonyms in much of the literature, the latter all ows
for local centralization. That is, a group of nodes close tog ether
depend on central local one which in turn provides the link to
other node clusters operating under similar arrangements. I n a
trulydistributednetworklikeblockchain,allnodesareeq ualand
liveindependently.
One and two-way encryption tools are extensively used in
blockchains. The ﬁrst is known as hashing and creates an
irreversible and unique digital signature for every transa ction,
a group of transactions, and blocks added to the existing cha in.Thesecondisasymmetricpublickeycryptographythatgenerate s
publicandprivatekeysforendusers.Userssharetheirpublicke ys
whilekeepingtheirprivatekeysinasafespace,digitaloranal og.
Mostofthedatarecordedonablockchainarethuscomprisedof
hashesandpublickeys.
Two types of consensus take place in blockchain technology
(Beyer, 2019 ). The ﬁrst one occurs when the specialized nodes
working on adding a new block of transactions to the chain, th e
so-calledminers,agreeonwhichtransactionsshouldbeinc luded
insuchblock.ThisisknownasNakamotoconsensus.Thesecond
happens when the new block of transactions is actually added to
the chain. Here, any node or network user can validate such a
blockandagreetoappendittotheexistingchain6.
Insum,ablockchainisaprogrammabledigitallayeroperating
within a distributed network, requiring cryptographic tools
for access and transaction management, and using consensus
algorithms for adding or appending new blocks of transactions
totheledger.
Key Traits
A vast literature on the key traits of blockchain technology
already exists. This section presents key blockchain traits based
onthecontributionthateachofitsthreeunderlyingtechno logies
furnishes.Twodiﬀerentsetsoftraitsemerge.Onestemsfrom the
unique contribution of each of the base technologies. The ot her
istheresultoftheintegrationandinteractionamongthem.
Table1summarizesthekeytraitsaccordingly.
Traits in the matrix diagonal represent standalone
contributions. All other boxes are the result of the integra tion of
thethreetechnologies.
6Validation is almost instantaneous as all it requires is the multiplica tion of the
unique hash identifying the previous block by the nonce(number used once)
providedbythenode(miner)requestingtheadditionofthenewbloc k.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 5 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
TABLE 1 | Blockchain technology core traits.
P2P network Cryptography Consensus
algorithms
P2P network Resilience Consensus/
TransparencyConsensus/
Transparency
Cryptography Consensus/
TransparencyPseudonymity Security
Consensus
algorithmsConsensus/
TransparencySecurity Immutability/
Incentives
Standalonetraitsinclude:
Resilience : In a distributed network, multiple independent
copiesoftheblockchaincanco-exist.Thereisthusnocentra l
pointoffailure.
Pseudonymity : Cryptographic tools enable users to interact
with others without having to reveal their real identities
or providing any personal data. A relatively high degree of
privacy thus exists. The same however does not apply to
transactions that in principle can be viewed by anyone in
thenetwork.
Immutability : Blocks of transactions in the chain are time-
stamped and mathematically linked in sequential order.
Changingoneblockthusrequireschangingallotherblocks.
Incentives :Processingtransactionsandaddingnewblocksto
thechainbringsﬁnancialbeneﬁtstonodesinvolved(miners ).
Transaction fees and cryptocurrency rewards are the most
commonformsofincome.
Traits stemming from the integration of the
technologiesinclude:
Consensus : Transaction processing and block addition are
validated by network nodes in all cases. This is algorithmic
consensus that should not be confused with human-
basedconsensus.
Transparency :Userinteractionsandtheresultingdatacanbe
viewed by any network member. Conﬁdential information or
datahasnoplacehere.
Security: Resilience, immutability, and consensus
substantially increase the level of internal blockchain
security.Whilestillpossible,hackingandnetworkattacks are
stillpossible.
Typology
Diﬀerenttypesofblockchainshaveemergedsincethetechnolo gy
ﬁrst saw the light of day wearing a large Bitcoin/cryptocurre ncy
hat. The standard way of classifying blockchains relies
on the distinction between private and public, alongside
permission levels. In this perspective, three diﬀerent blockch ain
types emerge public, private, and consortium blockchains
(e.g.,Thompson, 2018 ). While relevant for the private
sector, such diﬀerentiation might not be as eﬀective from
a public sector perspective. Furthermore, one potential
issue with such typology is the lack of clear diﬀerentiation
between the link/network and the application layers of
thetechnology.The distinction between private and consortium blockchains
hinges in part on how many entities control access to the
application layer. From the viewpoint of governments, having a
so-called “private blockchain” in the public sector might not be
the best way to promote the technology, given current demands
forincreasedtransparencyandaccountability.Government scan
also have multiple institutions involved in the deployment of
one blockchain platform—as could be the case for government
interoperability,isoneofthemainstaplesofdigitalgovern ment.
Calling such an arrangement a consortium does not add any
valuefromthepublicsectorperspective.
The best way to avoid such potential pitfalls is to go back
to the three core blockchain technologies described in sect ion
RevisitingBlockchain,Againandsuggestanalternativetypo logy
that caters to the speciﬁc idiosyncrasies of the public sector. For
starters,peer-to-peernetworksoperateatthelink/networkl ayers
andcanbeeitheropenorclosed.Userseitherﬁndthedooropen
andwalkrightinormustﬁrstringthedoorbelltobeabletoent er.
Cryptographic tools and consensus algorithms operate at the
application layer. Nodes or users accessing such layers are ﬁrs t
authenticated and then furnished an authorization to perfor m
speciﬁc actions—such as creating a smart contract, mining th e
blockchainnetworkordevelopingaDapp,forexample.
Table2depicts the matrix of options by separating the
diﬀerentlayers.
Note that blockchains require all users to be authenticated,
regardlessofaccesstype.Thediﬀerencebetweenopenandclosed
network access depends on how users are authenticated. In the
case of open access, users self-authenticate by creating pair s of
public/private keys and digital signatures that uniquely ide ntify
them. In the case of closed access, a third-party (one or more
entities)issuestheauthenticationcredentialsusingcrypt ographic
tools. Note that open access authentication does not fulﬁll
know-your-customer (KYC) or anti-money-laundering (AML)
regulationsandthusmightbelessattractivetobothgovern ments
andbusinessesboundbythem7.
Once authenticated, nodes will be able to access the
applicationlayer.Inthecaseofclassicblockchainnetworkss uch
asBitcoinandEthereum,authenticationalonegrantsimmed iate
access to the application layer. Authorization does not exist a s a
separate instance and thus, no central authority is required . In
thiscase,accesstotheapplicationlayerisfullydecentrali zed.But
open access blockchain platforms can also limit access to such
layer. Typically, this happens when the platform wants to limit
thenumberofnodesthatcanminetransactionsand/oraddane w
block. A hybrid open blockchain decentralizes the link/netw ork
laterbutcentralizesaccesstosomepartoftheapplicationlaye r.
For closed access networks, both authentication and
authorization are managed by a central outﬁt—one single ent ity
(private, in the traditional scheme) or many working togethe r
(consortium). Access to the link/network and application laye rs
is thus fully centralized. However, it is also possible that a clo sed
blockchain platform provides all authenticated nodes full ac cess
7In the cryptocurrency realm, KYC/AML services are provided in a centraliz ed
fashion by either coin exchanges or other specialized busines ses associated.
Governmentshowevercannotoutsourcesuchfunctionssoeasily .
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 6 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
TABLE 2 | Blockchains typology for the public sector.
Authentication Authorization
Network
AccessYes No
Open Autonomous Hybridopen
Selected nodes,
one or more
parties in charge
(Sovrin, EOS)Decentralized
Open to all by
default
(Bitcoin, Ethereum)
Closed Granted Centralized
Selected nodes,
one or more
parties in charge
(Hyperledger, R3)Hybridclosed
Open to all
authenticated
nodes (“Govchains”)
to the application layer. This might be relevant to public secto r
initiativeswhereallactorswithinasingleministryorinm ultiple
ministries or public entities work together in a cross-secto ral
initiative. The concept of “GovChains” might prove useful her e.
A GovChain is similar to a government dedicated network
with secure links to external clients. A GovChain runs on suc h
networkbutaddfunctionalityattheapplicationlayer.
Finally, this typology highlights the similarities between
hybrid open and closed centralized blockchains. In both, the
levels of authorization to the application layer are provided b y
a central outﬁt. However, since hybrid open networks do not
control authentication, all nodes and users still have read access
to the full blockchain. This is not the case in closed blockch ain
networks. The latter can also introduce more sophisticated
access control schemes to assign diﬀerent roles of nodes in th e
applicationlayer.
Smart Contracts
Undoubtedly, smart contracts are one of the most touted
blockchain features. While the idea itself dates from the en d of
last century ( Szabo, 1997 ), blockchains created the platform for
theactualimplementationoftheidea.
For example, Ethereum provides the software (Solidity)8and
platform (Ethereum Virtual Machine)9to program and execute
contracts10. In this fashion, transactions envisaged on a given
agreementcanbetriggeredatapre-establisheddateorbyact ion
takenbyoneofthepartiesinvolved.Contractualtransactio nsare
automaticallyexecutedand,sincethepartieshavedirectac cessto
digitalcurrency,paymentsoccursmoothly.
8https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/v0.5.7/
9https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/introduction-t o-smart-contracts.
html#index-6. Ethereum smart contracts have their own blockchain a ccounts
whichfunctionindistinctfashionvis-a-visuseraccounts .
10According to Ethereum, “‘Contracts” in Ethereum should not be seen as
something that should be “fulﬁlled” or “complied with”; rather, they a re more
like“autonomousagents”thatliveinsideoftheEthereumexecut ionenvironment,
alwaysexecutingaspeciﬁcpieceofcodewhen“poked”byamessageo rtransaction,
and having direct control over their own ether balance and their own key/value
store to store their permanent state’. https://ethereum-homestead. readthedocs.io/
en/latest/contracts-and-transactions/account-types-gas- and-transactions.htmlSmart contracts also come in diﬀerent ﬂavors ( OSTechNix,
2019). The ﬁrst one mirrors traditional legal contracts which
can now be executed on a blockchain platform. Not limited to
ﬁnancial agreements ( Murphy, 2018 ), these type of contracts
have attracted most of the attention of both practitioners an d
academics (e.g., Macrinici et al., 2018 ). DAOs or Decentralized
Autonomous Organizations come in second. Here, a given
community agrees to speciﬁc governance arrangements which
are then coded into a binding smart contract. DAOs suﬀered a
devastatingsetbackthankstothewell-known2016hack( Falkon,
2017)butarestillbeingexploredbypractitionersandacademics
(e.g.,Dialloetal.,2018 ).
Finally, Application Layer Contracts (ALCs) provide an
interface between the blockchains and applications such as
Dapps and the Internet of Things. Less well-known than the
others, ALCs handle multiple smart contracts. Here, the line
betweencontractsandregularcomputingprogrammingstartst o
blur. ALCs resemble well-known software gateways that allo w
communication across diﬀerent platforms at the application
layer. Coding seems to become now a “contract” which in turn
recalls“codeislaw”arguments( Dwyer,2017;Yeung,2019 ).
As with most nascent technologies, smart contracts have
limitations. On the technology side, they are prone to coding
errors and bugs as the DAO hack shows. This is exacerbated
by the fact that programmers must translate legal contracts i nto
code. Complex contracts might thus yield additional coding
errors and bugs. As all nodes have to run and validate the code
insmartcontracts,codesizeislimitedandthusrunningcom plex
applications is not possible ( O’Connell, 2019 ). Again, complex
contractsmightnotbesuitableforblockchainexecution.
While smart contracts reduce transaction costs, which are
now executed automatically, costs related to contract breac hes,
dispute resolution, and redress are much higher ( Szczerbowski,
2018).Smartcontractsarealsoimmutableandactasautonomous
agents. In this light, researchers recommend using a hybrid
approach where both regular and smart contracts act in sync
(LeviandLipton,2018 ).
The question on the legality of the ﬁrst type of contracts
has received plenty of attention ( Frankenreiter, 2019; Waltl et
al., 2019) Authors have argued that some smart contracts are
compatiblewithcurrentlegislation,atleastinafewindustr ialized
countries( DeFilippiandWright,2018 ).Moregenerally,itseems
thatlawsandregulationswillneedtobechangedorupdated.
Indevelopingcountrieswithweakstatecapacityandincipient
ruleoflawinstitutions,thismightbecomeamajorchalleng e.
Blockchains Are Not a Monolith
Since its inception, dynamic innovation, backed by top human
talentwithaccesstosubstantialﬁnancialresources,hasb eenpart
of the blockchain ecosystem. The community has thus been abl e
not only to tackle the initial limitations of the technology but
alsotoenhanceitscorefunctionality.Asseenabove,block chains
come in many diﬀerent formats and more are popping up by
the day. This is a critical consideration for both academics a nd
policymakers. Blockchain technology is not a monolith. On th e
contrary,blockchainsareamovingtarget.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 7 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Here, the distinction between blockchains and distributed
ledger technologies (DLTs) is important ( Dexter, 2018 ).
Blockchains are a subset of DLTs. A blockchain is a DLT that
mathematically links blocks of data in sequential fashion u sing
cryptographic tools. A DLT is a digital ledger that runs on a
distributed network and does not require the use of consensu s
algorithmsforitsfulloperation11.
BLOCKCHAIN-ING GOVERNMENTS
Blockchains, Development, and
Governments
Just like its digital technology predecessors such as the Inte rnet,
both for-proﬁt and non-proﬁt innovators and practitioners
continuously showcase the relevance of the new technology t o
tacklesocio-economic,political,andenvironmentalissue s.Here,
diﬀerentlayersanddiﬀerentlabelsappearinthescene.
The ﬁrst layer, which in turn is the most generic, links
blockchains to existing and emerging issues without necess arily
referencing development or the SDGs—albeit the latter being
universal. Labels used to describe this link include blockchain
for social good (Podder and Venkat, 2018; BreakerMag, 2019 ),
blockchain for social impact (Fernando, 2018 ), andblockchain
for social change (Verlhust and Young, 2018 ), the latter being
a research project. For example, the Blockchain for Social
ImpactCoalition(BSIC),spearheadedbyaNY-basedblockchai n
company, was launched in 2017. Comprised of close to 50
entities, BSIC mentions the SDGs but has set its own agenda12
Forthemostpart,blockchainstartupsworkingundertheselab els
take the initiative on their own and venture into the ﬁeld to
experimentwiththenascenttechnology.
PaceKewell13,akeyissuewiththissetofinitiativesisthelack
ofarigorousdeﬁnitionoftheconceptsbeingputforward.Soci al
good might have diﬀerent meanings for diﬀerent communities,
moresoiftheworkisundertakenonaglobalscale.Furthermo re,
social change and social impact can also be negative. That is,
on the ground projects can also generate change and impact
by exacerbating existing gaps despite the best eﬀorts of those
doing the implementation. Indicators and metrics to assess a nd
measurechangearemissinginmostoftheseeﬀorts.
The second layer includes entities directly supporting the
achievementoftheSDGs.Threegroupscomprisethislayer.The
ﬁrst works on a global scale and have advocacy and awareness-
raising role. The Blockchain Commission, a partnership of th ree
non-proﬁt entities launched at the United Nations in 2017, is a
typicalexample.
A second group includes UN agencies and development
organizations that work in developing countries. UNDP and
UNICEF,amongmanyothers,aregoodexamples.Theseentities
work on the ground and disburse their own resources as
11To be more precise, both blockchains and DLTs are part of the broader con cept
ofdistributedsystemswhereconsensusonhoweventsarerecordedi sfundamental
toensuresystemconsistencyandstability( Lamport,1978 ).
12https://blockchainforsocialimpact.com/about/
13Kewell et al. (2017) explored the links between blockchains and sustainable
development using an aﬀordances perspective, coining the term “bloc kchain for
good”intheprocess.grants to ﬁnance projects. UNICEF has launched an innovation
fund which has over 15 million dollars to ﬁnance innovative
blockchain projects in developing countries ( Harry, 2017;
UNICEF, 2018 ). UNDP allocates small grants from existing
resources and ﬁnances pilots, usually in partnership with
blockchain startups ( UNDP, 2018 ). Note that these grants go
to local innovators and entrepreneurs in developing and not to
governments. Most entities working in the SDG realm select th e
goals and targets that reﬂect their own internal mandates. Re ach
andscalealsoplayaroleascovering18goalsandover200targ ets
does require considerable human and ﬁnancial resources tha t
mostdonothave.
Last but not least are the organizations working in the
humanitarian space. This group also includes UN agencies as
well as reputed organizations that have carried out this line of
workformanyyears.WhileUNagenciessuchastheWorldFood
Programme(WFP)14operateindevelopingcountries,thisisnot
the case for many others. Perhaps surprisingly, one of the most
well-knownexamplesofapparentblockchainsuccessoccurredi n
this space thanks to WFP refugee program in Jordan ( Juskalian,
2018; WFP, 2018 ), which is now expanding to other regions and
thematic areas ( Baydakova, 2018 ). A recent report details the
various initiatives in this space while highlighting some les sons
learnedsofar( Coppi,2019 ).
While governments in developing countries are not one of
the main overall targets of these groups, very few take a more
comprehensiveandstrategicapproach,orexplicitlyconsiderth e
provision of public goods by governments as is the case, for
example, of the blockchain for social change research project
(VerlhustandYoung,2018 ).
Development organizations such as the Center for Global
Development, USAID, the International Development Research
Center and the Institute for Development Studies generated
reports aimed at understanding the potential development
impact of blockchains ( Hernandez, 2017; Pisa and Judden,
2017; Zambrano, 2017; Nelson, 2018; Pisa, 2018 ). These authors
attempted to delimit the speciﬁc application of the emerging
technology in the Global South while pushing back on the
ongoing hype. The Asian Development Bank produced a report
targeting Asia and provided recommendations based on the
analysis of ﬁve use cases ( Ferrarini et al., 2017 ), including digital
identity,project-aidmonitoring,andsmartenergy,allrel evantto
mostdevelopingcountries.
Morerecently,anoverallblockchainresearchreviewinclude d
an analysis of the relevance of the technology in the
implementation of the SDGs ( Hughes et al., 2019 ). The authors
highlight the goals and targets where blockchains technolo gy
could have the most impact while providing a couple of use
cases based on selected current development challenges Indi a is
facingtoday.
The current approach to deploy blockchains in support of
development is centered on the elaboration of relevant use
cases,whichmightbeopenlylinkedtodevelopmentgoals.Once
completed,theyarethenpitchedtosocialventures,developmen t
14WFPdoesbothhumanitariananddevelopmentwork.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 8 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
organizationsorevengovernmentsintheGlobalSouthtosec ure
eitherfundingorsupport-orboth—forsmallpilots.
Given the deluge of publications (and academic research)
on the technology, the above examples show a giant gap
when it comes to deploying blockchains in developing country
governments. Furthermore, only a few of these directly link
such deployments to digital government policies, strategies ,
and implementation agendas which, as reported by the United
Nations ( UNDESA, 2018 ), is ongoing in most countries,
includingdevelopingnations.
Therelationshipbetweenblockchainsanddigitalgovernme nt
has thus attracted little attention and real case studies ar e
for the most part missing in action15. Three distinct patterns
can however be identiﬁed. First, blockchains are positioned
assupport infrastructure for ongoing e-government platforms
and initiatives. Here, the emphasis is on the technology and
innovation part of the equation, and not on the institutional
beneﬁts, thus drastically reducing its transformational po tential
Second, blockchains are seen as a threat, sometimes lethal, to
public institutions as they seem to demand dramatic changes
in the way they are run—to the point that might put their
existenceintoquestion.Andthird,onthegroundevidencef rom
blockchaindeploymentswithingovernmentsisincipientatbe st.
Country Examples
While many blockchain pilots and projects are taking place in
developingcountries,someeveninvolvingthepublicsector, only
afewareactuallyledbygovernments.Thissubsectionhighl ights
someofthesecases,bearinginmindthatkeepingtrackofalls uch
initiativesisacomplextask.
Estonia is often cited as a best practice for blockchain
deployment ( Sullivan and Burger, 2017; Guarda, 2018 ) and an
example to follow. The country has managed to graduate to
the developed country team in <30 years. Estonia gained its
independencein1991andrapidlygainedalegitimatereputatio n
of a country able to harness ICTs to promote overall human
development. E-governance became its main staple. Nowadays,
thecountryprovidesassistanceinthisareatomanyothersal most
onaglobalscale.
The 2007 cyber-attacks on Estonia’s overall infostructure
opened the door for further innovation in the area of security .
That same year a company called Guardtime was launched,
oﬀering government a solution called KSI (Keyless Service
Infrastructure), which allowed for the decentralized veri ﬁcation
of public records, data, and access points without having to
use a digital signature. Instead, KSI uses one-way hashing
and a decentralized ledger. Deployed in 2008, KSI does
resembleblockchaintechnologysansoneofitscorecomponen ts:
consensusalgorithms.
Beingthatasitmay,thekeypointoftheEstoniaexampleisthe
role KSI played in supporting existing e-governance platforms
15Academic research, reviewed by the author, has the same gaps. For e xample,
the latest literature review on the subject published last Summer was on ly able
to identify twenty one relevant papers ( Batubara et al., 2018 ). Only six were
published in academic journals. Moreover, most of these papers take a s ectoral
approachfocusingontopicssuchaselectoralprocesses,healthcare,a ndeducation,
tomentonafew.and services. It furnished a new solution to a major digital
challenge that could perhaps not be solved otherwise. While th e
company claims it beat Nakamoto by a couple of years16, KSI is
notinthesameballparkasBitcoinorEthereum17.Technological
replication of the Estonia case using a diﬀerent platform might
thusbemorecomplexthanexpected.
While not a country, Dubaiis certainly larger in population
thanEstoniaandhostsover200nationalities.TheDubaiEmi rate
alsooperatesalmostlikeacity-stateandhasitsownpoliciesa nd
institutions in addition to federal ones. Back in 2016, the P rime
MinisteroftheEmirateannouncedthelaunchingofablockcha in
strategy planned to be fully implemented by 2020 ( Gulf News,
2016). Spearheaded by Smart Dubai, a local entity that oversees
the strategic deployment of new technologies and innovation in
close collaboration with the private sector, the strategy se t three
core goals: foster government eﬃciency; create new busines s
opportunities and startups; and assume a leadership position on
blockchaintechnologies( Bishr,2018 ).
Intermsofeﬃciency,twokeyprioritieshavebeenidentiﬁed: a
paperless government and a blockchain-based payments system
(Jones, 2018 ). Note that both themes were already part of the
overall policy agenda of Smart Dubai, which also happens to
hosttheSmartDubaiGovernmentinitiative18.Thesecondtheme
focusing on startups is also part of the Smart Dubai agenda.
More recently, Smart Dubai launched a decentralized open data
initiative, yet another local priority previously identiﬁed , in
partnershipwithablockchaincompany( Andrikopoulos,2019 ).
While getting updated information on the evolution of these
projects is cumbersome, the core lesson from Dubai is similar to
that of Estonia: blockchains are brought in to support existing
digital government issues and priorities and are eﬀectively
deployed to address related challenges. But in the case of Dub ai,
theEmiratehasdevelopedastrategyandcreatedaninternati onal
multi-stakeholderboardtooverseeitsimplementation( Berryhill
etal.,2018 ).
Kenyaseems to be following these same steps. Early last year
the government announced the creation of a blockchain task
force under the leadership of the Ministry of ICT. The task
force prepared a report which was submitted to the Minister
lastNovember.Whilethereportisapparentlynotpublicly,press
reports suggest that its contents are fully aligned with Keny a’s
development priorities ( Kenyan Wallstreet, 2018; Tanui, 2018 ).
Perhapscoincidentally,thegovernmentannouncedaprogramt o
provideaﬀordablehousingamonthbefore( Alexandre,2018 ).
CountriessuchasGeorgiaandPeruhavetakenamoresectoral
approach. Georgiaisoneoftheleadersintheuseofblockchains
for land title registration which has already been the subjec t
of critical academic research ( Lemieux, 2017; Thomas, 2017 ).
Recently, Peruannounced a new government procurement
system based on blockchain technology in partnership with a
local blockchain startup and the Inter American Development
Bank (IADB). Public procurement is one of the main sources of
16https://guardtime.com/technology
17KSIcanbestationedwithintheDLTrubric.
18Smart Dubai also spearheads the local Artiﬁcial Intelligence strateg y among
others.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 9 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
corruptionandatraditionalpriorityofe-governmentinitia tives.
IADB has launched a hemispheric initiative called LAC-Chain
withtheideaofsupportingthedeploymentofthetechnologyon
itsclientcountries( IDB,2018 ).
In any event, neither of these two countries have an overall
blockchain strategy. In principle then, the results and outco mes
of ongoing sectoral initiatives can provide fertile ground f or
suchdevelopment.
A counterexample for the developed world can also oﬀer
additional insights. Illinois became the ﬁrst US state to emb race
blockchaintechnology.Launchedattheendof2016,theinit iative
was part of the broader Smarter State initiative sponsored by
the Department of Innovation and Technology. The blockchain
project has three overall targets: increase government eﬃci ency
byintegratingservices;developalocalecosystem;andmod ernize
governancetohandleadistributedeconomy( IllinoisBlockchain
Initiative, 2017 ). Pilots on land titles and self-sovereign identity
werelaunchedafewmonthslater.
However, by the beginning of 2018, the project seems to have
ﬁzzled. The ﬁnal report published February last year highligh ts
thelimitationsofthetechnology,includingthelackofsuc cessful
pilots, scalability, interoperability, and lack of privacy ( Van
Wagenen, 2018 ).So whileIllinoisfollows thesame pathassome
countries discussed above, technical limitations seem to h ave
prevented success. In addition, the fact that the project was
requestingspeciﬁclegislativechangesatthestatelevelmi ghthave
alsoruﬄedsomefeathers.
DISCUSSION
Overview
The intersections between development, ICTs and developing
country governments provide the fodder for the conceptual
framework developed in this paper. Figure2 below depicts
such interconnections. Governments play various roles when
it comes to sustainable development and ICTs, and are not
limitedtothedigitalgovernmentsphere perse.Butgovernments
should lead to promote digital government within a sustainab le
developmentcontext.
On the ﬂip side, the traditional approach to e-government
centersontherelationbetweenthepublicsectorandtechnol ogy
while assuming development outcomes are either the natural
FIGURE 2 | Digital government in a development context.and automatic. For example, the standard e-government
transactional approach that emphasizes G2B, G2C, and G2G
interactions—depicted in Figure2 by the intersection between
government and ICTs, has limited scope for targeting speciﬁc
development gaps as the onus is on interactions among key
sectorsandstakeholders.
Having governments as part and parcel of the overall
equation also demands serious consideration of the relation ship
between state capacity and both development and digital
technologies.Thedynamicsbetweenthesethreecanbecomple x,
bearinginmindthatsustainabledevelopmentitselfencompass es
four pillars (governance included) while digital government
comprises three, as discussed in section Conceptual Framewor k
above. Nevertheless, the essential point is that state capaci ty is
both a means to promote digital government and sustainable
developmentandagoalinitself,asclearlyestablishedbytheUN
SDGagenda.
Taming the Beast: Taking Stock
For starters, and like most digital technologies, blockcha ins are
exogenous to the national ecosystems of developing countries .
Governments thus continuously play catch-up with such
technologies. A core issue here is the lack of local capacity t o
eﬀectively harness the new entrant, even if the platform is Open
Source and thus has no per-user licensing costs. Such capacity
is not merely technical but also scientiﬁc and managerial as
governments and partners should fully comprehend the inner
workings of the technology to, for example, launch public
bidding processes calling for the adoption of blockchains to
support speciﬁc digital government priorities or gaps. In this
regard, blockchains are not at all diﬀerent from previous digi tal
technologiesmigratingintodevelopingnations.
While the complexity of blockchains might add additional
entry barriers, governments are probably better oﬀ focusing
on both the three underlying technologies that support it and
the diﬀerent types of blockchains, DLTs included, that are
available. Regarding the former, many countries in the Globa l
South lack adequate cryptographic expertise, have weak public
key infrastructures (PKIs) in place, and are not very familia r
with consensus algorithms. Furthermore, while peer-to-peer
networkingisreadilyavailable,limitedInternetaccesswi llsurely
poseconstraintstowidespreadutilization.
As described in section Characterizing Blockchain
Technology for the Public Sector above, developing country
governments can choose among diﬀerent types of blockchains
and DLTs. However, the ﬁrst question they need to ask is if
blockchain technology is the most optimal solution for the is sue
at stake. Several models for making such a decision have alread y
been developed ( Rustum, 2019 ) and should be further reﬁned to
ﬁt developing country contexts. Selecting the adequate platfo rm
will mostly depend on the type of digital government priority
under the radar screen. It is however possible to conclude
that, in general, governments should opt for private or closed
blockchains ( Atzori, 2015 ), hybrids included. KYC/AML issues
are relevant here, particularly for the provision of public good s
such as education, health, and justice which consume scarce
public resources that should be optimally allocated. On the
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 10 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
other hand, in terms of the dissemination of public documents ,
information, and data, public or open blockchains can provide
the right vehicle as they guarantee immutability, integrit y, and
transparency while ensuring pseudonymous access—or access
basedonself-sovereignidentity,ifavailable.
The cases discussed in the country examples subsection
yielded essential insights for deploying blockchains withi n
governments. The evidence compiled so far, which is still
incipient,suggeststhatthetechnologycandeliverwhenexpli citly
linked to both digital government institutional instances and
digital government priorities and gaps. For the most part,
successful blockchain implementation in emerging countrie s
haveeithercomplementedexistingdigitalgovernmentplatfo rms
and initiatives or provided a new solution to vexing issues th at
couldnotbesolvedotherwise.
Inbothcases,thetechnologywasnotdeployedinastandalone
fashion. Integrationwith otherdigital technologies wasa lsopart
of the process. This is perhaps a crucial point as blockchains
seem to add real value when brought in as a new member of an
existing technology team. In this light, it is possible to sugg est
thatsmartcontractscouldbecomereallyintelligentifthe ycould
eﬀectivelyinteractwithDeepLearningalgorithmsandplatfo rms,
forexample( Salahetal.,2019 ).
Whilenothavingahappyending,theIllinoisexperiencesheds
lightontherisksofdeployingblockchains.Technicallimit ations
of the blockchain platforms selected for the various pilots
helped stall the project. The initiative also attempted to addr ess
its governance implications. Consequently, speciﬁc legislat ive
changes were requested to the local assembly, including
biometric-based notarization, self-notarization of docu ments
andseveralothermeasurestoimprovethemanagementofpublic
land records ( State of Illinois, 2018 ). While having potential
for increasing state capacity, demands for institutional ch ange,
grounded mostly on technological grounds, might not take oﬀ
if local decision-makers have not been involved in the proces s
from the start. Surely, this is not unique to blockchains. Bu t
the fact that the technology is also touted as governance and
institutional changer (e.g., Reijers et al., 2016 ), from centralized
to distributed mechanisms, might end up strengthening loca l
resistancetochange.
Harnessing Blockchains: Challenges and
Opportunities
As discussed in subsection Blockchains, Development and
Governments, blockchain deployment in developing country
governments is still in its infancy. Hype, complexity, lack
of successful implementation, and an overemphasis on
cryptocurrencies and new ﬁnancial markets are factors that
mighthelpexplainthisstateofaﬀairs—nottoforgetthefact that
blockchaintechnologyisstillmaturing.
Theconceptualframeworkpresentedinthispapertargetsthis
gap by providing governments and development practitioners
with potential entry points to explore the eﬀective deployment
of blockchain technology systematically. If governments a re the
main target of blockchain technology initiatives, then dig ital
governmentandstatecapacitymusttakecenterstage.Earlyevidencesuggeststhatblockchainscanmakeadiﬀerence
when aligned with existing digital government institution s,
strategies, priorities, and platforms. This, in turn, indica tes that
a more nuanced approach to the interplay between blockchains
andkeydigitalgovernmentcomponentsisrequired.
For starters, governments in the Global South should
capitalizeonexistingSouth-SouthandNorth-Southcooperat ion
agreements and networks to extract more information
on ongoing blockchain deployments in the public sector.
Collaboration across government peers on a global scale could
add more value than published reports and thus help avoid
pitfallsthatpioneersinthesectorhaveunexpectedlyfaced.
Looking at the way blockchains can tackle core digital
government themes and bottlenecks will be as important,
if not more. For example, government interoperability has
traditionally been one of such issues. More often than not,
public entities happen to run their own technology platforms
that almost never talk to each other. On the other hand,
citizensandstakeholderswillsurelybeneﬁtfromhavingon e-stop
shops to undertake all the business they do with government.
To reach this point, government platforms must be able to
converse among themselves. Governments have thus developed
government interoperability frameworks that promote public
sector integration. This is accomplished by the development
of digital gateways that mediate the conversations across
diﬀerent public platforms. Having a blockchain platform to
support and enhance interoperability by ensuring the integrit y
and transparency of the public sector certainly has enormous
potential ( El-dosuky and El-adl, 2019 ). The same goes for many
oftheothercoreareasoftraditionale-government.
Blockchains can also have potential in enhancing
state capacity. Many developing countries have designed
decentralization or devolution strategies where both
policymaking and ﬁscal management shifts from central
governments to those in regions, states, and municipalities .
Implementation of such policies has however been challenging,
particularly in low-income countries. Lack of overall capaci ty
has been one of the main challenges local governments face
accompanied by a potential decrease in ﬁscal resources.
Enter blockchains. For example, governments could set up
one blockchain platform, a GovChain, to cater to all local
governments. Financial resources could thus ﬂow within the
Gov-chan vis smart contacts, while local government oﬃces ca n
use the platform to support other government activities such as
public information disclosure. This is an area that might hav e
greatpotentialbutremainslargelyunexplored( DeSantis,2019 ).
Along the same lines, it is possible to make a case
fordistributed policymaking. Many developing countries are
characterized by socio-economic, cultural and geographica l
diversity that comprehensive national policies tend to ignor e for
the sake of universality. At the same time, many countries al so
have national, regional, and local development plans that, for
the most part, are not necessarily in sync. Finding a middle of
the road approach where local diversity shines but, at the same
time,fallswithinbroaderdevelopmentpoliciessetathigher levels
of government is feasible. Again, a GovChain could make a key
diﬀerencehere.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 11 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Whilecomplex,thechallengesforadoptingblockchainsinthe
public sector of developing countries are not insurmountable .
On the other hand, the opportunities are just starting to pop-
up and could be harnessed in the short-term if the links
between technology, sustainability and government instit utions
arebroughttothefore.
CONCLUSION
Developing countries are, for the most part, playing catch-up
when attempting to harness the latest digital technologies s uch
as blockchains, among many others. This set of countries has
also endorsed internationally-agreed development goals wh ile
devising their own national and subnational development plan s.
Whilejugglingsuchagendasisnotsimple,governmentscanpla y
animportantroleinpromotingthelinkbetweentechnologyand
development while enticing all other actors and sectors to ac t in
concert. Undoubtedly, governments should lead when it comes
to the modernization of public institutions, the deployment o f
digitalgovernmentandtheprovisionofpublicgoods.
This paper develops a conceptual framework aimed at
grasping the dynamics between sustainable development,
governments in the Global South and ICTs, introducing state
capacity as both a means and an end. State capacity is required
to achieve the various development goals and harness ICTs
eﬀectively. Building state capacity is also a goal that will ens ure
development gains can be sustained in the long haul. The
framework is then used to assess the relevance of blockchain
technologiesinsuchdynamics19.
While still technologically evolving, blockchains oﬀer
unique traits and beneﬁts that could make a diﬀerence if
deployed strategically within governments in developing
countries. Unfortunately, on the ground evidence of blockch ain
implementation is still emerging while a closer examination of
its relationship with digital government is almost absent. Use
cases still dominate the scene and the core assumption is that
blockchainswillprevailastheoveralldisruptorwithnopartn ers
insight.
19The conceptual framework suggested by the paper can also be used to st udy
the introduction of other digital technologies such as Artiﬁci al Intelligence in the
publicsectorofdevelopingcountries.However, early evidence suggests that blockchains can add
value when deployed as part of a team of digital technologies
working in sync. Early implementations also indicate that
adequate institutional support and endorsement are critical ,
especiallyfromthepublicentitiespromotingdigitalgovernm ent
that had already identiﬁed a range of priorities as key target s.
Nevertheless, risks still abound, stemming from the limita tions
of the technology itself and its complexity, and calls for rapi d
institutionalchangewhichcouldpushbackexistingpoliticalw ill.
In addition, issues related to implementation costs and actua l
projectmanagementneedfurtherexploration.
The distributed nature of blockchain technology and
its implications for governance systems has also upstaged
digital government concerns. Indeed, blockchains have bee n
touted as an “institutional technology” that could bring
dramatic changes within governments (and all other sectors ),
propelling new governance mechanisms mostly based on smart
contracts. While linked to ongoing discussions on algorith mic
governance concerning Artiﬁcial Intelligence and all its c ousins,
a blockchain-based perspective connecting these dots is miss ing
inaction.
Developing countries with low capacity states and nascent
capitalist development might ﬁnd such new governance options
less palatable given pressing sustainable development demands
and calls to sustain democratic governance regimes. If it is a
real institutional technology, then blockchaintechnolog y should
be a critical enabler for innovative institutional developm ent.
Blockchains could also deliver the goods within existing
institutional settings, thus making institutional change a matter
of human agency, not technology. And that would undoubtedly
be a critical achievement that could contribute to resilient long-
termsustainabledevelopment.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. Thi s data
can be found here: https://publicadministration.un.org/eg ovkb/
en-us/Reports/UN-E-Government-Survey-2018.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Theauthorhascreatedallthecontentonthispaper.
REFERENCES
Alexandre, A. (2018). Kenyan gov’t to use blockchain in new aﬀord able housing
project.Cointelegraph . Available online at: https://cointelegraph.com/news/
kenyan-govt-to-use-blockchain-in-new-aﬀordable-housing -project (accessed
October16,2018).
Andreasson, K. J. (ed.). (2015). Digital Divides: The New Challenges and
Opportunities of e-Inclusion. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
Group.doi:10.1201/b17986
Andrikopoulos, V. (2019). “Decentralised and open data turns Dubai into a
smart city | outlier ventures,” in Outlier Ventures | Investing in Blockchain.
AI & IoT Tech (blog). Available online at: https://outlierventures .io/research/
decentralised-and-open-data-turns-dubai-into-a-smart-city / (accessed May
6,2019).Asadullah, M. N., and Savoia, A. (2018). Poverty reduction during
1990–2013: did millennium development goals adoption and state
capacity matter? World Dev. 105, 70–82. doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.
12.010
Atzori, M. (2015). Blockchain Technology and Decentralized Governance:
Is the State Still Necessary? SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2709713.
Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. Available onli ne
at: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2709713. doi: 10.2139/s srn.27
09713
Batubara, F. R., Ubacht, J., and Janssen, M. (2018). “Challenge s of blockchain
technology adoption for e-government: a systematic literature revie w.”
inProceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Dig ital
Government Research: Governance in the Data Age (New York, NY: ACM).
doi:10.1145/3209281.3209317
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 12 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Baydakova, A. (2018). UN food program to expand blockchain testing to african
supplychain. CoinDesk (blog).Availableonlineat:https://www.coindesk.com/
un-food-program-to-expand-blockchain-testing-to-african-su pply-chain
(accessedSeptember26,2018).
Berryhill, J., Bourgery, T., and Hanson, A. (2018). Blockchains Unchained . OECD
WorkingPapersonPublicGovernance,no.28,1–52.doi:10.1787/ 3c32c429-en
Beyer, S. (2019). Proof-of-Work Is Not a Consensus Protocol: Understanding
the Basics of Blockchain Consensus . Medium. Available online at: https://
medium.com/cryptronics/proof-of-work-is-not-a-consensus-protoc ol-
understanding-the-basics-of-blockchain-consensus-30a ac7e845c8 (accessed
April1,2019).
Bishr, A. B. (2018). Dubai: a city powered by blockchain. Innovations 12, 4–8.
doi:10.1162/inov_a_00271
BreakerMag(2019).73blockchainsocialgoodorganizationsth atareactuallydoing
something. BREAKERMAG (blog). Available online at: https://breakermag.
com/73-blockchain-social-good-organizations-that-are-ac tually-doing-
something/(accessedFebruary1,2019).
Brown,A.N.,andSkelly,H.J.(2019).Howmuchevidenceistherereally? Mapping
theevidencebaseforICT4Dinterventions. Inform.Technol.Int.Dev. 15:18.
Casey,M.,andVigna,P.(2018). TheTruthMachine:TheBlockchainandtheFuture
ofEverything ,1stEdn.NewYork,NY:St.Martin’sPress.
Comin,D.,andMestieri,M.(2018).Iftechnologyhasarrivedevery where,whyhas
incomediverged? Am.Econ.J. 10,137–78.doi:10.1257/mac.20150175
Coppi, G. (2019). Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies in the
Humanitarian Sector . ODI. Available online at: https://www.odi.org/
publications/11284-blockchain-and-distributed-ledger-tec hnologies-
humanitarian-sector(accessedFebruary1,2019).
Cozzens, S., and Thakur, D. (2014). Innovation and Inequality: Emerging
TechnologiesinanUnequalWorld .Cheltenham,UK:EdwardElgarPub.
Davidson, S., De Filippi, P., and Potts, J. (2017). Blockchains and the Economic
Institutions of Capitalism . SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3221527. Rochester, NY:
Social Science Research Network. Available online at: https://pa pers.ssrn.com/
abstract=3221527.
De Filippi, P., and Wright, A. (2018). Blockchain and the Law: The Rule of Code.
Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
De Santis, R. (2019). Is There a Future for Blockchain in Local Government?
Available online at: https://icma.org/blog-posts/there-future-b lockchain-
local-government(accessedFebruary19,2019).
Dexter, S. (2018). Blockchain vs DLT (Distributed Ledger Technology). Mango
Research (blog). Available online at: https://www.mangoresearch .co/
blockchain-vs-distributed-ledger-technology-dlt/ (accesse d February 20,
2018).
Diallo, N., Shi, W., Xu, L., Gao, Z., Chen, L., Lu, Y., et al. (2018) . “EGov-
DAO: a better government using blockchain based decentralized au tonomous
organization,” in 2018 International Conference on EDemocracy EGovernment
(ICEDEG) ,(Houston,TX),166–71.doi:10.1109/ICEDEG.2018.8372356
Dutton, T. (2018). An Overview of National AI Strategies. Politics+AI (Blog).
Available online at: https://medium.com/politics-ai/an-overview -of-national-
ai-strategies-2a70ec6edfd
Dwyer, R. (2017). Code !=Law: Explorations of the Blockchain as a Mode of
Algorithmic Governance . Available online at: https://www.academia.edu/
34734732/Code_Law_Explorations_of_the_Blockchain_as_a_M ode_of_
Algorithmic_Governance
El-dosuky, M. A., and El-adl, G. H. (2019). GIZAChain: e-governmen t
interoperability zone alignment, based on blockchain technology. PeerJ
Preprints 7:e27477v1.doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.27477v1
Estevez, E., and Janowski, T. (2013). Electronic governance fo r sustainable
development — conceptual framework and state of research. Govern. Inform.
Q.30,S94–109.doi:10.1016/j.giq.2012.11.001
Falkon, S. (2017). The story of the DAO — its history and conseque nces.
Medium (blog). Available online at: https://medium.com/swlh/the-story-
of-the-dao-its-history-and-consequences-71e6a8a551ee (accessed December
24,2017).
Fernando,A.(2018).Interestedblockchainforsocialimpact?Here aretheprojects
you should know. Medium(blog). Available online at: https://medium.com/
@00AaronFernando/interested-blockchain-for-social-impact-h ere-are-the-
projects-you-should-know-8c14926e4f88(accessedMay29,20 18).Ferrarini, B., Maupin, J., and Hinojales, M. (2017). Distributed Ledger
Technologies for Developing Asia. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
doi:10.22617/WPS179184-2
Foster,C.,andHeeks,R.(2014).WhyeﬀortstospreadnovelICTso ftenfail.Appr.
Technol.41,59–61.
Frankenreiter, J. (2019). The limits of smart contracts. J. Inst. Theor. Econ. 175,
149–162.doi:10.1628/jite-2019-0021
Gomez, R. (2013). The changing ﬁeld of ICTD: growth and maturation
of the ﬁeld, 2000–2010. Electron J. Inform. Syst. Dev. Count. 58, 1–21.
doi:10.1002/j.1681-4835.2013.tb00408.x
Guarda, D. (2018). How Governments in Sweden, Denmark and Estonia Are
Adopting Blockchain and AI . Available online at: https://www.intelligenthq.
com/innovation-management/how-governments-are-adopting-bloc kchain-
and-ai-in-advanced-economies-part-2/(accessedDecember14 ,2018).
Gulf News (2016). Dubai Launches Blockchain Strategy to Become Paperless
by 2020. Available online at: https://gulfnews.com/uae/government/duba i-
launches-blockchain-strategy-to-become-paperless-by-2020-1. 1907790
(accessedOctober5,2016).
Harry(2017).Blockchaincommission&blockchainforimpactlaunched atUNto
advance the sustainable development goals. CultHub (blog). Available online
at: https://www.culthub.com/pr/blockchain-commission-blockcha in-for-
impact-launched-at-un-to-advance-the-sustainable-developme nt-goals/9176
(accessedSeptember26,2017).
Hau,M.V.(2012).“Statecapacityandinclusivedevelopment:new challengesand
directions,” in Global Development Institute Working Paper Series . esid-002-12
(GDI, The University of Manchester). Available online at: https:/ /ideas.repec.
org/p/bwp/bwppap/esid-002-12.html
Heeks, R. (2005). E-government as a carrier of context. J. Public Policy 25, 51–74.
doi:10.1017/S0143814X05000206
Heeks, R. (2010). Do information and communication technologies ( ICTs)
contributetodevelopment? J.Int.Dev. 22,625–40.doi:10.1002/jid.1716
Hernandez, K. (2017). Blockchain for Development – Hope or Hype ? Available
onlineat:https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/1234 56789/12945
Hughes, L., Dwivedi, Y. K., Misra, S. K., Rana, N. P., Raghavan, V., and Akella,
V. (2019). Blockchain research, practice and policy: applications, b eneﬁts,
limitations, emerging research themes and research agenda. Int. J. Inform.
Manag.49,114–29.doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.02.005
IDB (2018). Global Alliance to Promote the Use of Blockchain in Latin Ame rica
and the Caribbean | IADB. Available online at: https://www.iadb.org/en/
news/global-alliance-promote-use-blockchain-latin-america-and- caribbean
(accessedOctober30,2018).
IllinoisBlockchainInitiative(2017). IllinoisBlockchainInitiative:Insights,Progress
& Horizon Scanning . The Illinois Blockchain Initiative. Available online
at: https://illinoisblockchain.tech/illinois-blockchain-ini tiative-insights-
progress-horizon-scanning-61e25a51e345(accessedMarch24, 2017).
ITU (2016). Core List of Indicators. Available online at: https://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/coreindicators/default.aspx(acce ssedMarch25,2019).
Janowski, T. (2016). Implementing sustainable development goals wit h digital
government – aspiration-capacity gap. Govern. Inform. Q. 33, 603–13.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2016.12.001
Janssen, M., and Estevez, E. (2013). Lean government and platform-
based governance—doing more with less. Govern. Inform. Q. 30, S1–8.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2012.11.003
Jones, M. (2018). Smart dubai launches blockchain-based payments
for government. The Block (blog). Available online at: https://www.
blockchaintechnology-news.com/2018/09/24/smart-dubai-laun ches-
blockchain-based-payments-for-government/ (accessed Septembe r 24,
2018).
Juskalian,R.(2018). InsidetheJordanRefugeeCampThatRunsonBlockchain .MIT
TechnologyReview.Availableonlineat:https://www.technology review.com/s/
610806/inside-the-jordan-refugee-camp-that-runs-on-blockc hain/ (accessed
April12,2018).
Kapoor, K. K., Dwivedi, Y. K., and Williams, M. D. (2014). Rogers’ innovation
adoption attributes: a systematic review and synthesis of exist ing research.
Inform.Syst.Manag. 31,74–91.doi:10.1080/10580530.2014.854103
Kenyan Wallstreet (2018). Kenya govt sets up blockchain & artiﬁci al
intelligence taskforce!. Kenyan Wallstreet (blog). Available online at: https://
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 13 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
kenyanwallstreet.com/kenya-govt-sets-blockchain-artiﬁcial- intelligence-
taskforce/(accessedJanuary16,2018).
Kewell,B.,Adams,R.,andParry,G.(2017).Blockchainforgood? Strat.Change 26,
429–37.doi:10.1002/jsc.2143
Lamport, L. (1978). Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a dist ributed
system.Commun.ACM 21,558–565.doi:10.1145/359545.359563
Lemieux, V. L. (2017). Evaluating the use of blockchain in land tra nsactions:
an archival science perspective. Eur. Prop. Law J. 6, 392–440.
doi:10.1515/eplj-2017-0019
Levi, S. D., and Lipton, A. B. (2018). An Introduction to Smart Contracts and
Their Potential and Inherent Limitations . Available online at: https://corpgov.
law.harvard.edu/2018/05/26/an-introduction-to-smart-cont racts-and-their-
potential-and-inherent-limitations/(accessedMay26,2018).
Macrinici, D., Cartofeanu, C., and Gao, S. (2018). Smart contract applications
within blockchain technology: a systematic mapping study. Telemat. Inform.
35,2337–54.doi:10.1016/j.tele.2018.10.004
McKinsey (2011). Internet Matters: The Net’s Sweeping Impact on Growth, Jobs ,
and Prosperity | McKinsey. Available online at: https://www.mckinsey.com/
industries/high-tech/our-insights/internet-matters(acc essedMarch26,2019).
Meadows,D.,Meadows,D.,Randers,J.,andBehrens,W.W.III. (eds.).(1972). The
LimitstoGrowth:AReportfortheClubofRome’sProjectonthe Predicamentof
Mankind. NewYork,NY:UniverseBooks.doi:10.1349/ddlp.1
Millard, J. (2018). Open governance systems: doing more with more.
Govern. Inform. Q. 35 (4 Suppl.), S77–87. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2015.
08.003
Murphy, J. (2018). Five Non-Financial Blockchain Use Cases Marketers
Need To Understand . Forbes. Available online at: https://www.forbes.
com/sites/forbescommunicationscouncil/2018/03/27/ﬁve-no n-ﬁnancial-
blockchain-use-cases-marketers-need-to-understand/ (acc essed March
27,2018).
Ndou, V. (2004). E-government for developing countries: opportunit ies
and challenges. Electron. J. Inform. Syst. Dev. Count. 18, 1–24.
doi:10.1002/j.1681-4835.2004.tb00117.x
Nelson, P. (2018). Primer on Blockchain - How to Assess the Relevance of
Distributed Ledger Technology to International Developme nt.Available online
at: https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/digital-ﬁnan ce/Blockchain-
primer(accessedApril15,2019).
O’Connell,J.(2019). AmbisafeCo-founderontheLimitstoCodingSmartContracts.
Available online at: http://cryptographicasset.com/ambisafe-co-f ounder-on-
the-limits-to-coding-smart-contracts/(accessedApril19,2019 ).
OSTechNix (2019). Blockchain 2.0 - explaining smart contracts and its types
[Part 5]. OSTechNix (blog). Available online at: https://www.ostechnix.com/
blockchain-2-0-explaining-smart-contracts-and-its-types/ (a ccessed March
28,2019).
Pisa, M. (2018). Reassessing Expectations for Blockchain and Development .
Center For Global Development. Available online at: https://www.cg dev.
org/publication/reassessing-expectations-blockchain-and- development-cost-
complexity(accessedMay17,2018).
Pisa, M., and Judden, M. (2017). Blockchain and Economic Development: Hype
vs. Reality . Center For Global Development. Available online at: https://www.
cgdev.org/publication/blockchain-and-economic-development- hype-vs-
reality(accessedJuly20,2017).
Podder, S., and Venkat, S. (2018). Blockchain: A Powerful Tool for Social Good .
HuﬀPost. Available online at: https://www.huﬀpost.com/entry/bloc kchain-
a-powerful-tool-for-social-good_b_5a4e7f8ae4b0f9b24bf31 5a0 (accessed
January4,2018).
Rahman, H. (2001). Developing Successful ICT Strategies: Competitive Advanta ges
in a Global Knowledge-Driven Society . IGI Global. Available online at: https://
www.igi-global.com/book/developing-successful-ict-strategi es/260
Reijers, W., O’Brolcháin, F., and Haynes, P. (2016). Governanc e in
blockchain technologies & social contract theories. Ledger1, 134–151.
doi:10.5195/LEDGER.2016.62
Rustum, A. (2019). DLT access control comparison. B9lab Blog . Available online
at: https://blog.b9lab.com/dlt-access-control-comparison-b1e8c 69b953d
(accessedFebruary5,2019).
Salah, K., Rehman, M. H. U., Nizamuddin, N., and Al-Fuqaha, A. (2019 ).
Blockchain for AI: review and open research challenges. IEEE Access 7,
10127–10149.doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2890507Savoia, A., and Sen, K. (2015). Measurement, evolution, determin ants, and
consequences of state capacity: a review of recent research. J. Econ. Surv. 29,
441–58.doi:10.1111/joes.12065
Simoyama,F.D.O.,Grigg,I.,LuizPereiraBueno,R.,andCavarzereD eOliveiraL.
(2017).Tripleentryledgerswithblockchainforauditing. Int.J.Audit.Technol.
3,163–83.doi:10.1504/IJAUDIT.2017.086741
State of Illinois (2018). House Joint Resolutiom 25 - Illinois Blockchain and
Distributed Ledger Task Force: Final Report to the General A ssembly.
Available online at: https://www2.illinois.gov/sites/doit/St rategy/Documents/
BlockchainTaskForceFinalReport020518.pdf(accessedMarch08 ,2019).
Sullivan, C., and Burger, E. (2017). E-residency and blockchain .Comp. Law Sec.
Rev.33,470–81.doi:10.1016/j.clsr.2017.03.016
Szabo,N.(1997).Formalizingandsecuringrelationshipsonpublicne tworks.First
Monday2.doi:10.5210/fm.v2i9.548
Szczerbowski, J. J. (2018). Transaction Costs of Blockchain S mart Contracts. Law
ForensicSci. 16.
Tanui, C. (2018). The Kenya blockchain taskforce concludes it s report. Kenyan
Wallstreet (blog).Availableonlineat:https://kenyanwallstreet.com/the-ke nya-
blockchain-taskforce-concludes-report-on-blockchain-techn ology/ (accessed
November19,2018).
Tapscott, D., and Tapscott, A. (2016). Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology
behind Bitcoin Is Changing Money, Business, and the World . New York,
NY:Portfolio/Penguin.
Taylor, B. (2017) Triple-Entry Accounting And Blockchain: A Common
Misconception . Forbes. Available online at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbesﬁnancecouncil/2017/11/28/triple-entry-accounting-a nd-blockchain-a-
common-misconception/(accessedApril3,2019).
The Economist (2015). The Trust Machine . Available online at: https://www.
economist.com/leaders/2015/10/31/the-trust-machine (acces sed October 31,
2015).
Thomas, R. (2017). Blockchain’s incompatibility for use as a land re gistry:
issues of deﬁnition, feasibility and risk. Eur. Prop. Law J. 6, 361–90.
doi:10.1515/eplj-2017-0021
Thompson, C. (2018). The diﬀerence between a private, public & conso rtium
blockchain. Blockchain Daily News . Available online at: https://www.linkedin.
com/pulse/diﬀerence-between-private-public-consortium-collin-th ompson
(accessedMay14,2018).
Tilly, C. (2007a). Democracy . Cambridge; New York, NY: Cambridge
UniversityPress.
Tilly,C.(2007b). GrudgingConsent .Washington,DC:TheAmericanInterest.
UNDESA (2018). UN E-Government Survey 2018. Available online at: https://
publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/Reports/UN-E-Gove rnment-
Survey-2018
UNDP (2018). The-Future-Is-Decentralised . UNDP. Available online at: https://
www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/corporate/the-f uture-is-
decentralised.html
UNICEF(2018). UNICEF’sInnovationFundAnnouncesFirstCohortofBlockcha in
Investments in Emerging Markets. Available online at: https://www.unicef.org/
press-releases/unicefs-innovation-fund-announces-ﬁrst-c ohort-blockchain-
investments-emerging(accessedDecember10,2018).
United Nations (ed.). (1994). Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable
Development; Rio Declaration on Environment and Developme nt; Statement of
Forest Principles; the Final Text of Agreements Negotiated by Governments at
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED),
3 - 14 June 1992, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil . New York, NY: Department of
PublicInformation.
United Nations (2000). United Nations Millennium Declaration . Available online
at:https://www.un.org/en/development/devagenda/millennium.s html
United Nations (2015a). Millennium Development Goals Report 2015 . Statistical
material.Availableonlineat:mdg-report-2015.html(accessedJuly6,2 015).
United Nations (2015b). Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development . Available online at: https://www.un.org/ga/search/
view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
United Nations (2015c). Report of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on
Sustainable Development Goal Indicators . Available online at: https://unstats.
un.org/unsd/statcom/47th-session/documents/2016-2-IAE G-SDGs-E.pdf
Van Wagenen, J. (2018). Illinois’ First Blockchain Report Highlights Challenges
and Opportunities of Adopting Tech . Technology Solutions That Drive
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 14 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27Zambrano Blockchains in Developing Countries
Government. Available online at: https://statetechmagazine.com/ article/2018/
02/illinois-ﬁrst-blockchain-report-highlights-challenges-and -opportunities-
of-adopting-tech(accessedFebruary21,2018).
Verlhust,S.,andYoung,A.(2018). FieldReport:OntheEmergentUseofDistributed
LedgerTechnologiesforIdentityManagement .Blockchange.Availableonlineat:
https://blockchan.ge/ﬁeldreport.html(accessedApril14,2019).
Walsham, G. (2017). ICT4D research: reﬂections on history and fut ure agenda.
Inform.Technol.Dev. 23,18–41.doi:10.1080/02681102.2016.1246406
Waltl, B., Sillaber, C., Gallersdörfer, U., and Matthes, F. (2019). “Blockchains and
smart contracts: a threat for the legal industry?” in Business Transformation
Through Blockchain, Vol. II, eds H. Treiblmaier and R. Beck (Cham: Springer
InternationalPublishing),287–315.doi:10.1007/978-3-31 9-99058-3_11
WFP (2018). Blockchain for Zero Hunger | WFP Innovation. Available online at:
https://innovation.wfp.org/project/building-blocks(access edMarch12,2018).
Williams,S.P.(2019).Blockchain:TheNextEverything.NewYork, NY:Scribner.
Available online at: https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/B lockchain-
The-Next-Everything/Stephen-P-Williams/9781982116828
WorldCommissiononEnvironmentandDevelopment(ed.)(1987). OurCommon
Future.OxfordPaperbacks.Oxford;NewYork,NY:OxfordUniversityPress.
Yeung, K. (2019). Regulation by blockchain: the emerging battle for supremacy
between the code of law and code as law. Modern Law Rev. 82, 207–39.
doi:10.1111/1468-2230.12399
Zambrano,R.(2017). UnpackingtheDisruptivePotentialofBlockchainTechnolog y
for Human Development. Available online at: https://www.idrc.ca/en/stories/
blockchainZambrano,R.,andEymann,S.(2014).“Crowdsourcingandhumandev elopment:
the role of governments,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance , ICEGOV ’14 (New York, NY:
ACM),170–177.doi:10.1145/2691195.2691223
Zanello, G., Fu, X., Mohnen, P., and Ventresca, M. (2016). The crea tion and
diﬀusion of innovation in developing countries: a systematic lit erature review.
J.Econ.Surveys 30,884–912.doi:10.1111/joes.12126
Zheng, Y. (2015). “ICT4D, overview of theories in,” in The International
EncyclopediaofDigitalCommunicationandSociety (JohnWileyandSons,Ltd.),
1–10.doi:10.1002/9781118767771.wbiedcs153
Zheng, Y., Hatakka, M., Sahay, S., and Andersson, A. (2018). Conceptualizing
development in information and communication technology for developme nt
(ICT4D). Inform.Technol.Dev. 24,1–14.doi:10.1080/02681102.2017.1396020
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potentialconﬂictofinterest.
Copyright © 2020 Zambrano. This is an open-access article distri buted under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). T he use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the or iginal author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original pub lication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeset erms.
Frontiers in Blockchain | www.frontiersin.org 15 January 2020 | Volume 2 | Article 27