 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The regulation of Digital Trade   
Key policies and international trends 
 
 
 
 
 
Lillyana Daza Jaller  
Simon Gaillard  
Martín Molinuevo  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation for Digital Markets  
1 
 Contents  
Contents  ........................................................................................................................................................ 1 
1. Introduction  .......................................................................................................................................... 2 
2. Building the regulatory framework for digital markets  ........................................................................ 4 
a) Regulating remote electronic transactions  ....................................................................................... 5 
i. Electronic documentation  ............................................................................................................. 5 
ii. E-signature  .................................................................................................................................... 8 
b) Trust -building regulation  ................................................................................................................ 12 
i. Consumer protection  .................................................................................................................. 13 
ii. Intermediary liability  ................................................................................................................... 21 
iii. Privacy and data protection  ........................................................................................................ 24 
iv. Cybersecurity  .............................................................................................................................. 28 
c) Regulatory restrictions to digital trade  ........................................................................................... 30 
i. Ban of online sales  ...................................................................................................................... 30 
ii. Regulations on cross -border data flows  ..................................................................................... 31 
3. Concluding observations  ..................................................................................................................... 38 
Bibliography  ................................................................................................................................................ 39 
Annexes  ......................................................................................................................................................... 0 
Annex 1: Cross -country Comparisons of the Implementation of OECD Recommendation on 
Information Disclosure .............................................................................................................................. 0 
Annex 2 : Cross -country Comparison on the Three Main Features of the Right of Withdrawal  .............. 1 
Annex 3:  Cross -country Comparisons of the Implementation of OECD Recommendation on Data 
Privacy Principles  ...................................................................................................................................... 2 
 
  Regulation for Digital Markets  
2 
 1. Introduction  
One day, people will wonder how global trade was even possible with before goods and services were 
bought and sold in global digital markets without regard or even knowledge of where sellers and buyers 
where located . We are not there yet  --not by a long sh ot. For now,  digital trade remains segmented 
mostly along national and regional boundaries, due largely to a combination of lack of consumer trust in 
online transactions  and regulatory differences across borders, as well as the inherent challenges of 
movin g goods internationally .  
Regulation plays a central role in building the foundations of digital markets.  It can provide the legal 
tools necessary for remote contracts, clarify the rights and obligations of the multiple actors involved in 
digital transact ions, and establish a framework that promote s consumer trust in digital markets , even 
when the consumer does not know the merchant  or when the merchant is in a different  countr y.  
However, r egulation can also further segment digital trade, de facto restricting digital transactions to 
within national boundaries, or allowing for cross -border transactions with some partners to flourish, 
while limiting others. This can be the intended result of regulatory measures that limit cross -border data 
flows or online purchases or may be the undesired effect  of regulatory differences across  countries that 
leads businesses to offer different goods and services across boundaries.  
Digital trade  encompasses a 
broad variety of activities, 
ranging from renting a room in 
a foreign country through a 
mobile phone app , ordering a 
piece a jewelry online from an 
artisan across the world, 
obtaining satellite data on soil 
composition for mining, or a 
retailing firm replenishing its 
stock from a foreign vendor 
through automated, computer -
to-computer, communication . 
All these activities entail a 
commercial transaction 
performed, normally remotely, 
through electronic means1.  
The wide range of different go ods and services that can be traded electronically, together with the novel 
nature of the technologies that allow for these transactions, make it so that there is no single, neatly 
defined, body of legislation or regulation  that governs e- trade.   
Instead,  the regulation of digital markets is a patchwork of regulatory solutions from different policy 
areas. Broadly speaking, the regulation of e -trade entails element s of contract  law, in particular 
                                                           
1 Similarly to OECD (2011), we understand e -trade to refer to the sale of goods and services through digital 
networks , with the exclusion of orders made by telephone calls, fac simile or manually typed e -mail.  Figure 1: Domestic regulation can foster or hinder digital trade  
   
Regulation for Digital Markets  
3 
 regarding electronic documentation and signatures, financial law in what relate s to e-payments, 
consumer protection, intellectual property , cybersecurity , personal privacy, and data protection. A 
conduc ive regulatory framework in each of these policy  areas  is necessary for vibrant digital market s.  
However, specific restrictive measures within these areas may undermine e -trade, for example by 
unnecessarily curbing the types of goods that can be traded remotely, or  by limiting the cross -border 
flows of data that underpin e -trade transactions.   
Laws and regulations can hence either foster or hinder digital trade (Figure 1).  Regulation can play three 
different roles for digital markets . First, it can provide essential regulatory tools for remote transactions, 
such as electronic documents and signa ture s, as well as electronic payments; secondly, it can improve 
the conditions for trust in digital markets, by ensuring that consumers are prote cted and that their 
information is safe and remains private, hence increasing reliance and bringing new actors to digital 
transactions . A strong regulatory framework on these pillars can be associated with the expansion of 
digital trade – represented on the upward part of the slope in Figure 1. Yet, third, regulations can also 
introduce restrictions that hamper the conditions for digital markets . Restricting the types of goods and 
services that can bought online , limiting or increasing costs for the transfer of data –which is necessary 
for the transactions —, or creating burdensome conditions for online marketplaces, platforms, and 
services providers, ultimately limits the offer of goods and services in digital markets.  
In what follows, this study reviews the main policy areas th at build the regulatory framework for digital 
markets. The paper reviews domestic legislation  and, where available, international guidelines with a 
view to highlighting the key policy and regulatory concerns in each area, and to identifying regulatory 
models implemented around the world that may offer guidance for recommendations for policymakers .  
The study is organized in two sections:  
• The first section addresses measures that seek to facilitate electronic transactions and promote 
trust in digital markets.  In particular, this section addresses regulation on e-documents and e -
signatures, consumer protection , intermediary liability , privacy and data protection, and 
cybersecurity .  
• The second section looks into common regulatory restrictions in digital markets , including the 
ban of online sales  and regulations on cro ss-border  data flows. Although these measures often 
pursue public policy objectives, they inherently entail restrictions to digital trade that need to be 
taken into account, and  less restrictive alternatives could achieve such goals with fewer negative 
implications on digital trade.  
These different regulatory areas have in common that, taken together, they offer a set of basic rules 
that create tools for remote transactions (e -document and e -signature) or clarify conditions of digital 
transaction s that enha nce consumers’  and businesses’ trust  (online consumer protection; data 
governance and cybersecurity). Importantly, there are a number of additional policies relevant to digital 
trade that are not covered in the current study: regulations related to competi tion policy, taxation, 
intellectual property, as well as the conditions for business licenses can also make or break a conducive 
framework for digital businesses.   Regulation for Digital Markets  
4 
 2. Building the regulatory framework for digital markets  
Online transactions remain a relative ly new phenomenon, and one that has yet to gain the trust of most 
people.  Lack of trust i n online transactions remains in fact the main reason in middle - and high -income 
economies worldwide  for not shopping online.  
Basic regulations such as e -
documents and e - signatures 
provide tools for e -commerce 
such as facilitating document 
recognition and expediting 
processes. Additionally, 
regulations to protect 
individual rights with regard to 
their private data can increase 
consumer trust on the i nternet . 
The lack of consumer trust and 
confidence in the privacy and 
security of online transactions 
and information networks is one element that may prevent economies from enjoying all the benefits of 
e-commerce. Finally, certain re gulations can provide additional tools for law enforcement, allowing 
governments to be able to better protect their citizens’ rights.  
Amongst the challenges faced by policymakers in the digital sphere is the very nascent nature of 
regulation regarding online activity. UNCTAD Global Cyberlaw Tracker maps countries that have adopted 
laws regarding electronic transactions, consumer protection, and data privacy . In particular, it 
recognizes t hat, out of 194 countries, 79 percent have adopted “e -transactions law”, 52 percent feature 
consumer protection laws, 58 percent, privacy laws, and 72 percent, cybercrime laws.  Yet, despite these 
substantial figures, modern and comprehensive regulatory fra mework s for digital markets remain 
elusive, found almost exclusively in develop ed countr ies. A closer examination of domestic legislation 
around the world, suggests that having an “ e-commerce law” of similarly titled instruments is not 
necessarily indicati ve of the soundness of the country’s regulation on digital trade. Many countries’ 
regulation on privacy dates back to the 1980s, before the digital revolution, thus featuring inadequate 
provisions for the challenges of data privacy. Further, o ne country ma y include online transactions in 
their civil code’s strict rules regarding consumer protection, while another has a specific online 
consumer protection law in place which in fact has no teeth. Additionally, legislation with a tittle along 
the lines of “E -commerce Law” can include a broad range of provisions, from simply recognizing the use 
of e-documents, to providing a clear framework for companies and governments to protect individual 
rights of consumers in e -commerce. A sound assessment of the country’s framework requires thus a 
review of the content of a range of regulatory instruments and a specific evaluation of the solutions that 
they offer for digital markets.  Figure 2. Lack of trust the top reason fo r not purchasing goods and 
services online  
 
Source: 2017 CIGI -Ipsos Global Survey on Internet Security and Trust  
 
Regulation for Digital Markets  
5 
 a) Regulat ing remote electronic transactions  
The legal recognition of electronic documents and  signatures as adequate tools for remote transactions 
is a key step in building a thriving digital market.  As communication technologies connect people and 
businesses around the world with increasing ease and convenience, businesses engaged in digital trade 
also expand their network of clients and suppliers across borders. Ensuring that electronic documents 
and signatures are fully recognized and can be enforced is therefore an essential regulatory step to 
allow for remote electronic contracts and transactions.   
A strong and reliable framework for e -document s and e -signatures is particularly important for business -
to-business (B2B) transactions. Transactions by final consumers, such as those on e -commerce platforms 
like Aliababa, Souq.com, or Jumia and app -based services like Airbnb, do not typically entail m ajor 
documentation exchanges and can be concluded even without a specific regulatory framework for 
electronic transactions. However, for business relations that require a degree of customization of the 
products and services and that are provided over time,  such as those that allow suppliers to connect to 
global value chains and/or services that require peripatetic delivery over extended contract periods, the 
ability to conclude a contract or amend its terms remotely in a secure and reliable manner is a key step 
towards engaging in business -to-business  digital trade.  
i. Electronic documentation  
A strong framework for electronic transactions, providing for t he legal recognition of electronic 
documents and signatures , is a key step in building a thriving digital market.  As communication 
technologies connect people and businesses around the world with increasing ease and convenience, 
businesses engaged in digital trade also expand their network of clients and suppliers across borders. A 
conducive regulatory framew ork for digital trade should hence guarantee that contracts concluded 
remotely through electronic channels are valid and legally enforceable just as those concluded in 
person.  
The requirement of paper invoices and handwritten 
contracts not only imposes a costly burden on businesses 
but also reduces the possibility to engage in remote 
transactions . Yet, some countries maintain to date such 
statutory requirements, hindering the ab ility of their firms 
to engage in digital trade. For instance, some internet 
platform s allow for the e -commerce transaction to be 
automatically registered in the recipient’s invoicing system. 
Firms in countries where invoices and contract s must be 
kept in paper cop ies, such as Russia , or Ukraine, are 
prevented from benefitting from these additional services  
(NTB, 2012) .  
Principles  
Three principles are widely regarded as the central elements of a modern and sound framework fo r 
electronic documents: non -discrimination, functional equivalence , and technological neutrality.  Table 1: UNCITRAL recommended 
principles for electronic documentation  
Legal re cognition of data messages  
Satisfaction of writing requirement  
Admissibility & evidential weight  
Contract formation & validity  
Signature requirement satisfaction  
Technolog ical neutrality  
Recognition of foreign e -signatures  
Source: Authors, based on (UNCITRAL, 
1996)  and (UNCITRAL, 2001)   Regulation for Digital Markets  
6 
 • The principle of non-discrimination ensures that a document would not be denied legal effect, 
validity , or enforceability solely on the grounds that it is in electronic form. This principle is the 
bare minimum that a regulation on electronic documentation should include. In digital trade, 
this means that that a purely digital transaction, based on the offer of a product or service made 
online and its terms and conditions declared in digital form , are binding on the parties as if they 
were declared on a hard document or verbally. In other terms, it recognizes the common -sense 
condition that communications in digital form have  the same legal effect as in other forms of 
expression.  
• The functional equivalence  principle seeks to ensure that statutory requirements for paper 
documents are a lso met by electronic communications  that can effectively fulfill the same 
purpose . In particular, it sets out the specific requirements that electronic communications need 
to meet to fulfil the same purposes and functions that certain notions in the tradi tional paper-
based system -  for example, "writing," "original," "signed," and "record" - seek to achieve.   For 
instance, w here a law requires that a contract should  be retained in its “original”  form, 
according to the principle of functional equivalence an electronic communication must meet 
that requirement  if there exists reliable assurance as to the integrity of the information it  
contains  from the time it was first  generated .  
• The principle of technological neutrality  mandates the adoption of provisio ns that do not 
differentiate between  the type s of technology used. In light of rapid technological advances, 
neutral rules aim at accommodating any future development without further legislative work. 
Regulations should hence avoid requiring the use of cer tain technologies to afford certain legal 
effects to electronic documents. For instance, a regulation that gives legal recognition only to 
electronic documents stored under certain cybersecurity measures, such as the E -Transaction 
Law adopted by Lebanon in  2018, may appear to promote good practices in the use of 
technology, but risks unnecessarily excluding other communications that are not typically 
encrypted, such as email or text messages.  
International practice  
A key enabler for cross -border businesses,  the regulation of electronic transactions is one of the few 
areas of digital regulation with dedicated international guidance and substantive regulatory experience 
around the world. In fact, regulation on electronic information and signatures can be trace d back to the 
use of the telegraph in the 19th century. UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce (MLEC) of 1996 
is the international standard on regulation of electronic documents. The main objective of the MLEC is 
to facilitate remote transactions by est ablishing rules to allow the electronic equivalent of paper- based 
documents to be legally recognized, thereby removing obstacles encountered by the use of electronic 
means. The MLEC promotes the principles of non -discrimination, technological neutrality, and functional 
equivalence in the treatment of electronic documentation. The principle of non -discrimination is the 
cornerstone of the regulation, as it ensures that a document would not be denied legal effect, validity, 
or enforceability solely on the grou nds that it is in electronic form.  
Box 1 Summary of UNCITRAL’s rules for electronic commerce  
1. Legal recognition of data messages: information shall not be denied legal effect, validity, or enforceability 
solely because of its electronic nature. Data messages satisfy legal requirements for a writing, an original, 
and the retention of documents, records, or information; they are admissible evidence in legal proceedings  Regulation for Digital Markets  
7 
  
The UNCITRAL MLEC has inspired legislation around the world . UNCITRAL recognizes that l egislation 
based on or influenced by the Model Law has been adopted in 72 States and a total of 151 jurisdictions  
(UNCITRAL, 2019) . In the United States , for example, the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (UETA ) is 
based primarily on MLEC and adopted by most states ; it provides states with a framework law which 
gives legal validity and admissibility to electronic documents. The federal framework model law 
prohibits the denial of legal effect or enforceability of a record, signature, or contract on the basis of its 
electronic form. Where a law requires a  record to be in writing, this requirement is satisfied by an 
electronic record. Where notarization is required, the electronic signature or record of the person 
authorized to sign the record is sufficient. The use of an electronic agent to enter into a co ntract is 
permitted. UETA includes a “ mailbox” Rule, which clarifies when a message is considered dispatched 
and received. Finally, it gives negotiable instruments in the electronic form the status of “transferable 
records”, meaning an e -document may be th e authoritative copy of the record.    
Canada’s Uniform Electronic Commerce Act (UECA)  of 1999,  also designed to implement the principles 
of UNCITRAL MLEC, includes a section that gives the power to use electronic documents to create, 
collect, receive, sto re, transfer, distribute, or publish documents or information. The government may 
deem electronic communication to be acceptable where a specific type of communication is statutorily 
mandated.  
Not all countries have incorporated all aspects of the UNCITRA L Model Law. In  Middle East and North 
Africa (MENA), for example, all countries  with the exception of Djibouti and Libya, have introduced 
regulations that follow MLEC principles in recogniz ing electronic documents as equivalent to paper -
based documents.2  Israel has done so by including provisions recognizing the genera l principal of non -
discrimination  of e-documentation in its  legislation on electronic signature . The rest of the countries in 
the region  have  instead  adopted a more developed framework on e -documents , reflecting in greater 
detail some of the principles of the UNITRAL MLEC  . While a more detailed regulation offers advantages 
in terms of clarity of the regulation, both approaches do give legal recognition to elec tronic documents.  
                                                           
2 No available data on existing regulation for Libya, Palestine, and Syria.  2. Signature: e -signatures satisfy legal requirements for a person’s signature if the me thod used identifies the 
person and indicates approval of the information contained. The method must be appropriate for the 
purpose of the communication, in light of the circumstances  
3. Formation and validity of contracts: a contract shall not be denied vali dity or enforceability on the sole 
ground that a data message was used for its formation  
4. Recognition by parties of data messages: a declaration of will or other statement shall not be denied legal 
effect, validity, or enforceability solely because of its electronic nature  
5. Attribution of data messages: a data message is that of the originator if it was sent by the originator itself  
6. Acknowledgement of receipt: the addressee may acknowledge the receipt of data message through any 
communication or conduct unles s the originator requests otherwise  
7. Time and dispatch and receipt of data messages: dispatch takes place when the data message leaves the 
control of the originator  
8. There is a chapter dedicated to actions related to contracts of carriage of goods  
Source: (UNCITRAL, 1996)  Regulation for Digital Markets  
8 
 ii. E-signature  
Digital activity involves engaging in remote – often international—  contracts on a routine basis, to the 
point where users are not often aware of its international nature. The ability to conclude legally binding 
contracts remo tely, without the face- to-face interaction of the parties is a central feature of global 
business. Digital technologies reduce distances by facilitating interaction and collaboration across 
borders; electronic signature complements that digital proximity b y providing a mechanism which grants 
full legal recognition to any agreement that may be concluded, even at the distance.  
Electronic signature s are essential for multiple facets of digital trade : 
• B2C digital trade : A simple digital interaction like accepting the terms of use of a website or a 
mobile app (often without even reading the content) by clicking a box entails, in legal terms, the 
acceptance of a contract through an electronic signature. For the app develo per or the supplier 
of the online service,  a legal framework that recognizes such interaction as a legally binding 
commitment -in other terms, signing on the terms of the contract as a way of accepting them - 
brings needed certainty  to the transaction . Lack  of an electronic signature regulatio n in this 
context could mean that guests could disregard the conditions set out by homeowner s when 
offering a residence through  Airbnb because their electronic acceptance is not considered 
legally binding . 
• B2B digital trade : Electronic signatures are particularly important to transactions between firms, 
especially in the context of a global or regional value chain. While e -commerce transactions by 
final consumers are typically individual purchases of discrete goods or services that can be 
satisfied with a simple click on a box, cross -border deals between firms often involve a business 
relation that extends in time and entails the production and delivery of customized goods or 
service s, whose terms and specifications nee d to be clearly agreed to in advance. This type of 
business -to-business (B2B) interaction must be reflected on a distinct, specific contract between 
the client and supplier, sanctioned with the signature of the parties to accept the agreed terms.  
For thes e engagements, the parties may wish to back those digital documents with an electronic 
signature that provides certain guarantees against tampering or prying by third parties.  
• E-government : Electronic signature is also essential to facilitate interaction s between individual s 
and firms and the government. Allowing the  submission of information through digital channels, 
for instance for business registration, tax statements, customs documentation, or in 
administrative or judicial procedures , promote s efficien cy, facilitate s service delivery, and 
ultimately reduce s costs for government, businesses, and individuals. This type of remote 
interaction often involve s sensitive information. Electronic signatures in this context must not 
only be secure but mus t also guarantee that the  signature  belongs to the individual concerned 
in that specific activity.  
Principles  
With the growth of e- commerce around the world, governments have enacted legal instruments to give 
recognition and legal validity to electronic and digital signatures . While the objective of all these 
regulations is recognizing some kind of electronic representation as a legally valid signature, t hree 
different regulatory models are currently in place  ( (Frederick Fischer, 2001) ; (Blythe S. , 2011) ). Regulation for Digital Markets  
9 
 • On one end of the spectrum, the prescriptive approach only recognizes one type of e -signature 
as legally valid – typically, secure digital signatures that have adopted specific encryption 
mechan ism and have been issued following prescribed procedures. This approach was 
pioneered in the state of Utah, and later replicated in other states in the U .S. and countries 
around the world, including Bangladesh, Brazil, Malaysia, and Peru  (  (Blythe S. , 2011) ; (Adobe, 
2019) ). Proponents of this approach claim that legal certainty is necessary to enhance public 
trust in e -signatures  (Boss, 1999) . This level of security can be required in many transactions, 
especially those involving sharing of information with government authorities, such as on 
taxation, customs declarations, or personal information. However, w hile secure digital 
signatures have the advantage of  offering the maximum degree of security, the prescribed 
technology and procedures is unnecessarily costly and burdensome for many activities , in 
particular for contracts between private parties. Forcing users to employ secure digital 
signatures as the onl y recognized alternative is outweighed by the inconvenience related to the 
use of such technologies, which includes resort ing to certification authorities, and pay ing a fee 
to obtain a certificate .   
•  A “minimalist ” or “permissive” approach, on the contrar y, allows parties to choose the 
technology they prefer , giving any selected technology equal legal validity. The minimalist 
approach is technology -neutral, which means it leaves the parties to adopt the technology of 
their choice (for instance, whether the signature is encrypted or not or the type of encryption 
adopted). The United States’ Electronic Signatures in Global and Commerce Act of 2000 (E -Sign) 
prohibits the denial of legal effect, validity, or enforceability of an electronic signature due to its 
nature, affording no presumptions to any specific technology. Supporters of this approach 
believe that the parties should be able to choose the technology that best suits their needs. 
However, others find that it does not provide sufficient legal certainty  and it raises costs for the 
parties (Boss 2009).  The United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand have adopted this 
approach (AssureSign, 2019) . While it  affords the greatest liberty to the parties in adopting any 
type o f technology , thus reducing costs, the approach fails to acknowledge that certain 
technologies are indeed more secure than others and the greater security may be warranted 
under certain conditions.  
• A hybrid or “two -tiered”  approach is a mix between these t wo, recognizing all technologies as 
legally valid while giving certain presumptions only to secure digital signatures . Like the 
prescriptive approach, it describes the requirements of a secure digital signature, and include s 
rules of conduct regarding the rights and responsibilities of the parties, including the signatory, 
the certification service provider (CSP), and the relying party .  A few countries have further 
developed this approach to offer greater liberty to private parties to  adopt secure digital 
signatures through technologies of their own preference. While the prescriptive and hybrid 
models usually include rules of conduct regarding the rights and responsibilities of the parties, 
including the signatory, the certification service provider (CSP), and the relying party, this is 
usually absent from legislation adopting the minimalist approach.  
 
International practice  
At a minimum, a regulatory framework should recognize that electronic signatures are a legally valid 
form of accepting an obligation or terms of a document. Further, the framework should also ensure Regulation for Digital Markets  
10 
 that, when an electronic signature meets certain requirements, it has full recognition of validity and 
enforceability, just like a handwritten signature.3 The UN Convention on  the Use of Electronic 
Communications in International Contracts  provides that  e-signatures should satisfy a legal requirement 
for a signature  so long as the e -signature meets certain requirements . The method used to identify the 
party’s intent in respect of the information attached must be either as reliable as appropriate for the 
purpose of the electronic communication or proven to have fulfilled the requirements. The Convention’s 
scope is limited to contracts between parties whose places of business are in different countries, and it 
excludes certain transactions, including contracts for family or household purposes and transactions on 
a regulated exchange.  
                                                           
3 Handwritten signatures, in addition to being legally valid, are also enforceable as the y create the presumption 
that they were indeed inserted by the designated person (a rebuttable presumption, which allows the interested 
person to show proof, for instance, that the signature had been forged). E lectronic signature s can be recognized as 
legally valid but may or may not be given full enforceability depending on the technology and procedures in use. 
Typically, only “digital signatures” that use some type of encryption technology are given full enforceability – see 
Box 1 for further details. An e lectronic signature that is not fully enforceable would require that the person 
claiming its validity also provide evidence that such electronic signature was indeed inserted by the designated 
person.  Box 2: Electronic Signatures vs. Digital Signatures  vs Enhanced Digital Signatures  
Although the terms electronic signature and digital signature are sometimes used interchangeably, a digital 
signature is actually a type of electronic signature. An electronic signature is defined by Oxford Dictionaries as 
“symbols or other data in digital  form attached to an electronically transmitted document as verification of 
the sender’s intent to sign the document”.  In practice, an electronic signature is an electronic representation 
that the person has agreed to the content of the document, be that in the form of a typed name (“ John 
Lennon”), an image of the person’s handwritten signature ( ), or any other form electronic 
representation, such as an image ( ) or icon ( )  or simply the clicking of a box with a ✓ .  
Digital signature is defined as “a type of electronic signature that encrypts documents with digital codes that 
are particularly difficult to duplicate”. Whereas an electronic signature can be created by simply clicking a 
mouse or tracing a handwritten signature with a finger, digital signa tures involve the use of a code or 
algorithm to sign and validate the authenticity of a document. Unlike electronic signatures, digital signatures 
come under specific standards and a stringent verification process. A digital signature ensures the integrity  of 
a message. This is achieved through a series of steps. First, the receiver’s public key is used to encrypt a 
random key. This is combined with the encrypted message as well as the digital signature and the 
authenticated message is transmitted through a n unsecured network. Upon receipt, the message is separated 
from the digital signature and the receiver’s private key is used to decrypt it. A temporary digital fingerprint, 
hashed from the random key, validates the received fingerprint. If the message has  not been corrupted during 
transmission, it is authenticated.  
Digital signatures are most 
commonly created through a 
technology known as “Public Key 
Infrastructure” (PKI), which 
provides a cryptographic key pair 
that can be shared  through a 
trusted author ity. The use of the 
keys not only encrypts the 
message so that only the intended 
recipient can access it, but it also 
guarantees that the content of the message has not been violated or altered.   
Regulation for Digital Markets  
11 
 UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures (MLES) of 2001 provides the standards required for an e -
signature to be considered legally equivalent to hand -written signatures. It also lays out basic rules of 
conduct regarding the responsibilities and liabilities of the parties, including the signatory, the 
certification service provider (CSP), and the relying party. Any m ethod of creating an electronic signature 
that satisfies certain requirements satisfies a legal requirement for a signature. If deemed sufficiently 
reliable, foreign certificates and electronic signatures are recognized regardless of the place of issuance 
of the certificate, creation or use of the signature, or place of business of the issuer or signatory.  
 
Modelled after UNCITRAL’s MLES, t he hybrid approach has become the preferred method of regulating 
electronic signatures around the world. In 1998, Singapore introduced the first law of this type, later 
amending it in 2010 to bring it in line with the UN Convention, and it has become the t rend in modern 
electronic signature regulation, having been adopted by the EU, China, Hong Kong, Japan and South 
Korea, among many others (Blythe S. , 2011) . This approach is preferable as it sets out the use of a 
specific technology (PKI) and procedures (Certification Services Providers) to ensure that secure digital 
signatures can indeed guarantee the identity of the signatory and integrity of the content. These specific 
procedures are required, for instance, for submitting documents to the government.  The mere use of PKI, however, cannot guarantee that the per son who sent the message is indeed the person 
who he/she claims to be.  Indeed, one person could be sending secured messages using an alias.  To prevent 
this, an “enhanced digital signature” (or “secure digital signature” in some countries) is a digital si gnature that 
belongs to a person whose identity has been verified by a relevant authority.  An enhanced digital signature 
typically involves, in addition the use of a PKI : i) a certificate authority (CA) —typically an IT firm that offers 
electronic signatu re technologies, such as DocuSign or Adobe, and has been vetted to issue such certificate — 
who generates, stores, issues, renews, revokes, and verifies the digital certificates, and ii) a registration 
authority who verifies the identity of entities before their digital certificates are stored at the CA, which could 
be a public entity or a private one, depending on the regulation.  
 
Box 3: Summary of UNCITRAL’s standards for electronic signatures  
1. Equal treatment of signature technologies: any method of creating an e-signature that meets the 
requirements of the applicable law has legal effect  
2. Compliance with a requirement for a signature: e -signatures satisfy legal requirements for a person’s 
signature if the method used is appropriate for the purpose of the communic ation in light of the 
circumstances  
3. Conduct of the signatory: rules of conduct including reasonable care to avoid unauthorized use of its 
signature creation data; timely notification of any substantial risk that the data may have been 
compromised; accuracy  and completeness of all material representations by the signatory  
4. Conduct of the CSP: rules of conduct including accuracy and completeness of all material representations 
made by it that are relevant to the certificate throughout its life cycle; reasonabl y accessible means that 
enable a relying party to obtain necessary information  
5. Trustworthiness: factors that determine whether systems, procedures, and human resources used by a CSP 
are trustworthy . These  include financial and human resources; quality of hardware and software systems; 
procedures for processing of certificates and applications for certificates and retention of records; 
regulatory and extent of audit by an independent body  
6. Conduct of the relying party: rules of conduct including verification of reliability of an e -signature and of the 
validity, suspension, or revocation of the certificate, where applicable  
7. Recognition of foreign certificates and e -signatures: if foreign certificates and e -signatures are deemed 
reliable according t o recognized international standards, they should be recognized  
Source: (UNCITRAL, 2001)  Regulation for Digital Markets  
12 
 The procedure for obtaining the “certificate” can limit the use of digital signatures . A digital certificate is 
necessary for a digital signature because it provides the public key that can be used to validate the 
private key that is associated with a digital signature. Digital certificates make it possible for digital 
signatures to be used as a way to authenticate digital information. Digital certificates are  typically issued 
by a certificate authority (CA), which is a trusted third -party entity that issues digital certificates for use 
by other parties. CAs can be government bodies or private entities, including commercial firms, officially 
recognized by the government. The smaller the number of certification authorities, the harder it may be 
to obtain a digital certificate and hence to be able to use a digital signature. Hence, when adopting 
either a prescriptive or hybrid approach that sets out requirements f or a digital signature, the regulation 
should strive to create a vast network of certification authorities that can issue certificate s, minimizing 
the burden for private parties.  
The EU has further elaborated the two -tiered model by allowing for secure sig natures backed by private 
certification authorities. With a view to increasing security while reducing costs of adoption, the EU 
Electronic Identification and Authentication Services Regulation (eIDAS) of 2016 creates a third category 
of signature, in betw een the electronic signature (with minimum requirements and weak legal 
recognition) and the digital signature (full legal recognition, but burdensome certification procedures. 
This new category allows private parties to adopt a digital sig nature that meets  all the security 
requirements of the secure  digital signature (called “qualified Electronic Signature”) but enjoys greater 
freedom on the selection of the certification authorities.  A similar intermediate step was already 
present in Singapore’s ETA regul ation, which allowed private parties to  adopt other commercially 
available technology or procedures for a secure digital signature to the extent that it can provide 
security equivalent to the prescribed mechanism.   
b) Trust-building regulation  
Regulation pla ys an essential role in bolstering digital markets by promoting trust. As digital markets are 
still in their infancy, t he top reason for not engaging in online purchases , at least in developed markets, 
remains the lack of trust in remote electronic transac tions (Figure  2). Consumers typically have no face -
to-face contact with vendors, lead ing to few “visual cues”, such as location, facilities, and personalized 
interaction, which helps consumers gauge the retailer or suppliers’ professionalism. In this envir onment, 
consumers are asked to disclose sensitive information and personal data either to a retailer, online 
intermediary, or digital platform. As a result, one important limiting factor in both developed and 
developing economies is the perception that cro ss‑border online transactions and delivery are less 
secure, and remedies do not exist for when something goes wrong.  (World Economic Forum, 2019).  
Three sets of regulations are particularly relevant to promoting consumers’ trust in digital markets:  
• An effective framework for online consumer protection helps consumers be better informed 
about the characteristics of the good or services at hand as well as the terms of the transaction, 
promoting a greater understanding of the con ditions of the transaction;  
• As consumers are required to provide sensitive personal and financial details, a strong data 
governance  regime is essential to give individuals control over their own information;  Regulation for Digital Markets  
13 
 • Similarly, a cybersecurity  framework further imp roves trust by ensuring that firms meet certain 
minimum technical standards in the protection of their digital information and that illegal access 
to such data is duly prosecuted and, if needed, penalized.  
i. Consumer protection  
Online consumer protection is essential to support a global market for digital good and services.  
Distance shopping presents challenges, such as the inability to assess products in person before 
confirming a transaction. Online consumer protection laws aim to ensure “a level of protec tion not less 
than that afforded in offline commerce”  (UNCTAD, 2017)  (Bartley Johns, Hoppe, Molinuevo, 
Nghardsaysone, & Daza Jaller, 2017) .  To that end, online  consumer protection builds on the principles 
and mechanisms of traditional consumer protection regimes, extending and adapting those protections 
to digital markets, in order to reduce some of the challenges of buying and selling online, such as the 
rights  and obligations involving an electronic transaction, or the way to rescind it if necessary  (OECD, 
2000) .  
Principles  
The main guiding principles for online consumer protection are recognized in two main international 
soft-law instruments : 
• The UNCTAD Guidelines on Consumer Protection of 1985 (revised 1999 and updated in 2015) 
include recommendations directed to protecting online consumers and improving transparency 
in online transactions. The Guidelines also recommend cooper ation among countries, including 
in terms of information exchange and enforcement activities.  
• In 2016, the  OECD revised its Recommendation on Consumer Protection for E -commerce of 
1998, moderni zing its approach to fair business practices, information disc losures, payment 
protections, unsafe products, dispute resolution, enforcement , and education  (Box X).  In 
addition, the OECD guidelines embrace further issues, such as non -monetary transactions, 
digital content products, active consumers, mobile devices, p rivacy and security risks, payment 
protection and product safety  (UNCTAD, 2017)  (see sub -section on Challenges below)  
Box 4: General Principles for Consumer Protection for E -commerce from OECD Recommendation  
Pre - Purchase  
1. Transparent and effective protection: consumers who participate in e -commerce should be 
afforded transparent and effective consumer protection that is not less than the level of 
protection afforded in other forms of commerce  
2. Fair business, advertising and marketing practices: businesses engaged in e -commerce 
should pay due regard to the interests of consumers and act in accordance with fair 
business, advertising and marketing practices as well as the general principle of good faith  
3. Online disclosur es: online disclosures should be clear, accurate, easily accessible and 
conspicuous so that consumers have information sufficient to make an informed decision 
regarding a transaction. Online disclosures comprise the following areas of 
recommendations:  
4. Information about the business: businesses engaged in e -commerce with consumers should 
make readily available information about themselves that is sufficient to allow, at a 
minimum: i) identification of the business; ii) prompt, easy and effective consumer Regulation for Digital Markets  
14 
 International practice  
Online consumer protection laws are scarce across the globe. According to UNCTAD, 97 countries have 
enacted such laws. 10  percent  have draft legislation, 21  percent  no legislation, and 12  percent  no 
available data (UNCTAD, 2019) . Given that e- commerce is set to double from 201 7 ($2.3 trillion) to 20 20 
($4.2 trillion)  (eMarketer, 2019) , laws and regulations need to catch up at a faster pace. For instance, 
many countries have consumer protection laws but d o not grant specific rights to online consumers. In 
China, article 8 of the Law of the People’s republic of China on Protection Consumers’ Rights and 
Interests states that “consumers are entitled to receive correct information on the commodities they 
buy a nd use or on the services they receive.”, but this right concerns all types of consumers. The Indian 
Consumer Protection Act  of 1986 protects online consumer rights since 2014, but remains ambiguous  
(Satyan, 2015) . In the Phili ppines, Act No. 8792 grants online consumers the same legal status as offline communication with the business; iii) appropriate and effective resolution of any disputes 
that may arise; iv) service of legal process in domestic and cross -border disputes; and v) 
location of the business  
5. Information about the goods and services: businesse s engaged in e -commerce with 
consumers should provide information describing the goods or services offered that is 
sufficient to enable consumers to make informed decisions regarding a transaction  
6. Information about transaction: businesses engaged in e -comm erce should provide 
information about the terms, conditions and costs associated with a transaction that is 
sufficient to enable consumers to make an informed decision regarding a transaction. 
Consumers should be able to easily access this information at any stage of the transaction  
Purchase  
7. Confirmation Process: businesses should ensure that the point at which consumers are 
asked to confirm a transaction, after which time payment is due or they are otherwise 
contractually bound, is clear and unambiguous, a s should the steps needed to complete the 
transaction, especially for new payment mechanism  
Post - Purchase  
8. Dispute resolution and redress: consumers should be provided with meaningful access to 
fair, easy -to-use, transparent and effective mechanisms to re solve domestic and cross -
border e -commerce disputes in a timely manner and obtain redress, as appropriate, 
without incurring unnecessary cost or burden. These should include out of court 
mechanisms, such as internal complaints handling and alternative disp ute resolution. 
Subject to applicable law, the use of such out -of-court mechanisms should not prevent 
consumers from pursuing other forms of dispute resolution and redress. (See below sub -
section on online dispute resolution and redress)  
9. Privacy and security: businesses should protect consumer privacy by ensuring that their 
practices relating to the collection and use of consumer data are lawful, transparent and 
fair, enable consumer participation and choice, and provide reasonable security safeguards. 
(see  section on data privacy)  
Other  
10. Education, awareness and digital competence: governments and stakeholders should work 
together to educate consumers, government officials and businesses about e -commerce to 
foster informed decision making. They should work t owards increasing business and 
consumer awareness of the consumer protection framework that applies to their online 
activities, including their respective rights and obligations, at domestic and cross -border 
levels  
 Regulation for Digital Markets  
15 
 consumers (section 33, c), but falls short in detailing principles and rules . Conversely, some countries 
have granted specific rights to online consumers, thus following international standards, as exemplified 
by Uganda below.  
These laws are, furthermore, fragmented at the national level. Consumer laws, information laws, 
contractu al laws, etc. may encompass online consumer rights. Among the 97 jurisdictions listed by 
UNCTAD, some countries provide laws that partly entitle rights for online consumers. In Côte d’Ivoire, 
for example, the legislation is limited to consumers’ rights in their relationships with Internet service 
providers (ISP).  
One particular consideration is whether to establish specific regimes tailored to transactions through e -
commerce platforms. Solutions on this area differ widely. For instance, China places extens ive 
responsibilities on e ‑commerce platforms to the extent that platforms will be held liable if they fail to 
provide information on offending vendors, whereas the U.S. and EU place more responsibility on users 
(World Economic Forum, 2019) . 
According to international guidelines,  detailed framework for online consumer protection should include 
digital- specific protections at all stages of the transaction. Consumer concerns include whether the 
information they enter online is safe and the conditions for the sale (pre -purchase), whether the goods 
purchased online will meet their expectations when they arrive (purchase), and whether they are 
entitled to any remedies if any problems arise during or after the transaction (post -purcha se). These can 
be addressed through regulations addressing information disclosure requirements, the right to 
withdraw from a transaction, dispute resolution, and redress (Figure 3).  
Figure 3. Stages of consumer protection regulations  
 
 
Pre-purchase provisions  
Before an online purchase, a major challenge faced by consumers is the inadequacy of information 
disclosed by businesses. Information disclosure is key for consumers to assess the fairness of a 
transaction, including that of payment  systems, the quality of a product, and the reliability of the seller. 
Misleading information on total prices, taxes and delivery may impede the use of e -commerce platform  
(UNCTAD, 2017) . 
Key focus on “pre -purchase” rules is to bridge information asymmetries between the seller and buyer, 
especially in the context of transaction where both parties may have little connection with each other. 
Guidance for the pre -purchase stage focuses h ence on offering clear details about the goods and 
services, the business, and the conditions of transaction.  Misleading information on total prices, taxes 
and delivery may impede the use of e -commerce platform  (UNCTAD, 2017) . According to the 2016 
revised OECD guidelines for consumer protection in e -commerce, online disclosures should include 
information about the business, about the goods and services, and about the transaction (Figure X)  
(OECD, 2016). Informed decision making relies on knowledge about price and details about the product 
or service as well as the terms and conditions of sale, such as payment and delivery and post -purchase 
rights  (OECD, 2018).   
Regulation for Digital Markets  
16 
 The information provided should allow consumers to identify, locate, and easily communicate with the 
business and to make e ducated decisions regarding the online transaction.   Items of information 
particularly  relevant in the context of digital trade transactions include:  
• Identity and address of the merchant  
• Product specifications and delivery conditions   
• Payment  process  
• Procedures for complaint, and returns and cancellation (withdrawal)  
These information disclosure requirements often include various country -specific elements . In France, 
for instance, a company engaged in e -commerce must disclose its tax identification number while, in 
Uganda, a seller must provide membership of any self- regulatory or accreditation body. In Tunisia, the 
disclosure of the identity, address and phone number of the merchant or the service provider is 
sufficient. Annex 2 shows the art icles in each jurisdiction relating to OECD recommendations on 
information disclosure. It seems that the level of income does not positively correlate with the degree of 
stringency.   
Purchase provisions  
Provisions related to the purchase seek to ensure a transparent and effective conclusion of the 
transaction. Businesses should ensure that the point at which consumers are asked to confirm a 
transaction, after which time payment is due or they are otherwise contractually bound, is clear and 
unambiguous, as s hould the steps needed to complete the transaction, especially for new payment 
mechanism.  
Post -purchase provisions  
Post -purchase guidelines focus on offering consumers solutions in case the good or the service is not 
satisfactory. This is a central aspect  of consumer protection in general and a central tenet for online 
transactions , where the distance, lack of knowledge of the vendor, and, importantly, the lack of  the 
ability to physically inspect or test product, reduce trust in the transaction. In that c ontext, clear and 
effective mechanism for canceling transaction s, returning goods , and obtaining an adequate remedy 
(e.g. re -imbursement  credit, etc .) are essential to boost trust in digital markets.  Key post -purchase 
solutions include the right of withdra wal, online dispute resolution, and redress.  
Right of withdrawal  
The right of withdrawal allows consumers to cancel a contract after purchasing a product or services 
online. The right of withdrawal usually comprises three main features .  
• The information duty  binds businesses to provide the information on the existence of their right 
of withdrawal. Failing to comply with this requirement may trigger sanctions, such as an 
extension of the withdrawal period or a liability exemption.  
• The absence of reason  allows consumers to withdraw from contract without providing any 
reason. This feature is peculiar to online transactions.  
• The withdrawal period, also known as cooling -off period, entitles the right of consumer to 
withdraw from contract within a specific timeframe.  Regulation for Digital Markets  
17 
 The right of withdrawal has different characteristics across jurisdictions because of the variability of 
those features. For instance, EU regulation (art. 9, Directive 2011/83/EU) grants online consumers the 
right to withdraw from dist ance contracts within 14 days. A consumer can withdraw from contract if he 
does not like the product or has changed his mind. The consumer bears the direct cost of returning the 
goods, unless the trader agreed to bear it or failed to inform the consumer th at he must bear them (art. 
14, para. 1). Sichuan, a Chin ese province, entitles the right of withdrawal with a cooling -off period of 7 
days without giving a reason only if the consumer “made the decision against his own willingness and 
intention due to inco mplete or inaccurate information provided by the operator” (article 10 of the 
Regulations of Sichuan on Protection of Consumer Rights and Interests). The absence of reason is, in this 
instance, conditional to the information duty. On average, the cooling- off period across provinces in 
China varies from 3 to 7 days  (Metz & Purnhagen, 2012) .  
Online d ispute resolution  
In the event of a dispute between the parties to an online transaction, or the receipt of a defective or 
nonconfo rming product, legislation should provide tools for resolution. Traditional judicial mechanisms 
may not be adequate for dispute resolution when buyers and sellers located in different jurisdictions  
(UNCITRAL, Technical Notes on Online Dispute Resolution, 2017) . Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) 
mechanisms, such as mediation, conciliation, and arbitration provide solutions to domestic and cross -
border disputes  (OEC D, 2000) . Additionally, online dispute resolution mechanisms (ODR), through a 
public or private platform, offer an inexpensive and speedy procedure to solve disputes between parties 
to an online transaction  (Bartley Johns, Hopp e, Molinuevo, Nghardsaysone, & Daza Jaller, 2017) . The 
OECD recommends implementing ADR mechanisms that do not impose a cost on customers that is 
disproportionate to the value of the claim at stake  (OECD, 2007) . 
ODR ca n be described as a mechanism for resolving disputes using electronic communications and other 
information and communication technology “without the need for physical presence at a meeting or 
hearing”  (UNCITRAL, 2017) .  E-commerce is a favorable field for the development of ODR given the low 
value of products sold and the increasing cross -border transactions  (Cortés, 2010) . ODR requires a 
technology -based intermediary (the ODR platform), that gen erates, sends, receives, stores, and 
exchanges communications to ensure data security. ODR may embrace three principal methods of ADR , 
namely arbitration, where a neutral third party makes a decision that is binding on the parties ; 
mediation , in which a neutral third party aims at an agreement that is acceptable for the parties ; and 
negotiation s between the parties, which does not involves a third party . 
Box 5: Advantages  of ADR/ODR according to EU Commission  
The EU Commission estimates that the overall cost of ineffective redress on the internet cost 0.4% of the EU's 
GDP in 2010 given that one out of five consumers was displeased with an online purchase. Alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms are faster, cheaper and easier t o use for consumers than going to court:  
• Most disputes submitted to ADR are decided within 90 days.  
• The majority of ADR procedures are free of charge for consumers or inexpensive to use (below €50).  
• The ADR process is generally simpler compared to court pr oceedings.  
Source: (EC, 2011)  
 
ODR mechanisms, being digital in nature, are also suitable to address cross -border complain ts. The e-
consumer.gov  website is one of the first examples of an international ODR platform  focused on cross -
border complaints.  A partnership between 35 consumer protection agencies, e -consumer.gov help s Regulation for Digital Markets  
18 
 consumers and agencies combat international scams . It allows consumers make cross -border fraud 
complaints in several languages (English, Frenc h, German, Korean Japanese, Polish, Spanish, and 
Turkish) and across many industries (e -commerce, banking, tourism, lottery, etc.). It is also a secured 
platform hosted by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission for law enforcement to share and access 
consumer c omplaints. Under this international ODR platform, complaints are  first brought to domestic 
consumer protection bodies  and the n they  can be submi tted to the international platform  (ICPEN, n.d.) .  
Box 6: 2016 Revised OECD Principles on Dispute Resolution and Redress  
Principle 43:  Consumers should be provided with meaningful access to fair, easy -to-use, transparent and 
effective mechanisms to resolve domestic and cross -border e -commerce disputes in a t imely manner and obtain 
redress, as appropriate, without incurring unnecessary cost or burden. These should include out -of-court 
mechanisms, such as internal complaint handling and alternative dispute resolution. Subject to applicable law, 
the use of such out -of-court mechanisms should not prevent consumers from pursuing other forms of dispute 
resolution and redress.  
Principle 44: The development by businesses of internal complaint handling mechanisms, which enable 
consumers to informally resolve their complaints directly with businesses, at the earliest possible stage, without 
charge, should be encouraged.  
Principle 45: Consumers should have access to ADR mechanisms, including ODR systems, to facilitate the 
resolution of claims over e- commerce transactions , with special attention to low value or cross -border 
transactions. Although such mechanisms may be financially supported in a variety of ways, they should be 
designed to provide dispute resolution on an objective, impartial, and consistent basis, with individual outcomes 
independent of influence by those providing financial or other support.  
Source:  (OECD, 2016)  
 
Enforcement of ODR platforms is ensured by either public authorities, business associations, and/or 
consumer organizations:  
• Public dispute resolution providers , such as the EU -wide platform for consumers and 
businesses, offer ODR solutions  (European Commission, 2019) . Given the multiplicity of 
languages an d countries in the EU, the platform offers an example of an international ODR 
platform run by a public authority. Under that framework, n ational regulators are responsible  
for licensing private ODR mechanisms.  Courts have also developed ODR processes, as e videnced 
by the Hangzhou Internet Court (Box 7 ).   
• Private dispute resolution providers can settle their own ODR. The World Intellectual Property 
Organization, for instance, offers an arbitration and mediation center for domain name dispute 
resolution  (WIPO, 2019) . Square Trade is the preferred private ODR used by eBay  (SquareTrade, 
2019) . It has been particularly successful due to the large number of similar and simple disputes 
easing the recognitio n of patterns of comparable disputes and their matching with proposed 
resolutions.   
Regardless of the type of organization, there is binding enforcement of the ODR outcome. If parties 
cannot reach an agreement, one will most likely sue another at  a tradit ional court even if it is deemed 
disproportionate to the values in dispute  (Ortolani, 2016) . 
Box 7: Example of the Hangzhou Internet Court  Regulation for Digital Markets  
19 
 The Court of Hangzhou in China , released in 2017 , is an internet court for online shopping contract disputes, 
online shopping product liability disputes, online service contract disputes, loan contract disputes and online 
copyright disputes. The portal is in Mandarin and English. The method used is mediatio n. The process differs 
slightly from the general guidelines of UNCITRAL , as the parties engage directly in the facilitated settlement:  
1) Filing: registration and name certification, as well as complaint completion. After the user is authorized, 
the system supports the investigation of e -commerce, transactions, logistics, micro -credit, intellectual 
property , and other information  
2) Mediation: after the case is filed, the first pre -litigation mediation  takes place . Within fifteen days, the 
mediator contacts the parties, through online, telephone , or video mediation  
3) Final stage: if the mediation is unsuccessful, the case is formally submitted to the court, where it 
proceeds to the final decision — including the online payment of litigation costs  
Source: (Hangzhou Internet Court, 2019)  
 
UNCITRAL laid out general principles for ODR providers  (UNCITRAL, Technical Notes on Online Dispute 
Resolution, 2017) . Transparency, the first principle, ensures that any relationship between the ODR 
administrator and a vendor is disclosed, so that users are informed of potential conflicts of interest. 
Also, information should be available on the ODR administrator’s websit e in a user- friendly and 
accessible manner. The second principle is independence. It invites the ODR administrator to adopt a 
code of ethics for its neutrals, in order to guide them  as to conflicts of interest and other rules of 
conduct, and to adopt polic ies to mitigat e conflicts of interest. Expertise is the third principle, which 
invites the ODR administrator to implement policies on the selection and training of neutrals so that 
they conform with the standards set by the administrator. Lastly, explicit and informed consent, the 
fourth principle, should give the basis for an ODR process.  
Challenges ahead  
The boom of cross border digital trade is bringing new challenges to consumer dispute resolution 
mechanisms. Engaging in legal actions is not practical given the multiplicity of jurisdictions and law s 
involved. Parties may  be incentivized to use out- of-court mechanism s to dodge discordant legislations.  
However, cross -border cooperation between national bodies is rather limited. E -consumer.gov  offers 
multi -lingual services with adequate information on national law on consumer protection. In addition, 
consumer protection authorities do not have the authority to investigate in foreign jurisdictions if a 
citizen reports a problem with an international seller (Schmitz & Rule, 2017) . The EU offers an 
interesting case of a regional centralized ODR system along with authorized national ODRs.   
Also , online consumer protection regulations need to constantly evolve  to adapt to new technol ogies, 
behaviors, processes, and markets. For instance, the development of mobile devices may reduce the 
effectiveness of information disclosure since information is provided in small font and/or in scrolling text 
boxes. With smaller screens, limited storage capacity and battery life, mobile devices have reduced 
capacities to offer adequate information disclosure about the business, the terms and conditions and 
payments  (OECD, 2014) . 
The OECD points to seven  key new developments that will shape the future of online consumer 
protection  (OECD, 2016):  
• Non -monetary transactions : consumers increasingly acquire “free” goods and services , such as 
email accounts,  in exchange for  their personal data.  These transactions are now explicitly 
included in the scope of the Recommendation. Governments and stakeholders are called upon Regulation for Digital Markets  
20 
 to consider ways to provide redress to consumers experiencing a problem with such 
transactions  
• Digital con tent products: transactions involving digital content often come with technical or 
contractual access or usage limitations and many consumers have difficulty understanding their 
rights and obligations. New language has been added to clarify that consumers should be 
provided with clear information about such limitations, as well as information on functionality 
and interoperability  
• Active consumers:  current e -commerce business models increasingly blur the boundaries 
between consumers and businesses, with cons umers playing a participatory role in product 
promotion and development and entering into transactions with other consumers. The scope of 
the Recommendation has therefore been broadened and it now encompasses business activities 
that facilitate consumer- to-consumer transactions. A new provision is added to ensure that 
consumer endorsements are truthful and transparent  
• Mobile devices: the growing use of mobile devices for e -commerce brings a number of technical 
challenges to making information disclosures effective (e.g. on small screens) and can constrain 
record keeping by consumers. Two new provisions are included to highlight the need to account 
for the technological limitations or special characteristics of the device used  
• Privacy and security risks : cons umer data is at the core of many e- commerce services and this 
elevates privacy and security risks. The Recommendation recalls the need to address these risks 
consistent with other OECD instruments and includes two new provisions highlighting specific 
prote ctions of particular importance for B2C e -commerce  
• Payment protection: recognizing that the level of payment protection can vary depending on 
the type of payment mechanism used, the Recommendation calls on governments and 
stakeholders to work together to d evelop minimum levels of consumer protection across 
payment mechanisms  
• Product safety: in a number of countries, a range of unsafe products, which have been 
prohibited from sale or recalled from the offline retail market, are available in e -commerce. A 
new  provision is added to ensure that unsafe products are not offered to consumers online and 
that businesses cooperate with the relevant authorities to address the problem  
Redress  
Finally, online consumers should be entitled to redress for the harm suffered as a consequence of goods 
or services that are defective or do not meet advertised quality criteria  (OECD, Consumer Protection in 
E-commerce: OECD Recommendation, 2016).  Redress refers to the compensation for economic harm.  
Redress can take the form of a monetary remedy (e.g. refund or price reduction) or a conduct remedy 
with a restorative element (e.g. exchange or repair)  (OECD, 2007).  
The costs of return usually fall under th e customer’s responsibility . However, certain conditions may 
transfer the cost to the business. For instance, when the business did not clearly indicate the costs of 
return during the purchase of the product. Other factors may be considered, such as the ge ographical 
scope and population. Regulations in mainland China do not offer free return to customers because of Regulation for Digital Markets  
21 
 the country’s  size. Conversely, Taiwan’s regulations enforce free return due to its relatively small 
population and territory  (Metz & Purnhagen, 2012) . 
ii. Intermediary liability  
The internet’s unparalleled ability to connect billions of individuals worldwide has boosted business 
models based on intermediation between vendors and consumers. E -commerce platforms like Alibab a, 
eBay , and Mercado Libre are based on offering consumers products from thousands of different 
providers rather than their own stock.  “Gig economy” apps offer services such as rides, lodging, or 
delivery of food or groceries from firms and individuals.  Other services rely on content such as video 
(YouTube, Vimeo), opinions and reviews of products or services (Yelp, Google), or information (blogs) 
developed by thousands of users, most of whom remain relatively unknown to the final consumer.  The 
relations hip between the intermediary (websites and apps) and the firms or individuals offering their 
own products or services is hence essential to the functioning of those digital transactions.  
Intermediary liability rules are the set of provisions that distribut e the liability between intermediaries 
(website and apps) and actual vendors or content developers when things go wrong.  In other terms, 
intermediary liability is the responsibility that falls upon online intermediaries, such as search engines, 
applicatio n platforms, social networks, and broadband companies, for third -party content featured in, or 
products and services offered through, their website or apps  (Gasser & Schulz, 2015) . Just like 
intermediation is not a novel busine ss model, intermediary liability rules are not new a legal concept –
most such rules can be traced back to Roman law.  Intermediary liability rules can in fact be broader rules 
that apply to online intermediaries .  However, specific rules of digital intermed iaries are more likely to 
adapt to the particular conditions of digital markets.   
Principles  
Rules on intermediary liability need to strike a balance between protecting consumer rights and 
supporting the expansion of digital markets, including through intermediary platforms. While the good, 
service, or content may be offered or developed by third parties, intermediary platforms benefit from it 
by building their businesses around it.  Digital intermediaries manage the relationship with the 
costumer, and they are often the largest, more sophisticated actor involved in the transaction.  As such, 
regul ations can impose on intermediaries (jointly with the third party) liability for fake or faulty products 
or services, or for offensive or illegal content, transacted through or featured in their services.  On the 
other hand, intermediaries often don’t have  full knowledge of everything that is being offered by 
producers and content developers, who have greater control over it.   
For digital intermediaries, responsibility may arise mainly from two types of conducts: the offering for 
sale of counterfeited prod ucts, or the publication of unlawful content, such as images or text, by their 
users. The offering of fake products would normally entail a violation of intellectual property rules 
(typically trademark protection). Unlawful content can instead run against intellectual property rules 
when the content is unduly featuring other people’s work (a violation of copyright protection) by for 
instance reproducing music or video without the authors’ permission, or it may violate criminal law 
provisions such as rules a gainst libel, hate speech, or child pornography, the protection of individual 
privacy or classified information, or amount to l èse-majesté  crimes.  
Typically, rules on online intermediary liability have two components: one attributing responsibility to 
the intermediary and another reducing its liability by removing the violation (“safe harbor”). For Regulation for Digital Markets  
22 
 example, the intermediary would be held liable if it  had knowledge that the product being offered was 
fake but could be exonerated from responsibility if it took steps to remove the product from its listings 
upon obtaining knowledge of the violation.  Rules on responsibility pivot between no responsibility,  
actual knowledge of the infringement (the platform knew the content was unlawful), duty of knowledge 
(the platforms should have known that the content was unlawful), or absolute responsibility (the 
platform is responsible in all conditions). Safe harbor p rovisions typically involve notice and stay -down 
procedures, which require that upon receipt of a notice regarding infringing content, the intermediary 
search and remove all copies of the infringing content and ensure it is not uploaded again (Gasser & 
Schulz, 2015) . 
Views on the extent of liability that should be imposed on intermediaries varies greatly between the 
content industry and the internet industry. Most intermediaries do not have the time or resources to 
investigate e ach notification they receive from copyright a holder. As a result, they tend to remove the 
content upon notice. The American Association of Publishers (AAP) advocates for sanctions imposed on 
intermediaries for failing to ensure the protection of copyrigh ted material  (USITC, 2017) . Content 
industry representatives claim that the lack of such responsibility leads to an increase in online piracy 
and decreased revenue for content industries  (USITC, 2017) . On the other hand, internet industry 
representatives argue that an increase in intermediary liability is likely to increase costs and limit 
intermediaries’ ability to combat piracy (USITC, 2017) . Content industries usu ally advocate for notice 
and stay -down provisions , as it has been shown that requiring that intermediaries block websites is 
ineffective, as the infringing content can be moved by hosts (European Parliament, 2015) .  
International practice  
Rules on liability for digital intermediaries are nascent and still evolving, and a global trend on the topic 
remains elusive. Even within countries, views on the extent of liability that should be imposed on 
intermediaries varies greatly between the  content industry and the internet industry. Much of this 
tension is seen in the Unites States, home to some of the largest internet firms as well as content 
developers, which has traditionally resulted i n strong protections to digital intermediaries, as well as far-
reaching disciplines on intellectual property (Holland, et al., 2014) . Content industry representatives 
claim that the lack of intermediary responsibility leads to an increase in online piracy and decreased 
revenue fo r content industries, which has led the American Association of Publishers (AAP)  to advocate 
for sanctions imposed on intermediaries for failing to ensure the protection of copyrighted material  
(USITC, 2017) . On the other hand, internet industry representatives argue that an increase in 
intermediary liability is likely to increase costs and limit intermediaries’ ability to combat piracy (USITC, 
2017) . The U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) creates a safe harbor for intermediaries under 
certain circumstances, including if they unknowingly display, transmit, or store infringing content. 
Section 230(c) of the Communications Decency Act shield s intermediaries from liability for most third -
party content. However, when it comes to copyright infringement, they must meet certain conditions, 
including a notice and takedown requirement.  
The EU released a draft directive in 2016, which requires that intermediaries routinely check that they 
do not host infringing content.  In June 2017, Germany passed a law imposing fines of up to €50 million 
upon online intermediaries who do not remove illegal content within twenty -four hours of notice. 
Russia’s Federa l Law No. 187 provides intermediaries with safe harbor protections based on a legal test 
which determines whether they knew or should have known about infringing content. Content owners Regulation for Digital Markets  
23 
 are not required to notify intermediaries about infringing content, an d instead may go directly to the 
courts to request an injunction to block the content.  
Seeking to protect online freedom of expr ession, an international coalition released the Manila 
Principles for Intermediary Liability (Box 8). The Principles provide go vernments with standards for 
censorship and takedown laws which  respect the users’ rights while promoting innovation.  
Box 8: Intermediary Liability guidelines  
The Manila Principles for Intermediary Liability were developed to protect online freedom of e xpression and to 
provide governments with standards for censorship and takedown laws that respect the users’ rights.  The 
effort involved civil society groups from around the world, led by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF, USA), 
the Centre for Inter net and Society (CIS, India), Article 19 (UK), KICTANET (Kenya), Derechos Digitales (Chile), 
Asociación por los Derechos Civiles (ADC, Argentina) and Open Net (South Korea).  
The proposed principles are:  
1. Intermediaries should not be liable for third party content: intermediaries should be exempt from liability 
for third party content where they did not modify the content; they must not be required to routinely 
monitor content on their network or platform;  
2. An order by a judicial authority must be required fo r content restriction: an order from an independent and 
impartial judicial authority must be required for content restriction;  
3. Requests for restrictions of content must be clear, be unambiguous, and follow due process: where an 
intermediary receives a restriction request before a court order is issued, they need not evaluate the 
legality of the content; the request must include its legal basis; sanctions should be imposed for bad faith 
restriction requests;  
4. Laws and content restrictions order s and practices must comply with necessity and proportionality tests: 
restrictions should be specific to the content at issue, if applicable, limited in geographical scope; and not 
extend beyond its duration;  
5. Laws and content restriction policies and pract ices must respect due process: parties must be provided the 
right to be heard and to appeal against restriction orders;  
6. Transparency and accountability must be built into laws and content restriction policies and practices: 
applicable rules and transparenc y reports must be published online in a timely manner . 
Source: (EFF, 2019)  
 
At the international level, some principles on intermediary liability were included in recent trade 
agreement s. The recent Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans -Pacific Partnership 
(CPTTP) and the United States, Mexico, and Canada A greement (USMCA) set limits to intermediary 
liability by i nternet service providers in their intellectual property chapter. Internet service providers are 
not liable for copyright infringements “that they do not control, initiate, direct, and that take place 
through systems or networks controlled or operated by them or on their behalf”. However, they must 
remove or disable ac cess to copyright infringing content on their networks upon obtaining knowledge of 
its existence.  
Intermediary liability rules relating to criminal or civil infringement laws are being modernized for the 
digital environment. The proliferation of fake news in recent years has led countries to seek  to reduce 
the amount of misinformation that citizens can find online.  However, this raises  concerns about content 
filtering, freedom of speech, and media manipulation. Singapore , who has been often criticized for i ts 
heavy control of the media  (Leung, 2019) , recently introduced the Protection from Online Falsehoods 
and Manipulation to hold social media sites liable for third -party  content  published on their platforms . 
Noncompliant platfo rms are subject to fines and imprisonment if they do not remove the Regulation for Digital Markets  
24 
 “misinformation” or publish “corrections” next to it. Industry groups fear that this new type of law 
allows governments to decide what is true or false, endangering the freedom of expressi on and speech. 
Following a terrorist attack in a mosque in New Zealand, which was streamed live on Facebook, Australia 
passed a bill requiring social media platforms to promptly remove abhorrent violent user content shared 
on their sites. The acts covered by the new law include murder, torture, rape, and kidnapping. Other 
countries around the world, including France and Germany, are also tackling these issues through 
legislation.  
iii. Privacy and data protection  
Consumers are increasingly aware of the value of their personal data.  Lack of trust on the way personal 
data is managed leads consumers away from electronic transactions, limiting the growth of digital 
markets. At the same time, burdensome regulations on the use and transfer of individual data can build 
substantial costs for businesses, especially small and medium enterprises.  The goal is hence to allow 
data transfers in a manner that supports the expansion of digital markets, while increasing consumer 
trust that their private information  remains secure and under their control.  
Data privacy legal frameworks consist of entitling rights for all or certain types of individuals (also called 
data subject s) regarding the collection, usage, storage, and disposal o f their personal data. They also 
create obligations for controllers and processors while enacting derogations in certain circumstances 
(state security, public safety, etc.). Security processes for data controllers (either public or private) 
ensure the appr opriate processing of personal data.  
 
Principles  
Several international instruments have been focused on setting out the key principles of data privacy 
regulation. Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Privacy Framework of 2015 promotes a flexible 
approach to privacy protection, with a focus on avoidin g the creation of unnecessary barriers to 
information flows.  The Convention “108+ ” by the Council of Europe is an international human rights 
treaty focused on data protection , setting out principles that are compatible with the requirements of 
the European  regulation .  In 2013,  OECD members updated their Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy 
adopted in 1980 to account for the new reality of digital data flows. The OECD Guidelines declare digital 
risk an economic risk and they aim to protect privacy and in dividual liberties with respect to personal 
data process in the public or private sector. They include eight basic principles for data protection:  Box 9: How much is personal data worth?  
To raise public awareness, the OECD quantified the market price of certain personal data. Using different 
methodolog ies, the institution shed light on the revenues made by Face book and Experian per user. Those 
companies earn USD 4 to 7 per year per user.  
 
Looking at the market prices for a specific period, the OECD found that  companies earn : 
• USD 0.5 for a street address,  
• USD 2 for a date birth,  
• USD 8 for a social security numb er, 
• USD 3 for a driver’s license,  
• USD 35 for a military record.  
Source: (OECD, Exploring the Economics of Personal Data: A Survey of Methodologies for Measuring 
Monetary Value, 2013)  Regulation for Digital Markets  
25 
 • Collection limitation principle : limits the collection of personal data and suggests lawful and fair 
means fo r collection, as well as consent of the data subject where appropriate  
• Data quality principle : calls for relevancy of the personal data to the purposes for which they 
are to be used. Additionally, it calls for data accuracy, completion, and maintenance  
• Purpose specification principle : data controllers should specify the purpose for which the data 
are collected no later than at the time of data collection. Subsequent use of the data should be 
limited to those purposes and the data subject should be notified of any change of purpose  
• Use limitation principle : limits the use of the data for purposes other than those specified, with 
the consent of the data subject or by the authority of law  
• Security safeguards principle : calls for reasonable protection of the dat a from risks such as loss 
or unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, or disclosure of the data  
• Openness principle : suggests a general policy of openness regarding developments, practices, 
and policies with respect to personal data  
• Individual participation principle : the data subject should have the right to request data from a 
data controller or a confirmation of whether the data controller has personal data relating to 
the individual. If the data controller has such data, it should be provide d to the data subject 
within a reasonable time, in a reasonable manner and in a form that is readily intelligible to the 
data subject  
• Accountability principle : the data controller should be held accountable for abiding with 
principles of the Guidelines  
 
Box 10: The influence of EU legislation across the world. Example of Argentina.  
Argentina was the first country in Latin America to be recognized by the EU for having adequate protection of personal 
data. Argentina’s Personal Data Protection Act of 2000, based on the EU Data Protection Directive, includes general 
principles related to data protection.  
 
It addresses the legal means of data collection, including the requirement of free, express, and informed consent of 
the data subject prior to collection. Data collected must be true, accurate, relevant, and it must be updated as 
necessary. Data may not be used for a purpose that is different or incompatible with that which motivated the 
collection and the data subject must be provided with express and clear information regarding the purpose for 
collection. The data must be stored in a manner that allows for the data subject’s exercise of the right to access the 
information. Additionally, the data controller must implement technical and organizational m easures necessary to 
guarantee the security and confidentiality of the personal data.  
 
However, the law includes several exceptions to the general rule that personal information could not be transferred to 
countries with inadequate levels of data protecti on and the lack of independence of the supervising authority from the 
rest of the government. A draft bill updates the old law in certain areas, including the removal of legal entities from the 
definition of data subjects; the elimination of the duty to re gister databases; new rules on international transfers of 
personal data; and an introduction to sections on child consent. Additionally, it proposes the independence of the 
supervising authority in charge of compliance with data protection from the rest of  the government.  
Source: (Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, 2002)  
 Regulation for Digital Markets  
26 
 International practice  
Countries have unevenly  embraced data privacy legal frameworks. The 1970s and 1980s saw a surge in 
personal data protection regulation, with several European countries enacting laws and several 
international organizations, such as the OECD, enacting instruments addressing the is sue. But at the 
time, regulation arose for large government -owned datasets. Since the 1990s, digital communications 
led to the collection of massive data from private companies, which led to a new generation of legal 
frameworks to strengthen personal data protection and consumers’ trust. However, while some 
countries have strived to modernize their privacy frameworks to reflect the challenges of the new digital 
technologies, many countries lag behind and still rely on broad privacy principles set out in the ir 
constitution or elaborated in older privacy laws.  
Despite these different approaches, a common objective of data privacy is granting rights to individuals 
for the protection of personal information (or “personally identifiable information -PII”). However, the 
definition of PII  as well as  the grounds  under which  it may collected, processed, or shared, remain highly 
idiosyncratic to each jurisdiction .  
Europe has been at the forefront of the most comprehensive (and costly) legislation on data protect ion. 
It had a significant impact on other countries’ legislation (see box 11). The United States developed a 
less stringent and comprehensive framework which mostly relies on industry -related best practices. 
Canada and Latin American countries developed pri vacy frameworks in the 1990s and 2000s partly in 
the form of habeas data. Asia and Oceania have seen their most developed countries adopting data 
privacy laws (Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, South Korea) while others  remain lagging .  The Middle 
East an d Africa have the least developed data privacy legal frameworks  (Bygrave, 2014) . 
Box 11: Data privacy in the United States and the European Union  
Two legislative frameworks which are particularly different with regards to data privacy rules in the context of e -
commerce help illustrate the diverse approaches in this arena. The EU General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) grants the data subject a set of legal rights which provide control over data that describes him or her , 
consolidating data privacy and protection as a fundamental human right. The laws of United States , instead, 
tend to treat personal data as a property of the individual that can be transferred to others, ultimately grant ing 
ownership of such data to the data collector and processors , along with the power to use it and transfer it with 
certain limitations.  
The European Union has a notice requirement as well as a consent requirement. This means that anyone with 
access to the data must obtain consent from the data subject before using the data and must inform the data 
subject how the data will be used. C onsent  must be obtained in some circumstances. In the United States, 
anyone with unrestricted access to the data owns it and may use it with certain exception. One exception is 
where the data subject gives restricted access to the data, such as when a user, when  agreeing to share data, is 
afforded a right to later opt -out. Additionally, use may be statutorily prohibited, forbidding companies that do 
not meet certain requirements from using the data. Finally, if the data was accessed by unlawful means, it may 
not be used.  
 
The United States has no comprehensive federal data protection policy and instead relies on self -regulation by 
companies and the enactment of laws as they are deemed necessary. Certain types of information, such as 
health information and informa tion pertaining to children is subject to stricter rules. The Assault of Non -
Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act of 2003 regulates commercial email at the federal level.  
 Regulation for Digital Markets  
27 
 A comprehensive legal framework for data governance should provide  detailed rules on all the principles 
recognized in the OECD Guidelines (see above) . Annex 1 provides a cross -country comparison o f 
regulation embodying these principles , as enacted in three  low- and middle - income countries. 
Importantly, each of these principles can be implemented in different ways, depending on the priorities 
of the policymaker.  For example, consent to data collection and transfers can be expressed on an opt -in 
or opt -out basis, which can lead to greater or fewer data collected by firms; an adequate framework 
must ensure that the rules for consent are clear one way or the other, but a choice of one option o r the 
other depends on the policy concern of each authority.  
Implementing agencies  
A key aspect of data protection is who monitors and enforces the implementation of the regulation .  The 
establishment of a capable and effective implementing agency is central to ensuring adequate 
implementation of the regulation and to prov iding individuals with a policing entity to which resort in 
case of violations.   
Most countries who have adopted a comprehensive framework on data protection  have buttressed it 
with  a data protection agency (DPA) .  Certain countries, such as France, have a DPA since the 1970s, 
when large state -owned datasets were the main concern of the public.  While most DPAs are 
independent agencies, some countries have embodied them with ministries or policy -making bodies  
(Makulilo, 2016) . 
The U.S. does not have a DPA per se . Under  the EU -US Privacy Shield framework, private companies 
importing data from the EU must self- certify to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) that they comply 
with EU laws  , but there is no notification requirement fo r companies in most cases.  The FTC has the 
most actionable enforcement powers , based on the Federal Trade Commission Act, which tasks the 
Agency with protecting consumers against unfair or deceptive commercial practices . Sector -specific 
regulations  also e xist, as in the health sector , where Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996  (HIPAA ) is enforced by the Office of Civil Rights within the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Furthermore, state -wide regulations , enforced by the stat e’s Attorney General,  may be more 
stringent. The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), scheduled to become effective on January 1, 
2020, grants California residents additional protections with regard to their personal data. Under the 
new law, companies are subject to penalties of up to $7500 USD per intentional violation. Violations 
include not providing a link on their website to allow customers to opt -out of having their personal data 
sold to third parties. In the case of data breach incidents, the law provides for a private right of action 
under which each customer may receive up to $750 dollars per incident.  
Countries who have established DPAs typically give them the following tasks : 
• Raise a wareness : DPAs inform citizens about their rights regarding th e processing of their 
personal data. In 2013, the French DPA, CNIL, received almost 125,000 telephone requests for 
advice or further information  
• Assist data subjects : DPAs assist citizens, or data subjects, to enforce their right for information 
disclosure , data access or deletion, if applicable  
• Advise and support data controllers: the  German DPA advises and supports data protection 
officials and data controllers in their tasks, according to section 38 of the German Federal Data Regulation for Digital Markets  
28 
 Protection Act.  The French DPA delivers certifications for products or procedures that deal with 
data protection  (CNIL, The CNIL’s Missions, 2019) . 
• Supervise data controllers:  depending on their activities and size, data controllers must notify 
or obtain  authorization prior to processing data (see below). In Senegal, data controllers must 
fill a 6 -page notification or a 10 -page application for authorization  (CDP, 2019) . Conversely, in 
Australia, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner registers binding codes of 
practice from supervised industries  
• Regulate: DPAs enact regulations to ensure that privacy acts are enforced on a daily basis by 
stakeholders  
• Inspect and sanction: DPAs can perform inspections and impose fines on  data controllers. The 
Federal Institute for Access to Public Information and Data Protection, the Mexican DPA, can 
also resolve dispute s between data subjects and controllers  
Data protection agencies can be  costly to man an equip, straining government budgets. A European DPA 
typically employs up to 200 civil servants with high qualification s. The French DPA, CNIL, employs 71 
percent of highly qualified civil servants (A class)  (CNIL, Rapport d’activité, 2015) . 38 percent of staff 
members are lawyers and 22 percent legal assistants, while 12 percent are engineers and auditors  (CNIL, 
Statut et organisation de la CNIL, 2019) . In addition, the cost of a D PA will greatly depend on the size of 
the jurisdiction’s data market, the scope of the privacy act, and the revenue scheme adopted. The 
annual budget of the UK information Commissioner’s Office  was GBP 25m in 2017 (USD 33m) where as 
the French government sp ends €17m (USD 20m) per year on the CNIL.  
DPAs may be financed directly from the state budget (such as France), by an annual fee collected from 
data controllers when notifying the DPA prior to processing personal data, and/or by sanctions imposed 
on data controllers. Depending on the size, the annual turnover, and the type of organization, DPAs may 
collect different fees. In the UK, fees of the 400,000 supervised data controllers account for almost all 
the revenue of ICO  (ICO, 2019). They are categorized as follows:   
• GBP 35 for most data controllers,  
• GBP 500 for:  
o a turnover of GBP 25.9m  and more than 249 members of staff;  
o a public authority with more than 249 members of staff.  
• GBP 35 for charities, small occupational pension schemes, and organizations that have been in 
existence for less than one month regardless of their size and turnover.  
iv. Cybersecurity  
While less visible to individual consumers, cybersecurity regulation is an essential component for 
promoting trust in digit al markets. Major data breaches, like Yahoo ’s 2013  incident  which affect ed 3 
billion user accounts , not only compromise people’s privacy, but can have a chilling effect for digital 
markets as consumers see that their information is vulnerable . In 2015, the OECD declared digital risk an 
economic risk  (OECD, 2015) . If personal data is not securely processed it is more prone to breaches.  Regulation for Digital Markets  
29 
 Principles  
Promoting security in digital markets is an essential component of data regulation. To that end, in 
addition to ensuring the rights of data subjects, data privacy regulation should render data controllers 
and processors liable for data processing. A data controller makes decisions over the purposes and 
means of the data p rocessing, while data processors are responsible for processing data on behalf of 
controllers. Although businesses may see data security as an unnecessary up -front cost, a data breach 
can be more expensive in the end, in terms of the actual loss in additio n to the costs to remedy the loss. 
One study estimated that cybercrime, including consumer data breaches, costs the global economy 
about 600 billion USD per year (McAfee & CSIS, 2018) .  
Security requirements consist of organizational and technical measures as well human resources. These 
may include mandatory encryption of personal data, implementation of rigorous internal policies, or the 
appointment of a data manager. Assessment of the risk to a data subject’s privacy helps det ermine the 
adequate safeguards that need to be implemented (OECD, 2013). Countries without adequate data 
protection regulations risk being avoided by companies due to the lack of certainty about compliance 
and data handling (NTB, 2015) . Additionally, these countries are missing out on the benefits of the 
Internet, such as innovation and economic growth (WEF, 2016).  
International guidelines  
Data security is a concep t grounded in principles of various international guidelines. Article 7 of 
Convention 108 of the Council of Europe stipulates that “appropriate security measures” for protecting 
personal data “against accidental or unauthorized destruction of accidental lo ss as well as against 
unauthorized access, alteration or dissemination” must be taken. In  spite of being linked to data privacy, 
cybersecurity has increasingly become an autonomous topic due to the proliferation of data use and 
data breaches.  The EU Genera l Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which went into effect in 2018, 
introduces detailed  provisions to protect the personal data and privacy of EU citizens, including 
cybersecurity requirements (Table  2).   
  
Table  2: EU GDPR cybersecurity requirements    
Security of processing    Controllers and processors must ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk through 
measures such as data pseudonymization and encryption     
Breach notification    In case of a personal data breach, controllers must notify the supervisory authority 
within 72 hours of becoming aware of the breach.  In cases where the breach is likely to 
result in a high risk to the individual rights, the controller must notify the data subject of 
the breach without undue delay    
Impact assessment    Where data processing is likely to result in high risk to individual rights, the controller 
must conduct an impact assessment prior to processing, including the foreseen measures 
to address the risks    
Designation of data 
protection officer    Controllers and processors must designate a data protection officer under certain 
circumstances, including if the bulk of the processing activities require regular and 
systematic monitoring of data subjects on a large scale, or if it consists of processing of 
sensitive data on a large scale    
  Regulation for Digital Markets  
30 
 c) Regulatory restrictions to digital trade  
Regulation can also impose limitations that may hinder digital trade. Restrictions to digital trade, just 
like any economic activity, may be warranted for safeguarding public policy goals, such protecting 
children , promoting public health, or protecti ng individual privacy. Other limitations may be aimed at 
overcoming or preventing market failures, such as bridging information gaps, or preventing anti-
competitive practices. Oftentimes, however, the pursuit of public p olicy goals or the prevention of 
market failures can lead to overly restrictive measures  that unnecessarily disrupt digital trade -thus 
losing business opportunities that could help boost economic growth.   
A conducive regulatory framework for digital trad e must hence no t only provide for sound regulatory 
pillars to digital markets, as discussed earlier, but must also ensure that restrictions to digital trade, 
while effective to achieve the desired policy goals, are not unnecessarily cumbersome to digital firms.  
This section reviews some of the most common restrictions to digital trade and attempts to identify 
emerging good regulatory practices.  In particular, the section  address es restrictions related to bans on 
online sales and limitations on cross -borde r data flows.  
i. Ban of online sales  
Some governments prohibit or limit the online sale of certain goods or services. Like retailing services in 
general, the distribution of certain goods, such as chemical products like fertilizers or explosives, or guns 
and ammunition, drugs and medicines, or tobacco and alcohol products may be limited for reason s of 
public health and safety.  The sale of such products is typically governed in brick -and-mortar retail by 
establishing certain conditions (minimum age, medica l prescription, or  specific permits  requirements ) 
and checking and often recording the identity of the buyer during the transaction. E -commerce bring s 
particular challenges to such sales , as the digital nature of the transactions limits the ability of sellers to 
verify compliance with these conditions.  
Online sales ban s are largely accepted for transactions that require verifying the buyer’s identity. The EU 
in particular, in its quest to ensure the free movement of goods within the single market, has repeatedly 
faced this matter . For instance, despite a 2007 ruling by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) declaring 
that a ban on private imports of alcohol is an unjustified restriction trade within the E U, and the EU 
declining proposals to ban online sales of alcohol, the Swedish government has proposed a law which 
bans the online purchase of alcohol from another EU country, claiming public health as a policy concern  
(Gunnilstam, 2017) .  The ECJ has , in other occasions , admitted the  validity of online sales bans in cases 
where the identity of the seller must be verified as a condition for the sale. In Germany, the ECJ revoked 
a ban on the online sale of over- the-counter (OTC) pharmaceuticals in 2003  (Deutscher  
Apothekerverband, 2003) . This was found to be a discriminatory measure, since German pharmacies 
could sell the products at their physical stores, while foreign pharmacies only had the internet as an 
avenue into the German market. Although the Court accepted that OTC pharmaceutic als could be sold 
online, it agreed with Germany’s public health argument regarding the need to verify a doctor’s 
prescription before issuing medicine to customers,  accepting the ban on the online sale of prescription 
pharmaceuticals in Germany.  Similarly,  although the ECJ noted that a ban on online gambling 
maintained by the Netherlands was a restriction to trade, it ultimately agreed with the Dutch 
government that the need to combat fraud and criminal activity justified such a barrier (Ladbrokes 
Betting and Ladbrokes International, 2010) . Regulation for Digital Markets  
31 
 Some alternatives t o online sales bans focus on verifying the buyer’s identity by a registered 
establishment at the time of delivery of the product. U nder U.S. federal law, a person wishing to 
purchase a gun over the internet from a seller outside the state must have it shipped to a dealer within 
the state and retrieve it in person after demonstrating the minimum age and passing a background 
check  (18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(3)) .  This regime does not apply to the purchase of ammunition , as a buyer may 
purchase ammunition from a seller online anywhere in the country and have it shipped directly to his or 
her home.  However, states that set a minimum age to purchase ammunition , such as Massachusetts and 
the District of Columbia, require ammunition sales be completed face -to-face.  
From a digital trade perspective, however, it remains essential that such measures be applied on a non -
discriminatory basis to all sellers – foreign and domestic.  It would hardly be justifiable on a legitimate 
public policy basis that a ban on online sales  affects only foreign sellers.  Similarly, when a mechanism is 
established to allow domestic vendors to sell controlled goods  online  -such as requiring that the identity 
verification is done at the time of delivery -, foreign online  sellers should be afford ed a similar regime to 
the extent feasible.  
Online sales bans may fade out as technology improves and facilitates the identity verification. It can be 
expected that as technologies like face or fingerprint recognition evolve, and solutions like secure digital 
signature become mainstream, online sales of regulated goods will be gradually allowed, at least by 
vendors who meet certai n qualification criteria.  
ii. Regulations on cross -border data flows  
Data flows are the bloodstream of digital trade.  Data exchanges not only channel the information that 
results in digital transaction  (buyers’ and sellers’ details, price , contractual terms,  payment order, etc .), 
but when it comes to trade in services, they embody the actual object of the transaction (the 
professional advice; the customer care; the images , video, or sounds ; the app -based intermediation 
services  that are being trade, etc. ).  Digital data is also becoming increasingly important  to other 
activities, by providing information that boosts the capacity and efficiency of other economic activities  
(the real time monitoring of manufacturing robots; patien ts clinical data; etc .) –see Bo x 12.  Cloud 
computing allows users to store, manage, and process data remotely , which is highly beneficial to users 
who can choose to pay only for the quantity and time needed  (Koske, Bitetti, Wanner, & Sutherland, 
2014) . As su ch, regimes open to the flow of information across borders are essential for digital trade to 
flourish.  
Box 12: The need for data transfers in GVCs  
Data is crucial for firms in the manufacturing sector for several different reasons:  
1. Exercise control and coordination: firms must be able to move data across different locations to be able to 
control and coordinate production in different geographical locations, work with subcontractors and 
suppliers, and handle internal issues  
2. Pre-production rese arch and development: communication with external partners located around the 
world is necessary to conduct R&D and testing in the pre -production phase  
3. Ensure supply chain management: firms need to share information across different entities to manage 
input flows and the necessary capital  
4. Manage production: the production and assembly of products is handled by robotics; data transfers are 
necessary to control this process  
5. Run and monitor sold goods: firms rely on data transfers in the post -sales phase to ha ndle maintenance, 
repairs, and spare parts  Regulation for Digital Markets  
32 
  
Yet, public policy may prevent some data from being  freely shared around the world.  Governments 
prefer that some information remain physically located within their boundaries for national security 
interests, or for ensuring regulatory oversight over such information, or, often, as a way of promoting 
domestic business  related to the servicing of such data.  These data regulations lead to productivity 
losses, which in turn result in lower returns on investment  (OECD, 2016). These losses need to be 
weighed against the public policy concerns in order to find a reasonable solution that protects the 
citizens’ rights while enabling cross -border trade.  
Regulations regarding 
data localization and the 
restrictions on data flows 
have been on the rise 
around the world (Figure 
3), and the way in which 
they are imposed vary 
throughout countries. 
Companies across 
different sectors depend 
on data transfers to be 
able to participate in 
global value chains 
(GVCs)  (Box 12). In a 
survey carried out 
among U.S. industry 
representatives, data localization was the most cited measure restricting digital trade (USITC, 2017) .  
Data governance regimes seldom provide for full openness or closure to cross -border data flows.  
Governments aim to protect sensitive information through limitations on the transfers of data. These 
measures can be found in almost every region of the world . Regulations on cross -border data flows can 
broadly take two forms: i) requirements for storage or processing of data within their territory, typically 
referred to as server or data localization requirements, and ii) data transfer  conditioned to certain 
requirements in the destination country  (Figure 4) (Casalini & López González, 2019) .   
 
Figure 4: Types of limitations on cross -border data flows   Source: (NTB, 2015)  
Figure 3: Data localization measures implemented globally and intra -European 
Union  
 
Source : (ECIPE, 2016)  
 
Regulation for Digital Markets  
33 
  
 
 
Data localization requirements  
Data localization requirements compel  the storage or processing of data within the country where the 
service is provided. Some governments require the storage of a copy of the data within national borders , 
while others ban the processing or transfer of data out side country borders .  For instance, many states 
of the United States require that any contractors to public contracts locate their servers within the state 
itself.  Some countries, like Saudi Arabia, also follow this practice. Data localization requiremen ts can be 
narrowed down to  a specific sector. China and Indonesia maintain  broad localization requirements, 
while Korea  and Vietnam , for example,  impose data localization requirements on financial services and 
internet services providers, respectively. Mos t data localization measures are found in the accounting 
and financial sector, as well as the health sector (Bauer, Matthias et al, 2016) . 
While the geographical location of the data may sometimes respond to public policy co ncerns, for 
instance with data sensitive to national security, often this requirement results in unnecessary costs to 
the taxpayers.  Further, the localization of servers within a given country is hardly an effective 
cybersecurity measure in and of itself,  as the data may be better protected distributed in servers around 
the world than in one single location, or within one single country.  This can particularly troubling w hen 
requiring the localization of both the main data servers as well as the “recovery” centers used for 
backup.  
Box 13. Law enforcement and data localization requirements  
One of the policy goals often prompting data localization requirements is the need to ensure the access to data 
by law enforcement  (Chander & Le, Data Nationalism, 2015) . Whereas other rules on data governance, such as 
those on privacy protection, are desirable as a tool to increase trust in the digital markets, disciplines on data 
governance and its relat ionship with law enforcement provide courts with effective regulatory tools to carry out 
their law enforcement duty in the era of digital communications, while ensuring that online services are not 
unnecessarily burdened in that process. The tension arises  when law enforcement agencies need to access data 
stored in a foreign jurisdiction and the agencies lack specific tools to compel the online provider to produce the 
data. In that case, courts may fail to obtain the necessary information – potentially leavi ng a case un resolved as 
a result - or may resort to draconian measures that unnecessarily burden services providers and impact 
consumers –hence hampering the global digital market.  
How can cross -border data flows hamper law enforcement –  and vice versa?  
Som e recent high -profile cases illustrate the challenge that global data flows can bring to law enforcement: 
United States vs. Microsoft Corp demonstrated the linkages between cross -border data flows and the ability of 
courts to investigate and legitimately p rosecute unlawful conduct  (Matsakis, 2018) . There , U.S. federal 
prosecutors investigating a drug trafficking case in 2013 served a warrant to Microsoft Co. to provide an 
Regulation for Digital Markets  
34 
 individual ’s emails . Microsoft handed data stored on U.S.  servers  and the person’s address book but  didn’t 
deliver the actual content of the individual’s emails, arguing that they were stored in a Microsoft data center in 
Dublin, Ireland, and the warrant by U .S. authorities did not have extraterritorial applicat ion. U.S. prosecutors 
argued that, because the facts of the case took place in the United States and Microsoft is a U.S. -based 
company, producing a copy of such information would  not entail extraterritorial effects of the warrant, but a 
mere compliance wit h a warrant by a U.S. court. 4 The case was taken  to the Supreme Court but ended without 
a ruling due to the passage of the new Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data Act (“CLOUD Act”) in  2018. This 
law allows federal law enforcement to compel U.S. -based technology companies via warrant or subpoena to 
provide re quested data stored on servers regardless of where the data are stored in the U.S. or on foreign soil.  
The circumstances of this case raise substantial questions related to the regulation of cross -border data flows 
and law enforcement procedures. With no data localization requirements in the U.S., companies like Microsoft, 
which has over 100 data centers in 40 countries, could potentially move data swiftly for business purposes and 
thus hamper law enforcement  (Barnes, 2017) . If firms are free to transfer and store data in any physical location 
of their choosing, how can law enforcement agencies obtain access to such information? How can policymakers  
ensure that data regarding offenses occurring within their jurisdiction, by the ir nationals, stored by a domestic 
company remains reachable?   
Courts from developing countries have faced similar challenges in retrieving data from foreign jurisdictions, 
resorting at times to heavy -handed measures to overcome them. Brazilian courts have come,  in multiple 
occasions , to stand -offs with online services who refused to produce data. An early case in 2006 entailed an 
order from a federal judge issued to Orkut, a social media platform owned by Google and one of Brazil’s most 
popular websites at  the time, to provide details on over twenty Brazilian nationals alleged to be using the social 
platform for spreading child pornography and selling drugs. After an initial refusal by Orkut on the argument 
that the information was not stored in Brazil, but  in Google’s servers in the U.S. – for which the judge imposed a 
fine of USD 23,000 a day -, Google agreed to cooperate with the judge’s request and hand over the information  
(Nakashima, 2006)  (Morphy, 200 6). Eventually, Orkut went further in the cooperation with Brazilian authorities, 
granting the federal police direct access to Orkut’s accounts and the ability to monitor and even to delete users 
accounts in real time, without the need for a judicial order  (Pagnan, 2006) .  A similar case occurred in 2016, in a 
judicial attempt to retrieve data from encrypted end -to-end chat mobile app,  Facebook- owned WhatsApp . 
Faced with non- compliance, the judge first ordered the arrest of Facebook’s executive vice- president , who was 
released one day later by order of the Court of Appeals, who deemed the arrest arbitrary and unjustified (G1 
Sao Paulo, 2 016) . The judge  then  block ed WhatsApp services in Brazil for 72 hours , but the appeals court 
overturned the order only hours later  (BBC, 2016) . Another case involving WhatsApp entailed the freezing of 
Facebook’s bank accounts in Brazil for over 6 million  USD  in fines, as a result of months of noncompliance with a 
court order issued in an investigation of an alleged international cocaine smuggling ring (Commuter) . 
What are the existing tools for cooperation in law enforcement in the digital age?  
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are to date the main tool for international cooperation in law 
enforcement. MLATs are traditionally aim to fulfill  criminal and public investigation procedures like  obtaining 
testimony of witness es located abroad, executing search warrants in foreign jurisdictions, or obtaining records 
of financial institutions abroad.  
However, MLATs are poorly suited to address the challenges of the digital age. MLATs can be cumbers ome and 
time -consuming, not only due to the rigorous legal requirements that they entail, but also due to the limited 
                                                           
4 Given the confidentiality of the procedures, the nati onality of the individual  remains undisclosed, as well as  
whether the emails were generated within the United States, and  the reasons why the account content was 
physically stored in Ireland.  This latter fact may relate to the individual having indicated Ireland as its country of 
citizenship or residency, or simply to a business decision by Microsoft. On the facts of the ca se, see  Harvard Law 
Review, “ Microsoft Corp. v. United States ”, 130 Harv. L. Rev. 769, December 6m 2016,  
https://harvardlawreview.org/2016/12/microsoft -corp -v-united -state s/ and Lawreview,  “Microsoft Corp. v. United 
States ”, 102 Minnesota Law Review 6, February 23 2017,  
http://www.minnesotalawreview.org/2017/02/microsoft -corp -v-united- states/    Regulation for Digital Markets  
35 
 resources often available for this kind of international cooperation  (Force Hill, 2015) . They are designed fo r 
courts to reach assets, companies, and people, that are less mobile than the fleeting storage of bytes. 
Further more, if data controllers are free to move personal data around at will  and could disregard injunctions to 
produce required information by legi timate authorities, nothing prevents businesses from storing data in 
specific jurisdictions that are unresponsive to judicial cooperation, effectively providing a safe haven from legal 
prosecution. Unscrupulous firms could build a business model around suc h practices.  
What other solutions can help law enforcement while fostering seamless cross -border data flows?  
Policy makers who wish to support global trade and investment flows with an open cross -border data regime 
should be able to do so without sacrificing their domestic law enforcement capacity. Data localization 
requirements, while potentially effective to en sure access to data by law enforcement, entail costs that can 
hamper businesses. Innovative regulatory solutions should reconcile these policy objectives.  
• Legislation may grant domestic courts the ability to request their  citizens and firms to produce dat a 
regardless of their  physical location, overcoming the need for data localization requirements. The 
recently approved CLOUD Act distinguishes between data from Americans and non- Americans held 
abroad on servers of American companies. 5 It allows for the retrieval of data by American citizens held 
abroad thus bypassing MLATs, making it mandatory for firms to comply with such court order. on the 
other hand, the CLOUD Act permits foreign governments that have entered into executive agreements 
with the U.S. government to obtain information from U.S. -based internet companies.  
• Other solutions may focus on strengthening cooperation between law enforcement agencies and/or 
national data protection authorities. Stronger cooperation could focus on expedited consider ation and 
implementation of the request from foreign authorities, while ensuring that privacy concerns of 
citizens and residents remain well protected. Such regulatory agency cooperation is hardly a novelty. 
Competition authorities, across the Atlantic and  with many other countries, have established strong 
collaboration frameworks in cases related to transnational anti -competitive behaviors. Specific to 
cybercrime, “24/7 Networks” seek to ensure points of contact in law enforcement agencies in different 
countries that can respond in real time and jointly to cyberattacks and other cyber -crimes. 6 
• Trade agreements could support international rules on the interplay between data flows and law 
enforcement. By recognizing that court orders may, under certain conditions, reach online firms that 
are not established in the court’s jurisdiction, they could help prevent burdensome punitive measures 
on cross -border providers that unnecessarily disrupt the broader digital market.  To that end, a softly 
worded provision, similar to existing provisions on e -commerce cooperation in the Comprehensive and 
Progressive Agreement for Trans -Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) or the EU –  Canada Comprehensive 
Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), could promote greater collaboration between the parties in 
this field, or even serve as legal grounds for courts to request data from non -established firms.  
• Finally, guidelines in the form of rules of conduct for firms responsible for data storage and processing 
could also provide a valuable instrum ent to support domestic law enforcement efforts. Firms 
established in the country or firms located abroad who offer services in that country would need to 
comply with such rules to facilitate law enforcement, much like the Privacy Shield between the U .S. 
and EU provide a framework for compliance with privacy regulations.  
The interaction between cross -border data flows and law enforcement offers an example of the challenges that 
new technologies can bring to policy making. New forms of information sharing an d its sheer volume, 
                                                           
5 Several countries have already in similar procedures. See Maxwell, Winston and C. Wolf , “A Global Reality: 
Governmental Access to Data in the Cloud”, Hogan Lovell White Paper, 2012, 
https://www.hldataprotection.com/uploads/file/Revised%20Government%20Access%20to%20Cloud%20Data%20
Paper%20%2818%20July%2012%29.pdf  for a review the legislation of ten high -income countries on this matter . 
6 On MLATs, 24/7 Networks, and other forms of international cooperation specific to cybercrime, see World Bank 
and United Nations. 2017. Combatting Cybercrime: Tools and Capacity Building for Emerging Economies, 
Washingto n, DC: World Bank License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 IGO (CC BY 3.0 IGO).  Regulation for Digital Markets  
36 
 unthinkable only one generation ago, are creating formidable opportunities for business, spurring economic 
growth. These interactions, however, can affect sensitive public policies, such as the need to protect privacy, 
establish a conducive environment for trade and investment, or ensur e safety and security. These policy- making 
challenges are only at their initial phases, and warrant careful, balanced, and innovative regulatory responses.  
Source: (Molinuevo & Gaillard, 2018)  
 
Requirements for local processing establish that the data must be processed within the boundaries of 
the country concerned.  Russia’s Personal Data Act requires that the personal data of Russian c itizens be 
used by local data operators  and be stored in the country. While this can be more effective to the 
purposes of generating employment than mere localization , it also introduces a critical dependence on 
the local IT expertise.  In countries with limited human resources capacity, local processing requirements 
could entail severe risks to quality of services or even to cybersecurity.  
Data localization requireme nts introduce costs for firms who are forced to have multiple data storage 
locations,  and can close the market for those who cannot afford those expenses (Bauer, Matthias et al, 
2016) . These costs can ultimately be passed on  to consumers as well as the country imposing the 
restriction. Additionally, keeping the data static negatively impacts its resilience, making it more 
vulnerable to attacks  (Klein, 2015) . Countries imposing data localization re quirements often do so with 
the goal of creat ing jobs in the valuable IT sector . However, the employment and capacity transfers 
benefits are often marginal. I n 2011, Apple built a $1 billion data center in Maiden, North Carolina, 
bringing merely fifty full- time support jobs (Rosenwald, 2011). More broadly, a  review of a number of 
data localization regulations around the world showed  that alternative measures could to achieve the 
purported policy goals  while allowing for cross -border data transfers  (Chander & Le, 2015) . 
Conditional d ata flows  
Conditional data flows allow for cross -border transfers of d ata, but only after certain particular 
regulatory requirements are met. Conditions typically relate to  express consent by the data subject or t o 
the treatment of data by  the countr y where it is being transferred .  Conditional data transfers can apply 
to ce rtain types of data, such as personally identifiable information , or to data relating to specific 
sectors, such as health data.    
Conditional transfers  tend to reflect more open data regime s than localization requirements, but much 
depends on the implementation of the regime.  The broader the scope of types of data included, and 
the harsher the regulatory conditions for transfer, the more closed the data regime will be.  Ultimately, 
a conditi onal data transfer regime could be so strict that no transfers are allowed –being equivalent in 
practice to a data localization requirement . 
Figure 5. Taxonomy of conditional data flows  Regulation for Digital Markets  
37 
  
Source: (Casalini & López González, 2019)  
 
The EU data privacy regime  features the most prominent example of conditional transfers. Under the 
GDPR, personal data can only be transferred to countries  (or part thereof) who have  established a data 
privacy regime that offers an “adequate” level of protection for personal data –and the European 
Commission has officially recognized as much in an Adequacy Decision.  The issuance of an Adequacy 
Decisions entails a review by the European Commission of an exhaustive and detailed set of 
requirements relating to the regulatory framework of the country, in categories such as  
• the rule of law and legal protections for human rights and fundamental freedoms;  
• access to transferred data by public authorities;  
• existence and effective functioning of DPAs; and  
• international commitments and other ob ligations in relation to the protection of personal data.  
A key  aspect of regulation setting out conditions for cross -border data flows is who may assess whether 
the conditions  for transfers are met  (Figure 5). Essentially, the decision on whether data may  be 
transferred may rest on the firms transferring the data, or on a public entity  -typically the data 
protection agency. In the first case,  cross -border data transfer is only permitted where the data 
exporter, on the basis of its assessment, considers tha t the context of the transfer ensures an equivalent 
or adequate level of data protection in the recipient country.  However, and more frequently, the 
determination of adequacy or equivalence can be determined by the data protection authority, 
certifying that the data protection system of another country is suitable for the transfer.  This 
determination can take the form of a unilateral recognition , or it can take the form of a  mutual 
recognition of data protection measures  (Casalini & López González, 2019) . 
Regulations  setting out conditions for data transfer must also provide alternative solution s for transfers 
to countries that do not meet such regulatory standards. The GDPR, for example , allows transfers to 
countries  who may not offer “adequate” protection if the  rece iving firm is contractually bound to 
certain data protection obligations. The GDPR offer s pre-approved contractual clauses  and allows the 
parties to draft custom clauses and have them approved by the loca l DPAs ; also, firms may receive data 
if subject to legally binding corporate rules  (BCRs) that hold the m responsible for data protection .  
Regulation for Digital Markets  
38 
 Conditional data transfers offer a middle ground between strict data localization requirements and full 
openness to c ross-border data. In so doing, they grant policy makers the ability to set out certain 
safeguards  on the use of data , notably for the protection of individual privacy, while allowing for data to 
cross  border s where needed. As such, conditional data flows appear as a more suitable tool than data 
localization or processing requirements. R egulations on conditional flows in themselves offer a wide 
range of solutions , in terms of scope as well as procedures for regulatory complia nce, that allow for 
greater flexibility and lower costs to business or greater public oversight and data protection .  
Importantly, as shown in the case of the GDPR,  regulators can also adopt multiple channels for the 
protection of cross -border data, relyin g on private firms’ liability (through contractual clauses) where 
the broader regulatory regime does not meet the desired standards for data protection.  
3. Concluding observations  
The regulation of digital markets, like any economic and social regulation, entails the balancing of policy 
goals, often between economic freedoms and other public policy interests. J ust like in the offline world, 
measures meant to safeguard public health w ill ban the sale of certain goods (e.g. toys containing toxic 
chemicals), or do it under certain conditions (e.g. tobacco, medicines), thus inherently limiting trade. 
Other limitations may be motivated by other legitimate policy concerns, such as protectin g citizens’ 
privacy, limiting access to sensitive  or offensive  material like child pornography  or hate speech , or 
preventing cybercrime. In the online world, the regulation must also consider the additional challenges 
that remote, often international, tran sactions bring about. The sale of controlled substances, such as 
alcohol or tobacco products, or chemical products, may be banned or re quire additional conditions in 
digital markets, where the identity of the buyer can more easily be concealed. Ultimately,  the exact 
balance between the freedom to trade online with the level of security or protections remains an 
idiosyncratic decision of each policymaker to be made on a case -by-case basis.  
A cursory review of some of the key policy pillars of digital trade suggests that regulatory solutions are 
still evolving,  and consensus on “best regulatory practices “ remains elusive . This is particularly the case 
for the newer  issues, such as online consumer protection, intermediary liability, data protection, and 
cybersecurity. The regulation of remote transa ctions,  instead, such as electronic documentation and 
electronic signature  has benef itted from greater international guidance, but newer regulations have also 
introduced innovations to facili tate the adoption of such solutions while ensuring the security of the 
transactions.  
The review demonstrates that digital markets, especially at a global level, introduce important policy 
challenges that demand thorough and sound regulatory solutions . Regulations are necessary to provide 
the legal tools for remote transactions, such as electronic document and signatures , balancing the 
security of such tools with enough flexibility and incentives to promote mainstream adoption. Additional 
regulations address ed at boosting trust in digital markets  tackle key questions regarding citizens’ and 
users’ rights, such as consumer protection and data privacy, as well as central rules to  the functioning of 
digital platforms, such as intermediary liability rules. Policy makers and regulators, both at the national 
and inter national level, must work towards sound regulatory solutions in line with their public policy 
interests , their governments ’ implementing capacity, and harmonized with its international partners in a 
way that boost s access to global markets  and expand s the benefits of digital trade.  Regulation for Digital Markets  
39 
  
Bibliography  
15 U.S.Code § 6801, Protection of nonpublic personal information.  
18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(3).  
Adobe. (2019, June). Global Guide to Electronic Signature Law.  Retrieved from 
https://acrobat.adobe.com/content/dam/doc -cloud/en/pdfs/document -cloud -global -guide -
electronic -signature -law-ue.pdf  
Ahmed, U., & Anupam, C. (2015). Information Goes Global: Protecting P rivacy, Security, and the New 
Economy in a World of Cross -border Data Flows. E15Initiative . 
Albright Stonebridge Group. (2015). Data Localization: A Challenge to Global Commerce and the Free 
Flow of Information.  
Article 29 Data Protection Working Party. ( 2002). Opinion 4/2002 on the level of protection of personal 
data in Argentina.  Brussels: European Commission.  
AssureSign. (2019, June). E -Sign Laws Across Borders.  Retrieved from AssureSign: 
https://www.assuresign.com/e -sign- laws -across -borders/  
Barnes, R . (2017, October 16). Supreme Court to consider major digital privacy case on Microsoft email 
storage.  Retrieved from Washington Post: 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/courts_law/supreme -court -to-consider -major -
digital- privacy -case -on-microsoft -emai l-storage/2017/10/16/b1e74936 -b278 -11e7 -be94 -
fabb0f1e9ffb_story.html?utm_term=.85a60c2da3d0  
Bartley Johns, M., Hoppe, M., Molinuevo, M., Nghardsaysone, K., & Daza Jaller, L. (2017). Taking 
Advantage of E -Commerce: Legal, Regulatory and Trade Facilitation P riorities for Lao PDR.  
Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
Bauer, Matthias et al. (2014). The Cost of Data Localisation: Friendly Fire on Economic Recovery. ECIPE 
Occasional Paper No 3/2014 . 
Bauer, Matthias et al. (2015, June). Data Localisation in Russia: A Self- imposed Sanction. ECIPE Policy 
Brief.  
Bauer, Matthias et al. (2016). Unleashing Internal Data Flows in the EU: An Economic Assessment of 
Data Localisation Measures in the EU Member St ates. ECIPE Policy Brief.  
BBC. (2016, July 20). WhatsApp in Brazil back in action after suspension.  Retrieved from BBC News: 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world -latin -america- 36836674  
Blythe, S. (2011). E -Commerce Law Around the World -  Volume 1. USA: Xlibris C orp. 
Blythe, S. E. (2012). An E -Commerce Law for the World: The Model Electronic Transactions Act.   Regulation for Digital Markets  
40 
 Boss, A. H. (1999). The Internet and the Law: Searching for SEcurity in the Law of Electronic Commerce. 
23 NOVA L.REV.  
Boss, A. H. (2009). The Evolution of  Commercial Law Norms: Lessons to be Learned from Electronic 
Commerce. 34:3 Brooklyn Journal of International Law , 673.  
Bygrave, L. A. (2014). Data Privacy Law: An International Perspective.  Oxford University Press.  
Casalini, F., & López González, J. L. (2 019). Trade and Cross -. Paris: OECD. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/b2023a47- en 
CDP. (2019). Liste des formulaires . Retrieved from http://www.cdp.sn/liste -des-formulaires  
Chander, A., & Le, U. P. (2014). Breaking the Web: Data Localization vs. the Global Internet. US DAvis 
Legal Studies Research Paper Series . 
Chander, A., & Le, U. P. (2015, March 13). Data Nationalism. Emory LAw Journal, 64 (3). 
CNIL. (2015). Rapport d’activité.  Paris: Commission nationale de l'Informatique et des Libertes.  
CNIL. (2019). Statut et organisation de la CNIL . Retrieved from https://www.cnil.fr/fr/le -fonctionnement  
CNIL. (2019). The CNIL’s Missions. Retrieved from https://www.cnil.fr/en/cnils -missions  
Commuter. (n.d.). Brazil court blocks Facebook funds over WhatsApp.  Retrieved from Commuter: 
https://worldcommuter.com/brazil- court -blocks -facebook -funds -whatsapp -dispute -report/.  
Cortés, P. (2010). Online Dispute Resolution for Consumers in the European Union.  London: Routledge, 
Taylor & Francis Group.  
Deutscher Apothekerverband, C -322/01 (European Court of Justice December 11, 2003).  
Digital Signature Act § 61 , Malay. (1997).  
EC. (2011, November 28). Alternative Dispute Resolution and Online Dispute Resolution for EU 
consumers: Que stions and Answers . Retrieved from European Commission: 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_11_840  
ECIPE. (2016). Digital Trade Estimates.   
EFF. (2019). Manila Principles on Intermediary Liability . Retrieved from 
https://www.manilapr inciples.org/  
Electronic Transactions Act, Sing. (1998).  
European Commission. (2019). Online Dispute Resolution. Retrieved from 
https://ec.europa.eu/consumers/odr/main/?event=main.home2.show  
European Parliament. (2015). Review of EU Copyright Framework.   
Force Hill, J. (2015, January 28). Problematic Alternatives: MLAT Reform for the Digital Age. Harvard 
National Security Journal . Regulation for Digital Markets  
41 
 Frederick Fischer, S. (2001). Saving Rosencrantz and Guildenstern in a Virtual World? A Comparative 
Look at Recent Global Electronic Signature Legislation. 7 B.U.J.SCI & TECH. L., 229.  
G1 Sao Paulo. (2016, July 19). WhatsApp: Justiça do RJ manda bloquear aplicativo em todo o Brasil.  
Retrieved from O Globo: http://g1.globo.com/sao -paulo/noticia/2016/03/felizes -diz-faceb ook-
sobre -soltura- de-vice-presidente -preso -em-sp.html  
Gasser, U., & Schulz, W. (2015). Governance of Online Intermediaries: Observations from a Series of 
National Case Studies. Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2015 -5. 
Gunnilstam, J. (2017, January 1 7). Sweden is trying to restrict the free movement of goods within the EU . 
Retrieved from ECOMONY: Reporting fromt the E -commerce Economy: 
http://www.ecomony.com/Swedish -Government -to-Outlaw -Online -Alcohol,9431.html  
Hangzhou Internet Court. (2019). The lit igation platform of Hangzhou Internet Court . Retrieved from 
https://www.netcourt.gov.cn/portal/main/en/index.htm  
Holland, A., Bavitz, C., Hermes, J., Sellars, A., Budish, R., Lambert, M., & Decoster, N. (2014). 
Intermediary Liability in the United States . Retrieved from Global Network of Internet and 
Society Research Centers (NoC): https://publixphere.net/i/noc/instance/noc.html  
ICO. (2019). Data protection fee . Retrieved from https://ico.org.uk/for- organisations/register/  
ICPEN. (n.d.). Internationa Consum er Protection and Enforcement Network . Retrieved from 
https://www.icpen.org/resolve -dispute  
Klein, S. (2015, November 23). The Data Is in the Details: Cross- Border Data Flows and the Trans -Pacific 
Partnership.  Retrieved July 11, 2017, from The Diplomat: Th e Diplomat  
Koske, I., Bitetti, R., Wanner, I., & Sutherland, E. (2014). The Internet Economy -  Regulatory Challenges 
and Practices". OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1171 . 
Ladbrokes Betting and Ladbrokes International, C -258/08 (Second Chamber  June 3, 2010).  
Leung, H. (2019, April 2). Time.  Retrieved April 2, 2019, from Singapore is the latest country to propose 
tough legislation against fake news: http://time.com/5562501/singapore -fake -news -law-
freedom -speech/  
Makulilo, A. B. (2016). African Data Privacy Laws. In Issues in Privacy and Data Protection.  Springer.  
Manila Principles on Intermediary Liability . (2015, March 24). Retrieved from Electronic Frontier 
Foundation: https://www.eff.org/files/2015/10/31/manila_principles_1.0.pdf  
Matsakis, L. (2018, February 27). Wired.  Retrieved from Microsoft Supreme Court case has big 
implications for data: Matsakis, Louise, “Microsoft Supreme Court case has big implications for 
data”, Wired, February 27, 2018, https://www.wired.com/story/us -vs-microsoft -supreme -court -
case -data/  
McAfee, & CSIS. (2018). Economic Impact of Cybercrime — No Slowing Down.   Regulation for Digital Markets  
42 
 Metz, R., & Purnhagen, K. (2012). E-commerce in China and Germany : a Sino -German comparative 
analysis.  München: C.H. Beck.  
MGI. (2016). Digital Globalization: The new era of global flows.  McKinsey Global Institute.  
Molinuevo, M., & Gaillard, S. (2018, December). Trade, Cross -Border Data, and the Next Regulatory 
Frontier: Law enforcement and data localization requirements. Macroeconomics, Trade & 
Investment: MTI Practice Notes, 3 . 
Morphy, E. (2006, September 5). Google to Comply with Brazilian Court Order.  Retrieved from 
TechNewsWorld: https://www.technewsworld.com/story/52830.html  
Munukutla -Parker, U. (2006). Unsolicited Co mmercial Email, Privacy, Concerns Related to Social 
Network Services, Online Protection of Children, Cyberbullying. I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy 
for the Information Society, Vol. 2, No. 3 . 
Nakashima, E. (2006, September 2). Google to Give Data to Brazi lian Court.  Retrieved from Washington 
Post: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp -
dyn/content/article/2006/09/01/AR2006090100608.html  
NTB. (2012). E -commerce - New Opportunities, New Barriers: A survey of e -commerce barriers in 
countries outside the EU.  Stockhol m: National Board of Trade.  
NTB. (2015). No Transfer, No Production – a Report on Cross -Border Data Transfers, Global Value Chains, 
and the Production of Goods.  Stockholm: National Board of Trade.  
OECD. (2000). Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Con text of Electronic Commerce.  Paris: OECD.  
OECD. (2007). Recommendation on Consumer Dispute Resolution and Redress.  Paris: OECD Publishing.  
OECD. (2013). Exploring the Economics of Personal Data: A Survey of Methodologies for Measuring 
Monetary Value. OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 220 . 
OECD. (2013). The OECD Privacy Framework.   
OECD. (2014). Consumer Policy Guidance on Mobile and Online Payments. OECD Digital Economy 
Papers, 236 . 
OECD. (2015). Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and Social Prosperity: OECD 
Recommendation and Companion Document.  Paris: OECD Publishing.  
OECD. (2016). Consumer Protection in E -commerce: OECD Recommendation.  Paris: OECD Publishing.  
OECD. (2016). Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flow of Personal Data.  OECD.  
OECD. (2016). Working Party of the Trade Committe - Localising Data in a Globalised World.  Paris.  
OECD. (2018, April). Improving Oniline Disclosures with Behavioural Insights: Towards Better Outcomes 
for Consumers. Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation Policy Note . 
Ortolani, P. (2016, Autumn). Self- Enforcing Online Dispute Resolution: Lessons from Bitcoin. Oxford 
Journal of Legal Studies, 36 (3), 602.  Regulation for Digital Markets  
43 
 Pagnan, R. (2006, November 28). Orkut dá à PF "atalho" para barrar páginas.  Retrieve d from Folha de 
S.Paulo: https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/folha/informatica/ult124u21063.shtml).  
Rosenwald, M. (2011, November 24). Washington Post . Retrieved 2018, from 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/cloud -centers -bring- high -tech -flash -but-
not-many -jobs-to-beaten -down -
towns/2011/11/08/gIQAccTQtN_story.html?utm_term=.789bafce1374  
Satyan, K. (2015, July 2). Satyan, Kanika, E -Commerce and Consumer Rights: Applicability of Consumer 
Protection Laws in Online Transactions in India (July 2, 2015). A vailable at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2626027 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2626027.  Retrieved from 
SSRN: Satyan, Kanika, E -Commerce and Consumer Rights: Applicability of Consumer Protection 
Laws in Online Transactions in India (July 2, 2015). Av ailable at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2626027 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2626027  
Schmitz, A. J., & Rule, C. (2017, June 27). The New Handshake: Where We Are Now. International Journal 
of Online Dispute Resolution, 2016 (3). 
Smedinghoff, T. J., &  Ruth Hill Bro. (1999). Moving with Change: Electronic Signature Legislation as a 
Vehicle for Advancing E -Commerce. 17 J. Marshall J. Computer & Info L . 
SquareTrade. (2019). SqaureTrade . Retrieved from https://www.squaretrade.com/  
UNCITRAL. (1996). UNCITRAL model law on electronic commerce, with guide to enactment, 1996: with 
additional article 5 bis as adoped in 1998.   
UNCITRAL. (2001). Model Law on Electronic Signatures.   
UNCITRAL. (2017). Technical Notes on Online Dispute Resolution.  New York: United Nations.  
UNCITRAL. (2017). Technical Notes on Online Dispute Resolution.  New York: United Nations.  
UNCITRAL. (2019). Status of conventions and model laws -  Note by the Secreta riat. United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law -  52nd Session.  Vienna: UN.  
UNCTAD. (2017). Consumer Protection in Electronic Commerce: A Note by the UNCTAD Secretariat.  
Geneva: United Nations.  
UNCTAD. (2019, March 27). Cyberlaw Tracker . Retriev ed from 
http://unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D -Legislation/eCom -Consumer -Protection -
Laws.aspx  
USITC. (2017). Global Digital Trade I: Market Opportunities and Key foreign Trade Restrictions.  The U.S. 
International Trade Commission.  
USTR. (2016). National Trade Estimate Report.  Office of the United States Trade Representative.  
WEF. (2016). Global Information Technology Report.  Geneva: World Economic Forum.  
WIPO. (2019). Alternative Dispute Resolution. Retrieved from https://www.wipo.int/amc/en/inde x.html  Regulation for Digital Markets  
44 
 World Economic Forum. (2019, March). The Global Governance of Online Consumer Protection and E -
Commmerce.  Retrieved from World Economic Forum: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_consumer_protection.pdf  Annexes   
Annex 1 : Cross-country Comparisons of the Implementation of OECD Recommendation on Information 
Disclosure  
OECD 
Recommendations  France7 Tunisia 8 Uganda9 
Loi n° 2004 -575 du 21 juin 2004 pour la confiance 
dans l'économie numérique  Loi n°2000 -83 du 9 août 2000, relative aux échanges 
et au commerce électroniques  Electronic  
Transactions Act, 2011  
Paragraph 28. Businesses engaged in 
e-commerce with consumers should 
make readily available information 
about themselves that is sufficient to 
allow, at a minimum:  
i) identification of the business; ii) 
prompt, easy and effective consumer  
communication wit h the business; iii) 
appropriate and effective resolution 
of 
any disputes that may arise; iv) 
service of legal process in domestic 
and crossborder  
disputes; and v) location of the 
business.  
 
Paragraph 29. This information 
should include the legal name of t he 
business and name  
under which it trades; its principal 
geographic address; an e- mail 
address,  
telephone number or other electronic 
means of contact; appropriate domain  
name registration information for 
web sites that are promoting or 
engaging  
in commerc ial transactions with 
consumers; and any relevant 
government  
registration or license information.  Article 19  
• noms et prénoms (…)  
• raison sociale ;  
• adresse  ; 
• son adresse de courrier 
électronique  ; 
• coordonnées téléphoniques  ; 
• un prix dois être indiqué de 
« manière claire et non ambiguë, 
et notamment si les taxes et les 
frais de livraison sont inclus.  ».  Chapter V: On the Electronic Commerce Transaction - 
Article 2 5 
“In electronic commerce transactions, the merchant must 
provide the consumer, in a clear and comprehensible manner 
and before the execution of the contract, with the following 
information:  
• Identity, address and phone 
number of the merchant or the 
service  provider ;  
• A complete description of all 
transaction steps ;  
• Nature, specifications and pricing 
of the product ;  
• Product delivery and insurance 
costs as well as due taxes ;  
• Period for which the products is 
displayed with the indicated 
prices ;  
• Commercial guarantees and 
aftersale service conditions ;  Article 24 : “Information to be provided by suppliers or 
sellers. (…)  
• the full name and legal status of 
the person;  
• the physical address and 
telephone number of the person;  
• the web site address or e- mail 
address of the person;  
• membership of any self -regulatory or accreditation 
bodies to which the person belongs or subscribes and 
the contact details of that b ody; 
• any code of conduct to which that person subscribes  
• in the case of a legal person, the registration number, 
names of directors and place of registration;  
• the physical address where the person may be served 
with documents;  
• a description of the main characteristics of the goods or 
services offered by the person which is sufficient to 
enable a consumer to make an informed decision on the 
proposed electronic transaction;  
• the full price of the goods or services, including 
transport costs, taxes and any other fees or costs;  
• the manner of payment;  
• any terms or conditions of agreement, including any 
guarantees, (…)  
• the time within which the goods will be dispatched or 
delivered (…)  
                                                           
7 https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/affichTexte.do?cidTexte=JORFTEXT000000801164  
8 https://www.bct.gov.tn/bct/siteprod/documents/loi200083.pdf  
9 https://www.ulii.org/ug/legislati on/act/2015/8- 3 Regulation for Digital Markets  
1 
  
Paragraph 30. When a business 
publicises its membership in any 
relevant self -regulatory programme , 
business association, dispute 
resolution organisation or other body, 
the business should provide sufficient 
information to enable consumers  
to easily contact such body. 
Businesses should provide consumers 
with easy  
methods to verify that membership, 
access the relevant codes and 
practices  
of the organisation, and take 
advantage of any dispute resolution 
mechanisms  
offered by the organisation.  • Payment methods and 
procedures and, when necessary, 
conditions for available loans ;  
• Methods and time of delivery and 
of execution of contract and 
results of non -fulfillment of 
engagements.  
• Possibility of purchase 
cancellation and its deadline ;  
• Method for order confirmation ;  
• Method for product return or 
exchange and cost refund ;”  
• Etc.  • the return, exchange and refund policy of the person;  
• any alternative dispute resolution code to which the 
person subscribes and how the code may be accessed 
electronically by the consumer;  
• Etc.  
 
Annex 2 : Cross-country Comparison on the Three Main Features of the Right of Withdrawal  
 Morocco  Turkey  Finland  
 
Law  Law No: 31 -08 on measures to protect 
consumers10 Law No: 6502 on consumer protection11 Consumer Protection Act12 
Information 
Duty  Article 26  : « l'offre de contrat doit 
comporter les informations suivantes : 
(…) 4° L’existence du droit de 
rétractation  » Article 18 : “(2) (…) The seller or supplier 
is liable to prove that the consumer has been 
informed regarding the right of withdrawal.”  
 Section 13 : “(1) In distance selling, the 
consumer shall be supplied with the 
following information well in advance of 
the conclusion of the contract: (…) (8) the 
existence of the right of withdrawal”  
Absence of 
Reason  Article 30  : le consommateur dispose 
d’un délai de sept jours francs pour 
exercer son droit de rétractation sans avoir Article 18 : (1) The consumer is entitled to 
withdraw from the instalment sale contract 
without giving any reason and without None  
                                                           
10 http://www.egov.ma/sites/default/files/projet_loi_31- 08_21_1008.pdf  
11 http://unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D- Legislation/CountryDetail.aspx?country=tr  
12 http://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/1978/en19780038.pdf  Regulation for Digital Markets  
2 
 à justifier de motifs  ni à payer de 
pénalités, à l’exception, le cas échéant, 
des frais de retour.  incurring any penalties within seven (7) 
days.  
 
Withdrawal 
period  Article 30  : le consommateur dispose 
d’un délai de sept jours francs  pour 
exercer son droit de rétractation sans avoir 
à justifier de motifs ni à payer de 
pénalités, à l’exception, le cas échéant, 
des frais de retour.  Article 18 : (1) The consumer is entitled to 
withdraw from the instalment  sale contract 
without giving any reason and without 
incurring any penalties within seven (7) days . 
 Section 15 : (1) In distance selling, the 
consumer is entitled to withdraw from the 
contract by notifying the business of the 
same within 14 days  of rec eiving the 
confirmation (…)  
 
Annex 3 : Cross-country Comparisons of the Implementation of  OECD Recommendation on Data Privacy 
Principles  
 Senegal13 Ghana14 Mexico15 
Loi sur la protection des données à 
caractère personnel (2008)  Data Protection Act, (2012)  Ley federal de proteccion de datos 
personales en posesion de los particulares 
(2010)  
Collection 
limitation 
principle   Article 34 :  
La collecte, l’enregistrement, le traitement, le stockage et 
la transmission des  
données  à caractère personnel doivent se faire de manière 
licite, loyale et non  
frauduleuse.”  
“Article 33 : Le traitement des données à caractère 
personnel est considéré comme légitime si la personne 
concernée donne son consentement. Article 18 (1) A person who p rocesses personal data shall 
ensure that the personal data is processed (a) without 
infringing the privacy rights of the data subject; (b) in a 
lawful manner; and (c) in a reasonable manner. (2) A data 
controller or processor shall in respect of foreign da ta 
subjects ensure that personal data is processed in 
compliance with data protection legislation of the foreign 
jurisdiction of that subject where personal data 
originating from that jurisdiction is sent to this country 
for processing.  Artículo 6. - Los re sponsables en el tratamiento de datos 
personales, deberán observar los principios  
de licitud, consentimiento, información, calidad, 
finalidad, lealtad, proporcionalidad y responsabilidad,  
previstos en la Ley.  
 
Artículo 8. - Todo tratamiento de datos persona les estará 
sujeto al consentimiento de su titular, salvo las 
excepciones previstas por la presente Ley.  
Data quality 
principle  Article 36 : Les données collectées doivent être exactes 
et, si nécessaire, mises à jour. Toute mesure raisonnable 
doit être prise pour que les données inexactes ou 
incomplètes, au regard des finalités pour lesquelles elles Article 26 - A data controller who processes personal 
data shall ensure that the  
data is complete, accurate, up to date and not misleading 
having regard to the  Artículo 11. - El responsable procurará que los datos 
personales contenidos en las bases de datos sean 
pertinentes, correctos y actualizados para los fines para 
los cuales fueron recabados.  
 
                                                           
13 http://www.wipo.int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/fr/sn/sn009fr.pdf  
14https://www.dataprotection.org.gh/sites/d efault/files/Data%20Protection%20Act%20%2C%202012%20%28Act%20843%29.pdf  
15 http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/LFPDPPP.pdf  Regulation for Digital Markets  
3 
 sont collectées et traitées ulté rieurement, soient effacées 
ou rectifiées.  purpose for the collection or processing of the perso nal 
data Cuando los datos de carácter personal hayan dejado de 
ser necesarios para el cumplimiento de las finalidades 
previstas por el aviso de privacidad y las disposiciones 
legales aplicables, deberán ser cancelados.  
 
El responsable de la base de datos estará obligado a 
eliminar la información relativa al incumplimie nto de 
obligaciones contractuales, una vez que transcurra un 
plazo de setenta y dos meses, contado a partir de la fecha 
calendario en que se presente el mencionado 
incumplimiento.  
 
Purpose 
specification 
principle  Article 35, 1st paragraph : Les données do ivent être 
collectées pour des finalités déterminées, explicites et 
légitimes et ne peuvent pas être traitées ultérieurement de 
manière incompatible avec ces finalités.  Article 22. A data controller who collects personal data 
shall collect the data for a  
purpose which is specific, explicitly defined and lawful 
and is related to the  
functions or activity of the person.  
 
17. A person who processes data shall take into account 
the privacy of the individual by applying the following 
principles:  
 
(c) specifica tion of purpose,  Artículo 12. - El tratamiento de datos personales deberá 
limitarse al cumplimiento de las finalidades previstas en 
el aviso de privacidad. Si el responsable pretende tratar 
los datos para un fin distinto que no resulte compatible o 
análogo a los fines establecidos en aviso de privacidad, se 
requerirá obtener nuevamente el consentimiento del 
titular.  
 
Artículo 13. - El tratamiento de datos personales será el 
que resulte necesario, adecuado y relevante en relación 
con las finalidades previstas  en el aviso de privacidad. En 
particular para datos personales sensibles, el responsable 
deberá realizar esfuerzos razonables para limitar el 
periodo de tratamiento de los mismos a efecto de que sea 
el mínimo indispensable.  
 
Artículo 15. - El responsable t endrá la obligación de 
informar a los titulares de los datos, la información que se 
recaba de ellos y con qué fines, a través del aviso de 
privacidad.  
 
Use limitation 
principle  Article 35  : Elles doivent être adéquates, pertinentes et 
non excessives au re gard des finalités pour lesquelles 
elles sont collectées et traitées ultérieurement. Elles 
doivent être conservées pendant une durée qui n’excède 
pas la période nécessaire aux finalités pour lesquelles 
elles ont été collectées ou traitées. Au -delà de cette 
période requise, les données ne peuvent faire l’objet 
d’une conservation qu’en vue de répondre 
spécifiquement à un traitement à des fins historiques, 
statistiques ou de recherches en vertu des dispositions 
légales.  Article 25 - Further processing to be co mpatible with 
purpose of collection 25. (1) Where a data controller 
holds personal data collected in connection with a 
specific purpose, further processing of the personal data 
shall be for that specific purpose.  Artículo 12. - El tratamiento de datos  personales deberá 
limitarse al cumplimiento de las finalidades previstas en 
el aviso de privacidad. Si el responsable pretende tratar 
los datos para un fin distinto que no resulte compatible o 
análogo a los fines establecidos en aviso de privacidad, se 
requerirá obtener nuevamente el consentimiento del 
titular.  
Security 
safeguards 
principle  Article 71 :  
Le responsable du traitement est tenu de prendre toute 
précaution utile au regard  
de la nature des données et, notamment, pour empêcher 
qu’elles soient déformées,  Article 28. (1) A data controller shall take the necessary 
steps to secure the integrity of personal data in the 
possession or control of a person through the adoption of 
appropriate, reasonable, technical and organisational 
measures to prevent (a) loss of, damage to, or 
unauthorised destruction; and (b) unlawful acc ess to or Artículo 19. - Todo responsable que lleve a cabo 
tratamiento de datos personales deberá establecer y 
mantener medidas de seguridad administrativas, técnicas 
y físicas que permitan proteger los datos personales 
contra daño, pérdida, alteración, destrucción o el uso, 
acceso o tratamiento no autorizado. Los responsables no Regulation for Digital Markets  
4 
 endommagées, ou que des tiers non autorisés y aient 
accès. Il prend, en particulier,  
toute mesure visant à :  
 
Etc. unauthorised processing of personal data. (2) To give 
effect to subsection (1), the data controller shall take 
reasonable measures to (a) identify reasonably 
foreseeable internal and external risks to personal data 
under that person’s possession or control; (b) establish 
and maintain appropriate safeguards against the identified 
risks; (c) regularly verify that the safeguards are 
effectively implemented; and (d) ensure that the 
safeguards are continually updated in response to new 
risks or deficie ncies. (3) A data controller shall observe 
(a) generally accepted information security practices and 
procedure, and (b) specific industry or professional rules 
and regulations.  
 
17. A person who processes data shall take into account 
the privacy of the ind ividual by applying the following 
principles:  
 
(g) data security safeguards  adoptarán medidas de seguridad menores a aquellas que 
mantengan para el manejo de su información. Asimismo 
se toma rá en cuenta el riesgo existente, las posibles 
consecuencias para los titulares, la sensibilidad de los 
datos y el desarrollo tecnológico.  
Openness principle  Article 37 :  
Le principe de transparence implique une information 
obligatoire de la part du responsable du traitement portant 
sur les données à caractère personnel.  Article 17. A person who processes data shall take into 
account the privacy of the individual by applyi ng the 
following principles  
 
(f) openness,  Artículo 16. - El aviso de privacidad deberá contener, al 
menos, la siguiente información:  
 
I. La identidad y domicilio del responsable que los 
recaba;  
 
II. Las finalidades del tratamiento de datos;  
 
III. Las opcio nes y medios que el responsable ofrezca a 
los titulares para limitar el uso o divulgación  
de los datos;  
 
IV. Los medios para ejercer los derechos de acceso, 
rectificación, cancelación u oposición, de  
conformidad con lo dispuesto en esta Ley;  
 
V. En su caso , las transferencias de datos que se efectúen, 
y 
 
VI. El procedimiento y medio por el cual el responsable 
comunicará a los titulares de cambios al  
aviso de privacidad, de conformidad con lo previsto en 
esta Ley.  
En el caso de datos personales sensibles, el  aviso de 
privacidad deberá señalar expresamente que se 
trata de este tipo de datos. 
 
Individual 
participation 
principle  Article 58 :  
Lorsque des données à caractère personnel sont collectées 
directement auprès de Article 32. (1) A data subject who provides proof of 
identity may request a data controller to (a) confirm at 
reasonable cost to the data subject whether or not the data 
controller holds personal data about that data subj ect, (b) Artículo 28. - El titular o su representante legal podrán 
solicitar al responsable en cualquier mo mento el acceso, 
rectificación, cancelación u oposición, respecto de los 
datos personales que le conciernen.  Regulation for Digital Markets  
5 
 la personne concernée, le responsable du traitement doit 
fournir à celle -ci, au plus  
tard, lors de la collecte et quels que soient les moyens et 
supports employés, les  
informations suivantes :  
 
7) l’existence d’un droit d’accès aux données la 
concernant et de rectification  
de ces données ;  give a description of the personal data which is held by 
the party including data about the identity of a third party 
or a category of a third party who has or has had access to 
the information, and (c) correct data held on the data 
subject by the  data controller. (2) The request shall be 
made (a) within a reasonable time; (b) after the payment 
of the prescribed fee, if any; (c) in a reasonable manner 
and format; and (d) in a form that is generally 
understandable.  
 
Article 33. (1) A data subject m ay request a data 
controller to (a) correct or delete personal data about the 
data subject held by or under the control of the data 
controller that is inaccurate, irrelevant, excessive, out of 
date, incomplete, misleading or obtained unlawfully, or 
(b) des troy or delete a record of personal data about the 
data subject held by the data controller that the data 
controller no longer has the authorisation to retain. (2) On 
receipt of the request, the data controller shall comply 
with the request or provide the data subject with credible 
evidence in support of the data. (3) Where the data 
controller and the data subject are unable to reach an 
agreement and if the data subject makes a request, the 
data controller shall attach to the record an indication that 
a req uest for the data has been made but has not been 
complied with. (4) Where the data controller complies 
with the request, the data controller shall inform each 
person to whom the personal data has been disclosed of 
the correction made. (5) The data controll er shall notify 
the data subject of the action taken as a result of the 
request. Manner of access 34. The provisions of any 
legislation relating to the right to information of any data 
subject shall be additional to data subject rights under this 
Act. 
 
Article 17. A person who processes data shall take into 
account the privacy of the individual by applying the 
following principles:  
 
data subject participation.   
Chapter IV of the law deals with the rights of data 
subjects.  
Accountability 
principle  Article 70 :  
Le traitement des données à caractère personnel est 
confidentiel. Il est effectué  
exclusivement par des personnes qui agissent sous 
l’autorité du responsable du  
traitement et seulement sur ses instructions.  Article 17. A person who processes data shall take into 
account the privacy o f the individual by applying the 
following principles:  
 
(a) accountability  Artículo 6. - Los responsables en el tratamiento de datos 
personales, deberán observar los principios  
de licitud, consentimiento, información, calidad, 
finalidad, lealtad, proporcio nalidad y responsabilidad,  
previstos en la Ley  
 
 