USAID/EGYPT    
PRIVATE  SECTOR  LANDSCAPE  
ASSESSMENT  
 
October  2020 
This publication is made possible by the support of the American people through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID) and was prepared by Integra Government Services International LLC for the 
Learning, Evaluation,  and Analysis Project (LEAP III).
USAID/EGYPT PRIVATE SECTOR 
LANDSCAPE ASSESSMENT  
 
Final Report  
 
 
 
 
 
Contract Title:   LEAP III: Learning, Evaluation , and Analysis Project  
Contract Number:   GS-10F-083CA/7200AA18M0004 
Activity Number:   LEAP III 2020 –1009.1046 
Submitted:   October 26th, 2020  
Contractor:    Integra Government Services International LLC  
1156 15th Avenue NW, Suite 800  
Washington, DC 20005  
USAID Office:  USAID/Egypt  
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
This report is made possible by the support of the American people through USAID. The authors’ views 
expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States 
Government. CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  8 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  9 
1. INTRODUCTION  18 
1.1 SETTING THE CONTEXT: THE PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT LANDSCAPE IN EGYPT  18 
1.2 BUILDING ON USAID/EGYPT’S STRONG PRIVATE SECTOR ENGAGEMENT WORK IN T HE 
CONTEXT OF THE NEW COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION STRATEGY  19 
1.3 OBJECTIVES OF THIS PRIVATE SECTOR LANDSCAPE ASSESSMENT  19 
2. PSLA METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH  21 
2.1 APPROACH  21 
3. SECTORAL ANALYSIS 24 
3.1 AGRIBUSINESS AND FOOD PROCESSING  24 
3.2 BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVIC ES 29 
3.3 EDUCATION (INCLUDING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE 
DEVELOPMENT)  32 
3.4 FINANCIAL SERVICES 37 
3.5 HEALTH CARE 41 
3.6 LEGAL SERVICES 44 
3.7 MANUFACTURING  48 
3.8 TOURISM  54 
4. CROSS- CUTTING THEMES  60 
4.1 COVID -19 RESPONSE AND EMERGING OPPORTUNITIES  60 
4.2 DIGITALIZATION  62 
4.3 POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS  64 
4.4 WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT  66 
4.5 OTHER CROSS -CUTTING ISSUES  70 
5. STRATEGIC WAYS TO ENGAGE THE PRIVATE SECTOR  75 
5.1 HIGH -LEVEL TAKEAWAYS 75 
5.2 COLLABORATION MODELS 77 
ANNEX I. KEY INFORMANT INTERVIEW (KII) GUIDE  105 
ANNEX II. SUMMARY OF ONLINE SURVEY  110 
REFERENCES  128 
 3 
 LIST OF TABLES 
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY SECTOR 11 
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SECTOR  13 
TABLE 3: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE EDUCATION SECTOR  13 
TABLE 4: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR  14 
TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE HEALTH SECTOR  15 
TABLE 6: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE MANUFACTURING SECTOR  15 
TABLE 7: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR 
THE TOURISM SECTOR 16 
TABLE 8: SUMMARY OF CROSS- CUTTING COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT 
OPPORTUNITIES  17 
TABLE 9: SECTO RAL ANALYSIS  24 
TABLE 10: LOCAL SUPPLIER DEVELOPMENT IN THE READY -MADE GARMENTS (RMG) SECTOR  54 
TABLE 11: COMPANY OR BUSINESS ORGANIZATION ACTIVITIES BY SECTOR, KEY SERVICES, 
AND TARGET DEMOGRAPHIC (N=20) 111 
TABLE 12: GROWTH STRATEGIES BY SHORT/MEDIUM AND LONG TERM (N=16)  114 
TABLE 13: LIST OF TECHNOLOGIES COMPANIES/ORGANIZATIONS NEED (N=8)  117 
TABLE 14: LIST OF CHALLENGES AFFECTING BUSINESSES/ORGANIZATIONS (N=14) 118 
TABLE 15: MOST CRITICAL RISK FACTORS FACING BUSINESSES/ORGANIZATIONS (N=14) 119 
TABLE 16: SUMMARY OF STRATEGIES TO OVERCOME CHALLENGES (N=9)  120 
TABLE 17: BUSINESS/ORGANIZATION COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, SUSTAINABILITY, OR CSR 
STRATEGIES AND FOCUS AREAS (N=10)  121 
TABLE 18: EXAMPLES OF CSR OR COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES (N=10)  123 
TABLE 19: SELECTED DEFINITIONS  OF SUCCESS FOR PRIOR USAID COLLABORATION  126 
TABLE 20: USAID'S MOST VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION  127 
 4 
 LIST OF FIGURES 
FIGURE 1: SURVEY SAMPLE BY SEX AND AGE GROUP (YEARS) (N=25)  110 
FIGURE 2: REGIONS OF OPERATION FOR MULTINATIONAL RESPONDENTS (N=4) AND 
REGIONS OF OPERATION IN EGYPT (N=20)  111 
FIGURE 3: YEARS IN OPERATION IN EGYPT (N=20)  111 
FIGURE 4: NUMBER OF FULL -TIME AND PART -TIME EMPLOYEES (N=20)  113 
FIGURE 5: PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN EMPLOYEE S WORKING FULL- TIME AND PART -TIME 
(N=20) 113 
FIGURE 6: PERCENTAGE OF YOUTH EMPLOYEES WORKING FULL -TIME AND PART -TIME (N=20)
 113 
FIGURE 7: REASONS WHY SHORT -TERM AND LONG -TERM GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES 
CHANGED SINCE JANUARY 2020  116 
FIGURE 8: REPORTED LEVEL OF CONFIDENCE IN REALIZING SHORT-  AND LONG- TERM 
GROWTH TARGETS 116 
FIGURE 9: TYPES OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES USED (N=16)  116 
FIGURE 10: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY USE SINCE JANUARY 2020 
(N=11) 117 
FIGURE 11: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN CHALLENGES SINCE JANUARY 2020 (N=10)  119 
FIGURE 12: EXTERNAL FACTORS RANKED BY LEVEL OF NEGATIVE IMPACT (N=13)  120 
FIGURE 13: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN CSR/COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT/SUSTAINABILITY 
STRATEGY SINCE JANUARY 2020 (N=10) 123 
FIGURE 14: TARGETED HIRING PRACTICES FOR WOMEN AND YOUTH (N=13)  123 
FIGURE 15: AREAS OF ALIGNED INTEREST AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL (N=12)  125 
 
 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  
AfDB             -        African Development Bank  
AI                  -        artificial intelligence  
AUC             -        American University in Cairo  
BEE               -        business -enabling environment 
BEST            -        Building Economic Sustainability through Tourism Project (USAID)  
BDS               -        business  development service  
BMOs           -        business membership o rganizations  
BTM               -        Bishara Textile and Garment Manufacturing Company  
BWE             -        Business Women of Egypt  
CBE              -        Central Bank of Egypt  
CDCS           -        Country Development Cooperation Strategy  
CFS               -        Consolidated Freight Services    
CIRA              -        Cairo for Investment and Real Estate Development  
CPC              -        Cairo Poultry Company  
CSR              -        corporate social responsibility  
DFC   - Development Finance Corporation  
EAEF             -        Egyptian- American Enterprise Fund  
EBRD             -        European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
EdTech          -        educational technology 
EECAA          -        Egyptian Economic Court Automation Activity  
EECE            -        Engineering Export Council  
EGP              -        Egyptian pound 
ERAS            -        Egypt Rural Agribusiness Strengthening  
ETF               -        Egyptian Tourism Federation  
E-TRP           -        Egypt -Tourism Reform Program  
FAO               -        Food and Agriculture Organization  of the United Nations 
FAS               -        Food Security and Agribusiness Support (USAID)  
FinBi              -        Finance and Banki ng Consultants International 
FEI   -        Federation of Egyptian Industries  
FP/RH               -        family planning and reproductive health 
FRA              -        Financial Regulatory Authority  6 
 FTF               -        Feed the Future 
GAFI              -        General Authority for Investment  
GB Academy    -        Ghabbour Auto Academy  
GDA             -        Global Development A lliance  
GDP              -        gross domestic product  
GILO            -        Girls’ Improved Learning Outcomes (USAID)  
GoE             -        Government of Egypt  
GSTC   - Global Sustainable Tourism Council  
ICT               -        information and communications and technology  
IDA               -        Industrial Development Authority  
IFC                -        International Finance Corporation  
IFPRI            -        International Food Policy Research Institute  
IMC               -        International Modernization Centre  
IMCT             -        Integrated Management of Cultural Tourism  
IMF               -        International Monetary Fund  
ITIDA            -        Information Technology Industry Development Agency 
KII                 -        key informant interview  
LEAP III       -        Learning, Evaluation , and Analysis Project (USAID)  
M&E          - monitoring and evaluation 
MENA          -        Middle East and North Africa  
MFIs               -        microfinance institutions 
MNCs            -        multinational corporations  
MCIT             -        Ministry of Communications and Information Technology  
MoETE         -        Ministry of Education and Technical Education  
MoHE            -        Ministry of Higher Education  
MoTA           -        Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities  
MSMEDA      -        Micro, Small  and Medium Enterprises Development Agency 
MSMEs          -        micro-, small- , and medium -sized enterprises  
NBFIs           -        non-banking financial institutions 
NGOs           -        non-governmental organization 
NUCA          -        New Urban Communities Authority  
PCBs              -        printed c ircuit b oards  
PE                 -        private equity  
PPD    - public-private dialogue 7 
 PPP               -        public-private partnership  
PSE            -        private sector engagement  
PSLA             -        Private Sector Landscape Assessment  
R&D               -        Research and development  
RFP               -        request for p roposal 
RMG               -        ready -made garments  
RVCs                -        regional value chains  
SDS               -        Sustainable Development Strategy  
SEED             -        Strengthening Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development (USAID)  
SEFPP             -        Strengthening Egypt’s Family Planning Program  (USAID)  
SEZ            -        special economic zones  
STEM             -        science, technology, engineering, and mathematics  
TILO             -        Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes (USAID)  
TVET            -        technical and vocational education and training  
USAID           -        United States Agency for International Development  
VC                 -        venture capital  
VSLAs           -        village savings and loan associations  
WISE             -        Workforce Improvement an d Skills Enhancement (WISE)8 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors acknowledge the input of numerous private sector engagement experts  in Egypt, 
particularly those who shared their time in interviews and email exchanges during the preparation of this 
paper. The autho rs thank Ms. Amal Enan and Mr. Mohammed Mossallam, who provided local context 
and expertise on the private sector. The authors also thank Ms. Hanan Shawky, the team’s facilitator.  
This report would not have been possible without the expertise of Mr. Nikol aus Eichman (Private 
Sector Engagement Expert), Mr. James Brew (Private Sector Engagement Expert), Ms. Katie Paguaga 
(Private Sector Engagement Expert), and Ms. Sarah Eissler (Data Analyst). The team would also like to 
thank Dr. Eric Hyman  (LEAP III Contra cting Office Representative) ; David Quinn (LEAP III Project 
Director ), who served as an advisor ; and Brenna Casey ( LEAP III Associate)  for research, analysis and 
report writing, and editorial support.   
Photo credit: World Bank Photo Collection: Middle East & North Africa. 2015. “City Shots of Old Cairo.” Flickr.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT  
Egypt ’s private sector  is highly developed, employing approximately 70 percent of the country’s labor 
force.  A dynamic and young population, large market size, and access to important foreign markets 
drive Egypt ’s enormous economic potential.  Despite this progress, significant obsta cles dampen the 
country’s ability to recognize its potential for economic growth.  Most micro-, small- , and medium -sized 
enterprises (MSMEs) operate informally, and they contribute less than 30 percent  to gross domestic 
product (GDP).  The country has a co mplex and burdensome legal and regulatory system . Egypt’s 
growing population and high rates of unemployment pose additional hurdles.  
The current COVID -19 crisis has superimposed related challenges and uncertainty over Egypt’s 
persistent development challenges.  Though the Government of Egypt has taken proactive measures to 
mitigate the economic fallout of the crisis, the economic achiev ements Egypt has realized since launching 
its bold economic reform program risk backsliding.  Short -term effects of the crisis include reductions in 
tourism, income from the Suez Canal , and remittances coming from the Egyptian diaspora.  The long -
term effe cts of the current crisis are yet to be fully understood.  
Private sector engagement (PSE) is especially important in this time of crisis, as market- led development 
as envisioned by the USAID PSE Policy can only  occur if the private sector emerges stronger and ready 
to invest in the Egyptian economy.  
USAID/Egypt has engaged successfully with the private sector for many years.  In the past 15 years, 
USAID/Egypt has leveraged more than $50 million in cash and in -kind contributions through 
partnerships with Coca- Cola, General Motors, GlaxoSmithKline, IBM, Heinz, Hewlett Packard, 
Houghton Mifflin, HSBC, Intel, Microsoft, Oracle, and many others. USAID and implementing partners 
have already worked closely with more than 200 local and international companies in agribusiness, workforce development, enterprise development, tourism, higher education, and voluntary family 
planning (USAID /Egypt , 2019 a).
 
PSLA METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH  
Given this context, this Private Sector Landscape Assessment (PSLA) aims to gather data to help the 
Egypt  Mission understand specific private sector –related opportunities and synergies  and to inform the 
Mission’s 2020 Country Development Cooperation Strategy  (CDCS ) process.  The assessment seeks to 
add to the Mission’s existing private sector stakeholder database, expand its understanding of private sector goals and challenges, begin relationship building with new contacts, and identify appropriate 
actors for potential short - and long -term partnerships.  
The assessment team began the PSLA with a desk review and in -person consultations with USAID/Egypt 
staff in March 2020.  Research included current trends and opportunities in Egypt and a review of 
relevant external publications and internal Mission document s.  As part of this effort, the team also used 
the private sector database that the Mission  already had and leveraged local expertise and networks to 
identify more than 200 new contacts for local, regional, and multinational firms and investors in key 
sectors whose business interests align with USAID’s development objectives.  10 
 The evolving COVID -19 pandemic prohibited the  in-person interviews that form the typical foundation 
for PSLA data collection.  Accordingly, the Learning, Evaluation , and Analysis Project  III (LEAP III) 
modified the PSLA format to collect data remotely via an online survey and key informant interviews 
(KIIs). Our approach recognized both the practicalities of remote data collection ( i.e., the need to 
standardize questi ons better and the need to reduce the number of questions to make it manageable for 
interviewees) and improvement  opportunities for some areas in the PSLA process ( i.e., achieving  a more 
nuanced understanding of motivations, power dynamics, risk factors, a nd relationships among private 
sector actors and across entry points).  Although we partially  achieved this better understanding , 
structured, remotely conducted interviews also meant that the data collected were often more 
descriptive than analytical.  As Section 5  notes , an iterative approach may be needed to further narrow 
down identified opportunities into actionable activities for the Mission, particularly as they relate to any updates in Mission priorities deriving from  the CDCS process.  
The team scheduled and conducted 48 KIIs with stakeholders that USAID identified as a high priority 
and that  represent ed various business/organization size s, sectors , and geographic area s of operation.  
The team analyzed the following eight sectors: 1) agriculture and food processing; 2) business consulting 
services; 3) education, including vocational education and workforce development ; 4) financial services ; 
5) health care; 6) legal services ; 7) manufacturing; and finally, 8) tourism. For each sector,  we look at 
private sector challenges and interests and  aligned interests and engagement potential with USAID.  
Then, we present concrete opportunities for USAID to collaborate with specific private sector actors to 
address key development challenges.  In defining the valu e proposition, these collaboration models map 
not only to the development rationale for the proposed interventions ( i.e., decreased youth 
unemployment) but also the business case ( i.e., higher productivity through access to skilled labor). 
SUMMARY OF PSLA FINDINGS  
● The business -enabling environment (BEE) in Egypt is a persistent development 
challenge that cuts across all sectors.  Respondents consis tently cited o utdated and 
unnecessa ry regulations and excessive bureaucracy as significant barriers to entry and major 
impediments to growth and expansions across sectors. Therefore, improvement of the BEE 
must be a priority and represents the greatest potential for unleashing the private s ector’s true 
potential to grow  the Egyptian economy.   
● Integrating  MSMEs into lead -firm supply, service, and support networks is an 
overarching business objective.   To accelerate integration, MSMEs will need increased 
access to finance and business develop ment services. Lead firms can co -finance and support this 
access, but this should be done as a comprehensive support initiative in collaboration with 
development partners like USAID, which have the experience and influence needed to 
coordinate and connect their efforts with a wider range of development partners.  If not 
comprehensive, the current incremental measures taken by lead firms will continue to fail.  
● Egypt needs more  investment in training  and technical and vocational education to 
upgrade workforce  skills  in line with shifting job opportunities in all sectors.  
Technology is changing rapidly  and with it the necessary workforce skills, especially for skilled 
and semi -skilled labor.  The COVID -19 crisis has amplified this challenge with production 
disruptions, added safety protocols , and health -related absences.  Therefore, incremental 
improvements, especially in public education institutions, will no longer suffice. USAID and its 
development partners must instead focus on increasing coordination and co -investment 11 
 between employers and private technical and v ocational education and training  (TVET)  and 
other employment- focused training programs to better align workforce skills with changing job 
opportunities.     
● The entire Egyptian economy needs  a digital transformation, including in telehealth 
and in digital learning platforms, manufacturing, and government administration. 
Given the challenges related to COVID -19, there has never been a better time to accel erate this 
process. USAID works directly with both public and private sectors and is therefore well 
position ed to support and coordinate its efforts across all economic sectors. Over the last few 
years and especially over the last several months, innovatio n has greatly increased the options 
and decreased the price of digital solutions. USAID can therefore play more of an enabling and 
scaling rather than developing and testing role.  
● Youth and women represent the greatest untapped human capital resource in 
Egypt and across the MENA region.  Support programs must  focus on improving youth and 
women’s capacity and agency  to increase their inclusion and ability to succeed and contribute to 
growth in the Egyptian economy.  Partnerships among private TVET networks, employer 
training initiatives, and other education organizations should actively engage youth and women 
to improve their education for employment initiatives, focusing on job placement and retention 
as the most important metrics of success.  
● Response to meg atrends, like climate change and population growth, must  be 
aggressive, comprehensive , and persistent, and includ e a large increase in 
investment in private sector– led research and development ( R&D) .  At best, 
investments in climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies and strategies for coping with 
rapid urbanization have been incremental over the past few decades. The GoE, consistent with most governments in the region, hesitates to invest the necessary resources.  USAID and its 
development partners will have to take a bold approach to incentiviz e the private sector to take 
the lead.   
SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS  
Tables 1– 8 highlight priorities and engagement opportunities to further shape the Mission ’s private 
sector  strategy for Egypt .  Section 5, Mapping Strategic Ways to Engage the Private Sector , expands on 
these.  
AGRIBUSINESS AND FOOD PROCESSING  
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE  
AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY SECTOR  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
1. Strengthen local supply chains 
with support for expanding lead 
firm investments in outgrower and 
other MSME support networks.  USAID could help lead firms that are investing in outgrower and/or MSME 
support networks  gain access to capital and targeted technical assistance 
to.  This proven approach facilitates  the growth of small farmers and non -
farm enterprises by directly connecting them to markets and the support 
needed to access those markets.  This approach could also have a large 12 
 impact in countries such as Egypt, where strong lead firms operate 
alongside disorganized and/or under supported MSMEs in accessing export 
and local markets with high and increasing qual ity and safety standards. As 
mentioned previously , establishing an agribusiness hub is a good example of 
a comprehensive support network. Various other support models are also 
viable and should be designed according to the needs of both the lead firm 
and the network of MSMEs it work s with.  
2. Integrate a mentorship activity 
into USAID agricultural support 
programs . 
 USAID could implement  mentorship programs to  help MSMEs increase 
their efficiency and productivity levels and take on more value -added 
activities within the value chains they work in.  For example, mentorship 
programs could be between buyers and suppliers with current working 
relationships, between established and up -and-coming firms that work in 
the same sector , or among  smaller farmers who work together through 
outgrower networks.  Encouraging mentorship while integrating MSMEs 
into formalized supply chains will accelerate the integration process and 
develop  the needed skills for sustained integration.  
3. Support investments in to 
digitizing agricultural supply chains, 
distribution, and  sales networks.  USAID could engage lead firms interested  in investing in digitizing their 
agricultural supply chains and distribution and sales networks.  Digitizing 
supply chains is especially  importan t within the agriculture and food 
processing sector, given the potential to make relationships with  MSMEs 
that work within and along their supply chains  more efficient .  Such an 
initiative could support lead firms willing to co -invest in digital solutions 
alongside the MSMEs they work with. By doing so, USAID would enable 
both the digitalization and the in tegration of MSMEs into  more formalized 
supply chains, which are mutually reinforcing priorities.  
4. Facilitate market linkages and 
efficient transactions by improving 
a central database of suppliers and 
producers.  USAID could assist  the GoE in improv ing the reliability and accuracy of its 
database of local suppliers and producers and support programs for those 
that are registered in the database.  Public- private dialogue (PPD) can 
support  technical assistance  to meet  buyers’ needs. A partner suc h as the 
Federation of Business Industries could organize t he PPD via its Chamber 
of Food Industries. Some obvious complications relate to such a database, 
including informal MSMEs’ reluctance to be included , which  is why 
simultaneously improving  support programs for those that are registered  
would be important . The GoE has worked  to improve its database, 
including issuing  smart cards to curb corruption associated with distributing 
subsidies. The challenges facing  MSMEs and the GoE in the current 
COVID -19 crisis  make this the perfect  time to advance swift and 
comprehensive measures such as these.  
5. Improve the GoE’s monitoring 
and regulatory capacity to ensure 
that local production abides by 
domestic and international food 
safety and  health standards.  
 USAID could support improving  the GoE’s  monitoring and regulatory 
capacity to ensure that local production abides by domestic and 
international food safety and health standards.  Such support could include  
digitizing processes and procedures to increase transparency and decrease complexity.  Di gitizing agricultural supply chains ( Collaboration Model 3) 
and improving the GoE database and support programs for local suppliers 
and producers (Collaboration Model 4 ) should happen in lockstep with the 13 
 digitization of related GoE processes and procedure s. As a result, 
companies will more easily and efficiently report compliance information 
and the GoE will be able to streamline support programs for MSMEs.  
Though progress has been slow, “Digital Transformations” have long been 
a stated goal of the GoE and other governments in the MENA region and 
around the world , as has improving  monitoring and regulatory capacity.  
Recent increases in regional and global demand for Egyptian production, along with increases in related standards and regulations and new COV ID-
19-related challenges, have increased the pressure to move forward with 
these mutually reinforcing initiatives. 
 
BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVICES  
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SECTOR  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
6. Support business 
consulting/ development services . 
 In addition to expanding USAID’s existing efforts to support sector -focused  
business development service  (BDS) centers to provide technical assistance 
to MSMEs , the study has identified two collaboration models to support 
business consulting firms:  
1. Providing t raining/knowledge transfer opportunities for local 
consultants through direct training or through pairing with 
international consulting firms on technical advisory projects awarded 
by USAID. Local consulting firms  are interested in  receiv ing training  
on expert hazard analysis and critical control points in the field in 
both donor -centric areas ( e.g., monitoring and evaluation or M&E, 
technical assistance delivery, and management systems) and more 
commercial aspects , such as market intelligence, digital mark eting, 
productivity enhancements , and optimization.   
2. Enabling smaller and less established consulting firms to penetrate the 
market through a pay-for-results cost -sharing mechanism.  
 
EDUCATION (INCLUDING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT)  
TABLE 3: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
EDUCATION SECTOR 
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
7. Support in -house workforce 
development programs . Expand the pool and stability of a skilled labor force across industries by 
supporting in-house workforce development programs, developing  and 14 
 endorsing R&D initiatives by lead firms to serve their respective sectors, 
and expanding partnerships with TVET institutes.  
8. Partner with information and 
communications and technology 
(ICT) companies on educational 
reform projects . The COVID -19-related challenges in providing education have generated a 
massive global influx of investment and innovation in to providing e -learning 
services. U .S. technology firms are leading this innovation and have 
aggressively sought  partnerships with governments to provide these 
services. The Ministry of Education and Technical Education (M oETE) 
recently released its plan for  continuous in-service teacher professional 
development, which aims to create an online platform for all training 
content. The plan not only responds to COVID -19 realities but  will also 
help M oETE achieve training at  scale and save substantial logistical c osts. 
Starting with U .S. firms, USAID, in partnership with the cognizant 
ministries , could engage technology companies to address e-learning  gaps. 
In doing so, USAID can proactive ly bridge those gaps in line with the 
MoETE’s  vision for the sector  and support tech companies through 
advocacy, co- investment in R&D , and resource support , thus  rapidly 
increas ing inclusion for underserved populations and accelerating the digital 
transformation of Egypt’s entire education system.  
 
FINANCIAL SERVICES  
TABLE 4: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
9. Increase access to finance for 
MSMEs by partnering with local 
financial institutions and BDS 
centers.  
 USAID could identify current and recent lead firm partners with a well-
established  network of MSME suppliers and/or service providers and help 
them accelerat e MSME integration in line with Collaboration Models 1 and 
3. Then USAID could  connect financing partners to finance MSME growth 
in line with the opportunities and backed by the regularity of transactions 
and support that are associated with integration. 
10. Broaden the range of NBFIs . Financial institutions are notoriously risk averse ; slow to change ; and 
slower to tak ing on new clients, products, and services.  However,  when  
compelled by disruption, proof of concept, and new entrants into their 
markets, change can be rapid,  and competition can be fierce to protect and 
expand market share.  For example, relatively new and successful products 
and services in Egypt, such as leasi ng, microfinance, and electronic 
payments , have grow n rapidly .  However, the spectrum of needed products 
and services remains unaddressed and underpenetrated —especially for 
MSMEs.  USAID could accelerate the pace of change by supporting NBFIs , 
focusing  on expanding access to Fintech, crowdfunding, and angel 
investment.  Amid the COVID -19 challenge and its effects on the Egyptian 
economy, digital innovation is accelerating.  Digital innovation and 
consolidation of NBFIs (more than 800 microfinance institutio ns [MFIs] 15 
 currently operate in Egypt) will create a powerful force for change, as the 
NBFIs  can better disrupt and challenge the market dominance of more 
traditional financial institutions in Egypt.  
 
HEALTH  CARE  
TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
HEALTH SECTOR  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
11. Partner with Egyptian health  
care providers, particularly 
healthtech, with a specific interest 
in family planning and reproductive 
health (FP/RH ) issues . The USAID PSE Visioning Sessions in December 2019  note and the PSLA 
team confirms , based on lessons learned from the Family Planning through 
the Private Sector activity, that an opportunity exists to partner with 
private sector health care firms to provide much needed training and 
capacity building in exchange for greater support for voluntary FP/RH . 
 
MANUFACTURING  
TABLE 6: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
MANUFACTURING SECTOR 
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
12. Co -invest with business 
membership organizations ( BMOs ) 
and leading private sector players 
in manufacturing to enable MSMEs 
in the feeding industries to scale 
up and compete domestically . USAID could identify current and recent lead firm partners that have a 
well-established  network of MSME suppliers and/or se rvice providers and 
support them in accelerating MSME integration in line with Collaboration 
Models 1 and 3 above, then connect financing partners to finance MSME 
growth backed by the regularity of transactions and support that are 
associated with integrat ion. To pull MSMEs up into the financial markets, 
there must be a disruption that forces financial institutions into pursuing 
this market segment. This disruption will be triggered by both MSME 
integration and expanding access to alternative financing opti ons from 
NBFIs, and it will be accelerated through the digitization of supply chains 
and the continued rise of digital financial services (Fintech). BDS can also be 
used through pay for performance contracts to support MSMEs in 
preparing and applying for finance and complying with the related terms 
and conditions.  
13. Partner with the Ministry of 
Trade and Industry to support 
industrial clusters for feeder 
industries.  
 Another way to strengthen the manufacturing industry is to support the 
development of industrial clusters in sectors with high market demand, 
growth , and export potential.  Given the potential for cluster -based 
development, the Government  of Egypt  has made cluster- based 
industrialization a key pillar of Egypt’s sustainable development strategy to 
2030.  Promoting business clusters in manufacturing would significantly 16 
 enhance sector  productivity , promote forward and backward linkages, 
localize value addition , and reali ze the sector’s job creation potential.  
 
TOURISM  
TABLE 7: SUMMARY OF COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE 
TOURISM SECTOR  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
14. Develop the capacity of tour 
operations, boost management 
systems, and increase the 
adoption of digital solutions.  USAID could engage major hotels, mass tourism operators , and digital 
booking platforms to enable MSMEs to provide more personalized 
experiences to tourists in line with shifting trends in the tourism industry. 
Major hotel chains like Marriott are making big investments in booking 
platforms that provide local experiences for their guests , which are often 
referred to as cultural, eco, experiential , and more broadly alternative 
tourism options. This strategy  aims to be a differentiating factor over 
competing mass tourism options. Digital booking platforms including TripAdvisor  and Airbnb  also continue to expand their market share in 
alternative tourism by providing a convenient and secure booking option. Unfortunately, most traditional MSME operators lack the capacity to take 
advantage of these trends.  
15. Develop a tourism partnership 
fund.  
 In term s of funding for tourism MSMEs, private banks  indicate  little interest  
and no existing commercial financial options/instruments provide feasible 
terms and cater to the needs and conditions of small and medium 
operators and the seasonal nature of the touris m industry. Accordingly, 
contacts interviewed were interested in or expecting from USAID either 
grants or subsidized funding to support small projects or initiatives.  
The USAID/Jordan Building Economic Sustainability through Tourism 
Project (BEST)  is a best practice activity in the region that provides some 
lessons . BEST provides grants and technical assistance for product and 
market development, tourism industry competitiveness, public- private 
partnerships , and job creation . USAID could support a similar fund to 
provide finance, grants , and technical assistance to tourism companies in 
Egypt to revive and realign their products and marketing. Key goals  would 
include  improving Egypt’s competitiveness amid shifts in the global tourism 
industry,  upgrading workforce  capacity,  and increasing public -private 
partnerships to protect Egypt’s tourism resources. Such a fund could also 
finance and support the capacity development of MSMEs as outlined in 
Collaboration Model 14.  
Given the need to revive Egypt’s t ourism sector post -COVID, this initiative 
would be especially timely and could also help to diversify the tourism 
industry in Egypt to include cultural and eco -tourism options. Partners in 17 
 the fund could include major hotels, mass tourism operators, digita l 
booking platforms , a wider range of lead firms in Egypt, and other 
multinational corporations ( MNCs ) such as the Chaudhary Group, which 
has expressed interest in investing in Egypt’s tourism sector.  
 
CROSS -CUTTING THEMES  
TABLE 8: SUMMARY OF CROSS -CUTTING COLLABORATION MODELS AND ENGAGEMENT 
OPPORTUNITIES  
Collaboration model  Engagement opportunity  
16. Support PPD across the 
Egyptian economy to address 
enabling environment barriers.  
 PPD directly engages public and private sector counterparts in an outcome -
focused dialogue. PPD works best when it directly affect s businesses. 
When  participants communicate  both the process and the results to the 
community at large, including the public and private sectors, and civil 
society, whether regionally and nationally, then PPD can become a trusted 
avenue for achieving results. Given the prevalence of enabling environment 
constraints across t he Egyptian economy, PPDs offer a mechanism to 
constructively engage with the GoE on reform.  
  18 
 1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 SETTING THE CONTEXT: THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
ENGAGEMENT LANDSCAPE IN EGYPT  
Egypt’s private sector is highly developed, employing approximately 7 0 percent of Egypt’s labor force  
(Carnegie Middle East Center, 2013) .   Micro- , small- , and medium -sized enterprises (MSMEs) make up 
the vast majority of the private sector  (Arab African Advisers, 2017) .  After the economic crisis that 
followed  back- to-back revolutions in 2011 and 2013, the country’s leaders took steps to rebuild the 
economy, promote private enterprises,  and improve the business climate.  The Government of Egypt 
(GoE) launched a reform program in 2015 designed to enhance the business -enabli ng environment (BEE) 
through legal reform, liberalize the foreign exchange market, stimulate inclusive growth , and improve 
governance and transparency (Global Partnership for Effective Development Co -operation, 2018) .  The 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) signed a $12 billion loan agreement with Egypt in 2016 to finance 
structural reforms that would enhance private sector functionality, noting the country’s “dynamic and 
young population, large market size, favorable geographic location and access to important foreign 
markets”  as characteristics of its potential (IMF, 2016) .  Egypt  also has a growing untapped potential for 
e-commerce (Arab African Advisers, 2017) .  
Despite this progress, significant obstacles dampen th e country’s ability to recognize its potential for 
economic growth.  Most MSMEs operate informally , and their contribution to gross domestic product 
(GDP) is less than 30 percent.  They struggle to access  finance due to a challenging institutional, legal, 
and regulatory environment and limited business advisory services.  They thus have limited ability to 
absorb costs associated with growth. Egypt has a complex and discriminatory tax system, and business 
registration and licensing pose continued challenges.   Only about 50 percent of companies deal with 
banks (Hala El -Said et al. , 2014) , and those that do experience excessive bank requirements and high 
interest rates.  Banks also require high collateral, and these requirements often exclude female 
entrepreneu rs. Egypt’s growing population and high rates of unemployment pose additional hurdles.  
Lastly, institutionalized mechanisms to manage labor -management relations  are limited:  the GoE 
institutionalized the Egyptian Trade Union Federation as the sole union bo dy in 2017, preventing the 
establishment of other independent trade unions  (Global Partnership for Effective Development Co -
operation, 2018) .    
The current COVID -19 crisis has superimposed related challenges and uncertainty over Egypt’s 
persistent devel opment challenges. Though the GoE has proactively  mitigate d the economic fallout of 
the crisis, the economic achievements Egypt has realized since launching its bold economic reform 
program risk backsliding  (IMF, 2019, 2020) .  Short- term effects of the cri sis include reductions in 
tourism, income from the Suez Canal, and remittances from the Egyptian diaspora  (Breisinger et al., 
2020) .  The long- term effects of the current crisis are not yet fully understood  (Adbel -Halim, 2020) .   
In this period of uncertainty, many organizations will fail, others will survive, and some will thrive. Market leaders will look to maintain and strengthen their positions by expanding market share, 
venturing into new markets, and acquiring competition.  M arket challengers will look to gain market 19 
 share in  the voids left by failing companies and differentiate themselves in response to shifting and new 
market trends.  If they survive, small organizations will look for opportunities for rapid growth in a 
changing market environment.  As they navigate these challenges and opportunities, market leaders and 
challengers will rely on cash reserves, commercial finance, and political connections to gain access to 
available support programs.  Small organizations will have to look for alternative financing options as 
access to finance tightens amid uncertainty and will seek support programs where available and 
accessible.  
 Private sector engagement (PSE) becomes especially important in this time of crisis, as market- led 
development as envisioned by the USAID PSE Policy can only happen if the private sector emerges 
stronger and ready to invest in the Egyptian economy.  Therefore, the GoE, USAID, and its development 
partners must adjust development resources and programmi ng and provide  technical assistance and 
financial support during the crisis (especially for MSMEs) to help rebuild the Egyptian economy after the 
pandemic (Galal Ismail, 2020; United Nations, 2020) . 
1.2 BUILDING ON USAID/EGYPT’S STRONG PRIVATE SECTOR 
ENGAG EMENT WORK IN THE CONTEXT OF THE NEW 
COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION STRATEGY  
USAID/Egypt has engaged  successfully with the private sector for many years :  “In the past 15 years, 
USAID/Egypt has leveraged more than $50 million in cash and in -kind contributions through 
partnerships with Coca- Cola, General Motors, GlaxoSmithKline, IBM, Heinz, Hewlett Packard, 
Houghton Mifflin, HSBC, Intel, Microsoft, Oracle, and many others. Through these partnerships, 
USAID/Egypt has increased enrollment in TVET  [technical and vocational education and training] ; 
improved rural water resource quality; increased income for smallholder farmers; and improved access to credit for micro - and small enterprises ” (USAID/Egypt, 2019 c).  
USAID and implementing partners have already worked closely with more than 200 local and international companies in agribusiness, workforce development, enterprise development, tourism, higher education, and family planning (USAID/Egypt, 2019a) .  PSE has included global development 
alliances (GDAs) ; public-private partnerships (PPPs) ; and efforts such as training, roundtable events, and 
corporate social responsibility (CSR) collaborations  (USAID/Egypt, 2018) .  Examples of this work 
include Strengthening Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Developm ent (SEED), Feed the Future (FTF) 
Food Security and Agribusiness Support (FAS), Workforce Improvement and Skills Enhancement 
(WISE), and Egypt Rural Agribusiness Strengthening (ERAS) activities.  Through this work, USAID/Egypt 
has learned the valuable lesson that engaging the partner early is crucial for success (USAID/Egypt, 
2019b) . 
 
1.3 OBJECTIVES OF THIS PRIVATE SECTOR LANDSCAPE 
ASSESSMENT  
This Private Sector Landscape Assessment (PSLA) aims to gather data to help the Mission understand 
specific private sector –related  opportunities and synergies  and to inform the Mission’s Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy ( CDCS ).  The assessment seeks to add to the Mission’s existing 
private sector stakeholder database, expand its understanding of private sector goals and challenges, 20 
 begin relationship building with new contacts, and identify appropriate actors for potential short - and 
long-term partnerships.   
  21 
 2. PSLA METHODOLOGY AND 
APPROACH 
The USA ID PSE P olicy calls for strategic alignment of private sector and USAID interests to reach 
development objectives, which  requires  a deeper understanding of the private sector perspective.  A 
PSLA is a useful tool in gaining this perspective. In undertaking  this assessment, the USAID -funded 
Learning, Evaluation, and Analysis Project (LEAP III) used existing USAID PSLA guidance, but adjusted  
the methodology to meet COVID -19 requirements  and adapt to limitations on in- person meetings.  
Using its extensive PSE experience, t he team took  a nuanced approach to  meeting with profit and non -
profit institutions and inquiring about business growth strategies versus traditional program expansion.  
The team also considered the power dynamics and quality of relationships within and along 
supply/service/support chains and why those power dynamics are the way they are, the effects of 
COVID- 19 on operations, and the appetite for expanding uptake of digital technologie s. 
2.1 APPROACH  
LITERATURE R EVIEW AND I N-PERSON CONSULTATIONS 
The assessment team began the PSLA with a desk review and in -person consultations with USAID/Egypt 
staff.  Research covered current trends and opportunities in Egypt  and reviewed  relevant extern al 
publications and internal Mission documents.  As part of this effort, the team also used the Mission’s 
existing private sector database and drew from  local expertise and networks to identify more than 2,000 
contacts for local, regional, and multinationa l firms and investors in key sectors whose business interests 
align with USAID’s development objectives.  
The assessment team traveled to Cairo to consult in person with Mission leadership, Program Office 
members , the PSE Working Group, office directors an d deputies, and many of the technical teams.  The 
goal was to contextualize and focus the PSLA scope, including which sectors and companies’ 
interviewees to draw from.  
PRIVATE SECTOR S ELECTION C RITERIA  
In collaboration with USAID/Egypt and local experts , the team compiled a database of private sector 
actors across several key sectors.   The team targeted the following sectors, aiming to capture 
geographic representation across Egypt: education (15), health (4), services (7), information and 
communications and technology or ICT (9), agriculture (41), tourism (8), logistics (4), banking and 
financing (19), manufacturing (17), and energy (3). In addition to private sector actors, the team also 
included business membership organiz ations (23) and international donor partners (8).  
COVID -19 DISRUPTION AND PIVOT TO REMOTE DATA COLLECTION  
The evolving COVID -19 pandemic prohibited in-person interviews, which form the typical foundation 
for PSLA data collection.  In response , Integra mod ified the PSLA format to collect data remotely via an 
online survey and key informant interviews (KIIs). Our approach recognized both the practicalities of 
remote data collection ( i.e., the need for fewer, more standardized  questions to make it manageable for 22 
 interviewees) and the opportunity for improvement in some areas in the PSLA process ( i.e., gaining a 
more nuanced understanding of motivations, power dynamics, risk 
factors, and relationships among private sector actors and across 
entry points). 
Accordingly, the team developed a strateg ic line of questions that 
modified the key PSLA questions from USAID’s “How to Conduct 
a PLSA” and used the five questions from the new USAID PSE 
Policy as a lens. This allowed us to provide USAID/Egypt with 
improved insights and specific recommendations t o aid in decision -
making and with a road map for gaining further insight as COVID -
19-related restrictions subside. Annex I includes t he KII interview 
guide.  
The remote data collection process occurred in two phases:  
● Online survey: The team sent an online survey to 134 
private sector stakeholders, selected from the compiled 
database of private sector actors in Egypt.  A team of 
experts developed the online survey questionnaire, using SurveyMonkey, to capture baseline, 
contextual, and nuanced information. Th e survey was offered in both Arabic and English.  A nnex 
II summar izes the responses.  
● Remote KIIs:  Concurrently, the team scheduled and conducted KIIs with stakeholders whom 
USAID identified as a high priority and who represent various business/organization size s, 
sector s, and geographic area s of operation. The team conducted 48  interviews virtually (either 
through Zoom, Google Meet , or the phone de pending on interviewee  preference) . 
DATA ANALYSIS  
Two local experts conducted the KIIs remotely, in English or Arabic.  They took copious notes during 
each KII.  An external data analyst then used these notes to conduct thematic analysis guided by a 
codebook and  using NVivo 12 software.  Based on this coding, the team divided its analysis into the 
following eight sectors: 1) agri business  and food processing; 2) business consulting services; 3 ) 
education, including vocational education and  workforce development); 4) financial services; 5) health 
care; 6) legal services;  7) manufacturing; and finally 8) tourism. This report presents e ach sector through 
five areas of inquiry: sector overview , private sector challenges and interests , and aligned interests and 
engagement potential with USAID. Then, we present concrete opportunities for USAID to collaborate 
with specific private sector actors to address key development challenges. In defining the value proposition, these collaboration models map not only to the development rationale for the proposed 
interventions (i.e.,  decreased youth unemployment) but also to the business case ( i.e., higher productivity 
through access to skilled labor.) 
LIMITATIONS 
The team anticipated that the online survey would provide baseline and contextual information that we 
could probe  further  in the KIIs, but the response rate was lower than anticipated (just under 20 
percent).  Thus, the survey results provided contextual i nformation and descriptive statistics, but could PSE Policy Key Questions  
1. Can the private sector solve this 
problem by itself?  
2. Could there be a market -based 
approach to addressing this challenge?  
3. What are the roles and interests 
of the private sector in addressing 
this challenge?  
4. Are there factors constraining the private sector from 
involvement and investment?  
5. Is the re a role for USAID to 
help alleviate or eliminate these 
constraints?  23 
 not be used for further statistical analyses. Many s takeholders who did not participate in the survey 
indicated they did so because they  did not have enough time to participate. In future assessments 
followi ng this approach, assessment teams will need to shorten the survey to no more than 10 –15 
questions to improve the response rate.    24 
 3. SECTORAL ANALYSIS  
The section provides a sector -by-sector analysis  of findings from the KIIs and online survey , includin g 
the following sectors:  1) agriculture and food processing; 2)  business consulting services; 3 ) education, 
including vocational education and workforce development; 4) financial services; 5) health care; 6) legal 
services; 7) manufacturing; and finally  8) tourism. Table 9 outlines the five areas of inquiry for each 
sector , and Section 5, Mapping Strategic Ways to Engage the Private Sector  summarizes  the high -level 
findings across sectors.  
TABLE 9: SECTORAL ANALYSIS  
Overview  High-level details of the sector ’s status  
Private sector challenges  Specific challenges outlined  
Private sector interests  Specific interests outlined  
Aligned interests and engagement 
potential  Areas of overlap between USAID priorities/program ming and 
private sector interests  
Opportunities  Specific areas for USAID intervention  
 
3.1 AGRIBUSINESS AND FOOD PROCESSING 
OVERVIEW 
The team conducted KIIs with seven leading private sector organizations in the agriculture and food 
processing sector.  Though not comprehensive, these medium to large Egyptian organizations participate 
in various  activities that are representative of sector -spanning production, processing, and retail, with 
operations in both Upper and Lower Egypt. They are also involved in several  value chains, including 
horticulture, poultry, and confectionary products.  They include publicly traded and privately held 
companies and a producer association that target s both local and export markets.  The KIIs with these 
organizations provided insight into persistent and new operational challenges in the sector and business interests within a changing economic environment.  
COVID- 19 is clearly an immediate and pressing challenge, with shifting and decreasing demand for 
products and increases in production costs. However,  their responses to the KII questions indicate  that 
these organizations were successful enough  before the pandemic to survive and be optimistic about 
positioning themselves for growth in a post -COVID Egypt. This includes plans for acquiring competitors 
that are not faring as well.  
Though the agriculture and food processing sector of Egypt has prov en resilient compared with other 
sectors during the current COVID -19 crisis, significant shifts  are likely  in the post- COVID operating 
environment.  These shifts will be felt throughout the value chain and could include  
● Increased  reliance of processors on  large local suppliers  and imports and use of vertical 
integration to source raw materials, making it even more difficult for MSMEs to operate within 
and along their supply chains.  25 
 ● Decreased competition resulting from c onsolidation within the sector throug h acquisitions of 
companies that are failing to survive the current COVID -19 crisis, which could lead to higher  
prices and fewer choices  of products for consumers.  
● Growing influence  of larger companies with the G overnment as they continue to grow through 
acquisitions, further raising barriers to entry and lowering the pressure for the reforms needed 
to improve the BEE for MSMEs.  
Though these shifts in the operating environment for the sector are potential development challenges, 
they also present opportunities.  Large local suppliers and vertically integrated production operations, 
for example, can be supported to expand the use of outgrower networks and the inclusion of MSMEs 
for value addition and other services within and along their supply chains (discussed more later ). 
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
As noted previously , though the agriculture and food processing sector is resilient compared with other 
sectors, the COVID -19 crisis remains  a pressing and immediate challenge.  Th e increased level of 
uncertainty it produces is now superimposed over recurring and persistent challenges.  
Longer- term investment projects  lack access to capital .  The current uncertain operating 
environment  has amplified this challenge (World Bank, 2020).  Longer- term capital is needed throughout 
the value chain to increase production ( e.g., land reclamation), improve processing capacity ( e.g., 
upgrading facilities), expand distribution networks (e.g.,  cold storage), and enable access to new markets 
(e.g., meeting standards for export markets).  
A shortage exists in the supply of semi -skilled and skilled labor with a high turnover rate of 
available workers.  Semi-skilled labor has an especially high turnover rate, as these workers move 
between the formal and informal economy.  Recent disruptions in export markets due to COVID -19 
make  forecasting  demand and the labor needed to fulfill orders  difficult, adding to the cost of labor. 
Increased health and safety me asures and related disruptions in production  have also raised labor costs . 
Inconsistent quantity and quality of raw materials coming from small producers is another major challenge.  A reliable database and support system for local production  is also lacki ng. 
Production disruptions and resource constraints amid COVID -19 further complicate this challenge.  The 
health crisis is likely to affect small producers  disproportionately as their already vulnerable economic 
situation is compounded by anticipated reduc tions in production and limited access to inputs and 
markets  (United Nations Egypt, 2020) . 
Access  to market information and support in identifying and taking advantage of market 
opportunities (local, regional, and global) are lacking .  Matchmaking between producers and 
buyers, including support for attending trade fairs, are important activities for e xpanding access to 
markets.  These activities traditionally occur through face -to-face meetings, which are now difficult to 
conduct, given COVID- 19.  For example, the Sahara Expo 2020 —one of the largest of its kind in 
Egypt —has been rescheduled for 2021  (Sahara, 2020) .  Therefore, addressing this challenge will require 
access to market information and meeting forums using digital platforms.  
Inadequate monitoring and regulatory capacity to ensure that local production complies 
with domestic and internationa l food safety and health standards places a burden on 
companies. This burden takes the form of the cost and the liability of ensuring compliance within their 
own supply chains, particularly for those exporting fresh produce  (Faour- Klingbeil  and Todd, 2018) .  The 26 
 current transport disruptions, economic uncertainty, and heightened health and safety sensitivities 
underscore the need to improve these systems.  
Availability of labs and testing  is inadequate .  A major need exists for investment in labs for fresh 
produce exports (and for inputs to processed food) , which is particularly important  for testing for 
pesticide residual content, as this can lead to rejections from the EU and other markets.  A top 
horticulture producer noted , for example, that the United Arab Emirates refused to take peppers from 
Egypt and that shipments to the EU have been stopped.  The Ministry of Agriculture  runs only one lab , 
and its waiting list is for 2,500 samples per day.  Testing of  strawberries and peppers  is delayed for 
weeks, increasing cost and reducing quality.1  
Other regulatory challenges include highly bureaucratic and complex trade procedures, trade 
barriers, transport and logistics, the tax collection system, the land allocation and pricing proces s, the 
licensing and permitting process, and the lack of coordination among government agencies.  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
Though the current operating environment of the agriculture and food processing sector is highly 
uncertain, growth opportunities also  exist as the local and global economy continues to adjust to the 
current COVID -19 crisis.  Individual companies will take advantage of growth opportunities in the gaps 
left by companies that fail to survive the crisis.  They will also take advantage of shifts in demand and 
new opportunities associated with the post -COVID economy, such as fulfilling online food orders.  
Accelerating  the digitization of the entire agricultural sector  is a possibility— a process that the GoE, in 
partnership with the Food and A griculture Organization  of the United Nations (FAO) , has supported  
(FAO, 2019) .  Investing in modernizing production, processing, and distribution networks to improve 
the resiliency of Egyptian food systems and better align with international standards  represents another 
opportunity .  These investments will also better position Egypt to take advantage of post-pandemic 
regional and global demand for its agricultural products.  
 
The organizations interviewed in the KIIs expressed various business interests in  the current operating 
environment.  These interests can be broadly organized into three categories :  
 
1. Market expansion  through acquisitions and investments in expanding current operations, 
including penetrating rural market s and increasing market share in fragmented and 
underpenetrated urban markets.  
2. Facility upgrades  to align them better with international standards and changing market 
trends, including upgrading processing facilities and expanding local, regional, and glob al 
distribution networks to satisfy unmet demand.  
3. Transformational projects  to take advantage of new opportunities in a post -COVID 
economy, including investing in organic farming operations, land reclamation, and community farming projects. 
 Pursuing thes e interests will require access to capital, expertise, and support from a BEE that is 
conducive to growth.  In addition to the aforementioned  business interests, the process of formalizing 
 
1 The U.S. Department of Agriculture TAIB project (implemented by Land O Lakes) is working on implementing the 
new food safety law, which should improve this barrier.  27 
 agriculture supply chains in Egypt is ongoing and of continued inte rest to large international agribusiness 
and food processing companies as a longer -term development objective.  Specific initiatives related to 
this overarching business interest include partnerships with lead firms to improve access to finance, 
inputs, an d extension services for small farmers to improve their productivity, especially for high -value 
horticulture.  Upgrading processing facilities and distribution systems is another priority, including the 
cold chain for horticulture.  Many of these efforts f ocus on Upper Egypt because of the region’s  great 
productive potential, yet it lags behind Lower Egypt in its current productive capacity.  USAID has a long history of supporting this overarching business interest through its programs and partnership initi atives.  
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
Aligning  business interests with USAID’s development objectives for Egypt’s agriculture and food 
processing sector has significant potential.  To realize this potential , continued engagement with  and 
support for leading companies to encourage  longer -term, inclusive growth strategies will be necessary.  
Otherwise, pursuit of these business interests could also undermine USAID ’s development 
achievements  to date, especially if they involve  cutting or crowdin g out MSMEs.  In line with USAID’s 
PSE Policy, support for  the agriculture and food processing sector could include helping to improve the 
BEE, increase access to private capital, provide technical assistance, and provide access to information and analysis.  
USAID/Egypt’s 2020 PSE Action Plan suggested  replicating partnerships with supermarket retailers, such 
as that with Carrefour.  The plan also addressed further development of Upper Egypt’s  cold chain as a 
priority , which is related to improving access to consistent quantity and quality of horticulture 
production.  The new USAID ERAS activity has also successfully developed potentially replicable 
partnerships, including with PepsiCo to improve access to potatoes for its su bsidiary, Chipsy.  
The overarching business interest for all these partnerships is formalizing agricultural supply chains in 
Egypt.  In addition to improving productivity, processing, and distribution networks, meeting 
international standards for food safe ty is importan t.  The current COVID- 19 crisis presents considerable 
challenges to many of these initiatives, given disruptions in production and the lack of ability to conduct face-to-face meetings, as explained previously .  The crisis also presents an opp ortunity to accelerate key 
initiatives, such as digitizing  agriculture supply chains and fast-tracking policy reform.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
● Support l arge local suppliers and vertically integrated agribusiness operations to 
help expand the use of outgrower and othe r MSME support networks, such as 
including MSMEs for value addition and other services within and along their supply 
chains.  Given the persistent challenge of sourcing quality raw materials from MSMEs in Egypt’s 
agricultural sector, many companies have expanded their productive capacity through large, 
vertically integrated farming operations.  USAID could expand support for outgrower and other 
MSME support networks anchored to larger operations.  Doing so w ould expand the private 
sector –driven MSME support networks that have limited capacity to market their own 
production.  The traditional donor approach to support ing these networks is through 
subsidizing technical assistance, access to finance , and development and expansion of 
management platforms (with a focus on digitization).  Though effective in the short term, this 
subsidized support often falls off with the subsidy.  Instead, USAID could find partners that have 
already invested and/or are willing to first invest their own resources and assist them in 
developing a plan to refine the use of their resources to improve and expand support networks, 
including opportunities for MSMEs to engage in mor e value -added activities.  Once developed, 28 
 USAID could offer a pay -for-results contract to accelerate  implementation of support plans.  A 
good example of a comprehensive support network is establish ing an agribusiness hub as a 
centrally located facility to  help provide certified inputs and access to aggregation, storage, 
processing, distribution, extension,  and marketing services.  
● Increase access to capital for all sizes of organizations to pursue short -, medium -, 
and longer -term  investment opportunities, including alternative sources of capital 
(e.g., impact investors).  Uncertainty in the current operating environment will hinder access 
to finance in Egypt, especially for MSMEs.  Building on prior success in working with lead firms 
to support MSMEs operati ng within and along their supply chains, USAID could partner with 
impact investors to increase lines of credit to MSMEs backed by buyer contracts with lead firms.  
● Expand the pool and stability of a skilled labor force in the agriculture and food 
processin g sector by supporting  in-house workforce development programs and 
partnerships with TVET providers.  For example, USAID could help the Center of 
Excellence for Agriculture and/or similar higher education institutions in Egypt increase dialogue with lead f irms in the sector around skills and research needs and innovative approaches to 
agricultural development.  In addition to dialogue, USAID could aid lead firms by co -funding 
specific research initiatives and internship opportunities for students.  
● Support the private sector in digitiz ing supply chains, distribution, and sales 
networks and provide technical assistance to the GoE to improve support programs (e.g., agricultural  extension services) and the reliability and accuracy of its local 
producer database.  Digitizing  supply chains is especially important in the agriculture and food 
processing sector, given the potential to improve efficiencies in engaging and supporting MS MEs 
that work within and along their supply chains.  Digitization is also important for improving 
traceability and complying with local and international food safety and quality standards.  Heightened food safety sensitivities due to the COVID -19 crisis make this an ideal time to 
accelerate these initiatives. USAID could include a digitization focus, giving lead firms an opportunity to co- invest in solutions alongside the MSMEs they work with.  A more immediate 
challenge is to establish laboratories for fas ter testing.  One BMO  expressed interest in working 
with larger firms to invest in labs, transport, and logistics and post -harvest handling.  
● Improve the Government ’s monitoring and regulatory capacity to ensure that local 
production abides by domestic and international food safety and health standards 
and digitize processes and procedures to increase transparency and decrease 
complexity.  Digitizing agricultural supply chains must happen concurrently with digitizing  
related GoE processes and procedures.  Th is will make it easier and more efficient for 
companies to report compliance information and for the GoE to streamline support programs 
for MSMEs.  
● Invest in analysis, support the development of services, and provide on -demand 
technical assistance related t o improving access to market information and 
identifying and taking advantage of market opportunities (local, regional, and 
global). USAID could contribute analysis and support in developing services related to working 
with MSMEs to help its partners in the agricultural  and food processing sector.  Companies 
mostly lack the capacity to concentrate on these activities, and/or their staff focus too much on 
quarterly success metrics to look beyond a one-year time horizon.  USAID could develop an on-
demand technical support program that could provide services co -funded by interested firms to 
engage experts for this purpose, including from local education institutions.   29 
 3.2 BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVICES  
OVERVIEW  
Despite being one of Africa’s more es tablished management consulting markets, Egypt’s management 
consulting industry remains relatively underdeveloped, with significant untapped potential  (Consultancy -
me.com, 2018) .  The consultancy market in Egypt is mostly fragmented, and most local firms a re small to 
medium sized (with an average of 15–20 employees per firm).  Although new entrants  have increased , 
few local firms can compete with global or regional consulting firms over substantive government 
contracts or projects for multinational firms an d larger, more established local companies.  
Despite the well- documented  need for business consulting services by MSMEs across different industries 
in the private sector , several obstacles prevent the local consulting industry from satisfy ing this need and  
fulfilling its potential.  These obstacles include MSME reluctance to invest in a service that does not 
produce tangible results and the lack of awareness of the benefits of these business development 
services to family businesses.  
Nevertheless, the deman d for business advisory services has recently risen considerably among MSMEs 
in Egypt, mainly as new generations take  over family businesses and recognize  the need to upgrade and 
restructure to remain competitive and grow in a challenging environment.  The nascent entrepreneurial 
market is another potential source of new business opportunities, as more  startups seek consultancy 
services to develop their busi ness strategies/models and assess their potential markets.  
Recognizing its importance in developing Egypt’s MSME sector, the public sector and 
development/donor organizations have launched several initiatives  to increase MSMEs ’ access to 
business developm ent services by private consultants  (Stratexis, 2019). These initiatives include a funding 
program by the International Modernization Centre (IMC), to which MSMEs could apply to subsidize the 
cost of consulting or business advisory services.  The European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD) has an MSME advisory and subsidized funding program that supports MSMEs by 
connecting them with local consultants for business or industry expertise on many issues, depending on 
the client ’s needs and sector  (EBRD, n.d.).  EBRD partners with donors to share consulting service  costs  
with the MSME client.  Examples of projects implemented under the program include introducing new 
product lines, expanding to new markets, qualifying for new certifications, cutting clients’ energy usage 
and energy costs, or revamping their human resources strategy  (EBRD, n.d.).  USAID has also supported 
the sector by providing technical assistance , capacity building, I CT equipment, and furniture to various 
organizations to establish business development service ( BDS) centers and incubators to provide 
consulting and mentoring services to MSMEs and startups.  
COVID- 19 will significantly affect the consulting industry worldwide in 2020.  Initial forecasts estimate 
the consulting market gl obally to contract by 19 percent and in the Middle East by 18 percent . This will 
reduce the size of the market , which was about $3.6 billion in 2019 by $600 million  (Source Global 
Research, 2020) .  The exposure of individual firms and their ability to adap t will vary based on the 
services they provide, their size, and  the industries they serve.  Larger consulting firms are likely to 
perform better than medium - and small -sized ones, as they have more diversified portfolios, including 
longer -term projects, which clients (public sector and large corporations) are more reluctant to cancel. 
They also have more resources to invest in technology and deliver their serv ices more efficiently . 
In the short run, private sector companies, particularly MSMEs, are expected to prioritize retaining staff, 
develop plans to reconfigure their business es in the short term, and ensure long-run business continuity. 
Accordingly, COVID- 19 restructuring projects are likely to replace demand for mainstream business 
consulting focused on change -related work and operational improvement  (Source Global Research, 30 
 2020) .  Indeed, this has been the case in Egypt, where struggling MSMEs and family  businesses have 
approached lo cal consulting firms to support their restructuring efforts.  International consulting firms 
and larger local providers will continue to work on existing long -term projects and new digital 
transformation opportunities with pub lic and private sector clients for the foreseeable future.  Smaller 
local consulting firms, however , will need to develop innovative strategies to penetrate the MSME 
market, where the need for business development services is great  but the resources to pay  for them  
are limited.  
The team conducted KIIs with members of the business consulting sector,  includ ing a small boutique 
consulting firm focusing on MSMEs, family businesses, and startups and a private joint stock company 
that delivers financial and economic consultancy, technical assistance, training, engineering consulting, 
and project management services.  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
The business consulting services market is a nascent market with significant potential given the growing need for business advisory services in the private sector.  However, as 
established in the overview section, the sector is quite fragmented and has yet to mature.  Less than a handful of the existing business consulting firms can compete with international or regional firms for 
large government contracts or projects with multinational corporations.  Unlike their international counterparts, most Egyptian firms must build their expertise in different sectors, as they lack knowledge 
management systems or competency centers.  Another area local firms lag in is access to the latest data 
analytics tools, which global firms are integrating into their services.  Finally, the larger cost base of 
international firms allows them to offer more competitive pricing.  
Lack of awareness of the benefits of business advisory services among MSMEs and family 
businesses in general is another constraint local consulting firms face in Egypt. This is 
particularly the case when the first generation controls  the company and is wary of introducing changes 
to its business model and operational framework.  In many cases, they are also reluctant to invest in 
service that does not produce tangible or immediate results.  However, attitudes among MSME and 
family businesses in Egypt  have recently shifted toward accepting the need to evolve and adapt to the 
changing economic landscape.  This shift coincide s with the rise of second and third generations taking 
charge of businesses established in the 1970s and 1980s, raising  demand for cons ulting services to 
revamp outdated production lines and methods, upgrade management and operational systems, and meet international quality standards to access new markets.    
The pandemic has strongly affected the consulting sectors, mainly the smaller lo cal 
consulting firms that have seen more than a fair share of their projects being placed on hold or potentially cancelled.   These smaller firms also face a daunting challenge developing new 
business opportunities, as much  of their client base is currently  prioritizing cost -cutting measures and 
developing contingency plans to ensure business continuity.  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
One of the main intervention  areas for local consulting firms is engaging with new 
generations taking control of family businesses .  COVID- 19 has significantly affected the MSME 
sector in Egypt, threatening the survival of many businesses due to productivity  disruptions , cash flow 
and liquidity challenges, and inability to retain staff. Accordingly, in the beginning of  the pandemic, 
demand for consulting services decreased and when MSMEs did approach consulting firms, it was for 
crisis- related restructuring purposes rather than for the cons ulting firms’ usual services, e.g., operational 
improvements and strategy.  One firm,  for instance, has worked closely with several MSMEs on cost 31 
 restructuring (to address liquidity and cash flow problems) , retention models (to maintain workforce), 
and oth er areas like developing contingency plans to ensure business continuity in light of disruptions to 
domestic and export business.   
Demand for digitalization  is also rising  in the MSME sector.   MSMEs were beginning to realize 
the need to  digitaliz e to increase productivity through e- commerce, optimiz e production lines, and 
upgrade  management systems before COVID -19 struck.  However, the pandemic has made digitalization 
critical .  
Consulting firms also expressed strong interest in expanding into the microfinance sector , 
where potential for growth  is significant  and demand for consulting services is high  for both 
microfinance institutions,  or MFIs ( e.g., advising them on developing innovative products for MSMEs) , 
and for recipients to develop their bu siness acumen (e.g.,  support in developing business plans and 
feasibility studies).  Consulting firms also see increasing interest in business advisory services from 
startups in the tech sector, particularly the fintech sector, which is attracting investme nt and receiving 
regulatory support from the Government.   
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
An integral component of USAID ’s Mission to accelerate inclusive economic growth in Egypt is 
promoting MSME  growth and competitiveness by improving their  access to high -quality public and 
private services. COVID- 19 and its significant detrimental impact on MSMEs across various sectors 
strengthen the need to allocate financial and technical support from public and private sources. Over the 
past several year s, USAID/Egypt’ s SEED activity has sought to establish partnerships with  non-
governmental organizations (NGOs ), private firms, and public institutions to help MSMEs  build capacity. 
Through these partnerships, USAID/Egypt  has increase d MSMEs ’ access to business development 
services, finance, information, and other forms of technical and financial support. Significant potential 
exists for engaging private local consulting firms as partners in USAID ’s efforts to develop and 
strengthen the MSME s ector in Egypt.  One form of potential collaboration is through partnering with 
private consulting firms to provide technical advisory services and management consultancy services to 
MSMEs in selected sectors.  Through such partnerships, USAID can capitali ze on the business acumen 
and/or industry expertise of specialized consulting firms to increase MSMEs’ resilience and 
competitiveness.  Another potential form of collaboration is to match local consulting firms with 
relevant public authorities to advise th em on the legal and regulatory reforms required to improve the 
business -enabling environment for MSMEs.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
● Cost -sharing of business consulting services for MSMEs with financial restraints.  
USAID could adopt a pay-for-results mechanism, under wh ich it would co -invest in technical 
advisory services by local consulting firms for MSMEs and pay an incentive fee for achiev ing the 
project’s predetermined targets.2  The benefits of this mechanism are twofold : it would help 
address MSMEs’ skepticism of the value of consulting services and it would spur improvement 
among business consulting service providers.  
● Help for  local consulting firms to gain exposure to international best practices in 
the management consulting field (specifically in areas such as d ata analytics and knowledge 
management systems) through funding and facilitating networking opportunities for these firms 
 
2 Examples include financial facilitation (payment would be received upon obtaining finan cing), market linkages 
(measured in sales contracts), tangible productivity enhancements, and completion of certifications. 32 
 to engage with their global counterparts through international forums and roadshows.  USAID 
could also pair local consulting firms wit h international consultants to provide technical advisory 
services in areas where local expertise is lacking . 
● Training and development for local consultancy firms to develop their capacity in 
areas such as monitoring and evaluation (M&E), technical assista nce delivery, and 
management systems.   Furthermore, demand exists for developing the expertise of 
consulting firms in other, less donor -centric areas, such as market intelligence, digital marketing, 
productivity enhancements, preparation for certifications , e-commerce platforms, and 
optimization.  
3.3 EDUCATION (INCLUDING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND 
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT)  
OVERVIEW  
The Egyptian Government’s education strategy in Vision 2030 centers on the premise that the 
educational system has yet to deliver the quality required to address the country’s labor market needs 
and respond to evolving social and economic conditions  (PwC, 2019c ).  Under this vision, the Ministry of 
Education and Technical Education (MoETE) developed the Education 2.0 reform , which aims to 
modernize the education system through incremental, targeted , and systemic changes to bring learning 
back to the classroom, move away from rote learning, and equip students with 21st -Century skills.  A 
key feature of the EDU 2.0 reform agenda is heavy reliance on ICT by shifting to technology -based 
learning through digital platforms for learning, teaching, performance evaluation, assessment, and data collection. Mo ETE has also developed a strategy, Technical Education 2.0, to transform its technical 
education system to produce high -quality graduates with the technical and soft skills required by the 
market.  
Over the years, USAID has built a strong partnership with the Egyptian Government through initiatives 
targeting innovative teacher training, curriculum development, and policy reform to improve Egyptian youth’s access  to quality basic and higher education.  During the COVID -19 crisis, USAID supported  the 
MoETE and the Ministry of Higher Education (MoHE) in their response to educational disruptions ( e.g., 
supporting some university faculties’ pivot to e -learning and delivering home education and hygiene kits 
to remote, underserved communities). USAID launched a new activity in June 2020, Te ach for 
Tomorrow, to provide technical assistance to the M oETE’s teacher professional development initiatives 
under the Education 2.0 reform  (Enterprise, 2020 b). 
The private sector constitutes only 10 percent of total enrolment in Egypt’s K –12 education system and 
6 percent of the higher education system  (CAPMAS, 2018) .  Private education school fees are “beyond 
the reach of all but the wealthiest families ,” while the unaffordability or geographic inaccessibility of 
private school options  limits  most Egyptian households  (Krafft et al., 2017) . To better understand the 
interests of the various players in the private education sector, the challenges they fac e, and the 
opportunities for USAID to engage with the sector either by expanding its existing  programs or by 
venturing into new areas of collaboration, the LEAP III team conducted KIIs with five companies in the 
sector. The five companies range in size and represent institutions that contribute to different 
dimensions of the private education market.  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  33 
 The main challenges facing the private education sector pre -COVID were the lack of coordination with 
regulatory authorities, lack of access to finance, and shortage of high -quality teaching and admin istrative 
staff (all discussed as follows). Whereas integrating educational technology (EdTech) solutions and 
adopting e -learning platforms was an objective for education providers in both public and private 
domains before the pandemic, COVID -19 has accelerated these plans, leading to a discrepancy in the 
adaptability of players based on their size and resources. 
Bureaucracy has emerged as one of the most critical challenges in the private education 
sector.  P roviders struggle to receive approval for any activity ( e.g., establishing new schools and 
faculties, issuing new licenses, and approving new budgets) at any step of the process due to t he 
plethora of laws and regulations governing the industry and the lack of transparency . Bureaucracy also 
creates significant barri ers to entry for new providers and impedes expansion plans for K –12 schools 
and universities.  Despite private education providers’ efforts  to engage in dialogue with the authorities 
over necessary reforms, existing channels of communication are not effective in coordinating between 
private sector providers and regulatory authorities.3  
Two other persistent challenges facing private education providers are access to finance 
and the supply of highly trained teachers and administrative staff.  Barring a few exceptions, 
most private education providers have historically  self-financed their o perations and expansion plans  
because commercial banks are reluctant to lend to education providers,  leading  to prohibitively high  
interest rates charged by the local banks for potential loans. In a few cases, private equity (PE) funds and 
development fina ncial institutions have invested (debt/equity) in private schools/universities.  However, 
most schools are family owned and  are thus generally reluctant to dilute their ownership or control.  
Regarding the shortage of qualified teachers and administrators,  some education providers have 
attempted to address this challenge by providing in- house training programs, while others have offer ed 
higher remuneration packages to compete for top talent.  These responses, however, are neither 
feasible options for provid ers with limited budgets and resources nor sustainable solutions for the 
sector as a whole.  
Finally, the pandemic has accelerated digital transformation plans for schools and 
universities, forcing them to shift to e -learning systems abruptly.  Schools and universities have 
a great  need for support in terms of affordable ICT solutions and training programs for teachers and 
students, particularly less established institutions and those based in frontier regions.  
 
PRIVATE SECTOR INTEREST   
The KIIs revealed three key areas of interest : penetrating the education market in frontier regions 
where demand for private education  is growing, accelerating digital transformation plans in the aftermath 
of COVID- 19, and investing  in TVET institutions to br idge the labor market  skills gap.  
 
3 The bodies/channels include associations for private schools’ owners and the Supreme Council for Private 
Universities.  34 
 In recent years, the number of private sector providers in the K –12 and higher education 
institutions has grown in more frontier regions.4  One large educational provider , which has 
penetrated the private education marke t in Upper Egypt and the Delta, indicates that the demand for 
private education has increased in many less developed and frontier governorates because fewer middle -
class families in these regions are moving to the major urban cities, as was the trend histo rically. 
However, a growth in supply  has not matched increased demand , as private sector presence in the 
sector remains  concentrated in Greater Cairo and Alexandria.  Hence, the potential for growth in 
private K –12 and higher education providers outside of  the major cities is significant .5   
The COVID crisis and its implications have accelerated plans of K –12 schools and 
universities to integrate EdTech solutions and adopt e -learning platforms as part of their 
curricul a.  This situation has led to significant growth in demand from public and private education 
institutions for technology -based learning solutions6 provided by multinational and local I CT companies 
to develop or upgrade the necessary framework for remote learning and ensure accessibili ty and 
inclusion for all their students and teachers.  However, the level of preparedness has varied among 
education providers in the private sector, with smaller players and those based in frontier areas 
struggling more than their more established counter parts in more developed regions. Accordingly, less 
established private education providers need  support in the form of grants and capacity building to 
transition to more blended learning models.  
Over the past few years, Egypt ’s entrepreneurship ecosystem has developed in several dimensions, 
including access to finance, through growth in venture capital funds investing in technology startups ; 
Government support via the establishment of an agency to support MSMEs and entrepreneurship, the 
Micro, Small  and Medium Enterprise Development Agency (MSMEDA) ; the issuance of decrees to 
facilitate investments and address licensing issues ; and institutions (including universities) providing 
entrepreneurship support programs, e.g.,  startup incubators and accelerators. O ne priority to improve 
the ecosystem is increasing access to entrepreneurship education by integrating entrepreneurial content into curricul a in schools and higher education institutions  (Ismail et al., 2017) .  KIIs revealed a strong 
interest among higher education institutions, in particular, to establish new or expand existing entrepreneurship support programs and introduce new faculties/specializations focusing on entrepreneurship skills.   
Egypt's labor market dynamics imply  a significant need to expand  and improve the quality of TVET 
provided under the Ministries of Education and Trade and Industry.  At current growth rates, an 
estimated 295,000 additional places in secondary TVET will be needed by 2022  (PwC, 2019) .  Despite 
the growing need for qualifi ed technicians and labor, the private sector operates only 11 percent of the 
existing 2,472 vocational schools  (MoETE, 2020).  The only industry in which the private sector is the 
lead provider of vocational training is the tourism sector  (PwC, 2019; MoETE , 2020) .  Private sector 
institutes in the industrial and commercial specializations account for only 0.4 percent and 11.6 percent 
 
4 Examples in the K –12 sector include the expansion of private sector schools into Upper Egypt and the Delta, and 
in the higher education sector private universities have opened in Upper Egypt.  
5  In an interview, one large educational company’s Chief Executive Officer added that while private sector presence 
in the education sector in the Greater Cairo and Alexandria governorates ranges between 12 –20 percent, it only 
accounts for 3 –5 percent of the education sector in most other governorates. Another s tatistic provided by the 
Egyptian Center for Economic Studies reveals that the ratio of public to private schools in rural areas is 25:1 
compared with a 2:1 ratio in urban areas. See ECES (2020a).  
6 These include collaboration platforms, cloud services and  developing interactive curriculums.  35 
 of the technical and vocational institutes serving these fields. There are no private TVET providers for 
agricultural trainin g (PwC, 2019c ; MoETE, 2020) .  To address the shortage of qualified labor across 
sectors and the mismatch between the academic education current job market candidates  receive  and 
the skills needed by the market, private sector players have launched initiati ves to develop the 
workforce in their respective industries by developing in -house training programs to serve both their 
own needs and those of the sector or engaging with/sponsoring higher education institutions 
(technical/vocational institutions or public universities) to develop market -relevant curricula and 
coursework and provide internship opportunities to students.  
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
KIIs revealed several areas of  aligned interest between USAID and the private sector.  Industry players 
are interested in engaging USAID in designing  market -relevant curricula, coursework, and internships for 
students in institutions of higher education.  Education players may also seek  support from USAID for 
facilitating dialogue between private sector providers and regulatory authorities by collaborating with 
existing initiatives, e.g., the AmCham Education Committee.   
On the digital transformation front, I CT corporate sponsors are interested in engaging  with USAID on 
education sector reform projects , which aligns with USAID sector priorities, given its existing track 
record in supporting digitalization initiatives. In the Early Grade Learning activity, a government -to-
government activity supporting the Ministry of Education's reform agenda, the Mission is developing 
both traditional and digital teaching materials. USAID supports the Government of Egypt's science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics ( STEM ) high school model of education, and in the 2006 
School LINK GDA wit h Microsoft and Vodafone, USAID provided new schools with ICT centers that 
introduced computer -based learning.  In the 2007 Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes (TILO) 
project, USAID worked with Microsoft, Intel, and Oracle to provide training, hardwa re and software, 
and licensing to improve the use of technology in schools across nine governorates.  Under the U nited 
States –Egypt Science and Technology Joint Fund, USAID links and engages scientists whose work 
addresses development challenges, such as i nnovations in lab -to-market technologies for agriculture that 
may be suitable for commercialization.  
The COVID- 19 pandemic has elevated the importance of distance education and blended learning in 
Egypt and accelerated the Ministry's plans for technology e ducation. Recently the M oETE released its 
plan for in -service teacher continuous professional development, which aims to deliver all teacher 
training through an online platform. USAID's new Teach for Tomorrow activity is well  positioned to 
support the Mini stry in these efforts, making USAID the leading donor in the online teacher training 
space. 
Finally, KIIs with private companies across the various sectors this study  covers also identified firms and 
development organizations with experience and interest i n supporting education development projects 
through CSR initiatives (in case of corporations) or their programs (development partners), some of 
which have expressed interest in collaborat ing with USAID on expanding these initiatives and leveraging 
USAID ex perience and strong presence in this field.  
OPPORTUNITIES  36 
 ● To address the bureaucratic challenges, USAID can use its convening power to bring together 
Ministries of Education and the private sector in stakeholder consultations and policy dialogue. It 
can al so support establishing a framework for private -public policy dialogue or strengthening the 
entities/bodies that can play the facilitator role.  Existing private associations and forums for 
dialogue between private providers and regulatory authorities have  so far been ineffective.  Still, 
some leading private sector players have taken new initiatives, e.g., CIRA and the American 
University in Cairo (AUC), which are co -leading a private education committee under AmCham 
that USAID can support.   
● USAID project s to support developing entrepreneurship centers in private universities through 
the SEED activity were considered a significant success ( e.g., the case of Heliopolis University) 
and could be replicated in other private universities (particularly the smaller ones or those 
based in frontier regions, e.g.,  Deraya University), as demand for entrepreneurship studies is 
growing in the higher education market.7  
● KIIs captured several initiatives by industry players to sponsor higher educational institutions 
(TVETs and universities),  providing access to market- relevant curricul a, modern teaching 
resources and methods, and internship opportunities in thei r firms.  These initiatives are all 
opportunities for USAID to expand its WISE activity by developing new partnerships to address a critical need in developing the labor market in Egypt.  Examples include 1) the El -Araby Group 
for electrical appliances, wh ich established El- Araby Technical School, the first applied 
technology school in Egypt, in collaboration with the MoETE in 2018; 2) GB Auto, which has 
sponsored three vocational institutes to serve the automotive industry in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry; 3) Bishara Textile and Garment Manufacturing Company (BTM), 
which developed an industrial technical institute, the “Amal Bishara High School,” which 
provides a dual education model (theoretical and practical training). The school t rains 75 
students a year, 50 percent of whom are usually employed by BTM and the rest can work in other companies in the textile sector; 4) the Cairo Poultry Company (CPC), which has 
sponsored a department in a public university specializing in the poultry  sector; and finally 5) 
Apache Energy, which has expressed strong interest in proceeding with discussions with USAID 
on developing a TVET institute to serve the oil and gas sector in Egypt.  
● ICT companies are interested in engaging in educational reform pro jects like  those it 
collaborated with USAID on in the past, e.g.,  TILO and Girls’ Improved Learning Outcomes 
(GILO).  However, interview feedback on the effectiveness of the previous engagements 
highlighted the need for a more structured partnership with U SAID in future projects.  This 
entails discussing potential projects at the project design phase, and not on an ad hoc basis, as 
was the case in the past.  One ICT company indicated that  discussions at the project design 
stage would allow it to capitalize on its market and sector knowledge to advise on the kind of 
technology to  prioritize  and the scope/size of projects required for a more substantial impact on 
the sector.  On a separate note, though not explicitly mentioned in the interview, scope  exists 
for collaborating with Microsoft on expanding the outreach of its current programs supporting K–12 schools and universities in their digital transformation process.  
 
7 In the interview, Heliopolis University also expressed interest in a second round of the SEED project to focus on 
the startups that graduate from the incubators through technical assistance and grants to ensure they become 
commercially viable and can have the desired social impact.  37 
 ● KIIs with companies across industries and development partners expressed significant interest in 
engaging  with USAID on educational development projects. Examples of corporations that 
expressed interest in collaborat ing through CSR initiatives include Apac he Energy, which 
mentioned partnering with USAID/ Egypt on its community schools project for girls in 
underprivileged regions; Dell EMC, which is interested in engaging with USAID and its local 
partner NGOs to expand the outreach of its education programs s upporting public schools and 
universities in areas including digitalization/EdTech and entrepreneurship; and Noble Energy, which mentioned resum ing discussions over collaborating with USAID on its initiative to fund 
scholarships for youth in Sinai to atten d El-Areesh University after talks were halted due to 
COVID.  
● Examples of interest from development partners include 1) Sawiris Foundation for Social 
Development, which suggested  proceeding with discussions held with USAID /Egypt over 
potential collaboratio n in the education sector.  The Sawiris Foundation currently partners with 
the USAID Scholars Activity to provide six scholarships for higher education students with 
disabilities.  Other areas with potential for cooperation include enhancing education incl usion 
for students with disabilities, capacity building support for students before the higher education 
stage, and providing technological support for public schools by providing equipment and 
teacher training on I CT skills . 2) The MoHE  recently approache d the African Development Bank 
(AfDB) to provide technical assistance for establish ing three new technological universities. 
USAID already has plans to establish university centers for c areer development at these three 
universities. Given USAID’s experienc e in developing c enters of e xcellence in public universities, 
the AfDB believes scope exists for integrating similar centers in new technological universities 
planned. According to the AfDB, scope  also exists for establishing links between the STEM 
schools sponsored by USAID and the technological universities.  
3.4 FINANCIAL SERVICES  
OVERVIEW  
Financial services touch all aspects of economic and social activity.  Accordingly, financial services’  
availability, d iversity, and accessibility have a significant bearing on growth and development.  Egypt’s 
financial services sector is considered one of the oldest and most developed in the Middle East and 
Africa.  The banking sector, in particular, has exhibited strong resilience in the face of multiple crises, 
including the 2008 global financial crisis, political unrest in 2011, the 2016 currency devaluation, and 
most recently, during the COVID -19 pandemic.  The cost of this resiliency, however, is a highly 
underbanked population and low credit penetration.  Nearly 50 percent of bank lending goes to the 
GoE. The country is home to 39 banks, with more than 2,800 branches across Egypt  (AFI, 2018) , yet 
only 32 percent of the eligible population have a bank account and only 10 percent of women have 
access to financial services  (World Bank Group, 2018) .  Financial service providers  have largely directed 
formal financing to large corporations, with only 12 percent of firms receiving formal access to finance  
(PwC, 2019a ).  Despite representing 40 percent of the economy, more than 85 percent of MSMEs rely 
on informal sources of financing, and 40 percent of transactions are in cash.  
The GoE’s Sustainable Development Strategy (SDS), Egypt’s Vision 2030, highlighted financial inclus ion as 
a critical national priority.  Access to financial services formalizes economic activity,  leading to increased 
tax revenues, decreased unemployment, reduced poverty, lower levels of corruption , and improved 38 
 economic growth rates.  Recognizing that w idespread access to financial services drives economic 
growth, the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) emphasizes financial inclusion as a strategic objective, together 
with its responsibility to ensure banking sector  stability.  The CBE  has strongly demonstrated  its 
commitment with policies using a wide range of financial inclusion tools , including  mobile wallets, 
merchant mobile payment QR codes, increased allocation of bank lending to MSMEs, cardless ATMs, 
international money transfers, v illage savings and loan associations (VSLAs), support  for the Fintech 
ecosystem, and digital transformation of traditional sectors, such as fast -moving consumer goods.  These 
tools, however, remain in  nascent stages of utilization by the banking and non -banking financial services 
sectors.  
Within the banking sect or, Egypt has 16 banks offering digital and mobile services.  Non-banking financial 
institutions (NBFIs)  comprise 3,900 Egypt National Post Office branches, 873 licensed MFIs, and 848 
NGOs.  In addition, as of the end of 2017, Egypt had 140 brokerage compa nies, 37 insurance companies, 
226 leasing companies, and 13 mortgage companies.  Each of these groups has a larger role to fulfill in 
addressing an underserved market in alignment with the 2030 Vision.  
The growth of the financial services sector, and parti cularly in NBFIs, indicates  the sheer size of the 
underserved market and the wide spectrum of potential opportunities.   Publicly listed entities in the 
sector exhibited resilient growth.  Some have even soared despite the pandemic, such as the electronic 
payments network Fawry, which recently crossed the $1 billion market cap mark.  Indeed, KIIs 
conducted with NBFIs confirmed that although new entrants regularly enter  the sector, their market 
share continues to grow, as the entire market is growing.  The ne eds outstrip the availability of financial 
products, leaving ample room for innovation to improve accessibility and affordability.  
Microfinance is one of the fastest growing verticals in NBFIs ; one company reported growing its loan 
portfolio from $31 mill ion to $190 million in  the last five years.  However, the growth of microfinance 
indicates  the underutilization and promising potential of ancillary tools, such as microinsurance, mobile 
payments, and personal saving and investment platforms.  Similarly, M SME leasing and factoring entities 
have successfully packaged and priced risk, yet the roadmap for additional services such as trade finance 
and working capital facilities for MSMEs remains  attractive with respect to market demand and 
economic impact on th e value chain.   
The KIIs conducted in the sector included 1a leading microfinance institution with more than 230 
branches in Egypt ; a non-banking financial services arm of EFG- Hermes covering mortgages, leasing, 
factoring, microfinance,  and fintech; a mic rofinance institution with more than 20 percent market share 
in Egypt ; and an angel investing platform that invests in and provides technical support to seed -stage 
startups.  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
The absence of a suitably qualified workforce. All KIIs revealed that talent was by and large the 
biggest challenge.  Although the banking industry is known to recruit, train, and promote talent from 
within, NBFIs struggle with attracting C -suite executives, recruiting and retaining middle management, 
and enhan cing employee work ethic.  The growing demand for tech talent that can lead and execute on 
digital transformation, which is unarguably the sector’s future , amplifies the challenge . 
A lack of regulatory transparency.  In interviews, regulatory risk was the m ost cited concern 
relative to  increased investment in the sector.  Although the banking sector is highly regulated with 39 
 respect to the risk it poses to economic stability, NBFIs largely operate with vague regulations —they 
are regulated via the Financial Regulatory Authority instead of the Central Bank.  Because they often  
launch new or innovative financial products , this vague regulation could be a problem.  A common 
approach of leading market players is to seek forgiv eness after the fact rather than wait for the 
regulator’s blessing.  Accelerating technological innovation further amplifies t he vagueness of regulation , 
allowing  emerging markets to leapfrog and bypass the historic underdevelopment of the financial sector .  
Regulators are challenged to keep up with the pace of innovation  and protect the soundness of the 
financial system.  
Poor financial literacy.  Money and education level s are the key to accessing financial services.  
Without money, no need for a bank acc ount exists, and without awareness of banking services, no 
demand  for such services exists.  Although NBFIs, and particularly the microfinance institutions 
interviewed, have branched out significantly throughout the country, their marketing efforts are lim ited 
to advertising and word of mouth.  The sector faces a greater challenge in reaching and educating the 
end consumer on the benefit s of their services.  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
The KIIs repeatedly revealed that the private sector’s primary objective i n financial services is to grow 
the market and capture greater market share.  Given the size of the unbanked population and the 
limited range of products, resulting in restricted access to finance, players are exploring strategies for four primary drivers:   
Financial services providers are interested  in capitalizing on Egypt’s high mobile phone and 
Internet penetration to reach customers seamlessly and efficiently at significantly reduced 
costs.  The CBE largely supports this transformation to increas e availability, quality, and access to 
financial services.  Opportunities for financial institutions to engage with Fintechs for back -end services 
also exist . 
Growing competition in the market is driving the need for differentiation and innovation.   
Conversation s with Palladium revealed  that banks see the need for new products but have no idea how 
to create them.  They are used to collateral -based underwriting and struggle with different approaches.  
Companies acknowledge that the market is wide  open to new entrants and thus focus on defining and 
strengthening their core customer base.  New product development aim s to attract and retain 
customers with services that address their unique needs.  
Cross -country integration: Remittances and expanding services regionally  remain a 
challenge, yet present an attractive opportunity for scale, trade, and cross -border 
transfers.  
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
The entrepreneurship ecosystem has enormous potential for solving market gaps in addressing financial 
services and offers the promise of addressing  youth employment issues .  Access to finance is cited as the 
biggest hurdle for startups.  Although accelerators, angel investors, and venture capitalists have emerged, their investment efforts are largely fragmented and disconnected from the banking sector.  USAID efforts to give rise to existing startup incubators (such as Flat6 Labs) and support 
entrepreneurship through SEED are widely recognized.  However, USAID cannot invest for direct 
equity positions, limiting the scope of tools to be deployed with respect to access to finance.  USAID  40 
 could, however,  explore equity investment options through the D evelopment  Finance Corporation 
(DFC) .  In addition, USAID could expand support to venture capitalists and accelerators to identify and 
vet investment opportunities and mitigate investment risk, including access to additional capital and risk 
mitigation support from the DFC. This expanded access to capital would be an important milestone in 
granting Egyptian startups access to international capital markets and global investment networks . 
Furthermore, an opportunity exists to connect investment entities with USAID part ners in respective 
sectors to encourage  specialized investment entities (such as health care funds, agriculture funds, and 
the like), which will develop deeper learning, lower risk, and improved investment outcomes.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
1. Foster dialogue between regulatory entities ( the CBE and the Financial Regulatory 
Authority or FRA) and the private sector to streamline responsive regulatory 
frameworks that align with advancement and innovation in providing financial services.  USAID 
has the unique oppo rtunity to act as an educated listener to the private sector’s ambitions and 
provide a constructive environment for frequent dialogue between the private sector and  the 
regulator for timely education, transparency, and advocacy.  
2. Boost compliance with CBE m andates for reasonable financing for MSMEs. 
Commercial banks are aware of CBE mandates for low interest rate loans to MSMEs, but they 
lack a strategy for complying with them.  Loan officers need training to serve MSMEs and 
guidance on how to cost effectively evaluate risk among MSMEs.   USAID could partner with 
banks to boost compliance with the CBE mandates and facilitate financing for MSMEs  at 
reasonable interest rates.  This could also work with business development service providers to 
help MSMEs obtain financing on a success -fee basis. This also helps the financial institutions by 
providing a pipeline of finance -ready MSMEs. 
3. Support improved digital access and data analytics . Financial service providers are now 
acutely aware of the power of data in shaping the sector ’s future .  Although leading NBFIs have 
started investing in a data analytics infrastructure that enables them to provide imp roved and 
differentiated products that better address their unique customers’  needs, the field is 
underdeveloped in Egypt.  A need exists to train talent and attract data scientists and enhance 
the use of data in strategic decision -making and product devel opment.  
4. Broaden the range of NBFI services. Competition is fierce in services that have proven 
successful, such as leasing, microfinance, and electronic payments. However, the full spectrum of 
needed services remains  unaddressed and underpenetrated. USAID  has an opportunity  to work 
with existing financial service providers in identifying new opportunities based on market needs 
and international best practice, structuring products, and de -risking them for the private sector’s 
investment. De -risking can take the form of guarantees or establishing a customer base.  
5. Build f inancial a wareness: Financial literacy is a core obstacle to access to finance services. 
Without knowledge of available financial services, the unbanked cannot seek access to appropriate produ cts that address their unique needs.  USAID programs geared toward 
educating households on how to manage resources, save, and invest  and the benefits and 
implications of borrowing are vital ly important  to mitigate the risk of exploitation and a vicious 
cycle of financial dependence.  D igital lending and mobile payments compound the need for 
improved financial awareness .  Although technology removes the obstacles of geographically 41 
 reaching consumers with tailored products that address their needs, technologi cal illiteracy and 
resistance to changing habits hinder the enabling effect of this financial transformation , which 
could lift populations out of poverty.  Similarly, MSME education on managing resources and 
working capital to internally assess their lendi ng capacity, manage risk, and identify the 
appropriate products enables healthier provision of financial services.  MSMEs’ digital 
transformation in their value chain s unlocks opportunities for improved access to financial 
services.  USAID has an opportuni ty to partner with NBFIs on different levels of financial 
education and a focus on digital financial products.  
3.5 HEALTH CARE  
OVERVIEW  
Egypt’s health care system is complex, with many  public entities managing, financing, and providing health 
care.  The Government is the primary provider of basic health care (primary, preventative, and curative) 
accounting for 80 percent of bed capacity with 5,000 health facilities, 80,000 beds, and mor e than 50 
percent of the health workforce.  It is also the largest institutional provider of inpatient health care, with 
1,048 inpatient facilities accounting for an additional 80,000 beds.  Government -owned facilities are 
usually the only choice available to low -income groups, who make up most  of the population.  However, 
huge demand and challenges including escalating costs, financial shortages, inefficient use of available 
resources, and ineffective management  hamper these facilities.  This has led to a lack of public 
confidence, with people increasingly turning to the private sector where they pay higher fees for the perception of better services.  
The country has one of the largest health care markets  in MENA and has become highly regarded, thus 
becoming a hub for regional medical tourism particularly in cosmetic procedures, renal dialysis, and 
chemotherapy.  The private sector currently plays an important role in delivering health care services along the value chain including hospitals, clinics, general practitioners, specialists, dentists, psychiatrists, 
laboratories, pharmacists, pharmaceutical manufacturing and distribution, and the like.  Competition in the private sector is intensifying as the sector grows.  The private sector has 2,024 inpatient fac ilities 
with 22,647 beds, which make up 16 percent of Egypt’s total bed capacity. The World Health 
Organization reports  61,855 pharmacies in the country, 97 percent of which are run by the private 
sector  (USAID, 2016) .  Some of the reasons for growing priv ate services are better equipment, rapid 
population growth, and relatively low levels of funding for the public facilities.  
Egypt has a population of more than 100 million, yet private spending continues to dominate its health 
care expenditure, accounting for  62 percent of the market, while insurance is less than 1  percent. At an 
average of $157 per capita, health spending in Egypt is mid -range compared with other low -middle -
income Arab countries.  Like other emerging economies, demand for health care servi ces accelerates  
along with economic growth, a rising middle class, demographic and lifestyle factors (urbanization, aging, 
smoking, diet, and the like), increased awareness, and the increased range of treatments.  
Physicians represent the most powerful pro fessional group in the health sector.  Doctors can work in 
the public and private sector simultaneously. Although the Ministry of Health and Population employs 53 percent of the doctor workforce, the Health Insurance Organization another 11 percent, and th e 
universities 14 percent, most physicians have multiple jobs.  The elite are well -established and qualified 42 
 senior physicians, many of whom are faculty members in the major medical schools or shareholders in 
modern private hospitals and polyclinics.  One factor that may inhibit growth of the health care sector is 
the shortage of qualified skilled staff, including doctors, needed to serve the market.  The number of doctors per thousand people in Egypt is 0.8 per thousand population, compared with Jordan (3. 4), Saudi 
Arabia (2.6), and Tunisia (1.3).  Supply is much higher in Cairo, however, where health care professionals 
are most concentrated. 
In response to these shortages, Egypt has seen a wave of new health care startups trying to disrupt the 
industry and  offer lower -cost services in innovative ways to the Egyptian people.  Already embracing 
digital change, the COVID -19 pandemic has also given the industry a timely boost and the outlook for 
the healthtech sector is positive (International Finance, 2020) .  
For this PSLA, the assessment team spoke with three health  care companies: a pharmaceutical company 
dedicated to providing high-quality, low -cost contraceptives and training of service providers ; a chain of 
primary care clinics across Egypt targeting affor dable health  care for middle class families, and a company 
that manages and administers customized corporate health  care plans.  Various other Egypt -based 
startups, such as Chefaa, Vezeeta, and D -Kimia, are also among the leading health  care tech startups 
seeking to revolutionize the industry that may be of interest to USAID. 
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
Regulatory constraints:  As in other sectors, the most cited challenge for the private sector was an 
unclear regulatory environment, particularly as it pertain s to licensing and the regulator’s long -term 
strategy.  The private sector sees a strong value in collaborating with regulatory bodies in developing 
and understanding the strategic vision for health  care in Egypt.  This is particularly pertinent as the 
sector moves toward digital  offerings . 
The talent challenge: The already short supply of physicians and the challenge of retaining other 
skilled medical labor are critically curtailing the health care sector ’s ability  to provide quality care. 
Despite the supp ly of medical school graduates, employment opportunities in the Gulf area and the 
West have hampered talent retainment in the country.  The talent shortage extends to managerial, 
nursing , and supplementary infrastructure staff.  Fresh graduates of medical schools struggle to penetrat e 
the sector because of  the high cost of establishing a private sector clinic.  Meanwhile, established 
professionals controls opportunities with private providers, resulting in an uneven playing field. Career 
growth in the public sector is also slow.  Thus, talented physicians who lack access prefer to pursue 
opportunities abroad.  
Training and education of medical staff:  Advancem ents in the medical field are not widely shared 
and applied in Egypt’s health care sector.  Although Egypt has an opportunity to leapfrog and, in certain 
specializations, is more advanced than other countries in the region, research centers and resources 
cluster in urban centers.  Continued learning and education opportunities are not frequently accessible, 
leading to the continued practice of outdated procedures.  
Lagging technological advancement: First, as with innovations in other sectors, COVID -19 
accelerated the adoption of telehealth.  Whereas the regulatory framework for teleconsultations 
remains  vague, consumer and physician acceptance of technological solutions aimed at increasing access 
and efficiency has been growing.  Wider adoption will need inc reased awareness and marketing efforts 43 
 to educate the populations most in need of such services, such as people living in remote villages.  
Second, the public sector is inadequately equipped with the infrastructure to improve communication 
with the global medical community.  The sector struggles to encourage  and enabl e exposure to best 
practices and training on advanced procedures and equipment.  Finally, a  critical need exists for building 
the infrastructure for electronic medical records, integrating with  other providers in a fragmented 
sector, and digitizing processes for improved access and affordability.  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
Training for medical and managerial staff: Private providers great ly need advisors and 
partnerships with medical educational institutions for continued learning and training for physicians and 
managerial and medical staff.  
Capacity building for integrating technology solutions:   The sector recognizes the merits of 
technology and its inevitable adoption throughout the patient jou rney.  However, the shortage of high - 
caliber staff with technology and health  care expertise remains an obstacle for building scalable solutions.  
Geographic expansion within Egypt and regional collaborations in MENA:  Private sector 
providers that have grown significantly in Cairo and/or Alexandria are looking to expand in to other 
regions, such as the Delta and Upper Egypt, where demand for their services  is great .  However, 
establish ing communication channels with the medical community in other governorate s and penetrat ing 
their markets  are difficult .  Egyptian providers also see an opportunity to leverage their expertise and 
expand into MENA, but struggle to find partners  with which to enter new markets.  
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
USAID/Egypt has deep experience working in the health sector and with the private sector in particular. 
In line with the GoE’s commitment to population growth, USAID’s Health Team has focused on two 
primary areas to support: 1) family planning and reproduc tive health ( FP/RH) and 2) water and sanitation 
services.  Moving forward, its programmatic focus will be on improving the quality and access of FP/RH services for Egyptians of reproductive age. The Global Health team has a long record of working with 
the private sector.  The Family Planning through the Private Sector activity is a strong example of 
successful PSE that  created  a shared value and opportunity with businesses to improve the quality of 
worker well -being training and information. Through this tr aining, peer counselors introduce FP/RH 
messaging.  
Under the Strengthening Egypt's Family Planning P rogram (SEFPP) activity, for example, the private 
sector and the Ministry of Health and Population's family planning sector  have established links.  SEFPP 
uses Memorandum of Understanding (M OUs) undersigned by the medical and pharmaceutical syndicates 
to develop PPPs between the Ministry of Health and private sector practitioners in the family planning 
sector. These partnerships aim to introduce more sustain able solutions to challenges in the family 
planning sector by increasing demand for family planning services and enhancing the quality of services to improve contraceptive use and reduce fertility over time. One of the main priorities under this program 
is training professionals to  provide family planning services according to standards and recommended 
best practices. The objective behind this service is to achieve important results such as 1) ensuring that 
private sector practitioners (physicians and pharm acists) that provide  family planning services are well 44 
 trained on the latest contraceptive methods; 2) strengthening the relationship among the Ministry of 
Health and Population, syndicates,  and private sector providers; and (iii) providing private sector 
providers with continuous medical education. 
One company,  DKT, most closely align s with these goals.  DKT has launched several awareness 
campaigns to provide sexual health education and promote family planning.  These campaigns include 1) 
a campaign to raise awareness in  the male population o f the importance of using condoms through its 
condom brand’s website and Facebook page; and 2) an extensive program to spread awareness about 
emergency pills (EC) through a campaign called “Be Sure, Be Confident,” which promotes the message 
through a bilingual website for its EC product (contra plan II) in tandem with a social media campaign 
that informs women about the availability of this option.  In addition to these campaigns, DKT creates 
youth- friendly radio, television, and social media advertisements to reach young people who might 
otherwise not have access to sexual health information.  DKT , however, has held several meetings with 
USAID in the past, but meaningful collaboration did not materialize.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
● Partner with Egyptian health care providers, particularly healthtech, with a specific 
interest in FP/RH issues: As noted in the USA ID PSE Visioning Sessions in December 2020 
and confirmed by the PSLA team, an opportunity exists to partner with private sector health  
care firms to provide much needed training and capacity building in exchange for greater 
support for FP/RH.  Given the co nstraints of conducting a multi -sector PSLA, the team could 
only identify one company that was  explicit ly interest ed in FP/RH interventions. Others were 
open to capacity building and training support from USAID, which could include a n FP/RH 
element, but FP /RH was not raised as a priority. A range of healthtech providers are also 
emerging that are unfamiliar with partnering with development partners.  To assess private 
sector interest, USAID should conduct a phone survey of the top 100 health  care firms to 1 ) 
identify interested firms, 2) understand motivation for partnership, and 3) document possible partnership types.  
3.6 LEGAL SERVICES  
OVERVIEW  
Traditional family -run firms dominate Egypt’s legal sector. However, the industry has  recently  been 
showing signs of maturity, as an increasing number of international players are entering the market in partnership with local firms. In the past few years, new market entrants have averaged two to three firms annually, and the influx of global firms has raised the level of competition in the sector in terms of 
pricing and quality of services (Enterprise, 2019). Since 2011, law firms in Egypt have had to serve their 
private sector clients in an ever- changing political and legislative landscape and a ch allenging economic 
environment. Moreover, volatile markets and flows of both foreign direct investment and domestic 
investments over the past decade ha ve forced law firms to become more agile and readjust their 
interests and priorities based on the booming  sectors in each phase  (LEAP III, 2020, KII).  In 2015, for 
example, a boom in the renewable energy sector led firms to engage with clients/projects in the industry actively.  Shortly after, law firms ’ interest shifted to the education sector, which receiv ed a significant 
increase in investments from international and domestic private education providers.  The latest trend 
has seen law firms focusing on penetrating the tech sector to work with startups and venture capital ists 
(VCs),  particularly in the fint ech sector, where demand for legal services  is rising . 45 
 Other  challenges that emerged from the KIIs included finding and recruiting highly qualified lawyers from 
the domestic market.  The most critical challenge has been dealing with public authorities.  Inefficiency 
of domestic courts; lack of transparency over the enforcement of awards; continu al changes in 
regulations; and red tape with respect to permits, licenses, and other administrative procedures all pose 
significant obstacles for law firms in delive ring their services to private sector players and doing business 
in general.    
Before the pandemic, law firms in Egypt were already grappling with the issues  of keeping  pace with the 
digitalization drive in the private and public realms and ensur ing they can provide more agile and efficient 
services to their domestic and regional clients.  Some firms had already announced plans to invest 
heavily in artificial intelligence (AI) to be on the “cutting edge of the legal industry” by improving their 
technological capabilities and virtual delivery of services  (The Legal 500, 2020d ). The COVID- 19 
pandemic magnified this challenge , forcing  law firms to accelerate their digitalization plans as they seek 
ICT solutions that would enable them to access and process high ly classified documents, interact with 
clients, and submit documents to courts and governmental bodies  remotely and securely . Few firms 
were fully digitalized before the pandemic, leaving even Tier 1 firms struggling to adapt in the aftermath  
(LEAP III, 2020, KII) .  Hence, demand for legal technology solutions featuring AI capabilities  has 
increased  as Egyptian law firms look to adopt new business models and restructure their existing 
operations in the post- COVID era  (The Legal 500, 2020b ).   
The legal sector expects to play a significant role in supporting private companies to adjust to the impacts of the pandemic on their operations and on the economy as a whole.  As illustrated across the 
various sectors covered in  this study, private companies face significant financial challenges due to 
COVID- 19-related disruptions , and law firms expect a rise in bankruptcy and liquidation cases  (The 
Legal 500, 2020 a).  The legal sector also expects more labor and employment disputes triggered by 
measures companies have taken to cope with their financial struggles in the upcoming year  (The Legal 
500, 2020c ).  Furthermore, law firms expect to be engaged in restructuring efforts for companies in 
sectors that were significantly affect ed by the pandemic (e.g., oil and gas, aviation) and to continue 
expanding their operations on the transactional side by focusing on industries that proved to be highly resilient in the face of the pandemic, e.g., information technology, telecommunications , health, and 
education  (The Legal 500, 2020c) .  
The two KIIs conducted in this sector included a prominent and market -leading full services firm  and a 
medium- sized law firm with extensive experience in working on legal reform projects with donor 
organizat ions.  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
On the dispute resolution side, the main challenges revolve around the legal system’s efficiency in 
handling cases and enforcing awards.  
Litigation procedures are quite cumbersome and lengthy.  The procedural timetable usu ally 
depends on several elements, includ ing the nature of the case, the number of parties, the court’s case 
backlog, the parties’ requests, and the procedural circumstance.  The lack of transparency over the steps 
required and the ample room for procrastin ation (by requesting delays) by all parties lead to an 
inefficient and prolonged litigation process.  
Execution of court judgments is a rather complicated process and increasingly time -
consuming due to the legal procedures that need to be fulfilled.  Proce dural challenges to 
enforcement are a common cause of delays and a prolonged process.  Furthermore, one of the main 
challenges facing claimants seeking to enforce awards in investment disputes is the absence of a credit -46 
 checking service to determine  whether the potential defendants have assets/property and how the court 
can find these assets in case they need to seize them for compensation purposes.  This challenge 
restricts local courts ’ ability to enforce awards  (LEAP III, 2020 , KII). 
The use of experts i n legal proceedings is another area in which local courts are 
particularly deficient.  Experts used in trials must be licensed by the Ministry of Justice, and the 
majority are employees of the state.  Moreover, expert opinions are delivered in written repo rts, and if 
there is a long backlog, it can take months for the court to receive one, further prolonging the procedures.  Most important, in many cases, the quality of expert opinions is questionable, as the 
training received by the Ministry and its level of expertise does not equip them to deal with complex 
cases and those of a certain magnitude (quantum).  This is an area in which the expertise of the private 
legal sector is greatly needed (LEAP III, 2020, KII) .  
Continual rule  changes at short notice, without public announc ement, and the absence of a 
unified approach across different circuits means  that law firms need to do a lot of legwork 
to know  what  regulations apply  in each court before filing .  For larger, more establishe d firms, 
dedicat ing resources around the country is feasible to ensure any transactions or filings abide by the 
latest legal and regulatory requirements.  However, for smaller firms that cannot afford these resources, this uncertainty represents a signific ant challenge.   
Despite making some progress in improving the business environment through new 
regulations ( e.g., simplified industrial licensing and the enactment of bankruptcy law), the 
investment climate still needs  substantive reform to address heavy,  complex, and opaque  
regulatory frameworks.  According to the KIIs, red tape and bureaucracy challenges concerning 
approvals, licensing, and permits increase the costs of doing business (affecting a firm’s profitability) and 
pose a challenge when dealing w ith client expectations and offering competitive rates.  An example is  the 
lack of transparency and the time-consuming process of  dealing with state institutions like public notary 
offices and commercial registry offices (where register ing a real  estate pr operty can take six months ).  
With respect to new projects, the lack of coordination among the various entities that companies need to receive approvals from, e.g.,  the General Authority for Investment ( GAFI ), the Industrial 
Development Authority (IDA), the Egyptian Authority for Environmental Affairs, and the like also results 
in a non -transparent, time -consuming, and costly process for law firms and private sector companies.  
Law firms also struggle to find qualified lawyers in the Egyptian market, due to the lack of 
high- quality legal education and insufficient professional training for lawyers.  The law college 
is a lower- ranking college and hence has lower admission requirem ents for admission . It often attracting 
students who failed to enroll in their first -choice colleges that require higher grades, e.g., engineering, 
medicine, and economics.  The lack of quality control extends to the syndicate and to the Egyptian bar 
association, which have minimal admission requirements  (LEAP III, 2020, KII) .  Becoming a lawyer in 
Egypt requires only a bachelor’s degree in law and registration fees at the bar association , which is unlike 
more competitive environments in other countries .  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
Domestic and regional expansion:  Law firms continually explor e opportunities to expand their 
outreach to cities with a high demand for legal services and a low representation of law firms, e.g., the 
Delta region, Sinai, and Upper E gypt.  Egyptian law firms are also increasingly expanding into the MENA 
region, where a significant need  exists for legal services (particularly in North Africa).  
Tech sector  penetration:  The KIIs indicate  a strong interest among law firms in penetrat ing the tech 
sector and work ing with startups and VCs (particularly in the growing Fintech sector where demand for 47 
 legal and consulting services is rising ).  However, when dealing with startups, limited financial resources 
is a constraint, particularly for entrepreneurs at an early stage.  To address this challenge, law firms  are 
developing a services package that ensures that the needs of startups at an early phase are met at a 
competitive price, without  overcommitting the firm’s resources.  
Legal s ector reform projects: KIIs also indicate that private sector firms are keen to collaborate and 
engage with the Government and international development institutions on legal sector reform projects 
to address previously discussed challenges.  One  law firm is currently in discussions with the contractor 
that was awarded the Egyptian Economic Court Automation Activity ( EECAA). It believes digitizing  
economic courts will help reduce the inefficiency of the litigatio n process.  Another has also actively 
engaged with a wide range of donor institutions advising on legal reform projects , including  USAID 
projects on privatization and judicial reform projects.   
Digitalization and AI solutions to adapt to the post -COVID -19 era: The leading private legal 
firms in Egypt are actively pursuing the adoption of legal- tech solutions (featuring AI capabilities) to keep 
pace with developments in the industry worldwide, tackle the growing competition, and reduce the turnaround time o f legal cases.  This interest intensified significantly during the pandemic.  The abrupt 
shift to remote working arrangements left many firms in the sector struggling to adapt , and hence 
demand for digitalization of legal practices such as document managem ent, e -billing, contract 
management, practice and case management, and more, has increased . 
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
Reforming the domestic legal system is a major priority for private law firms in Egypt, as doing so would  
help unlock th e significant potential for growth in the private legal service market.  Accordingly, business 
interests are directly aligned with USAID/Egypt's efforts to build the public judiciary system ’s capacity .  
This includes projects like the EECAA, which aims to improve the efficiency of economic courts and 
enhance the quality of services provided through automation and training on best practices in the international legal field.  However, as discussed in fur ther detail in the following opportunities section, 
the benefits of capacity building and technical assistance projects in the public legal sector will only be 
fully realized when the inefficient and outdated regulatory frameworks currently in place are re formed.  
This is an area with significant potential for USAID engagement with both private and public 
stakeholders in the sector.  
The KIIs also revealed a strong interest from the private sector in engaging  and partnering  with donor 
organizations on broad er reforms to the business enabling environment by increasing the accountability, 
efficiency, and transparency of relevant public institutions —all of which are key priorities under USAID's 
democracy and governance program in Egypt.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
● Taking a l eading role in  developing public- private dialogue (PPD) between private 
sector law firms and public authorities about  the required reforms in the legal 
system.  Absent existing channels or bodies that provide an effective outlet for advocating for 
and regularly discussing the reforms needed, law firms have resorted to participating in 
workshops organized by public institutions for consultations over legislative and regulatory 
reforms and/or lobbying through business associations.  For example, one law firm has actively 
engaged in workshops conducted by bodies like GAFI on how to improve the BEE in Egypt and 
by other regulatory bodies ( e.g., the FRA) when they hold consultations over new legislation.  
Another has resorted to lobbying through associations like  the AmCham and the Junior 
Business Association to advocate for legislative and regulatory reforms.  48 
 ● Supporting practical l earning opportunities for law students. USAID could contribute 
to providing legal students with practical training opportunities and employment services  with 
grants to expand the outreach of programs like the moot court competitions and summer 
training programs organized by private law firms.  For example, one law firm  sponsors moot 
courts that allow  university students to gain practical skills they do not receive in their academic 
experience (e.g.,  writing memos, pleading,  etc.).  Winners of the competition (two or three 
students) are offered e mployment opportunities at this law firm  or are sponsored to study or 
gain work experience in the United States, Hong Kong, and Austria. It also organizes and 
delivers a summer training program that university students across Egypt can apply for.8  
Studen ts enrolled are given the opportunity to work on real cases and are considered as 
potential recruits.   
● Reforming the legal system. A dire need exists for more initiatives from donor 
organizations, like USAID, that focus on developing the legal sector thro ugh capacity 
development, training/technical assistance to courts and public offices ( e.g., notary offices and 
commercial registry), and digitization initiatives.  However, a major prerequisite for these efforts 
to produce the desired results is the introduction of systematic and structural reforms to the 
legal framework in Egypt.  According to the KIIs conducted, addressing the structural 
deficiencies of the domestic legal system, which include outdated and inefficient regulations, 
requires introducing thr ee layers of reforms: 1) d eveloping the capacity of regulatory authorities 
to introduce reforms ; 2) developing new business- enabling laws to ensure transparency and 
more efficient processes ; and 3) streamlining and unifying regulations at the local adminis trative 
levels to ensure consistency across the different circuits, municipalities and the like  (LEAP III, 
2020, KII) . 
3.7 MANUFACTURING  
OVERVIEW  
The manufacturing industry is a key driver of Egypt’s economic growth and development plans. It 
contributes significantly to the country’s GDP (16.2 percent in 2018/2019).  Manufactured goods made 
up 57 percent of Egypt’s total exports in 2018, and the industry’s share of employment reached 12.4 percent in the third quarter of 2019  (ECES, 2020b ).  The G overnment has outlined plans to develop the 
industry and increase its competitiveness in both the SDS, Egypt ’s Vision 2030 , and the Industry and 
Trade Development Strategy (2016– 2020).  Both strategies have set ambitious targets to grow  the 
sector, incl uding increasing the contribution of manufacturing as a percentage of GDP to 18 percent  
(PwC, 2019b ).  
The industry, however, faces several significant obstacles to achieving the aforementioned goals.  One of 
the main challenges is the unfavorable business  environment for MSMEs in the manufacturing sector.  In 
particular, MSMEs lack access to finance, markets, and technologies and have weak links with domestic 
and global value chains.
9  Consequently, most manufacturers rely heavily on imports for their pro duction 
inputs.  The sector also suffers from workforce issues  due to a shortage of skilled labor and a high 
 
8 It has some protocols in place with public universities.  
9 MSMEs are an integral component of Egypt’s manufacturing landscape as the industry accounts for 51 percent of 
all MSMEs in the c ountry.  See PwC (2019b) and Ministry of Trade and Industry, Industry and Trade Development 
Strategy (2016 –2020).  49 
 turnover rate of low- skilled labor.  Other persistent challenges include regulatory impediments that 
represent barriers to entry and constrain manu facturers ’ ability to expand domestically and into export 
markets.  
COVID- 19 has affected t he manufacturing sector more than most other sectors due to the external and 
internal shocks caused by the crisis.  Externally , the COVID -19 outbreak disrupted global  supply chains, 
directly  affecting the availability of production inputs for manufacturing  (ECES, 2020b ).  The pandemic hit 
Egypt’s main trading partners (including the European Union, the United States, Italy, Spain, China, 
Turkey, Saudi Arabia , and the United Arab Emirates) hard; they experienced severe disruptions in their 
industrial and manufacturing activity, which had negative impacts on two -way trade (AmCham, 2020) .  
On the export side, forecasts indicate that Egypt’s export proceeds may de cline by 25 percent 
throughout 2020  (AmCham, 2020 a).  Similarly, Egypt’s import levels have been strongly affected, as 
overseas suppliers ( e.g., China) focus on domestic markets.  Considering that Egypt’s manufacturing 
industry relies heavily on imported p rimary and intermediate production inputs, which together 
constituted almost 44 percent of total Egyptian imports in 2019  (ECES, 2020b ), the shortage of  inputs 
has significantly reduced factories’ production capacity.  Internally, manufacturing companies h ave 
suffered from liquidity problems due to production and consumption disruptions  on the one hand and 
financial obligations to their employees and the Government on the other (ECES, 2020b ).   
The LEAP III team conducted KIIs with four representatives from  a wide range of manufacturing sectors , 
ranging from large exporters to feeding companies.10  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
The challenges that emerged from the KIIs were consistent with those outlined in the literature cited 
previously . The companies interviewed echoed the need to enhance MSMEs ’ competitiveness , improve 
workforce quality and firms’ ability to retain low -skilled labor, address regulatory constraints, and 
manage the disruptions caused by COVID.  Additional challenges that emerged included unfair 
competition from the informal sector and the need for further  state support to facilitate investments in 
the industry and develop the firms’ export capacity.  
A critical challenge various manufacturing sectors  face is the underdeveloped natu re of the 
input  supplier industries, which forces manufacturers to import most of their parts and 
components.  MSMEs lack access to finance, markets, and technology, making it difficult for them to 
compete with imports.  Furthermore, the existing legislati on and regulations governing the sector 
impose relatively low local content requirements on domestic manufacturers.11  As a result, importing  
the inputs is cheaper than invest ing in local MSMEs to produce them.  The industry’s dependence on 
imports of prim ary and intermediate inputs means that production is highly vulnerable to external 
factors.  
The sector faces a shortage of high- quality and trained workers and a high turnover rate 
(particularly among blue -collar labor, which finds the informal sector mor e attractive).  
The industry has implemented several  initiatives to either develop in -house training programs or 
sponsor TVET institutions , which were mentioned in the education section. To deal with labor turnover 
 
10 MSMEs specializing in manufacturing and supplying components/production inputs.  
11 In an interview, one company referred to Law No. 21 of 195 8 on organizing and encouraging industry in Egypt, 
which applies to all industrial facilities, as an example of legislation that needs to be amended to facilitate the 
integration of MSMEs into the domestic value chain.  50 
 issues, companies have resorted to outsou rcing most of their blue -collar labor or increasing shift hours 
to reduce the quantity of labor needed.12   
Private sector players in the manufacturing sectors  experience BEE challenges that  are a 
significant obstacle to growth of the industry as a whole.  The lack of long- term visibility on 
economic policies (fiscal and monetary) and regulations create uncertainty and affect  the long- term plans 
of players in the sector.13  Red tape compounds t hese constraints, further restrict ing the growth 
potential of smaller players in the sector and act ing as a barrier to entry for new players (this is 
discussed further in the following cross- cutting theme section).  The unregulated nature of the informal 
markets negatively affects the profitability of manufacturers in several sectors, as it leads to unfair 
competition with informal sector players that are neither taxed nor comply with in dustry/health and 
safety standards.  Two companies interviewed  are examples of companies that have been negatively 
affected by the lack of monitoring and regulation of the informal sector .14  
Furthermore, inadequate financial (subsidies and incentives) and  logistical support from 
the Government  affects the competitiveness of local manufacturers in the domestic 
markets, as well as their capacity to export to the global market.   The Federation of Egyptian 
Industries and AmCham have served as platforms for dia logue with the Government (effective 
communication channels); however, the authorities require significant capacity building support to tackle 
the necessary reforms.   
The COVID- 19 outbreak has exacerbated the described challenges and has significantly disrupted 
business operations on both the domestic and external market fronts (see the subsequent cross- cutting 
section).  
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
A main objective of the larger manufacturing companies is to become vertically integrated 
companies, to reduce  their reliance on imports for high -quality and reliable production 
inputs and expand their distribution network and after -sales services.   By strengthening their 
forward and backward linkages, they aim to increase their market share and competitiveness in both 
domestic and global markets.  
However, as noted in the KIIs, this strategy is not a substitute for strengthening MSMEs in the manufacturing industry to facilitate their integration into domestic and global value chains. C ertain 
companies have advocate d for legislative and policy reforms in discussions  with regulatory authorities 
(including the Prime Minister and relevant ministries).  Suggested  reforms include introducing incentives 
for MSMEs operating in high -tech industries and increasing the minimum  requirement for local 
components that domestic manufacturers  must use  to encourage them to reduce their imports and 
invest in the feeding industries.  
 
12 These two companies adopted  initiat ives to deal with high low -skilled labor turnover rates.  
13 For example, according to one company, the recently proposed value -added tax amendments included an 
unanticipated and significant increase in the taxes imposed on the food processing sector, which will have to be 
passed on to the consumer.  
14 According to one company, the Government does regulate and monitor the auto parts sector well.  Traders that 
import products that are either counterfeit or do not comply with Government quality and safety standa rds easily 
penetrate the market.  In its interview, this company also noted that food processing companies face unfair 
competition with informal sector players that are neither taxed nor comply with industry standards (quality and 
hygiene) and hence can offer products at much lower prices.  
 51 
 To address chronic challenges regarding workforce quality in the manufacturing industry, 
several companies have expanded their in -house training programs to satisfy their needs 
for high- quality labor and serve their respective sectors.   One company included in this 
assessment  is an example of a company that has invested heavily in developing its workf orce. It has 
established a standalone in -house program to train skilled labor on the latest technological methods and 
on compliance with local and international quality standards.  Its training center is a role model for 
industry- led training across Egypt’ s manufacturing sector.  There is another example of a company that 
has developed a full- fledged training institution to provide technical and business skills training to its 
employees.  Its Academy also serves companies across the automotive sector and co llaborates with 
universities.  
Furthermore, both companies have engaged with the MoETE and/or the Ministry of Trade and Industry 
to develop new technical schools or sponsor existing ones to support the Government in revamp ing its 
TVET system.  Other manufa cturing sector initiatives that were not covered in the KIIs include the 
ElSewedy Group (the leading integrated cables and electrical products manufacturer in the Middle East), which is also sponsoring technical academies that  provide  three- year secondary -level programs under 
the auspices of the MoETE and serv e several sectors by training students in  energy components, 
industrial electronics, mechanics maintenance and repair, logistics, steel, plastic, and ICT  (ElSewedy 
Technical Academy, n.d).   
To compete with imports and penetrate new markets, manufacturing companies 
continu ally seek to invest in research and development (R&D) to upgrade their production 
lines and methods.  Interest in undergoing management -level digital transformation to improve the 
efficiency and agility of business operations and boost profitability is also growing.  However, small - to 
medium- sized companies need technical and financial support from the Government or development 
partners to enable them to upgrade their production methods/lines and digitalize their management systems.  For example , one company  expressed the need for technical assistance through consultants to 
enable it to upgrade its outdat ed facilities and production methods.  Smaller players also cited the need 
for financial and technical support to update their management systems, existing facilities, and production methods to enable them to penetrate new markets.  
In dealing with the COVI D-19 crisis, most manufacturing companies have prioritized 
business continuity by developing contingency plans and focusing on retaining most of their staff.   With respect to adopting digital solutions, larger companies generally revealed an increased 
reliance on their e -commerce platforms to conduct business transactions. However, smaller companies 
that rely more on physical transactions had to experiment with new  and innovative digital solutions to 
work  around their inability to reach suppliers and clients through traditional , mainly in -person,  channels.  
For example, to address the drop in wholesale orders  from traders, one company  resorted to 
developing a mobile application.  After realizing that most of its client base cannot navigate its website, it 
decided to create a more user -friendly mobile phone application to enable them to place their orders.  
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
Several manufacturing -related private sector interests that emerged in the KIIs align with USAID's 
current activ ities under the Trade and Investment Program and should be considered for the 52 
 prospective TRADE project (pending award).15  Indeed, USAID efforts related to trade, enterprise, and 
workforce development to improve the BEE and enhance businesses ’ competitive ness are needed to 
develop and enhance  Egypt’s manufacturing sectors.  Furthermore, the prioritization of MSME growth 
and development by USAID under this program is a welcomed approach, in light of the challenges they 
face in the manufacturing industry (as discussed previously ).  Areas of mutual interest between the 
private sector and USAID include 
● Workforce development: USAID activities (in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry) that support private sector players across various manufacturing sectors by enhancing  
their labor productivity through in- house training and improv ing human resource strategies that 
reduce staff turnover  are in great demand .  The need for technical assistance on workforce -
related issues is particularly high in the home textile and garment manufacturing sectors.  Private 
manufacturing companies are increasingly interested in  engaging  with the MoETE to revamp 
technical and vocational schools and supply the labor market with graduates equipped with the 
required skills.  Moreover, in light of Government  plans to establish 100 technical schools in 
partnership with private businesses by 2030  (Enterprise, 2020 a), substantial scope exists for 
extending USAID's efforts t o connect leading private sector players with the MoETE to address 
the shortage  of highly skilled labor with market -relevant skills.  Interviewees found USAID 
engagements with manufacturers to train and retain their workforce s and upgrade production 
methods and lines through WISE projects to be successful and expressed demand for such 
projects.  However, in some cases, feedback indicated that the projects  need to last longer or 
take place over several phases so that staff can be trained to deliver these pro grams internally 
for new recruits and sustain the impact of these programs  (LEAP III, 2020, KII) .  
● Enterprise development: As established previously , promoting  the growth and 
competitiveness of MSMEs by improving their access to finance, markets, technolog y, and 
business development services  is urgently needed .  USAID’s efforts to encourage formaliz ing 
private enterprises and to link these enterprises with established firms to facilitate their 
integration into domestic value chains  can address informal sector– related challenges . USAID’s 
collaboration  with the Federation of Egyptian Industries  (FEI) to support its capacity to provide 
business development services to MSMEs was successful and has proven to be sustainable, 
considering that the center has continued to operate  long after USAID grant funds dried up.  
The FEI welcomes further support from USAID for  its efforts to advocate for the previously 
discussed regulatory reforms that would unlock opportunities for growth in the manufacturing 
sector.  Technical assistance in the form of capacity building is also needed at the level of the ministries and bodies undergoing the reforms.  
● Access to finance: Despite CBE initiatives to encourage and promote MSME funding by local 
banks and the commitments announced by development financial institutions, funding for MSMEs 
in the manufacturing industry remains insufficient.  The Egyptian -American Enterprise Fund 
(EAEF) is a potential source of investment capital and loans to MSMEs in this industry.  
OPPORTUNITIES  
 
15 The KIIs covered most of the manufacturing sectors USAID prioritized under the prospective TRADE project, 
which includes food processing, engineering, home textiles, ready -made garments, and building materials and 
chem icals 53 
 ● Developing local supply chains in the engineering sectors ( e.g., electrical supplies, 
house appliances, auto motive, machinery, and equipment)  represents a significant 
opportunity for co -investment.   USAID could collaborate with various stakeholders to 
enable MSMEs in the feeding industries to scale up and compete domestically (first and then 
regionally) by providing access to finance, modern technologies, business development services, 
technical training, and be st business practices.  Potential USAID  partners  in this area include 
business management organizations (BMOs), such as the Engineering Export Council (EECE), 
that are interested in developing local supplier capacity to produce components that lead firms 
need but are not currently available in the local market and creating multi -million -dollar markets 
for components in the process.  Products that could be developed locally (to substitute imports) include printed circuit boards (PCBs), casters and gaskets fo r refrigerators and freezers, gas 
valves, LED s, compressors, small motors for appliances, and the like.  
● USAID can also support the leading players across the various sectors with the 
capacity  and interest  to invest in developing local supply chains.   Several leading 
manufacturing firms in the engineering sectors, e.g., El-Araby Group, ElSewedy, and FRESH, have 
expressed interest in supporting the EECE  initiative  (discussed previously ).  These market-
leading firms have the resources to conduct testing and pr ovide the exact specifications on the 
components needed ( e.g., electromagnetic labs). 
● USAID could  engage with the Ministry of Trade and Industry to strengthen local 
supply chains by supporting the Ministry’s  plan to develop  industrial clusters for 
supplier  industries, which  is an integral component of its growth strategy for the 
manufacturing industry.   In the RMG sector, USAID has an opportunity  to enable local 
players to take advantage of the European fast fashion markets by supporting the development 
of local suppliers of components ( e.g., zippers) and services ( e.g., printing, dyeing, design, etc.; see 
Table 10 ).
  
● USAID could  also engage with the Ministry of Trade and Industry in exploring the 
potential of regional value chains (RVCs) , support ing them  in areas such as trade 
facilitation (developing logistics and transport infrastructure to promote regional trade)  and institutional reform (to remove trade barriers), and developing local 
players’  capacity and competitiveness in sectors wi th high export potential ( e.g., 
textiles and chemical products).  COVID- 19’s disruption of global value chains has further 
exposed Egypt’s dependency on international markets for production inputs and strengthened 
the case for promoting integration in to RVCs and enhancing intraregional trade. The benefits of 
developing and integrating into RVCs include creating economies of scale and mitigating the risk of high dependen ce on the global market.  
● To increase the competitiveness of the textile sector in Egypt, i nvestments in 
upgrading machinery and workforce development  are needed.
16 Currently, local 
players cannot take advantage of the national brand of Egyptian cotton due to the costs entailed 
and struggl e to import cotton due to the high duties imposed.  
 
16 RMG manufacturers have expressed their interest in collaborating with USAID to upgrade their outdated 
machinery and production methods.  Another area in which they would welcome USAID support is expanding and 
improving the quality of their technical institute, particularly in teacher training. 54 
 ● USAID could help i ncrease manufacturing companies’ productivity  by partnering 
with IC T companies for technical assistance to develop their capacity for digital 
transformation and financial support to subsidize the cost of these solutions.   
● USAID could p rovid e companies with access and exposure to international markets 
through busines s-to-business connections  (e.g., funding trade missions or sponsoring 
companies to attend international exhibitions).  
● The process of certification, including ISO -17025 certified labs, HACCP , and 
EurepGAP, is a challenge across several industries  that USAID could help  with. 
Certification is necessary to access expanding regional and global markets, especially European 
markets.  In Egypt, certification is often a reactive process  in response to regulation.  A more 
proactive approach could include technical a ssistance to MSMEs to identify and comply with the 
most relevant certifications.  
TABLE 10: LOCAL SUPPLIER DEVELOPMENT IN THE RMG SECTOR 
LEAP III PARTNER PALLADIUM  PROVIDED THE FOLLOWING ADDITIONAL OPPORTUNITIES , 
BASED ON KIIS IN 2018 
ITH is a small garment factory that targets  small chain retailers in  local and export markets.  As of 2018 , it 
employed around 200 workers and estimated that it could double this employment by tripling production. It has 
the factory space for this expansion but need s additional machinery and support in making market linkages. Such 
an expansion would allow the  factory to expand local sourcing. Though import ing fabric, zippers, and 
accessories is easier , ITH is  interest ed in supporting the development of local suppliers. Low quality is the main 
challenge with sourcing locally. Another challenge is limited access to semi -skilled labor for the factory.  
El Kotb  is a specialty textiles company specializing in medical and automotive textiles and sportswear. It target s 
local and export markets and employed more than  200 employees as of 2018  when operating at 100 percent  
capacity. The company  would like to invest in ad ditional land and machinery , which would allow it to double 
annual sales and employment. The company sees an opportunity to source yarn locally but would want a 
feasibility study done before considering supporting such an initiative. It could also benefit from market linkage 
support. The company’s  main challenges include a lack of support from the GoE and workforce development .  
Fadel Giza Spinning  is a vertically integrated RMG with six factories and established access to fast -growing 
markets in the Middle East and Africa. Its main challenges all relate to the BEE.  
HGM Fashions is a sportswear manufacturer that is certified to supply to Walmart and is looking to grow its 
U.S. market share. It sees an opportunity to transfer information and market requirements to local suppliers to 
meet its input requirements.  
 
3.8 TOURISM  
OVERV IEW 
Tourism is a critical sector for employment and economic growth in Egypt.  In 2019, it contributed 
between 9.3 and 15 percent of Egypt’s total GDP and accounted for 9.7 percent of employment  55 
 (WTTC, 2020). Tourism revenues rose by $2.7 billion to reach $12.6 billion in 2019 and were estimated 
to increase to 29.7 billion by 2024  (Egypt Today, 2019; Egypt Independent, 2020).  Prime Minister 
Mostafa Madbouly called it the “fastest growing economic sector in Egypt”  (Journal of the American 
Chamber of Commerc e in Egypt, 2019).   
The success of the tourism sector is due to several important GoE  efforts.  In 2018, the  Ministry of 
Tourism and Antiquities  (MoTA)  released the Egypt -Tourism Reform Program (E -TRP). This program 
committed the Government to legislative reforms in areas such as digital tourism, increased marketing 
and promotion, incentive programs for local operators, and increased adoption of international 
standards such as food safety and inspections, among others. Its goal is to have “at least one person in 
every Egyptian household working directly or indirectly in the tourism sector”  (American Chamber of 
Commerce in Egypt, 2018).   MoTA began working with the Unit ed Nations World Tourism 
Organization to upgrade hotel classification criteria. It is also working with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) on investment opportunities to enhance the North Coast and Al -Alamein region 
through a hotel development fun d (Hospitality News: Middle East, 2019) .  With MoTA ’s support, the 
International Sphinx Airport opened in 2019 and the Grand Egyptian Museum was scheduled to open in 2020, providing thousands of jobs and increasing travel to Giza.  
The COVID- 19 pandemic has been an enormous  setback for the tourism sector.  According to the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), COVID -19-related restrictions on international 
travel are likely to result in a 90 percent decline in the total tourism se ctor in 2020. International flights 
are limited, neighboring countries are on lockdown, visitors are hesitant to gather in large crowds, and companies must adhere to strict safety guidelines and limit their capacity.  Many companies are relying 
on domestic tourism and government subsidies to keep their operations running  (ANBA, 2020) .  
A mass tourism model dominates the  market for tourism in Egypt, catering to larger delegations of 
foreign tourists with competitive prices to stay in resorts and tour the tra ditional touristic sites.  
Accordingly, leading tour operators and tourism companies are less interested in attracting individual 
tourists for cultural or ecotourism opportunities and more interested in organizing flights and tours for large delegations, w hich represent more lucrative business opportunities.  The pandemic may provide 
opportunities to rethink typical hotel and historical tourism and empower local communities and sustainable travel  (ANBA, 2020) .
 
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
Access to finance is a main challenge for Egyptian tourism companies.  Tourism operators 
often rely on investments from friends and family circles, as banks are reluctant to finance alternative touristic projects due to perceived high risk.  This field of tourism is also not currently on the agenda of 
venture capital ists and a ngel investors.  
Bureaucratic constraints are a nother primary challenge for tourism companies. Receiving 
approvals for touristic projects in heritage sites, conservations, or in remote  areas is 
usually challenging on several different fronts.  Until recently, oversight and management of 
cultural assets fell within the jurisdiction of a standalone Ministry of Antiquities.  Depending on the 
nature of a given cultural asset, however, other  government bodies (such as the Ministries of Tourism, 
Culture, Housing, or Endowments or local governorates) are also key custodians.  Establishing  a 
combined Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities in December 2019  streamlined approvals, but challenges 
remain. Conflicting policies among the different bodies, with overlapping responsibilities, lead to the loss 
or destruction of unique cultural assets, especially urban cultural heritage, and deters private 
investments.  ECO Nubia, for example, has identified se veral conservation areas for potential projects 56 
 and has approached the Ministry of Environment, which currently has no regulations in place to approve 
such projects.  Despite previously indicating that it will adopt regulations to allow for eco -friendly an d 
responsible firms to operate in conservation sites, the timeline for such regulations is unclear .   In 
addition, ecotourism is not recognized as a separate category by the MoTA.  Hence, ecolodges are rated using the same criteria applied to commercial ho tels and resorts, which, in effect, means they receive  
lower ratings.  
One KII with a tourism  BMO —launched to supplement what those operating in the industry perceive as 
insufficient efforts by the G overnment to promote cultural tourism in Upper Egypt and i ntroduce more 
innovative methods to market and promote cultural tourism —echoed this lack of cooperation from the 
MoTA.  Officials claim that the Committee’s activities conflict with the Ministry’s work.  Positive talks 
have taken place with the new M iniste r of Tourism, however, and the plan is to integrate the 
Committee’s work into the Ministry’s work strategy to complement one another’s efforts in promoting 
cultural tourism in the region.  
A security -related issue is the current requirement by the Ministry of the Interior for tour 
operators to track and report the movements of foreign tourists for security purposes. This 
requirement further discourages these companies from promoting small -scale tourism activities, as 
tracking delegations and their movements on group tours is much easier than trac king individuals staying 
in ecolodges and participating in smaller, more customized tours.   
The sector also faces a shortage of supply for qualified labor.  According to a representative 
from the Holiday Inn at an Am Cham event, this is a n increasingly difficult  challenge  (The Journal of the 
American Chamber of Commerce, 2019) . This challenge was echoed by a tourism  BMO  in Upper Egypt .  
This BMO  provides training opportunities to upgrade the skills and quality of the workforce in the 
cultural tourism sector in Upper Egypt, but it is not enough.  Retaining staff is also a challenge facing 
tourism operators in remote areas, as growing families tend to return to major cities for better 
education opportunities for their children.  
The sector also faces challenges related to infrastructure and sustainable sources of electricity, water , and food in the more remote tourism destinations .  Red Sea Diving Safari is a 
leading ecotourism and diving destination in the Southern Red Sea region, operating in three villages along the southern Red Sea coastline: Wadi Lahami Village, Marsa Nakari Village , and Marsa Shagra 
Village. The villages consist of ecolodges and restaurants, and the main activities offered are diving and 
kitesurfing. Marsa Allam is still a relatively underdeveloped region, however, and lacks basic infrastructure services.  Water supply from desalination plants is costly and so is depending on 
generators for electricity.  In addition, reliance on sourcing food supplies through suppliers from other 
cities is costly and unsustainable, especially during times of crisis ( e.g., floods, revolutions, or pandemics). 
The company decided to allocate a plot of its land to build a farm on which it would cultivate fruits and 
vegetables and raise livestock. (The farms have not only allowed the company to source its own needs, 
but it has also become a main supplier for several tourism operators in the region.)  
Finally, as stated previously, COVID -19 pose s significant challenges throughout the sector. 
According to one travel and tourism company, only 10 percent of the hotels owned are operating.  The 
pandemic posed “not a slowdown but a shutdown,” and the company was  “at the bottom of the 
business cycle.” One company reported that pre -COVID- 19 it was generally fully booked during the 
high seasons and had an impressive tourist return rate of 34 percent.  Two of the three villages have 57 
 remained operational, as they cont inued to host small numbers of local tourists as the resort introduced 
precautionary measures (including testing, sterilization, and a quarantine facility in one of the villages).  
Nevertheless, the company still had losses in the region of 17 million Egyptian pounds ( EGP), depleting 
their reserves and contingency funds and leaving its liquidity situation in a precarious state.  It is counting 
on the expected arrivals during the high season (starting in October) to replenish its reserves and boost 
its liquidity, but remains wary of potential developments in Europe, due to fears of a second wave.  Its 
contingency plan is to apply for the CBE funding initiative to finance the payment of salaries and wages of 
the employees of the tourism sector.17  
PRIVATE SECT OR INTEREST  
Increase marketing and improve online presence to attract a new and larger customer 
base.   One eco- tourism country  is targeting a niche market that it tapped into after launching its first 
ecolodge.  It represents a new category of ecolodges in Egypt that attract clients interested in staying in 
heritage sites and looking for accommodation that is neither too basic and simple nor too expensive and luxurious (the two existing categories of ecolodges in Egypt).  Because their financial performance has 
exceeded its owners’ expectations based on the initial projections for the project, the founder has conducted a feasibility project for expanding in Egypt  and the region to develop a network of ecolodges 
in natural and cultural heritage areas.  The founder shared t he study with potential investors that have 
shown interest in the project. Given the growing demand for sustainable and eco logically friendly 
tourism global ly, this company plans to increase its presence on popular online travel platforms and 
promote its ecolodge on social media platforms.  
Additionally, interest  is growing  in shifting to green tourism by applying for green certifications, 
conductin g energy audits, and installing renewable energy. Recreational tourism operators, including 
four- and five- star hotels/resorts , recognize  that these certifications are becoming an important 
marketing tool to land deals with tour operators in Europe. The Mi nistry of Tourism has developed a 
green certification program (The Green Star Hotel program),
18 which provides environmental ratings for 
hotels. The Global Sustainable Tourism Council (GSTC) officially recognized the Green Star Hotel 
Program giving it  international credibility.19  Two of the leading private sector tourism players , Orascom 
and Travco , own 60 of  the 90 hotels certified so far . Following the success of the Green Star Hotel 
program, a demand exists for an internationally recognized accreditatio n program for e cotourism 
operators (by the GSTC as well) to gain international credibility and increase their competitiveness with 
operators in neighboring or similar destinations.  
 
17 In addition to allocating 50 billion EGP to finance companies and touristic establishments that wish to renovate 
their hot els and transportation fleets, the CBE allocated EGP 3 billion of the aforementioned amount to finance the 
salaries and wages of the sector’s employees for three months and basic operating and maintenance expenses. The 
companies are given up to two years, including a one -year grace period, to repay banks partaking in this initiative at 
a 5 percent diminishing interest rate.  
18 From the Green Star Hotel website, https://www.greenstarhotel.org/how- to-become- certified/green -star-rating : 
“The Green Star Hotel is  a national green certification and capacity -building program managed by the Egyptian 
Hotel Association under the patronage of the Egyptian Ministry of Tourism.  The GSH program offers an opportunity for hotels operating in Egypt to be internationally reco gnized for raising their environmental 
performance and social standards while reducing their operational costs.  A team of certified local and 
international experts guide interested hotels through a sequence of training and information support sessions 
leading to field audits to ensure compliance with the program standards prior to granting the GSH certification.”  
19  GSTC- recognized means that a sustainable tourism standard has been reviewed by GSTC technical experts and 
the GSTC Accreditation Panel to ensu re they are considered equivalent to the GSTC criteria.  58 
 Identify new sites to expand operations and establish new ecolodges.   Extensive experience in 
the field of ecotourism through previous operations  allowed the founders of one eco-tourism company  
to identify two new cultural heritage sites to establish new ecolodges.  One is in the west bank of Luxor 
(Upper Egypt), and the other is in Saint Catherine (a city in Southern Sinai).  This company  had initiated 
discussions with the Ministry of Antiquiti es over the site in Luxor before postponing them due to 
COVID.  
Find sustainable sources for necessary supplies.  Another large ecotourism operator has focused 
on finding more sustainable sources for electricity, water , and food supply to grow its business and 
increase its profitability.  For example, for electricity supply, this operator initially relied  on diesel-
powered generators throughout  most of the day, which was a burden in terms of costs and 
environmental impact.  In 2010, the company decided to sw itch to a more sustainable source of energy 
by investing in solar panels to reduce their reliance on generators  significantly .  By charging each tourist 
staying at their resorts an additional 5 Euro “environmental fee,” it was able to cover the additional 
costs.  Although it  has installed solar panels, the water supply issue remains unresolved.  The company is 
still trying to address access to treated water for irrigation purposes.  At  present , desalination plants are 
charging the company exorbitant rates for water.  The company has developed a plan to establish its 
own desalination plant powered by solar energy to serve its own needs and those of  the neighboring 
resort, but its current financial and liquidity challenges in the aftermath of COVID -19 have for ced it to 
shelve its plans until it can find subsidized funding options or self -fund it in the future.  
Improve supply and quality of labor.   An important tourism  BMO noted an interest in working 
with donor agencies on vocational training programs, technic al assistance for management and logistics, 
promotional efforts on the international stage, and training  for sector operators on adopting basic digital 
solutions to promote their business and facilitate online transactions.  
In addition, one company  co-founded the first private language school, serving the south Red Sea area.  
One association for education, training, and development  manages the  Port Ghalib Language School , 
which was founded in 2013.  In addition to serving as a CSR initiative for the local community, the 
school has helped the company retain its staff, as they have been able to relocate their families to Marsa Allam.  This company  also provides educational courses on ecotourism in addition to diving.  The school 
is currently operating at a loss and needs additional sources of funding to ensure it continues to operate 
and expands to include more students from the local community.  The organization is interested in financial and technical support for the school,  which would expand eco tourism skills and workforce. 
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL   
USAID/Egypt’s PSE Visioning Sessions in December 2019  noted that  the Mission’s approach to 
programming has evolved from more traditional approaches emphasizing restoration interventi ons to 
enterprise- led approaches.  For example, through the Rediscovering Esna’s Cultural Heritage Assets 
activity, USAID is developing, implementing, and promoting an alternative tourism development approach that improves the local community ’s economy.  T his activity has engaged local MSMEs in 
revitalizing  the historical city center and has stimulated local investment of EGP 176,300 ($10,900) to 
renovate shops in the market.  In USAID/Egypt’s 2020 PSE Action Plan, the Mission stated that a priority is ensu ring that the new Integrated Management  of Cultural Tourism  (IMCT ) activity, once launched, 
focus es deliberately  on engaging the private sector and fostering  enterprise- led opportunities to create a 
sustainable private sector infrastructure that supports  cultural heritage sites.  The r equest for p roposal 
(RFP) for the project, released in fall 2019, aims to engage with the private sector to identify and 59 
 implement initiatives that provide new, integrated, and competitive cultural tourism experiences . The 
project aims to overcome barriers limiting Egypt’s full potential by integrating private investments, local 
MSMEs, and the local workforce into cultural tourism value chains and improving the enabling 
environment.  
Such enterprise- led approaches strengthen sus tainable tourism and cultural heritage restoration through 
shared value with the private sector.  This approach aligns with USAID’s objectives of preserving culture  
and boosting opportunities to attract domestic and international tourism and strengthening job creation.   
OPPORTUNITIES  
● Provide grants for small cultural and ecotourism operators to support business operations , 
focus ing on developing natural and cultural heritage sites that are not currently on the tourism 
map. 
● Provide technical assistance to develop operator  capacity in marketing, management systems, 
and adoption of digital solutions.  USAID can either engage with compa nies directly or through 
BMOs like the Committee to Promote Cultural Tourism in Upper Egypt.  
● Support the establishment of vocational institutes to increase the supply of trained labor across 
the country and particularly in frontier regions like Upper Egypt . 
● Develop a tourism partnership fund, such as that under USAID/Jordan’s Building Economic 
Sustainability through Tourism Project (BEST), which provides grants and technical assistance for product and market development, tourism industry competitiveness, and public -private 
partnerships and job creation  (USAID, 2017) .  Multinational corporations ( MNCs ) such as the 
Chaudhary Group have already expressed interest in investing in Egypt’s tourism sector, as have 
Hyatt, Marriott, and Hilton  (Daily News, 2019) . 
● Facilitate public -private dialogue with grou ps such as the Egyptian Tourism Federation (ETF),
20 
the Tourism Investors Association, the Egyptian Tourism Authority, the Tourism Development 
Authority, and the New Urban Communities Authority (NUCA), to improve the enabling 
environment for small operators.
 
20 ETF is composed  of five bodies: The Hotels Association, the Travel Agents’ Association, the Chamber of Tourist 
Establishments, the Chamber of Tourist Commodities, and the Chamber of Diving and Water  Sports 4. CROSS-CUTTING THEMES  
This section builds on the sectoral analysis by drawing out some cross -cutting themes that emerged 
from the KIIs and survey ,  specifically, 1) the COVID -19 response and potential emerging opportunities, 
2) digitalization, 3) leg al and regulatory barriers, 4) women’s empowerment, and 5) other issues, 
including sustainability and youth employment.  
4.1 COVID -19 RESPONSE AND EMERGING OPPORTUNITIES21  
The COVID- 19 pandemic has exacerbated the  political and social uncertainty that has  plagued Egypt.  
The global economy is witnessing the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s, 
with all countries seeing a slowdown in their economic activity.  Egypt is expecting its economy  to 
contract significantly , although these economic losses are likely to be lower than in many comparable 
countries, given Egypt’s low level of COVID -19 infections.  According to the IFPRI, Egypt’s GDP from 
April to June 2020 will decline by 1.1 percent. Without the GoE’s COVID -19 emergency response 
package, this figure could have reached 8.7 percent (IFPRI, 2020).  
The hardest -hit sectors have been services ( -10.9 percent) and manufacturing (- 8.3 percent).  The 
restrictions on international travel are estimated to have contracted t he tourism sector by 90 percent  
(IFPRI, 2020).  The partial closing of trade activities and the reduction of air and land transport  have 
driven losses in services.  The decline in demand for intermediate inputs, especially in trade and 
transportation, has affected the manufacturing sector .  Companies interviewed noted a decline in 
productivity in their factories due to several COVID -related factors including 1) curfew measures that 
affected the factory shift system; 2) the emergence of some COVID- 19 cases i n factories leading to 
production stoppage for some time; and 3) virus prevention measures, including reducing the number of 
workers per shift.  
Disruption in product levels and international trade have affected both local sales and export levels.  One logistics company noted that it has seen most of the industries its clients operate in suffer from 
disruptions, significantly reducing business for them while it faces rising expenses and a liquidity shortage .  
As noted by this company and discussed in Sectio n 3.1, the agri -food industry is one of the few sectors 
that has been resilient in the face of COVID -19. COVID -19 is not expected to have any direct effect on 
most agricultural crop production.  Livestock production is even expected to increase by 10 perce nt in 
2020 to substitute for a decline in imports.  This decline has also bolstered d omestic agri -food 
processing. The ICT sector has witnessed the biggest growth, driven by working from home, e -learning, 
and online shopping.  The Minister of ICT recently announced that the consumption of Internet services 
increased by around 50 percent (IFPRI, 2020).
 
COVID- 19 presents considerable challenges for the Egyptian economy but will also provide 
opportunities for economic transformation.  L imited competition from imports, for example, may 
provide opportunities for labor -intensive manufacturing to increase domestic production.  Support for 
 
21 The American Chamber of Commerce in Egypt has created a COVID -19 resource hub, 
https://www.amcham.org.eg/information- resources/covid -19-response  , which has extensive analysis of the impact 
of COVID -19 per sector.  61 
 the ICT sector can also help foster the digitization of government and business services, e -learning, and 
online remote work.  
ICT and technology companies have witnessed a significant rise in demand from public and private 
sector players for remote/e -learning collaboration platforms and online security solutions.  An increasing 
number of educational institutions, for example, have approached Microsoft to develop or upgrade their 
interactive curricula. Microsoft was already working closely with decision makers in the public sector 
(mainly, the Ministries of Education and Higher Education) before the pandemic on digitization initiativ es.  
During COVID, these efforts have accelerated, as Microsoft has upscaled its training programs, installed 
new solutions, and provided support services to help the sector respond to the crisis.  
One large ICT company  has noted a surge in demand for workf orce transformation products in both 
the private and public sectors.  It has also experienced rising  demand for security transformation 
products to secure online transactions and remote working arrangements.  Similarly, COVID -19 has 
created new business opportunities for certain ICT companies , as more  corporate clients have 
approached the company to provide remote working technology solutions.  It has also engaged with 
clients in both the public and private sectors to upgrade their e -service platforms.  Smaller players in the 
sector, however, have not fared as well and have been unable to compete as succe ssfully for contracts 
with large enterprises or for public sector projects or contracts with large enterprises.  
Many academic institutions noted that they are now planning to offer training courses online, but while 
they saw increased opportunity, the re are also risks —as companies start cutting costs, the training and 
development budget is usually the first area targeted. Others are also developing blended learning 
programs.  
Rethinking PSE in the COVID -19 Era  
Although the immediate health and economic eff ects of COVID -19 on USAID programming and related PSE 
strategies are increasingly clear, the long -term effects will unfold over time.  The most profound effect is 
expected to be on the PSE process, given the face -to-face nature of prevailing PSE strategies.  The pandemic’s 
effects will also vary by technical areas of USAID programming.  They will likely have a greater impact in 
programming areas that involve engagement at the micro level (e.g.,  smallholding agriculture, MSMEs, and 
women’s empowerment projects) than in areas that require engagement at a more aggregate level ( e.g., 
government capacity building projects). 
The following are s ome of the immediate effects of COVID -19 on the PSE strategy in Egypt:  
1. PSE must pay more attention to the survival of priv ate enterprises, especially MSMEs.  Many will not 
recover from their economic losses and will not return to business, which will undermine future PSE.  
2. The pandemic underscores  the importance of private sector networks to a government’s ability to 
ensure access to critical supplies ( e.g., food and health supplies).  Beyond tapping private sector 
networks and supply chains, the crisis has also highlighted the importance of workin g with the private 
sector in agricultural production, education, health care, and information dissemination.  
3. Many PSE strategies are based on face -to-face meetings and interactions, which COVID -19 has 
rendered difficult, if not impossible.  An immediate ef fect of COVID -19 on USAID’s PSE strategy is in 
challenging the notion that a “return to normalcy” of USAID programming is even possible. Therefore, 
changes to USAID programming that have been a long time in the making  need to accelerate, including 
a more f acilitative approach to development programming, locally  led development projects, and 62 
 digitiz ation of everything from supply chains to program management capacities (now envisioned by the 
new USAID Digital Strategy).  
4. COVID -19 underscore s the importance of  diversified economies and sources of livelihoods.  
Therefore, PSE strategies should also strive to develop  diversified regional economies.  
(Excerpt from a forthcoming  LEAP III Thought Piece on PSE in the MENA Region by Mr. Nikolaus Eichman and T auhidur 
Rahman)  
4.2 DIGITALIZATION   
OVERVIEW  
As of 2018, approximately 47 percent of the Egyptian population used the Internet, and 95.3 percent 
had a mobile cellular subscription (World Bank, n.d., “Egypt, Arab Rep.: Country Profile” ).  In 2019, 
households with a computer increased by 13 percent, and average Internet speed continued to increase  
(Daily News Egypt, 2020; Egypt Today, 2020 a).  Egypt’s digital transformation is changing companies’ 
business models and expanding markets ; creating new jobs for Egypt’s youth ; and, in the wake of 
COVID- 19, playing an important role delivering  remote learning and health care services.  
Recognizing the importance of digital growth, the GoE has prioritized expanding  digital technology 
across Egypt.  The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology ’s (MCIT) ICT 2030 Strategy 
toward a “Digital Egypt” focuses on innovation, capacity building, and digital transformation through 
infrastructure and legislation (MCIT, n.d.).  In a recent presentati on at AmCham, the MCIT Minister 
stated that the GoE is working to train 45,000 people in telecoms and I CT over the next three years, 
expand the digital economy through mobile and web portals and provide for digital delivery of 
government services, and incr ease the ICT sector’s contribution to GDP by 2 percent  (American 
Chamber of Commerce, 2018) . MCIT is also building new technology parks  that will provide a space for 
incubators and accelerators, promote innovation such as the use of artificial intelligence , and provide 
new skills for students and young entrepreneurs.  Other plans include increasing the use of electronic 
signatures, establishing electronic examination systems at the university level, establishing data center 
clusters, launching the cloud for  government agencies, digital ly transform ing the tax authority, and 
improving infrastructure to increase Internet resiliency  (Kamel and Alaa El -Din, 2020) . 
The GoE has expressed an openness to working with the private sector to achieve these goals.  In 
December 2019, President Abdel Fattah al -Sisi expressed interest in creating a digital trading platform, 
similar to Amazon or Alibaba  (Al-Youm and Al -Masry, 2019 a). Shortly thereafter, the Safina Egypt 
company launched an e- commerce platform for Egyptian trad ers, dealers, importers, and international 
exporters, and in August 2020, GAFI met with Amazon’s Souq.com to discuss expanding its activities in 
Egypt  (Al-Youm and Al -Masry, 2019 b; GAFI, 2020).  Recently, in response to COVID -19, international 
experts launched a “Together We Continue” digital platform to provide services to support business 
continuity for MSMEs and increase their resilience  (Alaa El -Din, 2020) .  Also in response to COVID -19, 
in the tourism industry, the UNESCO Regional Bureau fo r Sciences in the Arab States and MoTA 
convened senior officials through an online meeting to exchange information on safety procedures and guidelines and e-ticketing and online gift shops  (UNESCO, 2020) . 63 
 PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
Of the firms that respond ed to the online survey, about one-third accept online orders, have online 
transactions, and/or use digital accounting software.  Even f ewer report marketing their products and 
services online and either conducting or participating in online training. Half  of the respondents 
reported that their organization needs specific digital technologies that it currently lacks access to. One 
ICT firm reported that the challenges it faces include an appropriately skilled workforce, cash flow 
issues, and uncertain futur e budgets.  A non- profit organization dedicated to youth development across 
health and agriculture sectors reported mobility and Internet access at the local level as a critical risk 
factor. 
The KIIs echoed these survey findings.  One of the most critical challenges the sector  faces is the 
scarcity of qualified IT professionals.  Over the past few years, Egypt has experienced a brain drain in 
this sector, as many  high-caliber I CT professionals have pursued more lucrative opportunities abroad.  
Current MCIT -sponsored training programs graduate a limited number of developers, most of whom 
are snapped up by MNCs, leaving domestic players to compete over a small talent pool.  Another critical challenge facing most domestic players in the sector is that they lack  the capacity to compete 
with MNCs, particularly for contracts for large -scale public sector projects.  Accordingly, despite the 
many  opportunities that  public sector digitization initiatives have created, MNCs or larger established 
domestic players  continue to dominate this field .  
Other challenges facing ICT companies in expand ing their businesses include the low level of digital 
maturity in several industries, particular ly in manufacturing. In these sectors, awareness is lacking of the 
importance of digi talization for productivity and business optimization. In many cases, the companies 
also lack the capacity to benefit from technological solutions in business or production.  Adopting digital 
transformation strategies can require a significant investment, which is a constraint for local companies 
with limited financial resources (particularly second- tier or MSMEs).  
ALIGNED INTEREST AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
USAID has supported Egypt’s digital transformation in several activities.  In the Early Grade Learning 
project, a government- to-government activity supporting implementation of the Ministry of Education’s 
reform agenda, the Mission is developing both tradi tional and digital teaching materials.  USAID supports 
the Government of Egypt’s STEM high school model of education , and in the 2006 School LINK GDA 
with Microsoft and Vodafone, USAID provided new schools with ICT centers that introduced 
computer- based learning.  In the 2007  TILO project, USAID worked with Microsoft, Intel, and Oracle to 
provide training, hardware and software, and licensing to improve the use of technology in schools 
across nine governorates.  Under the U.S. -Egypt Science and Technology Joint Fund, USAID links and 
engages scientists whose work addresses development challenges, such as innovations in lab -to-market 
technologies for agriculture that may be suitable for commercialization.  Lastly, in the FTF Egypt FAS, USAID incorporates innovative technologies in small -scale cold storage infrastructure.  
These areas for USAID and private sector engagement di rectly align with the Agency’s new 2020 –2024 
Digital Strategy, which calls for consistent use of digital technology in the face of the worldwide digital transformation, across programming in all operating units, and with inter -agency and implementing 
partners, as part of the Journey to Self -Reliance.  It includes a detailed strategic framework, which 64 
 outlines USAID’s objectives in “leveraging digital technology to further programmatic gains”  (USAID, 
2020a ).  
OPPORTUNITIES  
1. Provide grants and technical assist ance to the Information Technology Industry Development 
Agency (ITIDA) under the MCIT to develop new I CT training programs to increase the supply 
of qualified developers available for domestic players in the market.  
2. Provide grants and technical assistance to support local companies needing digital 
transformation. That kind of support is in demand in the manufacturing industry and among 
MSMEs in general.  
3. Promote MSME capacity development in the sector through enterprise capacity building 
programs to increase competitiveness and ability to handle components of large service 
projects.  
4. Raise the awareness of private and public sector players regarding the importance of adopting 
digital solutions through training sessions that introduce them to digitalization pro grams and 
communicate  potential impacts on their productivity and growth.  
4.3 POLICY AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS  
Egypt’s legal and regulatory framework is a significant barrier to private sector growth.  As noted in the 
USAID/Egypt CDCS Phase One presentation, policy and institutional reforms are key to accelerating 
development in Egypt and improving  the outcomes of USAID’s investments.  
Over the past few years, the GoE has shown a commitment to reforming economic policy and 
addressing these constraints.  Difficult reforms have been undertaken since 2016, including new 
investment and bankruptcy laws, the introduction of a value -added tax, and the adoption of a more 
flexible exchange rate policy  (USAID/Egypt, 2020) .  Egypt climbed six places on the World Bank’s Doing 
Business 2020 index as a result of improvements in the legislative environment.  Egypt has  also ranked in 
the top 10 list of improvers over the past three years.  In the past 12 months, the GoE implemented the 
second most reforms in the MENA r egion.22  This included simplifying  starting up a business by 
abolishing the requirement to obtain a certificate of non -confusion and improving its one -stop shop, 
improving the reliability of electricity supply by implementing automated systems to monitor and report 
power outages, strengthening minority investor protections by requiring shareholder approval when listed companies issue new shares, and simplifying tax payments  by implementing an online system for 
filing and payment of corporate income tax and  value-added tax.
 
Despite this progress, Egypt remains in 114th place globally in the World Bank Doing Business rankings , 
indicating that more work is needed.  As recognized in the USAID/Egypt Country Economic Review  
(2020), “the real challenge that the Eg yptian government faces lies in the actual implementation of 
reform and enforcement of its laws and regulations.”   According to the 2019 World Justice Project 
index, Egypt ranks 121st out of 126 globally and last in the MENA region.  
 
22 AmCham  (2020b) provides a full  list of major laws enacted and government actions taken in 2019. 65 
 A recent FE I study  (FEI, unpublished)  revealed policy and institutional barriers , including lengthy, 
bureaucratic, and time- consuming trade procedures; cumbersome tax collection systems; inefficient land 
allocation and pricing; complicated processes for granting licenses and pe rmits, which hinder new 
players; lack of coordination among government agencies, which creates conflicts in the decrees of 
circulars issued and causes confusion and complications for businesses; and slow litigation processes 
(both for business to business and business to government), which can lead to long-standing unresolved 
disputes.   
As outlined in subsequent  responses from private sector actors, the policy and institutional environment  
is a dominating constraint across all sectors. Further deep structur al reforms are needed to improve the 
business and regulatory environment and enforces the rule of law.  
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
Respondents noted that t he overriding issue was bureaucratic inefficiencies and red tape.  
Multiple respondents noted that bureaucracy is the most critical challenge facing all players in the private 
education sector. One educational company  noted that so many laws and regulations govern the 
industry and in every step of the process ( e.g., estab lishing new schools, issuing new licenses, and 
approving new budgets) that receiving  approvals for any activity becomes difficult. Other education 
companies  shared this sentiment , noting  that bureaucratic red tape has delayed their expansion plans to 
devel op new technical schools.  A large ICT company  noted that regulations concerning the evaluation 
and assessment of educational institutions adopting digital solutions need to be updated.  Inspectors from the Ministry of Education are unfamiliar  with the app lication of EdTech solutions and hence 
unequipped to monitor and evaluate the performance of these schools and their teachers.  
In the agricultural sector, the FEI noted that bureaucratic red tape favor s established companies  but 
hinders new companies.  Similarly, an agricultural BMO  noted that most of the challenges facing 
exporters in the sector relate to regulatory issues under different ministries, e.g., agriculture, finance, 
and trade and industry.  
Regarding  the health sector, one company  noted that bureaucracy within the Ministry of Health results 
in an inefficient and slow process for registering new products and significantly delays the provision of 
new drugs (even generic ones) to the market.  Despite an expected total of 105 days mentioned in 
Egypt’s registration guidelines to complete the process, pharmaceutical manufacturers, for example, have 
reported delays in regulatory approvals taking up to two or three years.  This company  has attempted 
several times to engage in dialogue with the Ministry  of Health and other relevant authorities, e.g., the 
Egyptian Drug Authority, over needed reforms to the regulatory framework.  Despite promises to review the pricing system and regulatory approval process, little has changed.  
For the tourism sector, once a new heritage site is identified as a potential spot for a new ecolodge, for 
example, a tourism company  has to engage with several ministries and bodies, including the Minist ries of 
Antiquities, Tourism, and Environment, to receive the necessary approvals.  Receiving approvals from 
the Ministry of Antiquities entails a long, confusing, and untransparent process , and the Ministry of 
Environment lacks regulations to approve ecotourism projects.  Hence, ecolodges are rated using  the 
same criteria applied to commercial hotels and resorts, which, in effect, means they receive  lower 
ratings than they deserve.  66 
 Notably,  an energy company did not note any regulatory challenges in the energy sector.  It has received 
its payments on time and has had a good experience dealing with the Ministry of Petroleum. Its plans in 
Egypt are well aligned with the government’s oil and gas strategy.  
PRIVATE SECTOR OPPORTUNITIES  
Two new studies were recently commissioned to provide more detailed recommen dations for required  
reforms.  The first is a UNIDO study, in collaboration with the manufacturing committee in the F EI and 
the Ministry of Planning, that will focus on quick fixes for the manufacturing sector.  The second is a 
study conducted by the consu lting firm Bain & Company, in collaboration with the Ministry of Planning, 
which addresses reforms across different industries, emphasizing trade barriers.  
4.4 WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT  
OVERVIEW        
In Egypt, USAID targets specific activities to promote women’s empowerment and reduce gender 
inequalities and gaps across many  sectors and activities, including women’s economic participation, 
gender- based violence, sexual harassment, women’s health, and education. According to the 2020 Global 
Gender Gap R eport (WEF, 2020) , Egypt ranked 134th out of 153 countries with an overall gender gap 
index of 0.629, which signifies a slightly positive trajectory from prior years but indicates a long way to 
achieving overall gender equality.23  
In recent years, Egypt has progressed considerably in reducing the gender gap in several areas, namely 
health, education, and political engagement.  Although women have lower literacy rates than men (65 percent for women, 82 percent for men), primary school is much more accessib le for girls than boys in 
Egypt, with girls’ enrollment rates matching those  of boys in 2017 (25.43 percent for girls, 25.69 percent 
for boys)  (Samari, 2019) . However, gains in educational attainment have yet to translate into increased 
women’s economic pa rticipation. Only 24.7 percent of Egyptian women are engaged in the formal labor 
force, with 20 percent on part -time contracts (Zeitoun, 2018). Egyptian men earn approximately 3.8 
times more income than women (although legislation prohibits wage discrimina tion) (WEF, 2020; 
Zeitoun, 2020) .  Women’s economic activity predominantly occurs in the public sector or in the 
informal economy, but those who work in the private sector typically work as wage laborers in food processing, textiles and garments, electroni c assembly, education, health care, and export -oriented 
manufacturing  (Assaa d and El -Hamidi, 2009).  In the private sector, representation of women is low in 
general managerial roles (7.1 percent), top managerial roles (4.9 percent), and firm/business ownership positions (2.4 percent) (Zeitoun, 2018).  
Since 2010, the percentage of women in the formal labor force has risen only slightly (24 percent in 
2010 to 24.7 percent in 2019)  (Zeitoun, 2018).  Women’s full  participat ion in the formal labor force not 
only positively affects national GDP,
24 it also increases women’s economic empowerment and agency in 
controlling other aspects of their lives  (Constant et al.,  2020) . 
 
23 The index is measured as a proportion, with a score of 1 indicating full gender equality achieved across the 12 
indicators measured in the index.  
24 Booz and Company (2012) estimated that i f women’s employment rates matched those of men, it would result in 
a 34 percent increase in Egypt’s GDP.  67 
 Challenges to women’s participation in the private sector surround recruitment and retentio n.25  In 
Egypt, companies may perceive that women to be unreliable sources of labor and are thus reluctant to 
hire and train women, as they believe women may leave the position when they marry . Some companies 
do not want to incur costs related to women’s r eproductive roles, such as paying adequate maternity 
leave or complying with mandates for childcare services  (Assaa d, 2015) .  
Cultural and social norms shape and dictate women’s expected roles and responsibilities in society, such 
that they assume unpaid care work responsibilities (and the associated time burdens), have limited 
influence in the public sphere, and are submissive toward their husbands in household decision -making. 
Popular culture reinforces these stereotypes (women as homemakers and m en as leaders)  (IFC, 2019) .  
The share of time spent on unpaid labor does not decrease when women engage in paid labor, which requires women to make tradeoffs  (IFC, 2019) .  Private sector jobs often require longer working days 
(nine hours per day compared with 7.5 hours for public sector roles), which disincentivizes women from 
taking private sector roles, because longer hours compete with household responsibilities and increase 
safety risks during work commutes  (Assaa d, 2015) .  The decline in available public sector jobs 
disproportionately affects higher educated women, while growth in private sector opportunities has 
been limited (Constant et al.,  2020) .   
Additionally, and importantly, high rates of sexual harassment in the workplace create hostile workin g 
environments, lead to high rates of job dissatisfaction, and disincentivize women from staying in their position s for the long term, lead ing to higher turnover among women employees  and potentially 
contributing to the perception of women being unreliable sources of labor  (Assaa d, 2015; Maghraby et 
al., 2020) .  Although Egyptian law criminalizes sexual harassment in public places, there is no law against 
sexual harassment in the workplace specifically.  Poor enforcement of existing anti -discrimination and 
sexual harassment laws in the workplace, in public, and in public transportation foster s hostile working 
environments for women (Constant et al., 2020) .  In addition, a lack of reliable and available evidence on 
sexual harassment in the workplace poses cha llenges to understanding the full extent of the issue, 
sectoral differentiation, its long -term impact on women’s participation in the labor force, and an 
evidence- based path forward. 
  
USAID has worked on programming with the private sector and other partn ers to address these critical 
issues related to women’s empowerment.  This section outlines areas in which the private sector and development partners are working toward  women’s empowerment and gender equality.  The section  
then outlines opportunities for which USAID can leverage private sector expertise, capacity, and 
experience to improve women’s empowerment outcomes where interest  overlaps and to generate 
awareness among private sector partners and leadership on gender equality and women’s empowerment 
issues in the workforce.    
PRIVATE SECTOR CHALLENGES  
 
25 The Rand Corporation recently published a study that presents an in -depth exploration of barriers to women’s 
participation in the Egyptian labor fo rce (Constant et al., 2020). In addition, the World Bank published a Women’s 
Economic Empowerment Study in 2018 that presents country -specific in -depth analyses across indicators of 
women’s economic empowerment in Egypt (Zeitoun, 2018).  68 
 Behavioral and cultural norms are persistent challenges to addressing gender equality and 
impro ving women’s empowerment outcomes.  A woman- focused BMO  indicated that the main 
challenges to addressing women’s empowerment initiatives are cultural and behavior al norms; 
awareness campaigns are the most effective and important strategy to shift these nor ms. 
Private sector leadership  is unaware  of the issues and opportunities related to women’s 
empowerment.  Generally, private sector leadership views gender equality or women’s empowerment as a human resources  or compliance  concern and lacks awareness of their potential role 
in creating or fostering a culture of equality and diversity in their workplace s.  Across the KIIs, only 
development partners or women -focused business membership organizations mentioned women’s 
equality in the workplace to address or re duce sexual harassment, or other issues such as these.   
Funding is an issue for private sector partners to implement their general community engagement initiatives ( including  those specific to women’s empowerment).   In general, 
private sector partners indicated that a lack of funding or strategic logistical support to implement their 
initiatives limited their ability to continue.  In addition, partners indicate that funding is a challenge in 
scaling their community engagement initiatives as well.  For example, a health company interviewed 
recently had to cut its CSR budget as it s profits declined.  Another example, a business organization 
focused on women  faces challenges around financing and securing grant funding to support their 
programs and activities.        
PRIVATE SECTOR INTERESTS  
Workforce development training: CIRA, an education company,  trains approximately 700 teachers 
(mostly women) for free.  The  company  hired approximately 300 of these trainees intending to  provide  
400 additional trainees with skills to enter the market for hire.  Similarly, the Business Women of Egypt 
(BWE) association targets skill training and facilitates access to new and exist ing markets for women 
entrepreneurs over the age of 40.  
Girls’ and STEM e ducation: Apache has supported the Springboard Initiative (in collaboration with 
the Sawaris Foundation and Egypt’s National Council for Childhood and Motherhood) since 2004 to 
provi de access to educational opportunities for rural girls.  More than 10,000 girls have been educated 
through this initiative across three governorates.  Other companies  have worked with USAID/Egypt 
successfully to focus on girls’ education and STEM training through the GILO project with the Ministry 
of Education.  Microsoft Egypt  participates on the board of the STEM School for Girls.  
Women’s health: DKT, a health company, has been working with the Ministry of Health, Rotary 
Egypt, the Egyptian Family Planning Association, the Red Crescent, and Assuit University to deliver contraceptive and family planning services to vulnerable women, particularly those in rural, hard -to-
reach areas;  target health  care training to assess and treat women’s health issues effec tively ; and conduct 
awareness campaigns against female genital cutting (FGC)
26 and other women’s health issues.  
Entrepreneurship and facilitating access to f inance: The National Council for Women works 
with the CBE on a financial inclusion initiative through which it coordinates VSLA s to provide financial 
education and microfinance products for women, in addition to entrepreneurship education.  In 
 
26 FGC is practiced  regularly in Egypt and poses a significant risk to women’s and girls’ health.  Adherence to cultural 
and religious norms shapes both men and women’s widespread support and continued practice of FGC . 
(approximately 92.3 percent of all Egyptian women) (Demog raphic Health Survey, 2015; Van Rossem and Meekers, 
2020).  69 
 addition, EBRD is working with its partner banks to train them in disaggregating  and using data by sex 
and on gender financing.  The BWE association works with the Export Development Bank, which does 
gender- focused CSR, to showcase women entrepreneurs and increase  networking for small -scale 
women entrepreneurs.  The association  holds annual forums for various sectors (such as fashion and 
agriculture) in different regions each year (Sinai, Upper Egypt) to provide exposure to different markets, 
such as local and international buyers, allowing women -led businesses to exhibit their products and open 
new markets for their businesses.  FinBi’s CSR initiatives focus on engaging local and international 
institutions to empower youth and women, increase access to finance and access to education (focus ing 
on vocational training), and bridge the gap between labor  market needs and the education system.  
Specifically, FinBi has supported social entrepreneurship projects with the Association for Women’s 
Total Advancement and Development, an NGO based in Sinai.  
Reduction of  barriers to women’s participation in the labor f orce: Other development partners 
(such as IFC and the World Bank) have worked with private sector companies to enhance recruitment 
strategies for women and to foster strategies to better retain and promote women employees.  
Programs such as the Women on Boards program certify  professional women to join boards and 
diversify  private sector decision- making.  The BWE association partnered with the Global Project 
Partner to support a Women on Boards initiative, assembling  women experts for nomination to  the 
boards of publicly listed companies.  Some companies implement targeted recruitment practices and 
engage a large percentage of women in their workforce s.  For example, 40 percent of the employees of 
Plantform, a family- owned agricultural business, are wo men. 
ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL  
Opportunities to  engage  with the private sector in continuing  USAID/Egypt’s work on women’s 
empowerment around economic participation, women’s health, sexual harassment and gender -based 
violence, and educational and skill -building opportunities have the potential to multiply impact across 
activities.  The private sector  is interest ed in working on select women’s empowerment initiatives.  
Multiple companies interviewed for this activity have previously worked with USAID or other donor partners on such  initiatives.  
However,  some companies and BMOs mentioned challenges  with working with USAID on women’s 
empowerment initiatives.  A BMO,  for example, cited misaligned interests in engaging with USAID’s 
SEED program, as it did not suit the needs of women entrepreneurs (the information was too basic) and 
the funding provided  was too small.  Another BMO found the SEED program to be too ambitious, 
expensive, and unstructured for its needs.  They opted to partner with the Sawaris Foundation and 
French Aid on the “Women Pioneers” Program instead.  In another example, a health com pany had 
expressed interest in partnering with USAID on women’s health initiatives, but meaningful collaboration 
did not materialize.       
OPPORTUNITIES   
● Provide technical assistance to women -oriented BMOs, such as the BWE 
association . The  BWE association identified several potential areas for collaboration with 
USAID, such as USAID providing technical assistance to support the development of the BWE 
association’s social media presence to expand its reach as an organization, training members  to 
use online platforms to promote their products and build new market linkages (such as Amazon or local e -commerce), and training staff for capacity -building exercises to grow their 
programming.  70 
 ● Partner with private sector companies that are already wor king on women’s 
empowerment initiatives to provide funding and scaling capacities. For certain 
companies included in this assessment, like DKT, funding and associated capacity issues for 
scaling up activities limit their ability to continue efforts toward women’s empowerment. Given 
COVID- 19, when companies have likely faced a downturn in profits, funding partners are 
essential to continue work on women’s empowerment initiatives.  
● Be a thought leader, with other development partners, to increase awareness 
among private sector leadership of the barriers  to and opportunities from 
increasing women’s participation in the private sector.  With respect to opportunities, 
USAID can raise awareness and present the business case for why increasing women’s 
participation in the workforce benefits company and overall economic growth27  For one 
example, Dawi, a health company, strategically employs women to better target their products 
and services toward women as their main client.  This approach is considered a smart busi ness 
decision, as Dawi understands that if the woman in the household uses its services, she will then 
send her daughters, sons, husbands, and other relatives or friends to use them as well .  So 
targeting women, using women -centric marketing approaches, enables Dawi to attract multiple 
consumers by targeting one woman.28  
With respect to barriers, USAID can  first facilitate dialogue among private sector partner 
leadership to raise  awareness of the many issues preventing women’s engagement and retention 
in the private sector and why these issues transcend  human resources compliance and to 
identify the role private sector leadership can play in fostering a positive work culture and reducing barriers to women’s participation.  USAID has already begun to work wi th the private 
sector and the GoE on these activities.  Second, USAID can facilitate gender mainstreaming in 
general private sector engagement strategies to ensure that partners are aware of these gender -
specific issues in the workplace and have the tools to integrate socially inclusive recruitment, 
retainment, and promotion strategies.  Finally, USAID can work with public sector partners to co-design effective anti -sexual harassment and anti -bias training for the workplace, targeted 
toward both men and wom en employees, so that all employees know their rights.  USAID and 
its public sector partners  should also develop safe reporting mechanisms for victims of sexual 
harassment in the workplace to foster and create a safer work culture.
29 
4.5 OTHER CROSS -CUTTING ISSUES  
YOUTH ENGAGEMENT  
The share of youth, ages 15– 29, that is  not engaged in education, training, or employment in Egypt is 
extremely high, at around 30 percent before the pandemic  (World Bank, n.d., “World Development 
Indicators” ).  The impact of COVID- 19 on youth in Egypt and across the MENA region is yet to be fully 
understood.  However,  COVID- 19-related losses of job opportunities and reduction in access to 
 
27 IFC (2019) conducted a thorough study specific to the Egyptian context of why women’s representation at the 
board level positively affects company growth, investment for social investing and impa cts, diversity in employees 
and consumer base, among other indicators.  
28 This strategic business decision applies across economies (Silverstein and Sayre, 2009).  
29 Constant at al. (2020) provides an in- depth analysis of other strategic actions the privat e sector or actors in this 
space can take to promote women’s empowerment and participation in the workforce, in addition to removing 
additional barriers to women’s participation.  71 
 education, training, and other centers for the engagement of  youth will probably amplify the challenge of 
youth participation in the Egyptian economy throughout 2020 and into 2021.  A recent UN Policy Brief 
on the Impact of COVID -19 on the Arab Region suggests revising national youth strategies in the region, 
including plans for  reintegrating  youth through education, training, and employment programs  and 
increas ing investment and support for youth -led ventures (United Nations, 2020) .  As noted previously , 
the private sector in Egypt has exceeded expectations in term s of resiliency during the current COVID-
19 crisis and will be an effective engine for growth and recovery post -COVID.  The private sector 
must be incentivized and supported for this potential to be come an opportunity for 
accelerating youth inclusion in th e Egypt ian economy.   Without such support, youth 
participation may slip further as young people struggle to gain the skills needed to participate amid shifts 
in the Egyptian economy, especially after a prolonged period of disengagement.  KII and survey data 
collected for this report indicate the Egyptian private sector ’s continued willingness to target and 
support youth in gaining employment.  Specific examples include partnerships with vocational schools 
that allow use of production facilities to  provide  technical training with a pathway to employment upon 
graduation, incubation support for youth -led startups in the same industry or sector, and development 
of job opportunities that cater to youth.  These efforts have  both practical and social moti vations.  The 
practical motivation  involves  developing a capable workforce and maintaining a stable operating 
environment over the long term . The social motivation involves  a sense of obligation to the communit y 
and a desire for a healthy, engaged, and gai nfully employed generation of youth in Egypt.  Though the 
practical motivations are often the best leverage points for incentivizing increased support from the 
private sector, the social motivations are equally important for scaling and sustaining their en gagement.  
Youth employment is a policy priority in Egypt, and a recent World Bank study presents promising 
evidence that youth employment programs, including Active Labor Market Programs, can be highly 
effective in increasing youth employment and income, e specially for the most disadvantaged populations, 
such as young women and youth in poor areas  (Elsayed et al., 2018) .  That  said, evidence to the contrary  
also exists, indicating that such initiatives and related active labor market policies are ineffectiv e in 
increasing youth employment opportunities  (Krafft and Assaad, 2018).  This reality is rooted in supply 
and demand challenges.  On the supply side, skills training must  align with the skills employers demand.  
On the demand side, job opportunities must be available to youth for skills development to have a direct 
effect on increasing youth employment.  The case may be that youth employment programs have been 
most effective for  the most disadvantaged youth in Egypt, given that any skills development woul d be a 
vast improvement for such youth and effective ly prepar e them for any low- skill employment 
opportunity.  To have a broader effect, youth employment programs must also effectively prepare youth for semi-  and high- skilled employment opportunities.  Public-private partnerships have proven to be a 
promising approach  for this purpose , including performance -based skills development programs that are 
encouraged to concentrate on job placement over program participation as a metric of success  (Krafft 
and Assaad, 2018).  
USAID has a long legacy of engaging youth to increa se inclusion in the Egyptian economy, including 
current partnerships with the American University in Cairo to establish career development centers and 
offer scholarships for career -related ongoing education opportunities; targeting of youth as beneficiarie s 
in various USAID workforce development, entrepreneurship, agribusiness, trade , and tourism activities; 
and support for  youth- led enterprises in gaining access to finance and business development assistance, 72 
 including through the Egyptian -American Enterpr ise Fund and upcoming Business Egypt Activity.  This 
legacy is a source of credibility and momentum for continued USAID support via private sector -led 
initiatives.     
To increase youth participation in the Egyptian economy, USAID can support various neces sary 
activities, including the following:  
1. Increase investment and support for youth -led enterprises.  As mentioned previously , 
the post-COVID Egyptian economy will likely present both new challenges and opportunities for 
MSMEs.  To take advantage of these opportunities, youth entrepreneurs will need access to 
capital and support in the form of skills development and mentorship programs.  USAID could 
increase its investment in youth -led enterprises by expanding investment in related enterprise 
funds and fund ing complementary support programs.  
2. Increase investment and support for youth employment programs that private 
sector companies  directly manage or support  and are connected to actual job 
opportunities.  Semi- and high- skilled job opportunities for youth require more specialized 
training. USAID could increase direct support to in -house youth employment and internship 
programs that the private sector  manages , including through the use of GDAs, which has proven 
to be a successful model in the region  (USAID, 2020b ).  USAID could also increase support to 
partnerships between existing for-  and not -for-profit youth employment programs and private 
companies by subsidizing access to and incentivizing a focus on job placement.  
3. Accelerate the digitization of youth em ployment programs, including partnerships 
with related tech companies.  In a post -COVID economy, youth will need remote access to 
digital skills development resources.  USAID could launch a grand challenge encouraging youth 
employment programs to partner w ith tech companies and digitize access to their support 
programs. Like the MCIT and Nokia  partnership launched  in 2019, such programs should link 
directly to job opportunities and include internship, mentoring, and other support programs to 
enhance the pro bability of success in job placement and retention  (Bowen, 2019) . 
4. Expand access to basic skills development programs for the most vulnerable youth populations.  USAID could work with the GoE  to expand access to basic skills development 
programs for vulnerable youth by supporting expanded investments in basic digital skills 
development resources.  As in the digital skills academy recently launched by ITIDA and Udacity  
(Egypt Today, 2020 b), access to such digital resources could be subsidized and used as a 
prerequisite for semi - and high- skilled programs.  
5. Improve the enabling environment for small - to medium -sized enterprises.  Though 
not directly linked to youth employment, MSMEs are an importa nt source of job opportunities 
for youth and the enabling environment for such enterprises is poor in Egypt  (Krafft and Assaad, 
2018) .  Especially given the extraordinary circumstances brought on by COVID -19, improving 
the enabling environment for MSMEs sh ould be a priority for USAID and be considered as a 
complementary and necessary action for increasing  youth participation in the Egyptian economy.   73 
 Pursuing these and any other programs that target youth as beneficiaries should actively include youth in 
the development, decision -making, and delivery of all related activities.  Doing so will not only improve 
such activities ’ relevance  to the changing realities of youth in Egypt, but also enable youth to play an 
active role in their own development, thus bui lding confidence and providing experience and skills that 
are needed for successful employment. 
CLIMATE CHANGE  
The effects of climate change are broad and unpredictable, especially in the MENA region, where water 
scarcity amplifies the related challenges.  Climate change is also at the heart of the agriculture -water-
food security nexus in the region and is expected to further exacerbate the humanitarian crises, conflict, and civil unrest that plague the region  (Abouelnaga, 2019) .  As mentioned previously , the COVID -19 
crisis has created additional challenges in that climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies often 
require longer -term investments that are hard to justify during an economic crisis.  In Egypt, climate 
change is expected  to contribute to as much as a 50 percent reduction in agricultural production and 
threatens to flood Alexandria and the Nile Delta with rising sea levels  (Egypt Independent, 2019) .  
These, among other climate change –related challenges, including acute risk to human health, make Egypt 
one of the most vulnerable countries in the MENA region.
30  Therefore, climate change adaptation 
measures should be an immediate priority.  Unfortunately, the GoE is reluctant to make the necessary investments unless they come wit h guaranteed funding from developed countries  (UNDP, n.d.) .  
The private sector in Egypt, including companies interviewed for this report, is well aware of the challenges and threats associated with climate change and is willing to invest in solutions. Th at said, 
other persistent and pressing challenges, including the ongoing  COVID- 19 pandemic, complications 
related to the BEE in Egypt, and lack of access to finance , take priority and affect the private sector’s 
ability to take immediate action  (see Figure 12 in Annex II) .  They also cannot take on these challenges 
alone and will be ineffective if their efforts are not coordinated.  Therefore, a trusted development 
partner like USAID is needed to both co -invest in solutions and coordinate investments across all 
sectors of the Egyptian economy.  USAID is well positioned to play this role and as a co -investment 
partner, USAID can ensure broader access to and impact of climate change –related solutions.  
Though USAID has already provided, and continues to provide, support for Egypt’s efforts to mitigate 
and adapt to the effects of climate change, including through activities related to promoting  climate 
smart agricultural practices and better management of energy and w ater resources, a more aggressive 
approach is required to accelerate the pace of the private sector investments needed to scale and 
sustain Egypt’s response to the threat of climate change.  Absent the GoE’s willingness  to take a more 
aggressive approach, Egypt’s private sector will need to do so, with support from development partners 
like USAID. 
Some specific opportunities for USAID support include  the following:  
1. Support a vast increase in R&D investments related to climate adaptation and 
mitigation solu tions and strategies.   Building on related USAID grand challenges and other 
global USAID programs, Missions in the MENA region could  coordinate efforts and resources to 
 
30 https://www.adaptation -undp.org/explore/northern- africa/egypt 74 
 incentivize the private sector to scale R&D investments in response to climate change.  As a 
regional effort, global and regionally focused companies can better coordinate and focus their 
own internal resources toward this effort with USAID playing more of a coordinati ng than a 
funding role.  USAID can also encourage Egyptian companies to pa rticipate with a special 
programmatic focus and resources to address the most acute challenges in Egypt —agriculture 
and the threat of rising sea levels. 
2. Support the GoE in realizing its National Adaptation Plan and SDS, Egypt’s Vision 
2030, including incre ased coordination with private sector investments and 
initiatives.  Though Egypt has a strong policy framework in place to address climate change, as 
mentioned previously , the GoE is not willing to make serious investments without guaranteed 
support from d eveloping countries.  Starting with private sector support, USAID can build 
momentum for a more proactive response and advise the GoE on scaling this momentum through its own initiatives.  
3. Facilitate longer -term capital for private sector investments in  projects and 
business models  related to climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts in 
Egypt. USAID/Egypt could buy into the Catalyze or a similar investment facilitation program 
that focus es on financing large projects related to climate change adaptation and mitigation.  
Such initiatives could include land reclamation and indoor agriculture projects to increase 
productive capacity,  reforestation projects to reduce the effects of carbon emissions while also 
combating desertification  (Steffen, 2020),  and projects related to improving the resilience of 
coastal settlements and livelihoods.5. STRATEGIC WAYS TO ENGAGE 
THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
This section  describe s collaboration models for USAID to consider when engaging with specific private 
sector actors to address the Mission’s development challenges.  Each collaboration model includes 
example opportunities for engagement, outlines the value proposition to USAID and the business case 
for the private sector, describes potential technical approaches and structures for engagement, 
describes potential partners and pathways for sustaining results, and suggests next steps for USAID to 
engage with potential partners.  
The LEAP III team acknowledges that due to COVID -19 and the nature of remote  data collection , 
conduct ing additional data collection or a series of virtual workshops with USAID/Egypt may be 
required to further narrow down these broad opportunities into action able activities for the Mission, 
particularly as they relate to any CDCS -process- related updates to  Mission priorities.  Output from 
additional KIIs and virtual workshops with USAID/Egypt could be organized as an opportunity analysis.  
Such an analysis wou ld include an opportunity prioritization exercise conducted with the Mission’s PSE 
working group, initial desk research and due diligence on priority opportunities, and next steps in conducting outreach.  
5.1 HIGH- LEVEL TAKEAWAYS  
● The BEE in Egypt is a per sistent development challenge that cuts across all sectors.   
Complexity and corruption continue to plague GoE processes and systems and the increasing influence of the GoE in its “free” market system threatens the viability of the private sector, 
which grow s only in spite of this reality.  Respondents constantly cited o utdated and 
unnecessary regulations and excessive bureaucracy as significant barriers to entry and major impediments to growth and expansions across the different sectors. Therefore, impr ovement of 
the BEE must be a priority and represents the greatest potential for unleashing the private sector ’s true potential  to grow  the Egyptian economy.   
● Integrating  MSMEs into lead -firm supply, service, and support networks is an 
overarching business  objective.  MSMEs, however, lack capacity to comply with increasing 
quality, safety,  and traceability standards.  KIIs  regularly indicated  that the absence of effective 
public policies and regulations to support the development of MSMEs and lack of incentives for 
lead firms to invest in their development make importing raw materials and components more 
economical.  Vertical integration is  an additional alternative. While costly, vertical integration  
may be worth the expense if importing is not a viable option and if MSMEs cannot easily 
integrate into the supply chain.  To accelerate integration, MSMEs will need increased access to 
finance and business development services. Lead firms can co- finance and support this access, 
but this should be done as a comprehensive support initiative in collaboration with development 
partners like USAID, which have the experience and influence needed to coordi nate and 
connect their efforts with a wider range of development partners.  If not comprehensive, the 
current incremental measures taken by lead firms will continue to fail.  76 
 ● Egypt  needs  more  investment in training  and technical and vocational education to 
upgrade workforce  skills  in line with shifting job opportunities in all sectors.  
Workforce development is a persistent development challenge in Egypt and across the MENA 
region.  Technology is changing rapidly  and with it the necessary workforce skills, e specially for 
skilled and semi -skilled labor.  The COVID -19 crisis has amplified this challenge with production 
disruptions , added safety protocols , and health -related absences. COVID -19 is also shifting  the 
Egyptian economy in ways that are as yet unclear  but will likely change  the required workforce 
skills.  USAID and its development partners must instead focus on increasing coordination and 
co-investment between employers and public education institutions, including TVET and other 
employment -focused training programs, to better align workforce skills with changing job 
opportunities (this is envisioned to occur under the upcoming USAID Workforce Egypt project).    
● The entire Egyptian economy needs a digital transformation , including in telehealth, 
digital learning platforms, manufacturing, and government administration.  Though 
this has been a GoE and private sector priority for many years, poor coordination of initiatives 
and costly  solutions ha ve held back progress.  Given the challenges related to COVID -19, there 
has never been a better time to accelerate this process.  USAID works directly with both public and private sectors and is therefore well position ed to support and coordinate its efforts across 
all economic sectors.  Over the last few years and especially over the last several months, 
innovation has greatly increased the options and decreased the price of digital solutions.  USAID can therefore play more of an enabling and scaling than developing and testing role . 
● Youth and women represent the greatest untapped human capital resource in 
Egypt and across the MENA region.  It is crucially important to Egypt’s development that 
they be engaged and empowered. Engagement of youth and women through development 
programmin g must include their involvement in program design, decision -making, and 
implementation.  Support programs must  focus both on improving youth and women’s  capacity 
and agency to contribute  successfully to growth in the Egyptian economy.  Public -private 
partnerships to upgrade and expand TVET institutions and networks, employer training 
initiatives, and other education organizations should actively engage youth and women to 
improve their education for employment initiatives, focusing on formal job placement a nd 
retention as the most important metrics of success. USAID is planning to work on Egypt’s Gender accelerator through a partnership with the National Council for Women and the 
implementer Marketing, Implementation & Community.  
● Response to megatrends, like  climate change and population growth, must  be 
aggressive, comprehensive , and persistent, and includ e a large increase in 
investment in private sector– led R&D.  At best, adaptation and mitigation  approaches over 
the past few decades  have been incremental .  The GoE, consistent with most governments in 
the region, hesitates to invest the necessary resources.  USAID and its development partners 
will have to take a bold approach to incentivize the private sector to take the lead.  In line with 
the concept of a grand challenge and/or an innovation prize, which seek to support “bold” 
development ideas, an innovative  approach could be an R&D fund that can issue awards to 77 
 private sector firms that make breakthroughs in the development and/or commercialization of 
technologies that can address these challenges.31 
5.2 COLLABORATION MODELS  
5.2.1 AGRIBUSINESS A ND FOOD PROCESSING  
  
Collaboration Model 1 —Strengthen local supply chains with support for expanding lead firm 
investments in outgrower and other MSME support networks.  
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could expand support, including facilitating access to capital and 
targeted technical assistance , to lead firms that are investing in 
outgrower and/or MSME support networks.  This proven facilitative 
approach support s the growth of small farmers and non -farm enterprises 
by directly connecting them to markets a nd the support needed to 
access those markets.  This approach could have a significant  impact in a 
countr y like  Egypt, where strong lead firms operate alongside 
disorganized and/or under supported MSMEs to access export and local 
markets that have high and increasing quality and safety standards.  As 
mentioned previously , establishing an agribusiness hub is a good example 
of a comprehensive support network.  Various other support models are 
also viable and should be designed according to the needs of both the 
lead firm and the network of MSMEs it work s with.  
Value proposition  Lead firms in Egypt are already familiar with this approach and have 
invested in their own programs with different degrees of success. 
Programs that are highly subsidized and/or focus on participation of 
MSMEs rarely succeed.  Programs that focus on result s such as sales for 
the lead firm and increases in MSME income are more likely to succeed 
because interests are well aligned.  Rather than seeking to develop new 
approaches or doubling down on approaches that have proven ineffective, which is expensive, US AID could target direct support to help 
improve and expand already developed and well -managed lead firm 
support networks
—similar to what is envisioned through its partnership 
with Carrefour.  The demonstration effect of success will encourage 
more lead fir ms to invest in replicating successful approaches.  By 
targeting the expansion of existing networks, USAID investment can 
focus more on access to private capital, provision of targeted technical 
assistance, and support for improving the enabling environment, with  less 
expectation regarding cash contributions through grants.  
Business case Growing regional and global demand for Egyptian agricultural production 
comes with increasing quality standards and the need for consistent 
quantity of production.  To succeed, lead firms have two choices: 1) 
 
31 Such a fund could be regionally focused and attract additional financial support from other donors and private for - and not -for-profit 
institutions.  The exit strategy of such a fund should not be time bound but instead attached to addressing the challeng e successfully. The fund 
could also broadly focus on, for example, supporting R&D related to climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies. This  is just an 
example. The point is that the private sector will have to be incentivized to address these ch allenges proactively. Especially when support 
and/or regulatory response from the partner country(s) is insufficient.  78 
 invest in  vertically integrated supply chains t o control production or 2) 
invest in support networks to improve MSMEs ’ ability  to support and 
feed into their supply chains.  The latter approach is less expensive and is 
more  scalable as long as reliable, capable, and capitalized MSMEs are 
available to work with.  
Technical approach and 
structure Direct support to expand already developed and well -managed private 
sector support networks could take many forms, including GDAs and 
pay-for-performance contracts.  Direct support (not through an existing 
project) has the advantage of avoiding the urge to double down on past 
approaches implemented by USAID implementing partners.  Direct 
support  can also work in parallel to support from implemen ting p artners 
through existing USAID projects in the form of complementary technical 
assistance and access to capital for associated MSMEs.  Successful 
approaches should be scaled mainly through private capital, which could 
include USAID support in connect ing with third -party sources, such as 
impact investors.  The USAID Catalyze program could be used for this 
purpose.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Potential partners include any lead firm (producer, processor, exporter, 
retailer, etc. ), though building on the success of existing approaches holds 
the highest potential for immediate impact. Replicating success with 
Carrefour, for example, could start w ith engaging  other supermarket and 
hypermarket brands such as Metro Group’s Makro Markets. 
Sustainability potential  If the approach is to expand existing MSME support networks, USAID 
partners  will have a lot of skin in the game  and the demonstration effec t 
for future lead firm initiatives to follow  will be long -lasting .  The approach 
risks the appearance that USAID is picking winners, though given these 
lead firms are already well  established and investing in support 
approaches, the greater likelihood is that USAID will influence lead firms ’ 
approach  to maximize inclusion and benefit for MSMEs and accelerate the 
scaling of support.  Support for multiple lead firms will increase 
competition among them, which is an opportunity for MSMEs to increase 
the value they capture. 
Immediate next steps  Next steps include a prioritization exercise of high -potential lead firms, 
which the USAID/Egypt PSE W orking Group could conduct using the 
principles laid out in the recent private sector outreach training provided 
through the Middle East Bureau. Direct outreach from USAID would 
follow, allowing lead firms to self -select through a process of learning and 
informing alongside USAID re garding what approaches work best and 
why. Lead firms that are willing to expand support to MSMEs aggressively 
with their own resources and are willing to improve sustainability and 
inclusivity elements of their programs with support from USAID, should 
be prioritized.   
  
Collaboration Model 2 —Integrate a mentorship activity in to USAID agricultural support programs . 79 
 Collaboration opportunity  USAID could integrate a mentorship activity into its agricultural support 
programs  that is  aimed at helping MSMEs increase their efficiency and 
productivity and adopt  more value -added activities within the value 
chains they work.  For example, mentorship programs could take place  
between buyers and suppliers with current working relationships, 
between established and up- and-coming firms that work in the same 
sector,  or among  smaller farmers who work together through outgrower 
networks.  Encouraging mentorship while integrating MSMEs into 
formalized supply chains will accelerate the integration p rocess and 
develop  the needed skills for sustained integration.  
Value proposition  A small investment in encouraging mentorship will reinforce business -to-
business relationships and improve participation in and sustainability of 
USAID agricultural support programs.  
Business case Potential mentor firms are directly interested  in improving the capacity of 
the MSMEs they work with, but often lack the bandwidth, structure, and 
resources to do so. By providing the structure and resources, m entor 
firms can more easily justify the use of bandwidth.  Indirectly, mentor firms can use the social capital gained from such involvement to enhance 
their corporate reputation, which can have a positive impact on their 
bottom line through increased deman d for their products.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could manage such a mentorship activity as an add -on to and 
added benefit of participation in any agricultural support program across 
its entire activity portfolio.  Mentors and mentees could either self -select 
or be matched through the support progr am they are involved in.  Once 
matched, a simple application through the existing support program could entitle the mentors to reimbursement for expenses related to  meeting 
with their mentees.  To incentivize reporting, a yearly prize could 
highlight  exceptional efforts and improvements by mentors and mentees , 
respectively.  Once operational, USAID could hand off management to a 
third-party organization and seek donations from lead firms to fund the 
mentorship program.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Potential partners include any interested mentors and mentees  and any 
third-party management organization and lead firms that are interested in 
supporting the program through donations.  
Sustainability potential  Mentor/mentee relationships can lead to last ing business -to-business 
partnerships and have a cascading effect by enhancing the corporate 
reputation of the participants and the sectors they work in.  By engaging 
lead-firm sponsors and a third -party organization for management, 
USAID can ensure its co ntinuation beyond direct USAID involvement.   
Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engagement with its agricultural support 
projects to gauge potential interest and the number of initial potential 
participants.  If the program is deemed viable, a management system will 80 
 have to be developed, and then USAID can  engage potential resource and 
management partners.  
 
Collaboration Model 3 —Support investments in to digitizing agricultural supply chains, distribution, 
and sales networks.  
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could engage lead firms that are  interest ed in investing digitizing 
their agricultural supply chains and distribution and sales networks.  
Digitizing  supply chains is especially important  in the agriculture and food 
processing sector, given the poten tial to improve efficiencies in engaging 
and supporting MSMEs that work within and along their supply chains.  Such an initiative could focus support on lead firms willing to co -invest in 
digital solutions with  the MSMEs that they work with. By doing so, 
USAID would be supporting both the digitalization and integration of 
MSMEs within more formalized supply chains, which are mutually 
reinforcing priorities.  
Value proposition  By supporting lead firms expanding investments in digital solutions, 
USAID will be enabling and scaling, rather than developing and testing, 
which is less costly for USAID and holds more potential for sustaining 
and scaling impact.  
Business case Digitization is important for improving traceability and complying with 
local and international food safety and quality standards.  Given 
heightened food safety sensitivities  due to the current COVID -19 crisis, 
there has never been a better time to accelerate digitization initiatives.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could release a Broad Agency Announcement or similar 
mechanism that challenges lead firms in Egypt to seek out and invest in 
digital solutions that include an element of integration with the MSMEs 
that they work with.  The initial application could b e as simple as a 
description of the challenge and the desired or planned solution.  The co -
design phase could include USAID technical support and expertise to 
help interested companies navigate, filter, and prioritize potential digital 
solutions providers according to their needs.  USAID could then have an option to fund some  of the MSME integration component of the solution, 
if doing so clearly aligns with USAID’s development objectives.  If USAID wants to broaden the level of response, the MSME integratio n 
component could be presented as a priority rather than a requisite for participation.  USAID could also encourage solutions providers to 
respond with a description of their solutions.  In this case, the co -design 
phase could include USAID support in matc hmaking with potential 
clients, and the same  previously described  funding option could apply .  
This initiative would also support the recently launched “Digital Future” 
initiative, which is a GoE PPP that includes Microsoft and aims to  expand 
access to dig ital solutions for MSMEs.  81 
 Potential partners and their 
roles  Any lead firm in the agriculture and food processing sector, the MSMEs 
they work with, and digital solutions providers are potential partners. 
Partners would be responsible for seeking out and investing in their own 
solutions.  USAID would support this pro cess with technical expertise 
related to decision -making, matchmaking  with digital solutions providers, 
and accelerating the integration of MSMEs. 
Sustainability potential  Given that partners would be investing in their own solutions, the 
potential for sustaining and scaling impact beyond USAID support is 
great. If MSME integration is considered a priority, a cascading effect will 
also occur as MSMEs adopt and scale use of digital solutions as they 
grow.  
Immediate next steps  USAID could start engagement by consulting with current and recent 
partner lead firms, including those engaged for MSME integration through 
the SEED project.  This learning and informing exercise will help in 
understanding potential partners’  perspective a nd priorities and build 
awareness of the potential partnership opportunity. This engagement can 
be extended to digital solutions providers, including companies like 
Salesforce that presented at the recent Digital Strategy Workshop 
provided through the Midd le East Bureau.  
   
Collaboration Model 4 — Facilitate market linkages and efficient transactions by improving a  
central database of suppliers and producers.  
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could provide technical assistance to the GoE to improve the 
reliability and accuracy of its database of local suppliers and producers 
and support programs for those that are registered in the database.  PPD 
could support t echnical assistance  to ensure that buyers ’ needs  are being 
met.  A partner, such as the Federation of Business Industries via its 
Chamber of Food Industries , could organize the PPD .  Such a database 
does present  some obvious complications , including reluctance of 
informal MSMEs to be added.  For this reason  simultaneousl y improv ing 
support programs for those that are registered will be important .  The 
GoE has advanced various measures to improve its database, including 
issuing  smart cards to curb corruption associated with the distribution of 
subsidies.  Given the challenges faced by buyers, MSMEs, and the GoE in 
the current COVID -19 crisis, there has never been a better time to push 
forward swift and comprehensive measures such as these.  
Value proposition  By coordinating the necessary PPD for this type of initiative through a 
partner organization like the Federation of Business Industries, USAID 
can benefit from the influence of its network of members and from its 
collective will and resources to push forwa rd.  Technical assistance from 
USAID to the GoE can be implemented through related existing or 
upcoming projects.  82 
 Business case The lack of a reliable and accurate database has been a persistent 
challenge for buyers in Egypt, who are forced to develop pa rallel 
databases.  This represents a cost for the buyer that is often passed on to 
the MSMEs they work with, but it also a barrier to MSMEs by limiting  
their buyer options.  Therefore, database improvement would be  a clear 
win-win for both, but only if the support programs associated with being 
in the database are sufficient to overcome the perceived risks associated 
with entering the formal economy.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could coordinate PPD through a Memorandum of Understanding 
with the partner organization.  If resource support is necessary, a co -
investment element could take the form of covering meeting costs.  As 
mentioned previously , technical assistance can be implemented through 
related existing or upcoming projects, such as the Egypt Rural 
Agribusiness Strengthening activity or the Business Egypt activity.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  As mentioned previously , the Federation of Business Industries or a 
similar organization would be a potential partner.  
Sustainability potential  By coordinating the needed PPD through an existing local institution, a 
connection between the institution  and the GoE would last beyond 
USAID involvement.  Also, by involving the private sector through PPD, 
the improved database and support programs is more likely to  reflect 
their needs and therefore have a more lasting impact. 
Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engagement with the potential PPD 
partner and relevant GoE officials.  If interest in moving forward  exists, 
an MOU with partners and coordination of project resources for the 
provision of technical assistance would also be nec essary.  
   
Collaboration Model 5 —Improve the GoE’s monitoring and regulatory capacity to ensure that local 
production abides by domestic and international food safety and health standards.  
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could expand support to improve  the GoE’s  monitoring and 
regulatory capacity to ensure that local production abides by domestic 
and international food safety and health standards.  Such an initiative 
could include support for digitizing processes and  procedures that 
increase transparency and decrease complexity.  Digitizing agricultural 
supply chains as suggested in Collaboration Model 3 and improving the 
GoE database and support programs for local suppliers and producers as suggested in Collaboration  Model 4 should happen  simultaneously with 
digitizing related GoE processes and procedures. Doing so will make reporting  compliance information  easier and more efficient for 
companies  and streamlin ing support programs for MSMEs easier for the 
GoE.  Though progress has been slow, “Digital Transformations” have 
long been a stated goal of the GoE and other governments in the MENA 
region and around the world.  So has the improvement of monitoring 
and regulatory capacity.  Recent increases in regional and global demand 
for Egyptian production, along with increases in related standards and 83 
 regulations and new challenges due to the COVID -19 crisis, have 
increased the pressure to move forward with these mutually reinforcing 
initiatives. 
Value proposition  Supporting the improvement and digitization of the GoE’s monitoring and 
regulatory capacity will expand access to markets and improve the  
efficiency of transactions in the agriculture and food sector of Egypt. 
Supporting this initiative simultan eously with the improvement of a 
database of local suppliers and buyers and digitization of supply chains 
would truly be a digital transformation.  Though USAID has already 
provided support to the GoE for this purpose, including through its Food Security a nd Agribusiness Support and Egypt Rural Agribusiness 
Strengthening projects, building on this support with a focus on digitalization would  clearly add  value.  
Business case The GoE’s lack of monitoring and regulatory capacity has been a 
persistent challenge for buyers and exporters.  The GoE is protective of 
its role in this process and has recently taken steps to increase its 
involvement.  However,  the lack  of an efficient means of doing so  would  
further complicate the issue.  Therefore, the private sector has a clear 
interest  in support ing this initiative, which could be done in coordination 
with the PPD suggested in Collaboration Model 4.  
Technical approach and 
structure Technical as sistance from USAID to support this initiative could be 
managed through an existing or upcoming project.  PPD can be 
coordinated through a partner organization as suggested in Collaboration 
Model 4.  A digital transformation is expensive and may not get th e 
resource support needed from the GoE.   To get the necessary 
resources, USAID could explore coordination of efforts with other 
development partners, such as the World Bank, and partnerships with 
U.S. providers of digital solutions to help reduce the cost  of digitization.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  As mentioned previously , potential partners could include the Federation 
of Business Industries or a similar organization for PPD.  Private service 
providers could also be engaged to expand the reach, ability , and 
reliability of GoE’s regulatory capacity.  U.S. digital solutions providers 
could also be partners in terms of providing reduced -cost digital 
solutions.  
Sustainability potential  On its own, improving  the GoE’s monitoring and regulatory  capacity is a 
long-needed endeavor that will be more sustainable if implemented  in 
partnership with the private sector through PPD . Uptake of digital 
solutions by the GoE will be more sustainable if implemented together 
with digitizing supply chains and improving  support programs and 
database of local suppliers and producers  to create  a true digital 
transformation.  84 
 Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engagement with the potential PPD 
partner, the GoE, resource partners like the World Bank, and potential 
U.S. digital solutions providers.  If interest in moving forward  exists, 
USAID should directly manage coordination of USAI D efforts, with 
support from its existing or upcoming projects.  
  
5.2.2 BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SERVICES  
  
Collaboration Model 6 —Support business consulting/ development services  
Collaboration opportunity  In addition to expanding USAID’s existing efforts support ing 
development of sector- focused  BDS centers to provide technical 
assistance to MSMEs in specific sectors and/or value chains ,32 the study 
has identified two collaboration models to support business consulting 
firms:  
1. Providing t raining/knowledge transfer opportunities for local 
consultants through direct training opportunities or through pairing 
with international consulting firms on technical advisory projects 
awarded by USAID, to ensure knowledge transfer in areas where 
local f irms lack expertise.  
2. Enabling smaller and less established consulting firms to penetrate 
the market through a pay-for-results cost -sharing mechanism.  
 
Value proposition  By providing local consulting firms with technical assistance and 
opportunities to wor k closely with international firms, USAID would 
contribut e to developing the sector and upgrading the quality of business 
development services available to the private sector in general and 
MSMEs  in particular.  In addition, USAID would improv e MSMEs’ abil ity 
to access these services.  
Business case Local consulting firms , particularly smaller and less established ones , have 
limited opportunities for training and development.  They usually rely on 
the experience of the founders, who are either ex -employees in 
international consulting firms or have accumulated years of experience as 
freelancers.  Local  consulting firms are interested in  receiv ing training 
from experts in the field in both donor -centric areas ( e.g., M&E, technical 
assistance delivery, and management systems) and in more commercial 
areas including  market intelligence, digital marketing, productivity 
enhancements,  and optimization.  Furthermore, the exposure partnering 
global consulting firms  would gain  on potential USAID projects would 
enable them to develop their capacity in areas where local expe rtise is 
lacking, such as data analytics and knowledge management systems.  
 
32 This includes technical assistance related to supporting the integration of MSMEs into those sectors through e -
marketing, productivity enhancement, technology, and innovation. 85 
 Technical approach and 
structure USAID could  contribute to developing the capacity of local consulting 
firms in two ways .  The first is a more direct approach, in which USAID 
issues an RFP for experts in consulting to provide capacity building to 
local consulting firms (the terms of reference  could include a focus on 
targeting smaller and less established firms). The project can also fund 
and facilitate networking opportunities for these firms to engage with 
their global counterparts through international forums/roadshows/study tours and gain exposure to international best practices.  The second 
approach would be to pair local consulting firms with international 
consultants to provid e technical advisory services in areas where 
expertise is lacking locally.  This approach would entail including local 
consulting firms as partners to the global consulting firms and not  as 
subcontractors.  
To facilitate access to the MSME market for local consultants, the 
proposed approach would be a pay-for-results cost -sharing mechanism. 
Under this project, USAID would subsidize the cost of technical advisory 
services provided by local consulting firms for MSMEs and pay an 
incentive fee for achieving  the project’s predetermined targets.  
Conditions of disbursement would include  financial facilitation (payment 
would be received upon obtaining financing), market linkages (measured 
in sales contracts), tangible productivity enhancements, and achievement 
of certifications.  Moreover, to develop the roster of local consultants, 
USAID can set prerequisites for interested firms to ensure they are qualified to provide these services at the required standards.  One 
example of a precondition can be the completion of the training 
proposed in the aforementioned project.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  USAID contractors  would implement the activity  under competitive 
tender.  
Sustainability potential  Developing the capacity of small local consulting firms would increase the 
level of competition in a sector currently dominated by a handful of 
firms. This competition would expand options for MSMEs and private 
sector players and spur improvement among bus iness consulting service 
providers.  
The pay-for-results cost -sharing mechanism secures the buy -in of 
consulting firms that have to deliver services at certain standards to 
ensure they meet the deliverables required to receive their full fee.  
These standards will become new benchmarks for the industry that 
consulting firms will be expected to meet in general.  Furthermore, as 
mentioned previously  the successful experience of MSMEs under this 
project will have a demonstration effect on MSMEs across sectors and 
could facilitate a rise in demand for consulting services on a more commercial basis and beyond the scope of this project.   
Immediate next steps  The KIIs conducted in this study only scratched the surface of what is an 
under  researched and underdevel oped sector in Egypt.  A proposed next 86 
 step for USAID would be to conduct/commission a market study of the 
business consulting sector.  The study would provide a more in -depth 
assessment of the needs of local consulting firms to determine the main 
areas of  technical assistance that any prospective T echnical Assistance  
project  should include for capacity building in the sector.  Moreover, the 
unregulated nature of the industry means the quality of services provided 
varies significantly across the fragmented sector.  Hence, another 
purpose of the study could be to filter and short -list the small consulting 
firms with the necessary potential to benefit from technical assistance 
services USAID could provide.  Finally, the study should also include an 
evaluation of the effectiveness of the existing cost- sharing mechanisms by 
institutions like the IMC and EBRD by interviewing a wide sample of firms that participated in these initiatives.  The feedback would be useful 
input when designing the pay-for-results mechani sm. 
   
5.2.3 EDUCATION  (INCLUDING VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT )  
 
Collaboration Model 7 —Support in -house workforce development programs . 
Collaboration opportunity  Expand the skilled labor force with market -relevant qualifications across  
industries by support ing in-house workforce development programs, 
endorsing research and development initiatives by lead firms to serve 
their respective sectors, and expanding partne rships with TVET 
institutes.  
Value proposition  This is already a top-priority  area for USAID Egypt, as demonstrated by 
the commitments made under the WISE project and the new RFP for the 
follow -on project USAID Workforce Egypt. MoETE  has been very 
forthcoming and cooperative in working with the private sector to establish applied techno logy schools. WISE supported the establishment 
of an applied technology school with Al -Salhiya Agriculture company and 
the Ministry was very responsive. USAID Workforce Egypt, in collaboration with the Ministry and the private sector, will have to 
transfor m 10 technical schools into m odel schools,  which have many 
features, one of which is the ability to generate revenues. 
 
However, judging by the feedback received from the private sector 
players participating in this study, the quality of the labor force ac ross 
sectors remains one of the most critical obstacles constraining private 
sector growth.  Accordingly, an obvious need  exists to scale up existing 
projects and capitalize on the significant interest from the private sector 
and the government to co -invest in workforce development initiatives at 
a more sustainable scale.  
Business case To address the shortage of qualified labor and the mismatch between the 
academic education received by current job market candidates and the 
skills needed, lead firms across different sectors have invested in several 87 
 initiatives, which include developing i n-house training programs and 
engaging with or sponsoring higher education institutions 
(technical/vocational institutions or public universities) to develop 
market -relevant curricula and coursework and provide internship 
opportunities to students.  
These i nitiatives, however, have mainly served the needs of these lead 
firms with limited spillover effects for the rest of the sector.  Lead firms 
have expressed their interest in co -investing with USAID in larger -scale 
initiatives, e.g., sponsoring more vocatio nal and technical schools serving 
each sector, training institutes, and career advising centers.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID’s approach under the WISE project of leverag ing PPPs in 
revamping TVET institutes has proven to be successful, and sig nificant 
demand exists from both the public and private sectors for extending and 
expanding this project.  To ensure the project’s future success, however, 
the private sector concerns regarding potential partnerships with the 
government to establish new TVET institutes need to be addressed.  
These concerns include red tape in the tendering and licensing processes , 
which have deterred companies from engaging in such initiatives and resorting to in -house solutions.  Another major concern is th e lack of 
financial incentives and cost -sharing, because running technical schools is 
financially and procedurally burdensome. 
Initiatives for workforce development in other sectors may take different 
forms and entail direct partnerships with the lead firm s or relevant 
authorities in each respective sector.  The following section provides 
examples of potential partnerships in various sectors in which USAID 
could provide financial and technical support to improve the quality of 
the workforce.  
 
Potential partners and their 
roles  ● Manufacturing: Industry players  have taken  several initiatives  to 
sponsor TVET institutions and universities to provide a market -
relevant curriculum, modern teaching resources and methods, and 
internships.  These initiati ves represent  opportunities for USAID to 
expand the outreach of its workforce development programs and 
support efforts by industry players to revamp the technical and 
vocational education system.  Potential partners include El -Araby 
Group, GB Auto, BTM, an d ElSewedy.  
● Agriculture and food processing: USAID could support higher 
education institutions in Egypt to increase dialogue with lead firms in 
the sector around skills and research needs and innovative 
approaches to developing  the agricultural industry.  In addition to 
dialogue, USAID could support lead firms (e.g.,  CPC and S ekem ) by 
co-funding specific research initiatives and internship opportunities 
for students. 88 
 ● ICT: To address the shortage of qualified I CT professionals in the 
market and the brain dra in challenge, USAID could provide technical 
assistance to ITIDA under the MCIT to develop new IC T training 
programs.  
● Legal services:  USAID could contribute to providing legal students 
with practical training opportunities and employment services by 
providing grants to expand the outreach of programs like the moot 
court competitions and summer training programs organized by 
private law firms.  
Sustainability potential  Both public and private sector partners in this collaboration model are 
heavily invested in developing long -term and sustainable solutions to 
addressing a chronic challenge that has impeded the growth of the private 
sector and that of the economy as a whole. 
Immediate next steps  Because  USAID is planning to stick with the private sector –led approach 
to revamping the technical and vocational system, it should ensure that 
the project includes components that address private sector concerns 
(e.g., technical assistance to streamline tendering and licensing procedures 
and funding mechanisms to reduce the fin ancial burden placed on private 
sector players).  
With respect to alternative workforce development initiatives, USAID 
should seek to consult the relevant authorities and lead firms in the 
various sectors to design interventions with the most inclusive and  
sustainable impact.  
   
Collaboration Model 8 —Partner with ICT companies on educational reform projects.  
Collaboration opportunity  The COVID -19 pandemic has elevated the importance of distance 
education and blended learning in Egypt and accelerated the MoETE’s  
plans for technology education. Recently the M oETE released its plan for 
in-service teacher continuous professional development, which aims to 
deliver all teacher training through an online platform. USAID’s new 
Teach for Tomorrow activity is well  positioned to support the Ministry 
in these efforts, making USAID the leading donor in the online teacher training space.  
U.S. technology firms are leading in e -learning and have aggressively 
sought to partner with governments to provide these services.  For 
example, Microsoft recently launched Egypt's first e -learning platform for 
universities.  Microsoft is also interested in engaging in educational 
reform projects like those  it has collaborated with USAID on in the past, 
e.g., TILO and GILO.  However, fe edback from Microsoft indicates that 
discussing potential partnerships at the project design phase would be 
more effective than partnering on  an ad hoc basis as in the past. S cope 
also exists  for collaborating with Microsoft on expanding the outreach of 89 
 their current e -learning programs to support K –12 schools in their digital 
transformation process.  
The new consensus around technology education is a major opportunity 
to accelerate these initiatives. In partnership with the MoETE , USAID 
could engage technology companies , starting with U.S. firms,  to help 
address the gaps in e- learning uptake identified  by the M oETE and to 
bridge them in line with the Ministry’s vision for the sector. This can be done by supporting tech companies through advocacy, co -investment in 
R&D, and resource support to improve education al quality and inclusion 
and accelerate the d igital transformation of Egypt’s education system.  
Value proposition  This initiative  aligns  with USAID ’s Digital Strategy and have a significant 
cascade effect as youth become more tech savvy and translate those 
skills to the digital skills that are need ed for future employment. As noted 
throughout this report, digitization is an overarching objective across all sectors, which engaging youth through e -learning  will support .  
Business case  Even before the COVID -19 outbreak, M oETE was investing substantially 
in ICT for education solutions, in partnership with international and 
national private sector companies.  COVID -19 accelerat ed the Ministry’s 
efforts in this domain.  Some tech firms are already engaged, so the 
business case has been made and the market is quickly expanding due to 
COVID.  So rather than incentivizing their entrance, USAID would be 
accelerating the process, with the added benefit of expanding the 
presence of U .S. tech firms  in Egypt.  
Technical approach and 
structure Given this initiative ’s urgency , a broad and flexible support program is 
advisable. Resources should include technical assistance and funds for co -
investment as outlined previously . A GDA may be an effective 
mechanism and could have a similar structure to the USAID e -trade 
alliance but focused on e -learning. Alternatively, GDAs with individual 
companies focused on Egypt only could also be utilized.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Any tech firm is a potential partner, though USAID should proactively 
target U .S. firms.  
Sustainability potential  As mentioned previously , aggressive supp ort for accelerating the digital 
transformation of Egypt’s education system will support the digitization 
of all other sectors by increasing the presence of tech firms in Egypt and 
the tech savvy of Egypt’s youth. This positive impact will grow 
exponentially as tech firms expand their services as part of a greater 
digital transformation of the Egyptian economy.  
Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engaging  with the Ministry of Education to 
understand its technology plans, gaps, and interest in working with tech 
firms. If interest in moving forward  is sufficient , USAID can bring tech 
firms and the G oE together to co- create solutions. The Middle East 90 
 Bureau c an support this outreach through its ongoing private sector 
outreach activity, if needed.  
 
5.2.4 FINANCIAL SERVICES   
  
Collaboration Model 9 —Increase access to finance for MSMEs by partnering  with local financial 
institutions and BDS centers.  
Collaborati on opportunity  USAID has deep experience in developing value chain financing models 
that are customizable to almost any country context.  The keys to 
success are MSME integration into more formalized supply, service, and 
support chains; willing and able financing partners with appropriate 
financial products and interest rates; risk mitigation support for first -
mover partners; and sufficient financial literacy of the end beneficiaries.  
Though this set of circumstances  may seem overly idealistic, they  are not 
all necessary to get started and will naturally develop  once the partners 
gain experience and momentum.  The most important starting point is MSME integration, as the transaction history and strength of the 
relationship between lead firms and MSME s is what will attract willing 
financial partners.  All else will build from there.   To start, USAID could 
identify current and recent lead firm partners with a well-established  
network of MSME suppliers and/or service providers and help them 
accelerate  MSME integration in line with Collaboration Models 1 and 3 . 
Then USAID could  connect financing partners to finance MSME growth 
in line with the opportunities and backed by the regularity of transactions 
and support that are associated with integration. 
 
As mentioned previously , the financial inclusion gap in Egypt is massive 
with access for only the largest and most connected lead firms.  No 
single solution will change this reality in the short term, as will, capacity, 
and pressure to bring the financial institutions into this market  are 
lacking .  So instead of trying to pull MSMEs up into the financial markets 
as they are, financial markets must undergo disruption that forces 
financial institutions to pursue  opportunit ies to finance the massive 
MSME segment of the market  efficiently .  MSME integration and the 
continued rise of alternative financing options from NBFIs  will trigger this 
disruption, which  will be accelerated by the digitization of supply chains 
and the contin ued rise of Fintech.  
USAID has successfully supported these disruptions all over the world 
and could do so in Egypt as well. 
Value proposition  By focusing on MSME integration and the digitization of supply chains, 
USAID can support MSME growth while sett ing the groundwork for 
MSME’s financial inclusion. Successfully connecting NBFIs with 
appropriate digital financial services will have a powerful demonstration 
effect that can disrupt the financial market toward further MSME 
integration and financial inclu sion. 91 
 Business case Lead firms are willing to support their MSME networks only to a certain 
extent. Starting with a strong and reliable transaction history, lead firms 
will eventually invest in building MSMEs’ capacity to help them continue 
to grow in line with the lead firm’ s needs.  However, a t some point, 
MSMEs must be able to gain access to finance, as the lead firm will reach  
a point of diminishing returns in terms of investing in MSME support. 
Therefore, lead firms are willing to help MSMEs gain access to finance by 
providing some risk mitigation support through their contractual 
relationship, including triangulation of payments, but only as long as this 
support is less costly than the alternative, which is the failure of the 
MSMEs to grow.  Thou gh a sunk cost, lead firms are always more 
hesitant to allow MSMEs to fail if they have already invested in supporting them. For this reason focusing  on MSME integration ahead of supporting 
risk mitigation strategies to improve access to finance  is importa nt. 
Technical approach and 
structure Working through existing projects like the Egypt Rural Agribusiness 
Strengthening project, USAID could conduct initial consultations with 
existing and recent lead firm partners.  Consultations should assess the 
size of  the MSME network that the lead firm works with, the nature and 
history of their transactions with this network (at a high level), and the 
challenges and opportunities related to further integration and expansion 
of their MSME network.  USAID could make  a plan of action in line with 
Collaboration Models 1 and 3  and  then coordinate collaboration with 
the upcoming Business Egypt or any other appropriate activity to connect  potential financial partners to the lead firms, again, concentrating 
first on NBFIs with appropriate digital financial services. USAID must 
provide ongoing support by helping the lead firms and their financial 
partners develop and troubleshoot value chain financing models. Once 
established and operating, lead firms can pressure their own fi nancial 
institutions to consider extending financing to their MSME networks to keep them as a client. This model has worked well in Latin America and East and West Africa, from which USAID/Egypt could pull lessons 
learned and insights.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Any lead firm with an established and relatively well organized MSME 
network could be a potential partner, as could any financial institution. 
However, as stated previously , NBFIs with appropriate digital financial 
services would b e the best place to start.  USAID could also use BMOs 
through pay -for-performance contracts to support MSMEs in preparing 
and applying for finance and complying with the related terms and 
conditions.  
Sustainability potential  Value chain finance relationships between lead firms and financing 
partners to finance MSMEs rarely last beyond donor support, if the level 
of subsidization  is high  and the donor has a n urgent sense that the 
quantity is more important than the quality of l oans.  By focusing on 
MSME integration and the digitization of supply chains, USAID can 
indirectly support expanded access to finance for MSMEs by 92 
 strengthening the necessary conditions for it to take place.  Then by 
connecting NBFIs with appropriate digit al financial services to lead firms 
and supporting the development and troubleshooting of their 
partnerships (with modest risk mitigation support), a natural process of 
development and proof of concept will take place.   
Immediate next steps  Immediate next steps for USAID include engagement with potential lead 
firms and existing USAID projects to start assessing the potential size 
and readiness of their MSME networks for value chain financing. Once 
assessed, the timing and approach of further action would be informed 
and implemented in coordination with Collaboration Models 1 and 3. 
  
Collaboration Model 10 —Broaden the range of NBFIs.  
Collaboration opportunity  Financial institutions are notoriously risk averse ; slow to change ; and 
even slower to take on new clients, products, and services.  However,  
once compelled through disruption, proof of concept, and new entrants 
into their markets, change can be rapid,  and competition can be fierce to 
protect and expand market share.  For example,  relatively new products 
and services in Egypt that have proven successful, such as leasing, 
microfinance, and electronic payments , have grown rapidly .  However, 
the full spectrum of needed products and services remains unaddressed 
and underpenetrated —especially for MSMEs.  USAID  has an opportunity  
to accelerate change by supporting NBFIs with a focus on expanding access to Fintech and data analytics.  Amid current challenges of COVID -
19 and its effect on the Egyptian economy, digital innovation is 
accelera ting.  Digital innovation and consolidation of NBFIs (currently 
more than 800 MFIs operate in Egypt) will create a powerful force for 
change, as the NBFIs are better  equipped to disrupt and challenge the 
market dominance of more traditional financial insti tutions in Egypt.  
Value proposition  By simultaneously supporting value chain financing partnerships as 
outlined in Collaboration Model 9 and catalyzing innovation in and 
expansion of access to digital financial services by NBFIs, USAID can 
affect the necessary conditions for increased financial inclusion (including 
for MSMEs) without aggressive subsidization.  
Business case The business case for NBFIs to increase their market share in Egypt is 
clear as it represents a vast untapped market, especially for financing 
MSMEs. As mentioned previously , support  such as international best 
practices and targeted risk mitigation  is often n eeded to coordinate 
efforts toward this goal —especially if the target mark et includes MSMEs. 
The prospect of working with lead firms greatly strengthens the business 
case for these efforts.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could support NBFIs  with targeted technical assistance to bring in 
international best practices in value chain financing. USAID could also 
support innovation in and expanded access to digital financial services by 93 
 launching an innovation prize like or in conjunction with the supply  chain 
digitization initiative outlined in Collaboration Model 3.  Such a prize 
should reward  the ability to support new NBFIs with proven services and 
consolidation/expansion plans that increase financial inclusion within 
underserved sectors, populations , and regions. USAID could also pilot 
financing partnerships with lead firms as outlined in Col laboration Model 
9 and facilitate access to risk mitigation support programs such as the 
DCA loan guarantee. In addition, USAID could  facilitate  additional access 
to capital to NBFIs from impact investors.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Potential partners include all NBFIs interest ed in expanding access to 
digital financial services.  Lead firms can also be partners as outlined in 
Collaboration Model 9.  
Sustainability potential  As discussed previously , heavily subsidized finance initiati ves rarely 
succeed beyond donor support , largely because the “innovation” or the 
increase in “inclusion” focuse s more on the donor’s objective of reaching 
beneficiaries than on the business case for investing in relevant  markets. 
Therefore, a corrective ma rket retraction  often occurs  once the subsidy 
is phased out.  To avoid this situation, USAID should focus support on 
existing initiatives that have proven successful but  need support to scale 
success and/or expand to other potential clients, as explained i n 
Collaboration Model 9.  
Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engagement with NBFIs to gauge their 
current capacity and willingness to invest in this initiative. USAID could 
also engage the GoE to see if CBE resources  could be aligned toward this 
initiative, which is in line with current policy. However , waiting for this 
support may end in inaction.  
  
5.2.5 HEALTH  CARE  
  
Collaboration Model 11 —Partner with Egyptian health care providers, particularly healthtech, with 
a specific inter est in FP/RH issues . 
Collaboration opportunity  The USAID PSE Visioning Sessions on December 20, 2019 , note  and the 
PSLA team  confirms  that an opportunity  exists to partner with private 
sector health  care firms to provide much needed training and capacity 
building in exchange for greater support for FP/RH  based on lessons 
learned to date from the Family Planning through the Private Sector 
project . 
Value proposition  By providing training to health  care companies, USAID can leverage 
limited funds with an outsized impact on FP/RH uptake.  
Business case Health businesses gain from much needed capacity building and technical 
support for their staff, enabling them to meet client needs and boost 
revenues more effectively . 94 
 Technical approach and 
structure USAID can expand t he model of the Family Planning through the Private 
Sector pro ject. 
Potential partners and their 
roles  KIIs, while limited, did indicate potential opportunities for partnership . 
DKT Egypt , in particular, expressed  a strong preference to partner.  
Sustainability potential  Evidence from the World Bank, the World Health Organization , and 
Population Services International point s to success with this model.  
Immediate next steps  Given the constraints of conducting a multi -sector PSLA, the team could  
only identify one company, DKT Egypt, that was  explicit ly interest ed in 
FP/RH interventions.  Dawi and Smartcare are open to capacity building 
and training support from USAID, which co uld offer an opportunity to 
include a FP/RH element, but FP/RH was not raised as a priority. To 
assess private sector interest, USAID should conduct a phone survey of 
the top 100 health care firms to 1) identify interested firms, 2) 
understand motivation f or partnership, and 3) document possible 
partnership types.  
 
    
5.2.6 MANUFACTURING 
  
Collaboration Model 12 —Co-invest with BMOs and leading private sector players in manufacturing 
industries to enable MSMEs in the feeding industries to scale  up and compete domestically . 
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could identify current and recent lead firm partners that have a 
well-established network of MSME suppliers and/or service providers and 
support them in accelerating MSME integration in line with Collaboration 
Models 1 and 3 above, then connect financing partners to finance MSME 
growth backed by the regularity of transactions and support that are 
associated with integration. To pull MSMEs up into the financial markets, 
there must be a disrupti on that forces financial institutions into pursuing 
this market segment. This disruption will be triggered by both MSME 
integration and expanding access to alternative financing options from 
NBFIs, and it will be accelerated through the digitization of sup ply chains 
and the continued rise of digital financial services (Fintech). BDS can also 
be used through pay for performance contracts to support MSMEs in 
preparing and applying for finance and complying with the related terms 
and conditions.  
Value proposi tion Strengthening Egyptian MSMEs ’ capacity  to manufacture production 
inputs and improving the linkages among domestic value chain actors  
allow  USAID to help promot e a more sustainable growth model for the 
manufacturing sector by decreasing manufacturers ’ reliance  on imports 
for reliable, affordable, and high -quality components.  
Business case BMOs, like the Engineering Export Court Council, express substantial 
interest in  creating markets for locally sourced components by 95 
 developing local suppliers ’ capacity  to produce production inputs that are 
usually imported by the leading manufacturers in the sector.  Products 
that could be developed locally (to substitute imports) include PCBs, dye 
caster and gaskets for refrigerators and freezers, gas valves, LED s, 
compressors, and small motors for appliances.  Several lead firms in the 
engineering sector  are interested  in endorsing initiatives to invest in 
developing the capacity of MSMEs in the sector and enabling them to 
supply their production inputs.  Companies like FRESH and ELSewedy 
have offered access to their resources ( e.g., electromagnetic labs)  to 
enable local suppliers to produce the components that meet the desired 
specifications and the required quality.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could  partner  with BMOs ( e.g., the Engineering Export Council 
and the Federation of Industries) and lead firms in the engineering sector 
to develop a shared resource center for MSMEs to provide access to 
markets, capital, technical assistance, and technology. The services 
provided by the center c ould include  
 
● Developing databases on exis ting suppliers, product ranges, and 
market data on demand and supply ( i.e., quality, quantity, 
specification, and price) to enhance transparency and promote 
better exchange s between suppliers in the feeding industry and 
manufacturers in the national value chain.  
● Building supplier capacity to upgrade their products in terms of 
quality, innovation, and diversification by providing the required 
training and funding  and promoting cooperation with technology 
partners (companies and research institutes) to enable  MSMEs to 
test, examine , and apply new emerging technologies.  
● Implementing t echnical advisory programs to help MSMEs enhance 
their business models, internal operation systems, and product 
development.  
 
● Investing  in human capital through training opportunities, in 
technical, vocational, and business skills ( e.g., management and 
marketing) to ensure availability of the skilled workforce needed for 
the MSMEs.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Potential co -investor s in this project are BMOs like the Engineering 
Export Council and the Federation of Industries  and lead firms in the 
engineering sector, e.g., El-Araby  Group , FRESH, and ElSewedy.  
Sustainability potential  Lead firms would have strong vested interests in ensuring this project 
succe eds, as it would potentially boost their competitiveness in both the 
domestic and export markets.  Securing their buy -in by including them as 
co-investors further enhances the sustainability of the project beyond 
USAID’s involvement.  96 
 Immediate next steps  Engage in discussions with BMOs and lead firms to design the project.  
  
Collaboration Model 13 —Partner with the Ministry of Trade and Industry to support industrial 
clusters for feeder industries.  
Collaboration opportunity  Another collaboration model to strengthen value chains in the 
manufacturing industry is to support the de velopment of industrial 
clusters in sectors with high market demand, growth , and export 
potential.  Given the potential for cluster -based development, the 
Egyptian Government has made cluster- based industrialization a key pillar 
of Egypt’s SDS to 2030. Pro moting business clusters in manufacturing 
would significantly enhance sector  productivity , promote forward and 
backward linkages, localize value addition , and realize the sector’s job 
creation potential.  
To increase the amount of value addition that occur s in a country, simply 
enact ing policies that force manufacturers to utilize local components  is 
not enough .  Though the purpose of such policies is logical (to increase 
the amount of value addition realized locally beyond wages paid to 
laborers for assembly), manufacturers can only comply if local options  
are reliable and competitive .  Local MSMEs can supply components and 
provide service s but need support to comply with the standards of 
manufacturers.  Otherwise, and as noted  previously , vertical integration 
becomes the only alternative to importation. Many  proven models for 
supporting the development of industrial clusters  exist.  Special economic 
zones (SEZs) and industrial parks are a good start, as they provide 
incentives for manufacturers to locate and expand their operations in the 
partner country. To take full advantage of the potential of these 
investments, manufacturers also need  support for developing the capacity 
of local MSME suppliers with on-site access to support services, including 
those needed to streamline the exportation process.  Though Egypt has 
enacted policies and developed several SEZs and industrial parks for this 
purpose, like many countries in the region, the attitude is  “if you build it, 
they will come .” However, this is not enough.   
The usual next step is to develop additional infrastructure around these 
economic centers and give local MSMEs incentives to locate near the 
manufacturers.  What is missing is a sustained effort to build the se 
MCMEs’  capacity to become reliable suppliers a nd service providers , 
connect them with affordable investment and financing options to fuel 
their growth , and continually improve all the services needed to 
streamline the exportation process.  USAID can build on lessons learned 
in other countries in the r egion, such as Morocco where major 
improvements have been made in industrial clusters in the textile, 
automotive,  and aeronautics sectors.  Though capacity development of 
local MSMEs should be a co -investment between the manufacturers and 
the partner country, a development partner like USAID  can accelerate 
the process .  97 
 Value proposition  Most investment needed to develop industrial clusters i s already done in 
the form of setting up the SEZs and industrial parks and expanding 
manufacturing capacity.  Building the capacity of local MSME suppliers and 
service providers is a crucial next step to unlocking the full potential of a 
well-functioning  industrial cluster.  This incremental investment is 
relatively small, yet extremely valuable (especially for the local 
community) as it helps to localize value addition.  USAID’s role could be 
catalytic by providing technical assistance and international be st practices 
and facilitating access to finance and investment capital to MSMEs to fuel 
their growth.  
Business case  As noted previously , functioning clusters can improve the efficiency and 
profitability of manufacturing operations , but building MSMEs ’ capacity  
takes time and has a less certain outcome than vertical integration or 
importation of components —even if the former is less costly  in the long  
run.  To accelerate the time frame, reduce the cost , and improve the 
certainty of the outcome, support from a development partner like USAID is necessary, especially if the needed support is not coming from 
the partner country.   
An example of  a sector in which technical and financial support to 
clusters can help MSMEs realize their potential is the RMG sector. 
Functional clusters in this sector enhanced the competitiveness of local 
suppliers of components and services and enabled them to take 
advantage of growing demand in European markets.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could assist the local and national government s, including the 
Ministry  of Trade and Industry and MSMEDA,  in improving their support 
programs for industrial cluster development by bringing in regional and 
international best practices and arranging site visits and mentorship 
opportunities with more established clusters in Egypt and across the 
region. USAID could also assist manufacturers with resources for 
developing support systems for their MSME suppliers, including training 
centers, joint R&D and technology diffusion initiatives , and workforce 
development programs.  USAID can also facilitate access to business 
development services and investment capital for t he supported MSMEs, 
including through the EAEF.     
Potential partners and their 
roles  Manufacturers, local and national government agencies , and MSMEs are 
all potential partners for USAID.  However,  as mentioned previously , the 
focus should start with improving existing industrial clusters.  
Sustainability potential  By focusing on improving existing industrial clusters, USAID can provide 
an incremental, yet catalytic investment that will double as a powerful 
demonstration effect to incentivize furt her cluster development. Keeping 
the GoE involved to the furthest extent possible is important as the ideal 
collaboration for developing  industrial clusters is as a public -private 
partnership between manufacturers and the partner country.  98 
 Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID include engaging  manufacturing companies that 
have already invest ed significantly  in developing  industrial clusters and 
engaging  with the appropriate GoE support agencies.  This could be done 
through an existing or upcoming project like Egypt TRADE.  USAID 
could also take stock of best practices by collaborati ng with other 
Missions in the region , including USAID/Morocco.  
   99 
 5.2.7 TOURISM  
Collaboration Model 14 —Develop the ca pacity of tour operations, boost management systems, and 
increase the adoption of digital solutions.  
Collaboration opportunity  USAID could engage major hotels, mass tourism operators, and digital 
booking platforms to build MSMEs ’ capacity  to provide more 
personalized experiences to tourists in line with shifting trends in the 
tourism industry.  Major hotel chains like Marriott are making big 
investments in booking platforms that provide local experiences for their guests.  These experiences are often referred to as cultural, eco, 
experiential, and more broadly alternative tourism options, the entry 
point being the hotel or a mass tourism package that can be expanded to 
personalized options for clients.  This strategy is mean t to be a 
differentiating factor over competing mass tourism options.  Digital 
booking platforms including TripAdvisor  and Airbnb  also continue to 
expand their market share in alternative tourism by providing a convenient and secure booking option.  Unfort unately, most traditional 
MSME operators cannot  take advantage of these trends.  As they 
continue to rely on street traffic to pull in clients, they are rapidly losing 
market share to the growing number of international operators that 
utilize digital booki ng platforms.  
As Egypt reopens to tourism, tourists will seek experiences that they can 
trust to be safe, including reduced contact by joining smaller groups and 
using digital booking and payment systems.  For convenience, clients are 
more likely to book these experiences through a single digital booking 
platform such as TripAdvisor  or through a platform connected to their 
hotel or mass tourism operator.  To connect  to these platforms, MSME 
operators must be able to operate their tours safely, reliably,  and 
consistently according to high customer service standards.  They must 
also be able to process digital payments and differentiate themselves with 
effective digital marketing strategies.  
Meeting  these standards will require  technical assistance to develop 
MSME operators ’ capacity  in marketing  and management systems and 
adoption of digital solutions. MSMEs  will also need access to finance to 
upgrade their systems accordingly.  Though alternative tourism options 
are in demand, it is much easier for major hote ls, mass tourism 
operators , and digital booking platforms to allow international operators 
to fill the demand.  To increase the inclusion of local MSME operators , 
USAID will need to incentivize these partners to engage with them —
highlighting their authenti city and local knowledge as an important value 
addition.  
Value proposition  By working in partnership with major hotels, mass tourism operators , 
and digital booking platforms, USAID will have an effective and efficient 
means of upgrading  both the capacity and the market linkages needed for 
greater inclusion of MSME operators within a shifting tourism sector in Egypt.  However,  significant co -investment will likely be required to do 100 
 so, as the rise of international operators  presents an alternative .  Even 
so, such a partnership model would include skin in the game from 
partners and a direct linkage with the market, which will be less 
expensive for U SAID and have a higher likelihood of success than direct 
capacity development only.  
Business case  As mentioned previously , the authenticity and local knowledge of local 
MSME operators  has value , but this value must be weighed against the 
time and resources needed to upgrade their capacity to adhere 
consistently  to service and management standards and transact through 
digital booking platforms.  
Technical approach and 
structure The basic requisite for MSME operators is proficiency in the English 
language.  Next is management systems that are sufficient to book and 
process payments through digital booking platforms.  However,  most 
important, MSME operators must be able to comply w ith high customer 
service standards.  Working with major hotels, mass tourism operators , 
and digital booking platforms, USAID would need to first define the 
current demand for alternative tourism options and then assess and 
segment MSME operators according  to their capacity needs for reaching 
this demand.  Once defined, USAID and its partners could engage local 
BMOs to update training programs, and  USAID could then offer BMOs a 
pay-for-results contract to train MSME operators to comply with 
standards set by USAID’s partners.  As a co -investment, MSMEs 
operators would need to invest in the needed systems to progress 
through training.  As an incentive to complete the training program, 
USAID ’s partners could provide a year of free access to their digital 
booking platforms and cover the cost of initial promotions for their 
clients, along with ongoing mentorship and support as the MSME 
operators grow as a company.  
Potential partners and their 
roles  Potential partners could  include major hotels, mass tourism operators, 
and digital booking platforms to define standards, provide a market, and 
co-fund initial access and promotions for MSMEs on their digital booking 
platforms.  BMOs and the MS ME operators would also be partners in 
providing services and investment in improving their own operations.  
Sustainability potential  By working with partners that are a major gateway for access to clients, 
USAID will be able to connect the capacity that i s needed by MSME 
operators with a growing market for alternative tourism, though USAID 
may need to lead the initiative  initially  and subsidize BMOs to provide the 
needed training.  Success will encourage a lasting linkage between BMOs 
and USAID’s partners to continue collaboration while phasing out USAID support.  The GoE also prioritizes the success of MSME operators and 
can be engaged to provide additional resources to support the initiative.  
Immediate next steps  Next steps for USAID would include  engaging  major hotels, mass 
tourism operators, and digital booking platforms to gauge interest.  If 
interested, USAID would then need to assess the potential pool and 101 
 capacity of BMOs and MSME operators for participation in the program.  
USAID partners co uld be engaged through MOUs pledging and defining 
their support ahead of a co -design workshop to further develop the 
initiative.  BMOs could be engaged through the upcoming Integrated 
Management of Cultural Tourism in Egypt activity or any other aligned 
activity.  
 
Collaboration Model 15 —Develop a tourism partnership fund.  
Collaboration opportunity  Regarding  funding for tourism MSMEs, the team found  little interest from 
private banks  and no existing commercial financial options/instruments 
that provide feasible terms and cater to the needs and conditions of 
MSME  operators and the seasonal nature of the tourism industry. 
Accordingly, interviewees were interested in or expecting from USAID 
either grants or subsidized funding to support small projects or initiatives 
they were undertaking.  Suggestions included  an initiative for an innovative 
funding mechanism that the M inistry  of Tourism  to address the lack of 
access to finance for small - and medium- sized players in the sustainable 
tourism field that  has been stifled by red tape/bureaucracy.  The proposed 
funding mechanism is a zero -interest tourism fund designed to finance 
tourism operators that adopt energy efficiency technology solutions.  The 
number of rooms (capacity of the facility)  would determine the size of 
funding , execution milestones would serve as conditions of disbursement , 
and repayments would be directly linked to occupancy rates.  
One best practice activity in the region that  provides  lessons learned in 
this context is the USAID/Jordan Building Economic Sustainability through Tourism Project.  BEST provides grants and technical assistance for 
product and market development, tourism industry competitiveness, 
public- private partnerships,  and job creation.  
USAID could support a similar fund to provide finance, grants , and 
technical assistance for tourism companies in Egypt to revive and realign their products and marketing.  Key goals may include  improving Egypt’s 
competitiveness amid global shifts in the global tourism industry , 
upgrading workforce  capacity,  and incre asing public -private partnerships 
to protect Egypt’s tourism resources.  Such a fund could also be used to 
finance and support the capacity development of MSMEs as outlined in Collaboration Model 14.  
Given the need to revive Egypt’s tourism sector post -COVID, this 
initiative would be especially timely and could also help to diversify the 
tourism industry in Egypt to include cultural and eco -tourism options. 
Partners in the fund could include major hotels, mass tourism operators, digital booking platforms , and a wider range of lead firms in Egypt, as well 
as other MNCs such as the Chaudhary Group, that have expressed 
interest in investing in Egypt’s tourism sector.  102 
 Value proposition  By bringing in major hotels, mass tourism operators, and digital booking 
platforms, the fund could help bridge the gap between the current mass 
tourism model and USAID’s desired shift to alternative tourism options, 
including cultural and eco- tourism.  L inkages and co -investment to build 
the capacity of MSME operators to expand alternative tourism options  
would accomplish this shift .  A multi -source fund also creates shared 
responsibility and risk and eases the financial burden on USAID.  
Business case  Fund p artners would benefit from rapid recovery of Egypt’s tourism 
sector and its realignment with shifting global demand trends toward 
alternative tourism options, directly, by increasing tourist traffic and 
enhancing their experience of tourism in Egypt, and indirectly, by 
increasing demand for all other goods and servi ces as tourism revives and 
grows in Egypt.  
Technical approach and 
structure USAID could launch such a fund  through various mechanisms , including 
collaboration or using a structure like the current Egyptian -American 
Enterprise Fund. Alternatively, such an initiative could also be 
accomplished through a project or GDA.  Given the importance of the 
tourism sector in Egypt and the threat to the sector due to the current 
COVID -19 crisis, suc h a fund would be most effective if not time bound, 
but instead developed as a private entity that can eventually phase out 
USAID support.  
Sustainability potential  If developed as a private entity, the fund would be sustainable as long as it 
proves its ab ility to effect the desired outcomes and continue to grow its 
resource base through returns on investments and loans and by attracting 
additional capital.  
Potential partners and their 
roles/Immediate next steps  USAID could begin outreach by contacting donor organizations it has  
worked with in the past, such as UNIDO and UNDP, or other 
organizations active in the region, such as the World Bank , to gauge their 
interest as core funding partners.  Next, USAID could engage major 
hotels (Hyatt, Marriott, and Hilton), mass tourism operators, digital 
booking platforms, and other large firms with which it already has  a 
relationship.  For example, this could include the Ford Foundation, 
Microsoft, Vodafon e, General Motors, GE Foundation, BP, Chevron, and 
the like. These partners could have an interest in supporting improved transportation or digitalization within the tourism sector.  Lastly, USAID could conduct outreach to other new potential partners, suc h as the 
Chaudhary Group.  
  
5.2.8 CROSS -CUTTING THEMES   
  
Collaboration Model 16 —Support PPD across the Egyptian economy to address enabling 
environment barriers.  103 
 Collaboration opportunity  PPD directly engages public and private sector stakeholders  in an 
outcome -focused dialogue.  PPD works best when it achieves results that 
directly affect businesses.  When both the process and results are 
communicated to the community at large, including t he public and private 
sectors and civil society, regionally or nationally, then PPD can become a 
trusted avenue for achieving results.  Given the prevalence of enabling 
environment constraints across the Egyptian economy, PPDs offer a 
mechanism to engage  constructively  with the GoE on reform.  
Value proposition  PPD can be used to support reform or action agendas across USAID 
priority areas.  
Business case PPD enables  the private sector to work with public sector counterparts 
to identify priorities and create a framework for reform.  
Technical approach and 
structure The structure of the PPD will need to be tailored to the specific issues 
and actors in each sector.  In addition to working with some of the more 
traditional think tanks (like the Egyptian Center for Economic Studies), 
scope exists for trying to establish more concrete and structured 
platforms for private sector comment on policies.  The opportunity to 
engaging more non -traditional actors also exists , for example, by training 
journalists and academics to contribute to the policy discussion . 
Potential partners and their 
roles  ● Education:  Existing private associations and forums for dialogue 
between private providers and regulatory authorities have been 
ineffective to date.  However, leading private sector players, e.g., 
CIRA and AUC, have taken new initiatives, co-leading a private 
education committee under AmCham that USAID  can support .  
● Financial services:  Foster dialogue between regulatory entities 
(CBE and the FRA) and the private sector to streamline regulatory frameworks that are resp onsive and aligned with advancement and 
innovation in providing  financial services. 
● Health:  Facilitate dialogue among  private pharmaceutical firms, the 
Ministry of Health , and the Egyptian Drug Authority to advocate for 
reforms in the existing regulatory f ramework (related to the pricing 
system and regulatory approval process).  
● Legal services sector:  Take a leading role in developing  PPD 
between private sector law firms and public authorities over 
required legal system  reforms.  Absent  existing channels, la w firms 
have resorted to participating in workshops organized by public 
institutions for consultations over legislative and regulatory reforms 
and/or lobbying through business associations.  For example, 
Shalakany Law Firm has actively engaged in workshops conducted by 104 
 bodies like GAFI on how to improve the BEE in Egypt and other 
regulatory bodies ( e.g., the Financial Regulatory Authority) when 
they hold consultations over new legislation.  Hassouna & Abou Ali  
Law Firm  have resorted to lobbying through associations like 
AmCham and the Junior Business Association to advocate for 
legislative and regulatory reforms.  
● Manufacturing sector: Facilitate dialogue between the private and 
public sectors to promote the reforms requ ired to develop 
manufacturing industries.  Over the past few years, leading players 
like El- Araby  Group  and the Federation of Egyptian Industries have 
been in dialogue with the authorities (including the Prime Minister 
and relevant ministries) advocating f or legislati ve reforms (including 
increasing the minimum requirement of local components) and 
introducing incentives for MSMEs operating in high -tech 
manufacturing industries.  However, these efforts have yet to bear fruit. 
● Tourism: Facilitate public -private dialogue with groups such as the 
ETF, the Tourism Investors Association, the Egyptian Tourism Authority, the Tourism Development Authority, and NUCA  that are  
particularly related to issues of small operators such as improving 
enabling environment.  
Sustainability potential  PPD, if effectively organized and funded, can be one of the most cost -
effective ways of achieving enabling environment reform.  
Immediate next steps  USAID should  take stock  of all PPD efforts across priority sectors and 
identify operational gaps.  
 
 
  
  ANNEX I. KEY INFORMANT 
INTERVIEW (KII) GUIDE 
The following questions are modified from the PSLA How -to Guide (Annex I) and the five questions of 
the new USAID PSE Policy. 
Please make sure to ask each question and take sufficient notes to allow the rest of the team to read the 
notes, understand what the person said, and generate analysis. Also, if the respondent gives a lackluster 
answer or does not  seem to understand the question as it was asked, please probe each question. We 
provide an illustrative list of probe exa mples, use them as you see fit.  
  
Interviewer Name    
Interview #    
Date of Interview    
Platform and Mode of Interview  [Skype, WhatsApp, Telephone, etc.] [Video or call 
format] 
Company Name    
Respondent Position    
Respondent Sex  Man   Woman  
Company/Organization Sector    
Company/Organization Key Activities    
  
PRIVATE SECTOR QUESTIONS  SECTION 1: RESPONDENT INFORMATION  
QUESTION NOTES  106 
 General Business/Organization Information  
1. I would like to learn about your 
business/organization’s activities and programs. 
Please tell me about your main activities.    
  
Business Interests  
2. What new opportunities or activities is your 
organization/business currently pursuing in Egypt?  
Probe: For non- profit : In what ways are you 
expanding programming or activities?    
3. How is your organization/business pursuing 
these opportunities?  
Probe: For non- profit : How are you expanding 
programming or activities?   
Business Challenges  
4. What are the main challenges to 
growing/maintaining your business/organization?    
5. How is your business/organization addressing 
these challenges, including those that may not be 
within your direct control, but those that affect 
your operations?    
6. How has your business/organization prioritized 
its response to these challenges?    
Aligned Interests and Engagement Potential  107 
 7. What development partners have you worked 
with or would you like to work with in addressing 
these same challenges? If you  have worked with 
partners, what was the nature of this partnership? 
(If USAID, please see Section 6)    
8. Can you briefly discuss any current or former 
corporate social responsibility (CSR) work your 
business/organization has engaged in?   
9. What, if any, specific factors are currently 
holding back increased investment in your 
business’/organization’s involvement specific to 
these support/CSR/engagement programs we have 
discussed?    
10. How could partners such as USAID help to 
alleviate or eliminate these challenges?  
Probe: In what ways would you envision your 
business/organization partnering with USAID to 
solve problems? What would this collaboration 
look like and why would it be needed?   
Previous Collaboration with USAID  
11. Can you tell me about how this collaboration 
started, how you collaborated, and how it was 
designed?    
  
12. Can you tell me what this collaboration 
achieved? Was this considered a success? How 
was success defined? What metrics specifically did 
you use to define this success?    
13. What did your business/organization learn 
from this collaboration with USAID? Has it 
influenced other parts of your business? How?    108 
 Supplemental: Sector -Specific Questions  
Based on the responses to the questionnaire, questions on sector -specific issues and opportunities will be 
drafted and circulated to the team.  
  
BUSINESS MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS  
Question  Notes  
1. How do you work with the Government to 
resolve challenges related to the business -enabling 
environment (laws, regulations, and procedures)? 
Are any particular agencies helpful in resolving 
these challenges? If so, which  one(s)  and why?    
  
2. How effective are your organizations' 
communications and advocacy efforts in effecting 
change? Within the Government? Within client 
organizations?    
3. Have you ever worked with an international 
donor organization, USAID or other, in support of 
a particular program or service provided by your 
organization ( business development service , 
advocacy, market linkages) and/or in support or 
your organizations' internal capacity development 
objectives? If so, how and was the program 
considered a success?    
  
DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS  
1. What economic development programs does 
your organization support? What other program 
areas does your organization  support  (health, 
education, governance)?    
  QUESTION NOTES  109 
 2. Does your organization work in coordination 
with other development partners? With USAID?  If 
so, how and has this coordination proven useful in 
furthering the objectives of your programs? Is this 
collaboration coordinated through a Joint 
Development Par tner Working Group?    
3. Can you provide an example of working 
collaboratively with USAID to address a 
development challenge related to private sector 
development and/or engagement with the private 
sector as a joint initiative to reach development 
goals?    
  ANNEX II. SUMMARY OF ONLINE 
SURVEY  
SECTION 1: RESPONDENT INFORMATION (N=25)33 
  
The respondents represented various private sector companies and business membership organizations 
in Egypt. Figure 1 presents the survey sample by sex and age group in years.  
 
 Figure 1: Survey Sample by Sex and Age Group (years) (n=25)  
 
 
Respondents were in their current role for an average of nine years, although this ranged between zero 
and 32 years. Company positions represented included C hief Executive Officer, Chairman, Managing 
Director, Vice President, Board Member, Lawyer, Assistant to Chief Executive Officer, Director, 
Manager, Foreign Affa irs, or Partner.  
SECTION 2: GENERAL BUSINESS/ORGANIZATION INFORMATION (N=20)  
  
Most respondents represented local companies or business organizations (n=16), whereas four were 
multinational. Figure 2 presents the scope of geographic regions in which the mu ltinational companies 
have operations and the regions in Egypt within which  all respondents operate. 
 
 
33 The total number of respondents to start the survey was 25. However, some respondents did not complete the entire survey, sto pping at 
different points. Each section will note the total number of respondents that d id answer all section questions.  
111 
 FIGURE 2: REGIONS OF OPERATION FOR MULTINATIONAL RESPONDENTS (N=4) AND REGIONS OF 
OPERATION IN EGYPT (N=20)  
      
 
Respondents represented companies or business organizations across sectors (Table 1 1), who have 
been in operation in Egypt from 0–5 years to more than 20 years (Figure 3).  
 
FIGURE 3: YEARS IN OPERATION IN EGYPT (N=20)  
 
 
TABLE 11: COMPANY OR BUSINESS ORGANIZATION ACTIVITIES BY SECTOR, KEY SERVICES, AND 
TARGET DEMOGRAPHIC (N=20)34 
Main Sector of 
Operations  Key Services, Products, or 
Mission  Target Demographic  
Financial Services (n=1)  -Microenterprise credit  -All microentrepreneurs in non -
seasonal activities  
Health (n=1)  -Services for job creation, providing high -
quality education, addressing health 
topics, and providing community 
development for marginalized 
communities  -Marginalized communities, with a 
focus on the disabled, women, and 
children in shelters  
 
34 Some respondents indicated they operate across two or more sectors.  
112 
 Agriculture and Food 
Processing (n=10)  -Fresh and frozen agricultural products  
-Horticultural technical extension services  
-General and post -harvest logistics  
-Empowering and providing services to 
marginalized communities  
-Organic herbs and spices  -Worldwide  
-Farmers (small, medium,  and large)  
-Exporters (small, medium , and large)  
-Distributors in Europe  
-Marginalized Egyptian communities  
Business and Legal 
Services (n=1)  -Legal services  -Foreign companies doing business in 
Egypt and local companies  
ICT (n=2)  -Technology investments  
-E-services, correspondence, meetings, 
quality and archiving management systems  -Startups  
-Government organizations  
Oil and Gas 
Cross: Manufacturing 
(n=1) -Manufacturing and marketing of floor 
coverings -Worldwide  
Business Associations 
(n=2) -Providing services to industry community  
-Supporting businesses socially and 
economically, seeking new markets and 
networking opportunities  -Industry community  
-Egyptian business community  
Tourism (n=2)  -Building and managing ecolodges  -Tourists in Egypt who seek eco -
friendly and authentic travel 
experiences 
Other (n=3)  
*Textiles, Government 
Service, and Electronics  -Production of clothing and textiles  
-Manufacturing and distribution  
-E-services  -All 
-Government organizations  
  
Most businesses and organizations represented in our sample had more than 500 full -time employees 
and 10 or fewer part-time employees (Figure 4).  Businesses and organizations in the sample either had 
women employees represent 10 –25 percent  (n=7) or 26 –50 percent  (n=7) of full- time employees and 
less than 10  percent  of part -time employees (n=13) (Figure 5). Businesses and organizations in the 
sample either had youth employees represent 26 –50 percent  (n=7) of full- time employees and less than 
10 percent  of part-time employees (n=16) (Figure 6).  
 113 
 FIGURE 4: NUMBER OF FULL -TIME AND PART -TIME EMPLOYEES (N=20)  
 
 
FIGURE 5: PERCENTAGE OF WOMEN EMPLOYEES WORKING FULL -TIME AND PART -TIME (N=20)  
 
 
FIGURE 6: PERCENTAGE OF YOUTH EMPLOYEES WORKING FULL -TIME AND PART -TIME (N=20)  
 
 
Of the 20 respondents in this section, seven  had current agreements with the Government of Egypt. 
The rest did not.  
SECTION 3: BUSINESS/ORGANIZATION INTERESTS (N=16)  
 
114 
 Table 12 presents the growth strategies that businesses or organizations in this survey are currently 
pursuing to expand operations in Egypt in the near  term (1– 5 years) and the long term (beyond 5 years).  
 
TABLE 12: GROWTH STRATEGIES BY SHORT/MEDIUM AND LONG TERM (N=16)  
  Short and Medium Term  Long Term  
Strategy  Examples  Examples  
Increase 
operations/  
production  -More products and brands  R1 
-Expand clothing production capacity R3 
-Increase distribution R5 
-Engaging new suppliers R5 
-Enforcing our brand by building a new ecolodge 
in a new location R10  -Increase monthly production to reach 80k  units 
from current 30k units R2 
-Achieving growth rates in Egyptian agricultural 
exports by up to 20  percent  R3 
-Reaching full production capacity within five  
years and reaching the maximum production 
limit R4 
-More investments to increase production 
capacity vertically and horizontally to suit the 
requirements of our customers worldwide R6 
R&D/  
digitalization  -Innovation  R2 
-Developing digital content and solutions R7  
  -We plan on continuing the efforts we exert, 
enhancing our reporting and targeting of ultra-
poor, as well as launching an MIS  system to 
better track our partners ’ data, so we are able 
to focus on learning an expand our reach R8 
-Develop its products to meet market 
requirements R10  
Enter new 
markets  -Spread geographically  R1 
-Enter a new scope of business, for example, in 
the extraction of medicinal herbs R8 -Expansion into practice areas R11 
-We are planning to expand in Egypt by 
building a new ecolodge in a new location (west 
bank of Luxor) and , after three years, build our 
first ecolodge outside Egypt, mainly in Oman 
R12 
Marketing  -Improve marketing R9   115 
 Upgrading  -Update dyeing and finishing machines R3 
-Investing in machines and lean manufacturing 
R5 -Use new technology in fabric dyeing and 
finishing to improve the impact on environment 
R2 
-Focusing on delivering the highest quality of 
product to Egyptian households R5 
Improving 
regulatory 
environment  -Cooperating with official authorities in Egypt to 
work on removing any obstacles to the Egyptian 
agricultural exports system R4    
Increasing 
services  -Cooperating with the operating authorities in 
Egypt to provide various services to the 
agricultural sector R4 
-Providing appropriate technical support to 
exporters and farmers to raise efficiency and effectiveness R4 
-Cooperating with international agricul tural 
technical experts to train fresh school and 
university  graduates on agricultural best 
practices R6 -Become a prominent leader in transmission of 
knowledge and innovative concepts that pave 
the road to the advancement of the Arab 
community at large. R7 
Engage with new 
partners  -Engage with international donors to expand our 
activities all over Egypt R6  
-Participate in business associations R9 
-Partnering with new tourism companies R10   
Reducing costs   -Reducing production cost by applying lean 
manufacturing techniques R5 
Workforce 
development    -Continuous training and coaching of the 
workforce R5 
-Modernize our vocational secondary school to 
produce higher and well -rounded graduates R2  
R: respondent number 
 
Of the 16 respondents in this section, 10 indicated that their short -term growth opportunities had  
changed  significantly since January 2020 , and four  indicated that their longer -term growth opportunities 
had changed significantly since January 2020.  Figure 7 presents the factors that explain  change of short - 
and long -term growth strategies.  
 116 
 FIGURE 7: REASONS WHY SHORT -TERM AND LONG -TERM GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES HAVE CHANGED 
SINCE JANUARY 2020  
 
 
Respondents then indicated the level of confidence they have in their business or organization meeting 
and realizing short - and long -term growth metrics and strategy. Figure 8  presents the level of confidence 
respondents reported in meeting these targets in the short and long  term.  
 
FIGURE 8: REPORTED LEVEL OF CONFIDENCE IN REALIZING SHORT - AND LONG -TERM GROWTH 
TARGETS  
 
    
Digitalization  
Respondents indicated they used various digital technologies in their businesses or organizations. Figure 
9 presents the types of technologies used. One respondent in the tourism sector indicated they also 
used online platforms, such as Booking.com or Airbnb, to book tourists/clients.  
 
FIGURE 9: TYPES OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES USED (N=16)  
 
117 
  
Eleven  out of 16 respondents indicated that their organization/company’s use of digital technologies has 
changed since January 2020. Figure 10  presents factors responsible for the change, as indicated by 
respondents.  
 
FIGURE 10: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY USE SINCE JANUARY 2020 (N=11)  
 
Eight respondents indicated that they needed  digital technologies that they  did not currently have access 
to, includ ing the technologies in Table 13. 
  
TABLE 13: TECHNOLOGIES COMPANIES/ORGANIZATIONS NEED (N=8)  
Technology Type  Examples  
Software or systems  -Newer version of Gerber pattern -making software  
-Integrated ERP systems 
-Production and quality control terminals  
-Warehousing and sales invoices by handheld devices 
-Online payment systems  
-Constructing own website  
Distance communication tools -Providing council services to members at a distance  
-Offer financial services remotely  
Marketing tools -Digital marketing  
Access to online retailers  -Amazon  
-Alibaba  
118 
 SECTION 4: BUSINESS/ORGANIZATION CHALLENGES (N=15)  
 
Respondents were asked to identify up to three challenges their business or organization were currently 
facing. Table 14 presents the different types of challenges.  Ten respondents indicated that these 
challenges had changed significantly since January 20 20, citing the reasons presented in Figure 11. 
 
TABLE 14: CHALLENGES AFFECTING BUSINESSES/ORGANIZATIONS (N=14)  
Types of Challenge  Example  
Laws and regulations  -Old laws R2 
-Long process when dealing with some authorities R2 
-Lack of consistency in legal environment R7 
-Licensing, as Egypt had no license for ecolodges yet R8 
-Restrictive legislation R9 
Workforce/ labor issues  -Lack of skilled labor R1 
-Recruitment R3 
-No talen ts or trained personnel R6  
Reduced revenue  -Significant drop in production orders  R1 
-Markets getting slow R4 
-Cash flow R6 
Cost issues  -High cost of daily transportation of employees R1 
-Increasing manufacturing productivity and reducing production cost R3 
-ERP is too expensive R3 
-Expanding in logistics and pack houses in all governorates due to land 
exaggerated and over pricing R5 
Digitalization  -Developing the work online R4 
Financing  -Funding for our small farmers extension services initiatives R5 
COVID19  -The outcomes of COVID -19 crisis R9 
Market volatility  -Instability R7, R8  
R = Respondent number  119 
 FIGURE 11: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN CHALLENGES SINCE JANUARY 2020 (N=10)  
 
Respondents described  the most critical risk factor(s) their business es or organizations  were facing to 
maintain or expand operations in Egypt over the next year. Table 15 presents these factors. 
 
TABLE 15: MOST CRITICAL RISK FACTORS FACING BUSINESSES/ORGANIZATIONS (N=14)  
Most Critical Risk Factor  Example  
Market volatility  -Uncertainty of the global markets R1 
-Loss of business R10 
COVID -19 -Travel restriction and the fear of travel R8 
-COVID- 19 R7, R9  
Environmental concerns  -Uncertainty of water abundance and prices in near future R1 
Unfair competition  -Unfair competition from foreign companies for the government to 
provide them with facilities and encouragement for more than local 
companies. Introduce laws for industry and commerce R2 
-Instability and unethical competition R6 
Financing/ costs -Increased cost of production due to lower productivity, cost of labor and 
hygiene R4 
-Funding for our extension services initiatives targeting small farmers R5 
R = Respondent number  
 
Respondents were asked to rank the following external factors that are negatively affecting their 
organization s by level of impact (with 1 having the most negative impact and 5 having the least). Figure 
120 
 12 presents how respondents ranked external factors by level of negative impact on their business or 
organization. The COVID- 19 pandemic ranked as the most negatively impactful external factor, whereas 
climate change (outside of “other ,” which did not receive a response) was the least negatively impactful.  
Of the options provided in the “other ” category, eight respondents indicated NO RESPONSE. The 
others provided the following other external factors with associated level of impact on their 
business/organization:  
·   “Garment p roducers in other countries rece ive government support for their exports, which 
allow them to offer competitive prices to their customers. In contrast, Egyptian government is very 
reluctant to pay such support. Interest rate is quite high. Also, free trade agreement with US is still not 
finalized” (2) 
·   “Worldwide political issues”  (4) 
·   “Unethical competition and intellectual property” (4) 
·   “Loss of market opportunities and bad crop year leading to financial losses” (4) 
·   “Licensing” (5) 
 
FIGURE 12: EXTERNAL FACTORS RANKED BY LEVEL OF NEGATIVE IMPACT (N=13)  
 
Out of 13 respondents, nine indicated having a strategy to overcome these challenges.  While 1 
respondent indicated these specific strategies were confident ial, others explained.  Table 16 summarizes  
strategies and actions plans that businesses and organizations described  to overcome the following 
challenges: business -enabling environment, climate change, access to financing, COVID -19, and others. 
TABLE 16: SUMMARY OF STRATEGIES TO OVERCOME CHALLENGES (N=9)  
General Plan/Strategy  Examples  
Increased 
investments/financing  -Increased investors R1 
-Get access to finance from banks R5 
-Use the success of the current ecolodge as case study to convince new investors to join. 
Banks are still refusing to help tourism sector . R6 
121 
 Climate -friendly  -Using climate -friendly products for our floor coverings  R1 
-Focus on providing extension service s on water management and introduce new crops 
that are sustainable for climate change R2 
-Raise the awareness about eco -friendly solutions R6 
Increase use of digital 
technologies  -Work on digital rather than printed R3 
-Digitize operations and remote worki ng R3 
Expand/diversi fy 
operations  -Open new areas of business R3 
-Work in more than one market R4 
Improving business -
enabling environment  -More cooperation with Ministry of Tourism to change the business environment for 
MSMEs in tourism R6 
-Presenting position papers to the relevant Governmental agencies R7 
R = Respondent number  
SECTION 5: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND CSR ACTIVITIES (N=13)  
  
Most respondents indicated having a current sustainability, corporate social responsibility (CSR), or 
community engagement strategy (n=10). Table 17 outlines the different strategies identified.  
 
TABLE 17: BUSINESS/ORGANIZATION COMMUNIT Y ENGAGEMENT, SUSTAINABILITY, OR CSR 
STRATEGIES AND FOCUS AREAS (N=10)  
Main Focus Area  Examples  
Women’s empowerment  
  -Additionally, we have a childcare facility for mothers to drop off their 
children during working hours. R1 
-Women’s financial empowerment and community support  R6 122 
 Clean water/environmental 
sustainability/e nergy  -In the current period, we are focusing on projects to provide clean water 
to the neediest areas and help with health care. R2 
-Clean energy for factory production.  R3 
-Sustainable use of resources. Waste reduction. R4 
-We help local communities to discover  their own Natural & Cultural 
Heritage treasures…Put it in action using Tourism practices, to receive 
financial and psychological benefits. We aim to help original inhabitants 
of the island to rebuild their houses, using the same old techniques of 
Nubian A rchitecture, in parallel to develop a complete utilities network 
and infrastructure (Water – Sewage – Electricity) in an eco -friendly way 
to protect the island’s natural heritage. R7 
Workforce/ youth development  -We established a vocational school and allowed students to use our 
production facilities for training. This school is completely subsidized by 
the company. Students are offered employment opportunities upon 
graduation at the factory. Throughout their schoo l years, students are 
given a monthly allowance. R1 
-Incubating startups in the same fields  R5 
-As for job creation, we aim to add the island to the Egyptian ecotourism 
map, and introduce this unique type of tourism in the whole area around 
it, with all re lated services such as: lodging in Nubian houses, revive 
authentic Nubian food recipes and drinks, community center for local and visitors’ events, Nubian handcrafts preservation. R7 
Health  -We also offer completely subsidized private health insurance for the 
employees. R1  
-Health development R9 
Education  -Education and training  R8 
-Education development  R9 
Food safety -Raising awareness about food safety with suppliers and labor. R4 
R = Respondent number  
 
Of these 10 respondents with a current strategy, four indicated that this strategy had significantly 
changed since January 2020, for reasons presented in Figure 13.  
 123 
 FIGURE 13: REASONS FOR CHANGE IN CSR/COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT/SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGY 
SINCE JANUARY 2020 (N=10)  
 
 
Of the 13 respondents, a majority indicated they have targeted recruitment practices to hire women 
and youth (Figure 14).  
 
FIGURE 14: TARGETED HIRING PRACTICES FOR WOMEN AND YOUTH (N=13)  
 
 Respondents listed several CSR or community  engage ment activities and programs (Table 18).  
 
TABLE 18: EXAMPLES OF CSR OR COM MUNITY ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES (N=10)  
Category  Examples  
Youth development  Summer jobs for undergraduates; targeting hiring for undergraduates with 
no prior experience; encouraging youth to be financially independent; 
sports activities; participating in job fairs for young lawyers  
Food security  Providing foodstuffs  
124 
 Environmental sustainability and 
energy  Desalination plants; drilling wells; waste reduction; clean energy in 
production 
Health  Equipping hospitals; providing financial and medical aid; raising awareness 
on hygiene 
Women’s empowerment  Childcare; hiring and training women; offering equal opportunities and 
equal pay  
Workforce development  Providing trainings; providing employment; established vocational technical  
and employment center to provide top -quality vocational training and 
workforce support (a model of excellence in workforce development); 
established the Middle East Development Center for executive and 
management training center  
Agriculture  Raising awareness on best practices for pesticides with small farmers and 
helping them build integrated pest management programs; raising 
awareness for best practices on irrigation management and health 
management; assisting small farmers  
Education  Providing free educational services to students, teachers, and parents  
General community 
development  Providing financial aid to build roofs, schools, mosques, housing supplies, 
equipment, and brides support to local communities; using local homes for 
tourism purposes and thus creating source of revenues for local residents 
 
Challenges reported for implementing sustainability, CSR, or community engagement activities include 
the lack of funding to implement or follow up on projects (n=5), difficult procedures or regulations in 
Egypt (n=3), supporting actually sustainable projec ts (n=1), and COVID -related challenges (n=1). As one 
example, a tourism company explained, “Tourism policies provided by the ministry of tourism [is a 
challenge]. [They ask] for the staff to have a tourism degree”  and further indicated that the “tourism 
police” can be an inhibiting factor to implementing CSR or community  engagement activities.  
SECTION 6: ALIGNED INTERESTS AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL (N=12)  
  
Respondents were asked, “would your business/organization be interested in collaborating with USAID 
in any of the following areas for positive impact within the communities in which you work?” and were 
able to select all areas of interest that applied. Figure 15 presents the areas respondent s selected.  
 125 
 FIGURE 15: AREAS OF ALIGNED I NTEREST AND ENGAGEMENT POTENTIAL (N=12)  
 
 
The areas that respondents expressed  most interest in including  entrepreneurship (n=8), followed by 
women’s empowerment (n=7), agriculture (n=7), and trade (n=7). No respondent indicated another 
option outside of those listed.  
SECTION 7: EXPERIENCE WITH USAID (N=12)  
  
All but three respondents (n=9) had worked with USAID or another donor partner  previously . Six 
respondents had worked with USAID; others had worked with the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD), Industrial Modernization Centre (IMC), WISE International, International 
Finance Corporation (IFC), Government of the Czech Republic, Government of Japan, ExxonMobil, and 
others.  
  
Of the six resp ondents that had previously worked with USAID, they collaborated in the following 
projects or areas:  
● Project WISE, including through a Renewable Energy Program for Vocational Schools;  
● A training center and pack house for agricultural crops in upper Egypt (through the Advanced 
Marketing and Agribusiness Logistics GDA ); 
● The National Book Program;  
● A renewable e nergy program for v ocational schools;  
● UN Women project funded by USAID;  
● MSMEs ; and 
● Education.  
 
Of the previous collaborations, three respondents indica ted contributing money (n=2) and/or in -kind 
(n=3) resources. Three respondents did not contribute money or in -kind resources to the 
collaboration. Most respondents (n=4) had a high level of input into the design of their collaboration with USAID, whereas one had a minimal level of input and the other had no input.  
  
126 
 Respondents described the process of collaborating with USAID positive ly. For example, one wrote, “[It 
was a] positive collaboration based on mutual trust and benefit ,” and another wrote, “USAID personnel 
is very professional and keen on supporting us to succeed .” 
  
All respondents who had previously collaborated with USAID (n=6) considered the collaboration a 
success. Respondents defined success as outlined in Table 19.  
 
TABLE 19: SELECTED DEFINITIONS OF SUCCESS FOR PRIOR USAID COLLABORATION  
“The project succeeded in achieving tangible targets, motivating participants, and raising awareness. After the 
project ended, workers and employees kept asking when will be involved again in similar projects .” R1 
“Exporting for the first time from Luxor directly to Europe 4,200 tons of fresh produce (table grapes, mango, 
pumpkins, green beans). Extension service best practices field days to 5,500 farmers. Post -harvest best 
practices training to 6,500 beneficiaries, of which 75  percent  represent farm ers, Agri -associations staff, 
Member of production organization, Packhouse and cold store management staff, Packhouse casual labor, 
University graduates, and 600 women. 25  percent  increase gross margin per hectare in green beans. 47  
percent  increase in sal es per hectare. Created more than 78,000 seasonal labor days. Creating 866 part time 
jobs for trained laborers (women). Linking nine associations in upper Egypt with six exporters through 28 forward contracts (green beans, onion, herbs and fennel). Buildin g international marketing capacity to 15 
associations, resulting in narrowing the gap between small farmers and exporters .” R2 
“We did our role and our teams got prizes in the international competition .” R3 
“The MSMEs project is considered one of the world's best practices in microfinance .” R4 
R = Respondent number  
 
Respondents did share a few challenges with working with USAID, mostly concerning time, difficulty in 
applying, and compliance. For example, one respondent shared that the “lengthy decision process” was a 
challenge. Another shared more in -depth feedback:  “For the projects to be sustainable, we need more 
time. We needed more visits by the consultants and a longer time span, especially with regards to lean 
manufacturing, because it requires a change of behavior. For the project to be sustainable, we need 
weekly visits by the consultant during one year for design and implementat ion of the project, in addition 
to one more year for follow up and sustainability .” 
  
Regarding  sustainability of the USAID collaborati on project, half of the respondents (n=3) indicated their 
project was sustainable. One respondent explained why  for an MS ME project : “This is due to the 
diversification of different credit programs and the innovative use of tools to achieve its objectives. MSME project has its independent management with an autonomous nature overseen through ABA Board and its own executive .” 
  127 
 Respondents shared USAID’s most valuable contribution to these collaborations including the technical 
capacity of USAID consultants, equipment and resources, and provision of opportunity and support 
(Table 20).  
 
TABLE 20: USAID' S MOST VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION  
“The selection of the consultants, who worked with us, was great.  The design of the lean manufacturing 
project was really good, though we needed more coaching. And the discussions with management, 
professionalism. and experience of the USAID staff.”  R1 
“Furbishing our center of excellency and the pack house with latest equipment and technology .” R2 
“Provided a chance for our organization to contribute to the learning and development of students .” R3 
“Financing the project .” R4 
“Supporting [the] UN Women project .” R5 
“Funding and technical support .” R6 
 R = Respondent number  
 
In summary, all respondents (n=12), regardless of whether they had prior experience with USAID, indicated that 
they would be interested in collaborating with USAID in the future.  
 
 
 128 
 REFERENCES 
2014. “Small and Medium Enterprises Landscape in Egypt: New Facts from a New Dataset.” Journal of Business and 
Economics. (Author, 2014)  
Abdel -Halim, A. 2020. “Long -Term Implications of COVID -19.” The Cairo Review of Global Affairs. 
https://www.thecairoreview.com/covid -19-global -crisis/long -term-implications -of-covid -19/. 
Abouelnaga , M.  2019. “Why the MENA Region Needs to Better Prepare for Climate Change.”  
AFI, Central Bank of Egypt, Digital Financial Services (DFC) Working Group. 2018. “Financial Inclusion through 
Digital Financial Services and Fintech: The Case of Egypt.” Case Study. https://www.afi -
global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2018 -08/AFI_Egypt_Report_AW_digital.pdf . 
Alaa El -Din, M. 2020. “Free Digital Platform Supporting SMEs Launched to Tackle Consequences of COVID -19.” 
Daily News Egypt. https://dailynewsegypt.com/2020/05/17/free -digital -platform -supporting- smes-launched -
to-tackle-consequences -of-covid -19/. 
Al-Youm, Al -Masry. 2019 a. “Egypt E ager to Launch D igital Trade Platform in Africa Like Amazon: Sisi.” Egypt 
Independent. https://egyptindependent.com/egypt- eager -to-launch -digital -trade -platform -in-africa -like-
amazon -sisi/. 
Al-Youm, Al -Masry. 2019 b. “Egyptia n Company Launches E lectronic Commerce Platform for Egyptian Products.”  
Egypt Independent. https://egyptindependent.com/egyptian -company -launches -electronic -commerce- mull-
for-egyptian -products/ . 
AmCham. 2020 a. “Economic Impact of COVID -19: A Research Note by AmCham Eg ypt.” 
https://www.amcham.org.eg/information- resources/covid -19-response/economic -impact- of-covid -19-a-
research -note-by-amcham -egypt . 
AmCham. 2020 b. “Egypt Business Digest: Updates on the Economy, Key Legislation and Major Investment 
Projects.  http://www.amcham -egypt.org/bsac/BusinessClimate/BC_July2020.pdf . 
American Chamber of Commerce. 2018. “U.S. Business Mission —Breakfast Meeting and Ministerial Panel.” 
https://www.amcham.o rg.eg/events- activities/events/1160/us -business- mission- breakfast -meeting -and-
ministerial -panel . 
American Chamber of Commerce in Egypt. 2018. “Egypt’s Tourism Reform Program (E -TRP) Revealed.” 
https://www.amcham.org.eg/cyberlink/events/view/1168/egypts -tourism -reform -program -e-trp-revealed . 
(ANBA) Brazil- Arab News Agency. 2020. “Egypt’s Tourism Industry Workers Get Subsidy.” 
https://anba.com.br/en/egypts -tourism -industry- workers -get-subsidy/ . 
Arab African Advisers. 2017. “MSME Support Programme  in Egypt and the Social Fund for Development —Legal 
and Regulatory Component: Policy Paper.”  
Assaad, R. 2015. “Women’s Participation in Paid Employment in Egypt is a Matter of Policy not Simply Ideology .” 
Policy Brief 022, Egypt Network for Integrated Deve lopment. 
https://elnidaa.org/app/uploads/2019/07/PB22_women_employment_assaad.pdf . 129 
 Assaad, R. and El-Hamidi, F. 2009. “Women in the Egyptian Labor Market: An Analysis of Developments, 1988 –
2006.” In R. Assaad (Ed.), The Egyptian Labor Market Revisited.  Cairo: American University in Cairo Press, 
pp. 219 –257. 
Booz and Company. 2012. “Empowering the Thir d Billion. ”  
http://www.booz.com/media/uploads/BoozCo_Empowering -the-Third- Billion_Full -Report.p df. 
Bowen, M. 2019. “Nokia Collaborates with Egypt’s MCIT to Develop Digital Skills.” Intelligent CIO.  
https://www.intelligentcio.com/me/2019/02/28/nokia -collaborates- with-egypts -mcit-to-develop -digital -
skills/ . 
Breisinger, C., Abdelatif , A., Raouf, M., and Wiebelt, M. 2020. “COVID- 19 and the Egyptian Economy: Estimating 
the Impacts of Expected Reductions in Tourism, Suez Canal Revenues, and Remittances.” IFPRI. 
https://ebrary.ifpri.org/digital/collection/p15738coll2/id/133663 . 
CAPMAS. 2018. Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) Statistical Yearbook 2018.  
Carnegie Middle East Center. 2013. “The Private Sector in Post -Revolution Egy pt.” 
Constant, L., Edochie, I., Glick, P., Martini, J ., and Garber, C. 2020. “Barriers to Employment that Women Face in 
Egypt: Policy Challenges and Considerations. ” Rand Corporation. 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2868.html .   
Consultancy -me.com. 2018. “A Strong Consulting Sector in Egypt Can Deliver a Range of National Benefits.” 
https://www.consultancy- me.com/news/1417/a -strong -consulting -sector- in-egypt -can-deliver- a-range- of-
national -benefits  
Daily News. 2019. “Chaudhary Group Seeks to Invest in Egypt’s T ourism Sector, Especially in Cairo.” 
https://dailynewsegypt.com/201 9/11/23/chaudhary -group -seeks -to-invest -in-egypts -tourism -sector-
especially -in-cairo/ . 
Daily News Egypt. 2020. “Egypt’s Computer Ownerships Increases 12.73% in 2019: CAPMAS.” 
https://daily newsegypt.com/2020/05/17/egypts- computer -ownership -increases -12-73-in-2019- capmas/ . 
Demographic Health Survey . 2015.  “Egypt Health Issues Survey. ”  
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR313/FR313.pdf  .  
ECES. 2020a . “Views on the Crisis: The Impact of COVID -19 on Egypt’s Pre -University Education.” 
http://eces.org.eg/cms/NewsUploads/Pdf/2020_4_2 -10_48_52Education%20%201 -4-
2020%20english%20.pdfschools 
ECES. 2020b . “Views on the Crisis: Impact of the COVID -19 Crisis on the Manufacturing Sector Combined.” 
http://www.eces.org.eg/cms/NewsUpload s/Pdf/2020_4_5- 21_17_29Manufacturing%20Industry -
%20final%20- %20English%20(e).pdf. Using data from the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development 
and the Quarterly Bulletin of Manpower Survey and Trade Map.  
Egypt Independent. 2019. “Egypt Is among C ountr ies Most Affected by Climate Change: Minister.” 
https://egyptindependent.com/egypt- is-among -countries -most-affected -by-climate- change-
minister/#:~:text=The%20potential%20impacts%20of%20climate,coastal%20populations%20in%20the%20c
ountry  . 130 
 Egypt Independent. 2020. “Egypt’s T ourism Sector Sees ‘Remarkable Growth,’ Tourism Receipts to Increase to 
29.7 bn by 2024.” https://egyptindependent.com/egypts -tourism -sector- sees-remarkable- growth -tourism -
receipts -to-increase -to-29-7-bn-by-2024/ . 
Egypt Today. 2019. “Egypt's Tourism Revenues Rise to $12.6B in 2019.” 
https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/6/75420/Egypt -s-tourism -revenues- rise-to-12-6B-in-
2019#:~:text=CAIRO%20%2D%201%20October%202019%3A%20The,billion%20in%20FY%202017%2F20
18.&text=Acc ording%20to%20the%20WEF's%20travel,ranked%2065%20in%20the%20TTCI.  
Egypt Today. 2020 a. “Egypt Spends $1.6B to Increase Internet Speed.” 
https://www.eg ypttoday.com/Article/3/88665/Egypt -spends -1-6B-to-increase -internet -speed.  
Egypt Today. 2020b. “ITIDA, Udacity Offer Free Virtual Academy to Help Egyptian Youths Gain Digital Skills, 
Master Remote Freelance Jobs.” https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/1/88128/ITIDA -Udacity -offer- free-
virtual -academy- to-help-Egyptian- youths.  
Elsayed, A., Hempel, K., and Osman, A. 2018. “Overcoming Youth Unemployment in Egypt: Randomized 
Evaluations Showcase the Promise of Active Labor Market Programs.” Working Paper. https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/files/research -paper/Impact -Evaluation- Youth -Employability -
EEIP-Egypt -Oct2018.pdf . 
ElSewedy Technical Academy. n.d. “Home.” https://sta.edu.eg/en/.  
Enterprise. 2019. “Joh n Matouk— Founding Partner, Matouk Bassiouny.” 
https://enterprise.press/stories/2019/02/06/f -john-matouk -founding -partner -matouk -bassiouny/ . 
Enterprise. 2020a. “Gov’t Looks to the Private Sector in a New Vocational Program Mirroring the PPP Schools 
Model.” https://enterprise.press/stories/2020/04/27/govt -looks -to-the-private- sector- in-new-vocational -
program -mirroring -ppp-schools -model -15033/ . 
Enterprise.  2020 b. “USAID’s support to Egypt’s Education Sector: How Does It Work and Will It Be Impac ted by 
Covid -19?” https://enterprise.press/stories/2020/06/29/usaids -support -to-egypts -educati on-sector- how-
does- it-work -and-will-it-be-impacted -by-covid -19-17718/ . 
EBRD. n.d. “Advice for Small Businesses.” https://www.ebrd.com/work- with-us/advice -for-small-businesses/egypt-
local- consultants.html%20 . 
FAO. 2019. “FAO and MALR launch a Digital Agriculture Initiative in Egypt.” Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/egypt/news/detail -events/en/c/1200501/ . 
Faour -Klingbeil, D. and Todd, E.C.D. 2018. “A Review on the Rising Prevalence of International Standards: Threats 
or Opportunities for the Agri -Food Produce Sector in Developing Cou ntries, with a Focus on Examples 
from the MENA Region.” Foods, 7(3). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5867548/ . 
GAFI ( General Authority for Investment). 2020. “GAFI CEO Discusses ‘Amazon’ Plans in Egypt.” 
https://gafi.gov.eg/English/MediaCenter/News/Pages/GA FI-CEO-Discusses -Amazon -Plans-in-Egypt.aspx.  
Galal Ismail, A. 2020. “How Egypt’s Economy Can Continue to Thrive during a Global Pandemic.” World 
Economic Forum. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/06/egypt -economy- thrive -during -global -
pandemic/ . 131 
 Global Partnership for Effective Development Co- operation. 2018. “Private Sector Engagement through 
Development Co -operation in Egypt: Case Study.” 
GovTribe. 2019. “Integrated Management of Cultural Tourism (IMCT) in Egypt.” 
https://govtribe.com/opportunity/federal -contract -opportunity/integrated -management -of-cultural -
tourism -imct-in-egypt -72026320r00003.  
IFC. 2019. “Women on Board in Egypt: How Gender -Diverse Boards Bring Value to Egyptian C ompanies. ” 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/211c8328- 06c1- 4bea- af37-
d7af5c3727af/IF C+Women+on+Board+in+Egypt.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=nfpWEo5 .  
IFPRI. 2020. “Impact of COVID -19 on the Egyptian Economy: Economic Sectors, Jobs and Households.” Regional 
Program Policy Note 6. 
http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/collection/p15738coll2/id/133764/filename/133975.pdf . 
IMF. 2016. “A  Chance for Change: IMF Agreement to Help Bring Egypt’s Economy to Its Full Potential.” Country 
Focus. https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2016/11/11/NA1 11116- A-Chance -For-Change -Egypt . 
IMF. 2019. “Egypt: A Path Forward for Economic Prosperity.” Country Focus. 
https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2019/07/24/na072419 -egypt -a-path-forward -for-economic -
prosperity.  
IMF. 2020. “Egypt Takes Proactive Approach to Limit the Pandemic’s Fallout.” Country Focus. 
https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/07/09/na070920 -egypt -takes -proactive- approach -to-limit-the-
pandemics- fallout . 
Hospitality News: Middle East. 2019. “New IFC Fund to Boost Tourism in Egypt.” 
https://www.hospi talitynewsmag.com/en/event/new -ifc-fund-to-boost -tourism -in-egypt/ . 
International Finance. 2020. “Egypt Is Accelerating Digitisation in Healthcare.” Healthcare. 
https://internationalfinance.com/egypt -is-accelerating -digitisation -in-healthcare/ . 
Ismail, A., Tolba, A., Barakat, S., and Meshreki, H. 2017. “Global Entrepreneurship Monitor —GEM Egypt Report 
2017– 18.” https://www.gemconsortium.org/economy -profiles/egypt.  
Journal of the American Chamber of Commerce in Egypt. 2019. “Business Monthly: Open for Tourism.” 
http://ww w.amcham -egypt.org/BM_Issues/October2019Issue.pdf . 
Kamel, N. and Alaa El -Din, M. 2020. “6 Technology Parks to Be Completed This Year: CIT Minister.” Daily News 
Egypt.  https://dailynewsegypt.co m/2020/06/16/6 -technology -parks -to-be-completed -this-year-cit-minister/ . 
Kharas, H. and Abdou , E.D. 2012. “Regulatory Reforms Necessary for An Inclusive Growth Model in Egypt.” 
Brookings Institute. https://www.brookings.edu/wp- content/uploads/2016/06/11 -inclusive -growth -egypt -
kharas.pdf . 
Krafft, C. and  Assaad, R . 2018. “Promoting Better Jobs for Young People in Egypt.” ERF Policy Portal: The Forum. 
https://theforum.erf.org.eg/2018/01/23/promoting -better -jobs-young -people- egypt/ . 
Krafft, C., Elbadawy, A., and Sieverding, M . 2017.  “Constrained School Choice in Egypt .” GLO Discussion Paper 
No. 134, Global Labor Organization (GLO), Maastricht . 132 
 The Legal 500. 2020a. “Interview with Frederic Soliman, Managing Partner at Soliman, Hashish & Partners Law 
Firm.” https://www.legal500.com /interviews/frederic -soliman -managing -partner -mohamed -hashish -
managing -partner/ . 
The Legal 500. 2020b. “Interview with Hazim A. Rizkana, Managing Partner at Rizkana & Partners.” 
https://www.legal500.com/interviews/hazim -a-rizkana- managing -partner/ . 
The Legal 500. 2020c. “Interview with Ibrahim Shehata, Partner at Shehata & Partners Law Firm.” 
https://www.legal500.com/interviews/ibrahim -shehata- partner/ . 
The Legal 500. 2020d. “Interview with Mohamed Khodeir, Founder & Managing Partner at Khodeir and Partners.” 
https://www.legal500.com/intervi ews/6947/ . 
Maghraby, R., Elgibaly, O. , and El-Gazzar, A. 2020. “Workplace Sexual Harassment among Nurses of a University 
Hospital in Egypt. ” Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.srhc.2020.100519 .  
MCIT (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology). n.d. “Egypt’s ICT 2030 Strategy.” 
http://www.mcit.gov.eg/ICT_Strategy . 
MoETE. 2020. “Statistical Data on Pre -University Education in 2019/2020.” 
http://emis.gov.eg/Site%20Content/matwaya/2020/matwaya2020.pdf . 
PwC. 2019 a. “Shedding Light on Egypt’s Shadow Economy.” https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/shedding -
light-on-egypts -shadow -economy.pdf . 
PwC. 2019 b. “The Future of Manufacturing – Egypt. Global Manufacturing & In dustrialisation Summit.” 
https://gmisummit.com/wp -content/uploads/2019/04/GMIS_Egypt -Report.pdf . 
PwC. 2019 c. “Understanding Middle East Education: Egypt Country Profile. ”  
https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/industries/education/education -country -profile -egypt.html  
Sahara. 2020. “Show Info.” https://www.saharaexpo.com/en/home.html . 
Samari , G. 2019. “Education and Fertility in Egypt: Mediation by Women’s Empowerment.” SSM - Population Health.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssmph.2019.100488 . 
Silverstein , M.J. and Sayre , K. 2009. “The Female Economy. ” Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2009/09/the -
female -economy.  
Source Global Research. 2020. “COVID -19 | Update for 20 March 2020.” 
https://reports.sourceglobalresearch.com/content/marketupdates/update -2020- 03-20. 
Steffen, L. 2020. “Egyptian Desert Transformed into Forest with Recycled Sewage Water.” Intelligent Living,  
Environment. https://www.intelligentliving.co/egyptian -desert -forest -recycled -sewage -water/.  
Stratexis. 2019. “Egypt Needs Strong Management Consulting Services.” https://www.stratexis.com/post/egypt-
needs -strong -management -consulting -services . 
UNDP. n.d. “Egypt.” Climate Change Adaptation. https://egyptindependent.com/egypt -is-among -countries -most-
affected -by-climate- change-
minister/#:~:text=The%20potential%20 impacts%20of%20climate,coastal%20populations%20in%20the%20c
ountry.  133 
 UNESCO. 2020. “UNESCO Web Conference Highlights COVID -19 Crisis and Museums in Egypt.” 
https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco -web-conference- highlights- covid -19-crisis-and-museums -egypt . 
United Nations. 2020. “Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID -19 on the Arab Region. An Opportunity to Build Back 
Better.” https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/s g_policy_brief_covid -
19_and_arab_states_english_version_july_2020.pdf . 
United Nations Egypt. 2020. “COVID -19 Socio -Economic Response and Recovery Plan for Egypt.” 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/EGY_Socioeconomic -Response- Plan_2020.pdf . 
UN Women. 2013. “A Study to E liminate Sexual Harassment in Egypt.”   
https://www.peacewomen.org/node/90812 .  
USAID . 2016. “Situational Analysis of the Private Sector in the Delivery of Family Planning Services in Egypt. ” 
USAID. 2017. “ USAID  Building Economic Sustainabil ity through Tourism. ” https://www.usaid.gov/jordan/fact-
sheets/usaid -building- economic -sustainability- through- tourism . 
USAID. 2020a . “Digital Strategy 2020 –2024.” 
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/USAID_Digital_Strategy.pdf  (pg. 25).  
USAID. 2020b . “Youth.” Jord an, Our Work, Essential Public Services. https://www.usaid.gov/jordan/youth . 
USAID /Egypt. 2018. “PSE Stocktaking 2004 –2018— USAID/Egypt.”  
USAID /Egypt. 2019 a. “FY 2019 PPR PSE Key Issue Narrative.”   
USAID/Egypt. 2019b. “OEG FY 19 PPP Module for PSLA Desk Rev iew.” 
USAID /Egypt. 2019c. “USAID/Egypt 2020 PSE Action Plan.”  
USAID/Egypt . 2020. “Egypt Country Economic Review.”   
van Rossem, R. and Meekers, D. 2020. “The Decline of FGM in Egypt since 1987: A Cohort Analysis of the Egypt 
Demographic and Health Surveys. ” BMC Women’s Health, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12905 -020-00954-
2.  
World Bank. n.d. “Egypt, Ara b Rep.: Country Profile.” 
https://databank.worldbank.org/views/reports/reportwidget.aspx?Report_Name=CountryProfile&Id=b450fd57&tbar=y&dd=y&inf=n&
zm=n&country=EGY.  
World Bank. n.d. “World Development Indicators.” DataBank. 
https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=2&series=SL.UEM.NEET.ZS . 
World Bank. 2020. “The Global Economic Outlook during the COVID -19 Pandemic: A Changed World.” Who 
We Are, News. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2020/06/08/the- global -economic -outlook-
during -the-covid -19-pandemic- a-changed- world . 
World Bank Group. 2018. “The Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion.” Global Findex Database. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29654 134 
 World Economic Forum. 2020.  Global Gender Gap Report.  http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2020.pdf . 
WTTC ( World Travel and Tourism Council).  2020.  “Egypt 2020 Annual Research: Key Highlights.” 
https://wttc.org/Research/Economic -Impact.  
Zeitoun, N.A.M.S. 2018. Women ’s Economic Empowerment Study. Washington, DC : World Bank Group. Accessed:  
http://documents.worldbank.org/cur ated/en/861491551113547855/Women -Economic- Empowerment -
Study.  
 
 
 
  
 