White Paper
Windows of Opportunity: 
Facilitating Trade with 
Blockchain Technology
July 2019 
© World Economic Forum
2019 – All rights reserved 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, including 
photocopying and recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system.
The views expressed are those of certain participants in 
the discussion, and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
all participants or of the World Economic Forum.
REF 180118 - case 00040020Contents
    
This white paper has been published by the World Economic Forum as a contribution to a project, 
insight area or interaction. The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein are 
a result of a collaborative process facilitated and endorsed by the World Economic Forum, but 
whose results do not necessarily represent the views of the World Economic Forum, nor the 
entirety of its Members, Partners or other stakeholders.Preface        3
Introduction        4
State of single windows      5
 Benefits       5
 Pain points      7
Potential use-cases with blockchain     10
 Challenges      11
 Use-cases      11
Guidelines for operationalizing use-cases    15
Next steps        19
Appendix       20
Acknowledgements       21
Endnotes       223
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyThe Fourth Industrial Revolution, driven by rapid technological change and 
digitization, is having a profound impact on global trade. By applying innovative 
new technologies to trade, “TradeTech” promises to increase efficiency, 
drive economic development and grow inclusivity. However, challenges and 
uncertainties remain on the policy governance of TradeTech. Public-private 
partnerships are needed to maximize the benefits and mitigate the potential 
downsides of applying new technologies to global trade. 
Building on global developments and aspirations for TradeTech, the World 
Economic Forum’s Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, through its Digital 
Trade team, collaborated with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) to 
launch a new project. This project aims to guide public-sector stakeholders to 
make informed decisions about using emerging technologies to facilitate trade, 
drive economic development and improve competitiveness – particularly in the 
case of blockchain deployment in trade single windows. Given its prioritization 
of emerging technologies and having worked closely with Latin American and 
Caribbean (LAC) governments, the IDB has valuable experience and knowledge  
to help co-design and shape the trade agenda. 
Within trade facilitation, trade single windows serve as the single electronic point 
for exporters and importers to submit regulatory and commercial documents to 
respective government ministries and agencies. However, promises of increased 
efficiency are hindered by pain points and challenges, such as the lack of 
interoperability among agencies, persistence of outdated processes and limited 
visibility and traceability of shipped goods. 
By exploring the application of new technology – blockchain – in the trade single 
windows network, this White Paper outlines the current obstacles governments 
face in implementing and maintaining single windows, and the potential for 
blockchain to address those issues – while understanding the experimental nature 
of the technology. The White Paper draws on the expertise of more than 80 
project community members globally across various industry sectors, government 
agencies, intergovernmental organizations and academic institutions as well as in 
civil society. The policy framework laid out in this White Paper is also intended to 
be applied in a proof of concept with the support of the IDB. 
This project reflects the mission of the World Economic Forum’s Centre for the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution: to provide an international platform of expertise, 
knowledge-sharing and public-private collaboration and to co-design and pilot 
innovative new approaches to policy and governance in the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution. This project will encourage proofs of concept within and outside of the 
project community, share and scale lessons learned using the World Economic 
Forum’s platform on international trade and investment.Preface
Ziyang Fan, 
Head of Digital 
Trade, World 
Economic Forum
Pablo M. Garcia, 
Director of the 
Institute for the 
Integration of 
Latin America and 
the Caribbean, 
Inter-American 
Development 
Bank4
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyTrade costs – the costs of moving cargo from one country 
to another – are a leading constraint for companies wanting 
to engage in trade. A significant share of these costs 
stems from the time and money that companies spend 
on paperwork and in multiple submissions of the same 
information, as required by various government border 
agencies to release goods for export and allow them to 
enter the importing country. Trade single windows have 
considerably improved this process, acting as one-stop 
electronic platforms for registered users to lodge the 
required import and export trade documents. Studies 
suggest that electronic single windows have helped halve 
document processing times in border agencies, cut 
trade compliance times to one-third, increased adopting 
countries’ exports and gross domestic products (GDPs) 
and encouraged an overall improvement in transparency 
and user experience for border clearance.
Single windows have proliferated in recent years; as of 
2017, 27 countries had a full electronic single window 
and 36 had a partial single window. All 164 signatories 
to the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), which entered 
into force in 2017, are encouraged to adopt an electronic 
single window. Their benefits notwithstanding, single 
windows leave a good deal of room for improvement. 
Implementation has been challenging, especially for 
many developing countries; surveys have revealed such 
problems as agencies’ long response times, a reliance on 
paper-based documents and a requirement to submit the 
same data multiple times to different authorities. 
Such challenges undermine government progress in 
facilitating trade and enabling small- and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) to engage in trade. It is also a good 
time to address such issues: Companies are digitizing their 
trade operations and thus demand automated processes, 
including those provided by governments. There is also 
a compelling case for improving single windows due to 
the growth of e-commerce: whereas previously border 
agencies mostly dealt with a limited number of large 
companies doing regular, container-based transactions, 
now they have to contend with an avalanche of parcel-
based shipments and new traders with whom they are less 
familiar. In response, governments around the world are 
considering using new methods and the technologies of 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution to improve the operation, 
data quality, risk management and user experience in 
single windows. Introduction
The purpose of this policy framework is to help 
governments in these explorations by focusing on the 
potential for blockchain in single windows. Blockchain, 
a database that retains information on all transactions 
on a ledger visible to all stakeholders, is already being 
considered and piloted in various areas of world trade 
– such as trade logistics, supply-chain management, 
customs and border regulatory processes, cross-border 
payments and trade finance. This policy framework (1) 
analyses the main pain points in single windows around the 
world; (2) assesses specific use-cases where blockchain 
might alleviate some of these pain points; and (3) develops 
guidelines for governments to consider and apply 
blockchain in trade single windows. The policy framework 
is aimed at government agencies involved in border 
clearance; however, private-sector organizations engaged 
in trade can also use this report to consider how best to 
encourage governments to use this technology.
The following section discusses the importance of trade 
single windows in trade facilitation and reviews the main 
pain points experienced by single window operators and 
users. The next section assesses the value propositions 
of blockchain and analyses how these are best applied 
to remove the main pain points experienced by single 
window operators and users, while also developing a 
series of use-cases for blockchain in single windows. 
The section thereafter focuses on the considerations for 
operationalizing blockchain use-cases in single windows. 
The final section discusses what steps can be taken next. 5
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyExploring blockchain’s usefulness in single windows 
requires an understanding of the essential challenges 
facing single windows and their users. This section 
discusses the gains and pain points single windows have 
created, based on academic literature and structured 
interviews with single window operators in various 
geographic regions.
Benefits 
Introduced in the late 1980s in Sweden and Singapore, 
where they reduced border clearance times from four 
days to 15 minutes, trade single windows have become a 
centrepiece of trade facilitation efforts around the world. 
The TFA encourages signatories to adopt electronic 
single windows – single windows powered by information 
technology. The United Nations Economic Commission 
for Europe has been instrumental in developing definitions, 
guidelines and standards for single windows, and several 
entities including development banks and the World Customs 
Organization have helped countries build and finance them.
By 2017, trade single windows had been adopted in full 
or in part in 63 countries (Figure 1). They typically bring 
together dozens of government agencies in charge of 
such areas as health, agriculture, quarantine, immigration 
and technical standards. For example, in Uruguay, the 
single window brings together 27 agencies such as tax 
and customs authorities and ministries of agriculture and State of single windows
fisheries, environment, energy and mining, and enables 
traders to submit 127 different types of documents 
required by the various border agencies. 
Single windows have delivered a notable return on 
investment in a wide range of countries, facilitating trade 
considerably and lowering companies’ international trade 
costs (Table 1). Their benefits have been compounded by 
the digitization of trade documents: such “paperless trade” 
obviates the need for exporters and importers to spend 
time filling out paper documents, re-entering the same data 
multiple times and visiting government agencies in person 
to secure signatures and stamps.3 Many governments have 
digitized customs clearance and duty payments; research 
suggests this has cut border compliance time for imports 
by one-third, and significantly reduced corruption in the 
customs process.4
Such efficiency gains can be even greater when trade 
single windows are combined with port community 
systems (PCS) that enable the exchange of information 
among players in port environments. For example, in 
Benin, Togo and Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
traders receive a “single invoice”, where all costs at the port 
(such as terminal handling charges) and regulatory costs 
(for instance, duties and taxes) are combined into a single 
invoice that is automatically sent to the importer or relevant 
party. Once the full invoice is paid, the bank pays all of the 
individual stakeholders and goods are released.
Figure 1: Trade single window adoption among 120 analysed countries, 2017
Source: Author processing from the UN Paperless Trade Database, 20176
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyTable 1: Selected impacts of digital technologies in border processes
Digital 
approachesGeneral objectives Selected impactsCountries that have 
adopted by 20175
Digital single 
windows
Digital 
payments of 
customs duties 
and fees
Information 
on export and 
import processes 
available onlineDigital trade 
documents, 
“paperless 
trade”Improve and accelerate 
trade compliance by 
enabling traders to submit 
all documents required 
for border clearance in 
one “window”, typically 
electronically
Enable agencies to process 
trade documents faster, 
thereby accelerating the 
clearance of cargo at borders
Reduce invoicing times by 
automating computation of 
duties and fees
Reduce corruption in customs
Reduce time for importers to 
make payments online
Accelerate reconciliation and 
thus customs clearance
Make trade requirements  
easily accessible, including for 
new exporters and importers, 
and promote transparency of 
trade operationsReduce re-entry of same 
information on multiple 
paper-based documents
Lower processing times for 
traders and staff at trade 
agencies that process 
documents
Improve legibility of trade 
documents traditionally filled 
out by hand
Reduce probability of errorIn Kenya, the average time spent on 
processing applications dropped by 50%, the 
number of documents required for processing 
halved and traders saved time previously 
spent on visiting various agencies.6
In Cameroon, the time to import used cars 
fell from seven to two days, the time to lodge 
shipping manifests from seven days to one 
minute and the time to obtain import licences 
from eight hours to 15 minutes.7
In Colombia, the time to import a container fell 
from 48 to 13 days and the time to export a 
container from 34 to 14 days in 2006–2011.8
Costa Rica reaped $16 in economic gains 
from every $1 invested in the single window. 
Without the system, exports would have been 
on average 2% lower than they were between 
2008 and 2013, or 0.5% of GDP.9
In Tanzania, digitization of customs clearance 
and duties cut import clearance times from 
nine days to less than one day.13
Small and remote firms accelerating their 
access to trade requirements, information 
and documents in a single place reduces 
processing time and enables them to work 
without intermediaries.Exporters and importers in countries with 
paperless trade spend far less time on 
paperwork for border clearance: Sub-Saharan 
African importers spend on average 98 hours 
on paperwork for a consignment, as opposed 
to only four hours in Thailand and one hour in 
Canada and Sweden where traders use digital 
documents.10
In Costa Rica, exporters became able to fill 
out a single form online, which the single 
window distributed automatically across trade 
agencies to issue permits; trade in this channel 
grew 1.4% faster than exports processed via 
traditional methods. 
Paperless trade has facilitated global supply 
chains, such as by enabling just-in-time 
delivery.1127
53
6467127
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyPain points 
While they have delivered significant gains, single windows 
in many countries have yet to be implemented in full and 
thus work as seamless one-stop shops for traders to submit 
trade documents and accelerate border clearance. Research 
and interviews reveal several pain points in single window 
systems related to interoperability among the stakeholders, 
paperless trade, traceability of goods, document and 
payment processing and trustworthiness of data (Table 2). 
The following section details some of the main challenges.
Limited interoperability
– National single windows are disconnected from one 
another. The TFA calls for countries to coordinate their 
border procedures to facilitate trade. Such coordination 
is, however, still very limited – in the UN survey, only 
seven European countries and Canada reported full 
engagement in “trade-related cross-border electronic 
data exchange” while 48 had some partial exchanges.14 
For example, the ten members in the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations’ (ASEAN) single window enable 
electronic exchange of preferential certificates of origin, 
while the four members of the Pacific Alliance share 
phytosanitary and origin certificates.15 The reasons for 
the fragmentation of national single windows include 
disparate national databases, lack of platforms for 
efficient exchange of data and differing regulations, such 
as tax secrecy, data privacy, transfer laws and different 
document formats. As a result, every country is worse 
off: Traders have to enter the same data on export and 
import declarations, risking mismatches and longer 
processing times; governments “fly solo” in interpreting 
data, managing risks and detecting anomalies; and each 
importing country has a more limited window to conduct 
pre-arrival processing that would otherwise accelerate 
the release of goods.16
– Border agencies operate with isolated data.  The 
main value proposition of single windows to their users 
is that they aggregate trade processes in one window.17 
However, single windows are not that single: Border 
agencies that form part of a single window still often 
operate in isolation with regard to their respective data, 
struggling to share data and coordinate actions such 
as risk management and inspections with each other.18 
Single windows in some Latin American and Caribbean 
countries are also disconnected from customs, so that 
traders inherently need to deal with a “double window”. 
Part of the problem is technical, with legacy databases 
impeding the sharing of data, while part is political, with 
agencies keen to protect their turf and modus operandi.19 
In some countries, corruption remains a problem: Players 
who monetize delays at the border have little interest in 
facilitating trade. 
Persistence of paper
– Border agencies still demand that traders file paper-
based documents and visit agencies in person.  
Despite pledges to introduce paperless trade, electronic 
single windows are not always that electronic: Many developing country border agencies and customs 
demand traders submit paper documents – by 2017, 
only 28 countries had adopted electronic application 
protocols for export permits, 25 had adopted electronic 
issuance of preferential certificates of origin and 45 had 
adopted electronic submission of both sea and air cargo 
manifests.20 The persistence of paper is caused by sheer 
inertia, limited budgets and staff concerns about the 
impact of digitization and automation on jobs. 
– Businesses are unfamiliar with digital processes and 
lack information and communications technology 
(ICT) skills to perform digital filings. Companies 
can also impede paperless trade. Even in advanced 
countries, some companies are set in their ways and 
continue to use paper-based documents; in developing 
countries, companies can lack confidence in the 
security of data submitted online and ICT skills or IT 
infrastructures to use digital interfaces – even though 
digitization of trade processes in principle should help 
especially small firms that have limited staff capabilities 
for trade compliance.21
– Unstructured data embedded in trade documents 
are not converted into more easily analysable 
structured data, and data formats are not 
harmonized. Governments have enormous amounts 
of useful data on traders and shipments that can be 
used for sophisticated predictive analytics, such as 
risk management. Yet this data cannot be efficiently 
analysed because it remains in unstructured formats, 
embedded in paper documents that have yet to 
be converted into digitized, structured databases. 
Moreover, data formats are not harmonized, limiting the 
scalability of data analytics. 
Inefficient manual processes and lack of automation
– Manual document processing and reconciliation 
of databases.  Errors are legion in trade documents, 
because many are still often handwritten and simply 
illegible, and because the same data is being re-
entered manually multiple times into new documents 
and databases, a process prone to error. Even in more 
digitized settings, updates to agencies’ databases can 
require manual interventions, which wastes staff time, 
increases the odds of error and stops agencies from 
allocating resources to more value-adding work such as 
sophisticated risk management. Even in countries with 
low labour costs, the inefficiencies of manual processes 
can raise personnel costs far above those with digitized 
documents and shared databases.
– Inefficiencies in making and reconciling customs 
duty and fee payments. While 53 countries have 
enabled electronic payments for customs duties 
and fees, the costs of making and reconciling these 
payments can be surprisingly high.22 One reason is 
that, while invoicing based on a customs declaration 
is typically automated, customs payments in many 
countries require importers to first pay the sum in the 
invoice, and even physically present a document to 
customs to prove the duty was paid. In Sri Lanka, the 
customs platform computes the fees, taxes and duties 8
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technologyautomatically, but traders still need to visit customs to 
submit paper documents that agents then process.23 
Furthermore, direct deposits and wire payments contain 
limited data, and customs then has to manually match 
an electronic payment to a given shipment, which 
decelerates customs clearance rates.
Limited traceability of goods in supply chains
– Limited sharing of data across trade networks 
among border agencies and the private sector.  
Digitization and sharing of data among border agencies 
themselves and with the private sector has increased 
visibility and advance knowledge about incoming 
shipments. For example, in the United States, the Air 
Cargo Advance Screening (ACAS) enables customs 
access from airlines’ advanced air cargo information 
regarding shipments arriving in the United States. 
However, sharing of data among governments and the 
private sector is still limited, impeding agencies’ ability 
to trace goods to their origin, verify certificates of origin 
and recognize anomalous patterns and manage risks, 
ultimately resulting in potential risks to end users of 
shipped products. 
Concerns about data trustworthiness and security  
of data
– Limited trustworthiness of data entered on single 
windows.  Border agencies and traders’ processes 
involving the re-entry of the same data multiple 
times while reconciling different agencies’ databases 
undermine the trustworthiness of data in single windows. 
Data trustworthiness diminishes if data provided by the 
agencies and trader differ. 
– Companies are concerned about the security of their 
sensitive commercial and financial data submitted 
online.  This problem is exacerbated in countries where 
the government has misused corporate information, 
and/or has limited cybersecurity protections, electronic 
signature laws and centralized management of data.24 
There are no contracts between firms that use single 
windows and border authorities. Thus, the former has 
little control over how their data may be used or shared 
and by whom. This contrasts with port community 
systems where parties enter into a contract and have 
recourse if their data is misused. 
– Companies are unable to access and reuse their 
identities and data in single windows.  Companies 
that use single windows often need to enter their identity 
and other datasets multiple times to access government 
and commercial services, as well as being forced to 
use a variety of identifiers when dealing with different 
stratas of government. They are unable to use data, such 
as their records of compliance, authorized economic 
operator (AEO) certifications and trade transactions, in 
single windows. This level of data could be very useful 
for commercial purposes, such as enabling banks 
that provide trade finance to carry out due diligence or 
insurance companies to offer better rates to companies 
with a strong record of trade compliance.Solving these pain points can have significant payoffs; 
for example, the dramatic difference in the number of 
hours spent on regulatory paperwork between countries 
that have implemented paperless trade and countries 
that are still using paper-based documents. But even 
countries that have the world’s most digitized single 
windows and are the top performers in trade facilitation 
struggle with lack of interoperability and inefficient 
processes; they are still seeking to further reduce 
border clearance times and gain new capabilities.9
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyTable 2: Selected pain points in electronic trade single windows
Main pain points Selected reasons Main impacts
Limited 
interoperability
Persistence  
of paper
Inefficient 
manual 
processes
Limited 
trustworthiness 
and portability 
of identities 
and dataLimited 
traceability  
of shipmentsNational single windows disconnected from 
each other
Border agencies still demand traders file paper-
based documents and visit agencies in person
Businesses are unfamiliar with digital processes 
and lack ICT skills to perform digital filings
Manual document processing and reconciliation 
of databases
Limited trustworthiness of data entered on 
single windowsLimited sharing of data across the trade network 
among border agencies and the private sectorIncreases overheads as staff in each agency 
need to reconcile respective databases with 
those of others.
Undermines the credibility and usefulness of 
data held by any one border agency. Limits agencies’ ability to verify origin of goods, 
trace goods in supply chains and detect 
anomalies and fraudulent patterns in multi-
country supply chains, resulting in possible 
risks to end consumers of shipped products.Unstructured data embedded in trade 
documents are not converted into more easily 
analysable structured data; and data formats are 
not harmonized
Inefficiencies in making and reconciling customs 
duty and fee payments
Companies are concerned about the security 
of their sensitive commercial and financial data 
submitted online
Companies are unable to access and reuse their 
identities and data in single windowsWastes customs staff’s time in mundane 
reconciliation processes; decelerates the 
release of goods from customs, costing traders 
time and money.
Makes companies reluctant to use single 
windows and electronic documents and filings, 
where these are optional; process devolves 
back to paper.
Forces companies to re-enter data across 
government services and forego opportunities 
to use valuable transactional data for other 
commercial purposes. Duplication of efforts, delays and lack of end-
to-end visibility of shipments: traders have 
to enter the same data on export and import 
declarations, risking mismatches and longer 
processing times; each government “flies 
solo” in interpreting data, managing risks and 
detecting anomalies; each importing country 
has more limited opportunities to conduct pre-
arrival processing. 
Increases data re-entry, probability of 
errors and mundane, repetitive processes 
that consume traders’ and agencies staff 
resources. 
Perpetuates use of paper in regulatory filings, 
wastes firms’ time in mundane processes.
Limits opportunities for sophisticated data 
analytics to detect anomalies and fraud in 
shipments, and scalability of data analytics.10
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyBlockchain has several useful properties for settings that 
characterize single windows – multistakeholder systems 
in which users struggle to share data with each other are 
forced to continue performing manual processes and 
question the trustworthiness of their data. For example, 
blockchain can help diverse stakeholders interoperate by 
enabling them to access the same data at the same time 
(hence the term “distributed ledger”); smart contracts built 
on a blockchain can automate stakeholders’ compliance 
with various contractual obligations; and blockchain data 
is a stream of reliable information on past transactions 
as they are immutable once entered (Box 1). This section 
assesses potential use-cases to alleviate the pain points in 
single windows using blockchain.25Potential use-cases with blockchain 
Box 1: What is blockchain? 
There are a great many definitions and descriptions of 
blockchain. For the purposes of this paper, blockchain 
can be defined as a shared, distributed ledger of records 
or transactions that is open to inspection by every 
participant, such as countries’ trade agencies that form 
part of single windows.
To understand blockchain’s various properties, it is 
useful to think of a typical trade transaction. It involves 
several documents and bilateral interactions, such as 
between importers and trade finance banks, exporters 
and shipping lines and exporters and importers and 
their countries’ regulatory authorities. These interactions 
amount to a significant waste of time: Parties fill out 
numerous documents, often entering the same data 
multiple times; they email and call each other to verify 
and often correct information that was entered; they 
check on each other’s processing times, often bilaterally 
in each individual transaction. 
Each of these bilateral messages and interactions holds 
its own version of “truth” about the product’s journey 
from seller to buyer. The multiple bilateral “truths” often 
lead to error, fraud, delays and inefficiency, including in 
border clearance. 
Blockchain can reduce the number of steps and 
processes among the network of players involved in 
any one trade transaction and give every player a bird’s 
eye view of any one shipment. As a distributed ledger 
technology (DLT), blockchain can slash the number of 
bilateral communications and informational linkages 
and leakages by providing a single ledger that records 
the transactions as they occur and enables all parties, 
such as trade agencies, to access this data in real time. 
Blockchain enables transactions to be recorded in “blocks” of data that are visible to all stakeholders – and 
thus enables disparate parties in a network to access the 
same data in real time, reducing all parties’ transaction 
costs and enabling stakeholders to share data and 
interact more fluidly. 
Why is blockchain useful?
Blockchain also holds promise for authenticating data 
and improving the trustworthiness of data. Shortly after 
each transaction occurs, it is put into a block on the 
blockchain. These blocks are mathematically “chained” 
together. The blocks are verified and managed by the 
network nodes (computers or users participating in a 
blockchain network) via a shared governance protocol; 
each node contains a complete record of all of the 
transactions ever recorded in that blockchain. No single 
node can change or delete a block – which means data 
on blockchain is immutable and tamper-evident. With 
immutable blocks of data, blockchain also enhances a 
party’s ability to trace transactions, such as shipments in 
world trade.
Blockchain can also automate the fulfilment of contractual 
obligations via smart contracts built on a blockchain, and 
thereby reduce intermediation costs. 
Who can use blockchain?
Often, blockchain is thought of as a database anyone 
can use – and it is the case that blockchains can be 
“permissionless” like bitcoin, where anyone can join the 
network of users. But in most commercial applications, 
they are permissioned, meaning that users need 
permission to join.26 Though permissionless networks 
are open, transparent and decentralized, they are also 
anonymous, unregulated, usually crypto-based and 
have high transaction fees. Meanwhile, permissioned 
blockchains are not decentralized or open to all, but they 
have low transaction costs and identifiable participants, 
and they can be regulated. This paper focuses on 
permissions ledgers – bearing in mind that there is a 
continuum of blockchain applications falling between the 
permissioned and permissionless models, with different 
governance and revenue models.11
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyChallenges
Before going further to assess blockchain’s value added, 
it is important to consider some challenges in analysing 
blockchain’s potential in single windows. 
First, data on blockchain’s impact is still very limited: Piloting 
and testing is needed to understand blockchain’s full 
potential. Governments have been adopting digital single 
windows and paperless trade over the past 30 years, and 
by now there are significant amounts of data and analysis 
data on the impacts of digitization of single windows, trade 
documents and payments. However, no systematic data 
currently exists on blockchain’s impacts: We essentially 
know the “digitization premia” but we still cannot, in a similar, 
rigorous way, capture the “blockchain premia” in border 
clearance.27 However, blockchain pilots in trade and other 
domains are compelling enough to suggest that it could have 
significant new value and thus merits exploring and piloting. 
Secondly, it is premature to determine blockchain’s unique 
potential with regard to other technologies in border 
clearance. This report does not claim that other digital 
technologies could not solve many of the pain points in single 
windows: Digital documents, payments and data sharing 
via application programming interfaces (APIs) have already 
done a great deal of good. Many developing countries would 
score enormous gains if they implemented single windows as 
successfully as Singapore, Korea or Mexico have done. This 
report is not a “battle of technologies” intended to compare 
technologies side-by-side or seek to persuade governments 
that blockchain is a superior technology. The evidence is 
still much too limited to make such claims, since blockchain 
technology (like many other technologies) is maturing, and 
fierce debates persist.
What can be said is that blockchain is not a silver bullet that 
cures all ills in world trade –what it can and cannot do well 
can be defined only through further testing and piloting. 
Many governments that have been successful in automating 
their border processes – such as the United Kingdom, 
Korea, Singapore, Mexico and the United States – are today 
the most avid experimenters with blockchain in customs 
and single windows, precisely to assess the technology’s 
potential in offering new efficiencies and capabilities. Also, 
many leading logistics companies and banks are exploring 
blockchain for streamlining their operations. 
This report seeks to help governments consider where 
and how to apply blockchain in border clearance, and to 
operationalize blockchain use-cases in single windows.
Use-cases
Table 3 and the following discussion lay out several potential 
use-cases to address selected pain points in single windows 
for which blockchain could be a particularly useful solution, 
along with further complementary technologies and policy 
measures.12
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technology
Pillars for blockchain in single windows: electronic signatures and transactions laws, solid IT Infrastructures, 
mobile-enabled interfacesSingle windows use-cases and blockchain’s potential
Auditability
Main pain 
point 
Limited 
interoperability
Inefficient 
manual 
processes
Limited 
trustworthiness 
and portability 
of identities 
and dataNational single windows 
disconnected from each 
other
Limited trustworthiness 
of data entered on single 
windowsLimited sharing of data 
across the trade network 
among border agencies 
and the private sector
Inefficiencies in making 
and reconciling customs 
duty and fee paymentsBorder agencies that form 
part of a single window 
operate in isolation
Companies are unable 
to access and use 
their identities and 
data included in single 
windowsInteroperability and 
data share among two 
or more national single 
windows
Improved reliability of 
data entered on single 
windowsEnd-to-end visibility into 
shipments and supply 
chains
Automation of processes 
to make and reconcile 
duty and fee paymentsInteroperability and 
coordination of actions 
among agencies making 
up the single window
Authentication of 
identities and portability 
of identities and data 
across service providers, 
including for commercial 
purposes (e.g. access 
trade finance)Big data and AI; 
harmonization of 
national documentation 
requirements, agreements to 
share data across borders 
Data standards; data-
security protocols; AI to 
detect fraudulent and 
erroneous data entriesInternet of things 
applications; agreements 
to share data with private 
sector and across borders; 
machine learning to detect 
anomalous patterns in data
Robotic process automation; 
deferred duty payments; 
information-rich electronic 
paymentsInter-agency collaboration 
and APIs to share data; big 
data and AI
Development of a unique 
ID such as Global Trade 
Identity (GTID); government 
regulations to encourage or 
demand portability of dataImprove all national single windows’ visibility 
into supply chains, ability to manage risks 
and recognize patterns and conduct pre-
arrival processing; share data on Authorized 
Economic Operator certifications
Make data entered into single windows 
immutable and unauthorized modification to 
the data traceableEnable more complete data on shipments 
and supply chains and audit trails on traders 
by bringing together single windows and/
or private-sector trade intermediaries on a 
common blockchain with immutable streams 
of data
Automate payments and their reconciliation; 
accelerate revenue collectionImprove all border agencies’ ability to 
share data and coordinate actions, gain 
360-degree visibility of transactions and 
manage risks, improve user experience
Provide single window users with a unique 
identity and enable users to apportion relevant 
parts of their identities and transactional data 
to third-party service providersLimited 
traceability 
of shipmentsSelected reasons Use-case Blockchain’s potential Alternative/
complementary 
technologies and 
actions 
Distrubuted database
 Immutability
ImmutabilityImmutabilityAuditability
Auditability
Auditability
Smart contracts
Digital identity
Distrubuted database
Distrubuted database
Distrubuted database
Table 3: Single windows use-cases and blockchain’s potential 13
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyInteroperability among national single windows.  
Interconnected, interoperable national single windows 
would have various benefits. They could enhance national 
border agencies’ oversight of traders and transactions; 
help countries tackle fraud, such as the undervaluation of 
shipments by the importing country’s customs; and reduce 
the number of data entries and document submissions from 
exporters and importers. Governments adopting blockchain 
to connect their single windows would need to integrate 
processes within their own single windows, build trust with 
each other, standardize data elements,28 align blockchain 
implementations with their respective cross-border data-
transfer regulations and establish robust collaboration with 
the private sector.29 One novel solution is Infocomm Media 
Authority of Singapore’s effort to develop an interoperability 
framework, TradeTrust, for the secure exchange of electronic 
trade documents in cross-border trade.30 Piloting can help 
countries work together while discovering mutual benefits. 
For example, with IDB’s support, Latin American customs 
agencies have successfully piloted a blockchain scheme to 
share data from their respective AEO programmes (Box 2). 
Interoperability among border agencies that form part 
of a single window. One of the main pain points facing 
single windows is the friction in sharing data among trade 
agencies that form part of that window. Blockchain can 
make a significant difference in this setting: Used in a 
way analogous to Google Drive, blockchain can enable 
the myriad trade agencies to access the same data at 
the same time, gain greater visibility of shipments and 
manage such critical issues as food safety and intellectual 
property compliance while reducing staff time spent on 
reconciling agencies’ respective databases. It could also 
be used to drive interoperability between a single window 
and PCS. However, operationalizing data-sharing among 
agencies will take serious political leadership for agencies 
to work together – yet this work is already being done. 
For example, the UK government has piloted a blockchain 
scheme to share data and coordinate actions among the 
country’s 28 border agencies.31 A recent proof of concept 
established that blockchain can be used to securely share 
the results of sensitive risk checks involved with granting 
firms AEO status.32
End-to-end visibility of shipments and supply chains.  
As changes are made on the blockchain, new blocks 
are added over time, forming a chain of data that can 
serve as an audit trail for border agencies to detect fraud 
and suspicious patterns, manage AEO certifications and 
possibly also establish new categories of trust, such as 
“trusted e-trader” programmes for small firms that have a 
solid track record of compliant trade transactions but which 
do not necessarily qualify for traditional AEO status.34 The 
end-to-end visibility will be even greater as a larger set of 
players in the trade networks, such as lines and logistics 
firms, adopt blockchain. More generally, blockchain could 
help agencies move from a transactional (shipment-based) 
risk-management approach to an entity-based approach, 
thereby enabling audit trails of companies and allowing 
companies themselves to better reuse their data included in 
single windows. Automation of workflows and customs duty and fee 
payments.  Smart contracts can be built on a blockchain 
to do x when y happens and thus automate what, in 
many cases, are still manual processes involving costly 
intermediaries. Smart contracts could be applied in single 
windows to automate customs fee, duty and tax payments. 
For example, smart contracts could trigger advance 
payment from the importer when customs authorities 
have completed pre-arrival processes for the importer’s 
consignment. Automating payments would reduce 
importers’ shoe-leather costs of making payments and 
presenting paper-based proofs that payments had been 
made and reduce customs’ payment reconciliation costs. 
It could possibly also reduce legal disputes and litigation 
costs and increase trust and confidence in the supply chain.
Improved trustworthiness of data entered into single 
windows.  Once entered into blockchain, the data cannot 
be modified. Data records on all entries and transactions Box 2: CADENA: Blockchain in AEO mutual 
recognition agreements in Latin America
During 2018, the IDB, together with the customs 
administrations of Mexico, Peru, Costa Rica and Chile, 
and with technical support from Microsoft, designed a 
solution using blockchain technology called CADENA 
v.0.33 It facilitates the sharing of the data associated with 
Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) certificates among 
customs administrations as specified in their mutual 
recognition agreements (MRA). While AEO programmes 
enable companies to facilitate their trade and save time 
and money in their trade transactions, CADENA helps to 
secure and facilitate supply chains globally. 
CADENA has been designed, first, to find a solution to 
a customs and border management challenge – the 
sharing of cross-border data – and secondly, to enable 
customs to learn about blockchain in order to consider 
possible further use-cases. Blockchain enables different 
national customs authorities to access the same verified, 
tamper-proof and real-time data. This ensures that 
traders can receive MRA benefits both at the countries 
of origin and destination of their exports as soon as they 
are granted their AEO certification. 
During the pilot project, customs validated the benefits of 
the technology for sharing cross-border data, providing 
timely information about the level of compliance of 
traders to feed risk-management systems. Furthermore, 
they found that CADENA could next be expanded to 
automate the entire AEO certification process, and to 
other customs functionalities that require engagement 
with different stakeholders, both public and private. 
To build on the findings made during CADENA and to 
incorporate new developments in blockchain technology 
in 2018, a new phase is proposed to develop CADENA 
v.1 during 2019. CADENA v.1 will scale to other 
countries, such as Colombia, and will benefit from the 
synergies of LACChain (see Box 5) to address further 
issues related to governance, administration, data 
privacy, sustainability and scalability.14
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technologyare timestamped and any changes and additions will 
be visible on the chain to all stakeholders, as the one 
and only version of the “truth”. As such, blockchain can 
improve the trustworthiness of data entered into single 
windows and used by border agencies. Granted, like 
any database, blockchain is only as useful as the data 
included in it; the veracity and quality of data can be 
increasingly assessed with AI-driven tools – and by making 
machines rather than humans impute data on ledgers 
when possible.35 Blockchain’s security is also still debated. 
The companies developing blockchain technologies are 
strongly encouraged to improve blockchain’s security. Much 
ultimately depends on the security architecture built around 
blockchain implementations. 
Authentication of identities and portability of identities 
and data across service providers, including for 
commercial purposes.  Blockchain can help users 
to authenticate and control their identities and data. 
Blockchain-based identities can be “self-sovereign”, 
administered by the identity holder and based on the 
decentralized identifiers (DIDs) that are much like a secure 
website. Each DID can be assigned to different parts of 
a user’s identity; one DID could be a company’s name; 
another, its federal identification number; still another, 
its Harmonized System (HS) codes, and so on. Single 
window users could be encouraged to access and carry 
these pieces of their digital identity and use their DIDs and 
transactions authenticated by blockchain for commercial 
purposes. For example, companies that have managed 
to secure an AEO status could use that data point to 
negotiate better cargo or corporate insurance rates, and 
small companies could use their blockchain-based trade 
compliance data to better access trade finance.36
The concept of a Global Trade Identity (GTID) – to reduce 
supplier and customer risk in supply chains by enabling any 
supply chain partner to validate the trustworthiness of a 
legal entity with which it looks to do business – can, in the 
blockchain environment, offer a commercially and politically 
neutral identity infrastructure.37 It would help develop the 
concept of a trade data pipeline, in which commercial, 
logistics and regulatory trade data associated with an 
operation “travels” through a pipeline that could be read 
and used by public and private stakeholders according to 
their level of access to the data.Single windows can gain when blockchain is adopted 
in the broader trade ecosystem. Gains from blockchain 
in single windows can also expand as blockchain becomes 
more widely adopted in the trade network, and as banks, 
ports, terminal operators, logistics providers and tax 
authorities adopt blockchain solutions to streamline their 
operations. Bringing the various players that “touch” a trade 
transaction on a common blockchain could drastically 
reduce re-entry of data in trade transactions, enhance 
intermediaries’ visibility of shipments end-to-end and enable 
border agencies to access more diverse and reliable supply-
chain data – which can help optimize their risk-targeting and 
verify the origin of products, for example. Multistakeholder 
blockchains will have a critical need for common 
understandings on governance and data, and IP rights.
Such multistakeholder solutions are already being 
developed, including the Maersk-IBM TradeLens platform 
for logistics, the we.trade platform for trade finance and 
a range of national initiatives. For example, Mexican 
customs, customs brokers, Hutchison Ports, and the Port 
of Veracruz are together piloting a blockchain solution 
that provides them with common, real-time data on the 
location and documents associated with a given export 
shipment. The Korean Customs Service has worked with 
the logistics community to explore blockchain’s usefulness 
in the accuracy and transparency of data on certificates 
of origin; more than 50 Korean companies on the export 
side, alongside five working groups and ten companies 
based in Viet Nam and Singapore on the import side, 
have participated in pilots.38 The European Commission’s 
Directorate-General for Taxation and Customs Union 
(DG-TAXUD) recently tested blockchain’s value added in 
temporary admission and excise domains, finding that 
blockchain has significant potential in these specific areas 
of trade and revenue collection.39Box 3: Technologies to complement blockchain in 
single windows
Blockchain has several potential use-cases for single 
windows – and can also be usefully complemented by 
other technologies. For example, machine learning can be 
a powerful complement to blockchain in border agencies’ 
risk management and fraud prevention, helping agencies 
predict risks and invest resources in high-risk shipments 
while facilitating licit trade. Artificial intelligence (AI) can 
help agencies transform unstructured data in trade 
documents into structured data that enables data and 
information on trade documents to be used for pattern 
recognition and risk analysis. 
Robotic process automation can further streamline well-
functioning single windows’ workflow by automating 
mundane and repetitive processes, enabling agency staff to 
invest their time in serving users and performing other higher-
value work, and reducing the odds of human error. Internet 
of things (IoT) applications can further border agencies’ and 
single window users’ visibility of shipments end-to-end – 
for example, IoT-enabled physical tamper detection with 
edge-computing and sensors can enhance the integrity and 
availability of data for border agencies on the blockchain and 
enable ledger updates and payment transactions.15
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyBlockchain has the potential to generate new efficiencies 
and provide new capabilities, both for the agencies that 
form part of single windows and the businesses that use 
them. The biggest question mark for border agencies 
is to what extent blockchain adds new value in single 
windows, and what it actually takes to effectively pilot and 
operationalize blockchain. For staff at border agencies 
to champion blockchain requires compelling answers to 
these questions. 
There are at least six key steps and considerations when 
introducing blockchain into single windows (Table 4).Guidelines for operationalizing use-cases 
Actions
Who 
drives
Level 
of effort 
needed
Key 
questions 
to addressEnsure political support 
exists for trade facilitation
Establish a “grand 
vision” for blockchain 
in the single window 
and a business case for 
stakeholders
Adopt blockchain in 
pilots and iterating to 
improve outcomes
Bring together a 
multidisciplinary team 
to pilot and apply 
blockchain
Define how to cover 
costs and how to 
engage development 
banks and donors
What is the outcome 
to be attained by using 
blockchain? 
What is in it for each 
stakeholder? 
How are costs covered?
How could development 
banks and donors best 
support via technical 
advice and funding?Where is blockchain 
managed from? 
What are the 
responsibilities of the 
different stakeholders and 
what are stakeholders 
rewarded for? 
How are data and 
document-sharing 
governed among 
stakeholders?
How to define and 
differentiate access 
privileges?
Which international data 
standards should be 
considered?How does the new 
solution integrate 
with the current 
solutions (process and 
technology)?
Can IT create a 
functionable “digital twin” 
of a trade?
Does blockchain provide 
a trusted interaction layer 
for sharing events and 
information/data?
Does blockchain also 
need to account for and 
support wider supply 
chain business models?Could users make their 
data portable and for 
what purposes, and how 
is off-chain data shown 
to outsiders certified as 
“real”? 
Are data-storage needs 
an issue?
How to best 
communicate the 
benefits of blockchain 
to firms that use single 
windows?What is the improvement 
from baseline and last 
measurement?
What are the weakest 
links in implementation 
and why?
How does my country 
compare to others that 
are also working on trade 
facilitation, before and 
after blockchain was 
adopted?How to improve on the 
process and outcomes in 
steps 1-5?
What new properties of 
blockchain technology 
and other technologies 
could be employed? 
What is the optimal 
governance structure 
if pilot is scaled or 
replicated?
In which other areas of 
trade facilitation could 
blockchain be tested?Head of state, agency 
heads, private-sector 
users, focus groupsAgency heads, IT leads 
and users; international 
expertsAgency IT leads, experts Agency heads, IT leads Agency front-line staff,  
report to head of stateImplementors, private-
sector usersEstablish a governance 
structure with mandate, 
scope, responsibilities 
and data-share rules
Standardize data entered 
on blockchain and data-
security protocols
Define reward systems 
for staff in agencies to 
implement blockchain
Define data-storage 
needs
Assess compatibility of 
blockchain with existing 
regulations; consider 
regulatory sandboxes 
to fuel blockchain’s 
developmentDevelop the technology 
architecture, acquire 
blockchain technologies 
and integrate blockchain 
with existing databases 
and technologies
Retrain agencies’ IT 
staff and acquire new 
capabilities with technical 
knowledge of blockchainTest a single, 
interoperable identity for 
single window users and 
enable them to make 
their data portable
Possibly develop a new 
identity for blockchain 
users, e.g. GTID
Communicate technology 
improvements to usersDevelop and track 
KPIs, e.g. time release 
indicators; operational 
efficiency in border 
agencies; and trade 
facilitation and SME  
trade growth 
Reward agencies’ staff 
for meeting targets 
defined in steps 1 and 2Assess the pilot and 
consider ways to 
improve and scale it
Consider blockchain’s 
emerging capabilities and 
rethink its governance
Assess governance 
structure built into step 2
Consider range of 
applications in other 
niche areas in single 
windowsCreate vision and  
business caseCreate governance 
structure, including  
for data, and 
implementation planBuild technology 
architecture and
integrate technologyManage user 
identities  
and dataMeasure impact  
and report on it IterateTable 4: Guidelines for operationalizing blockchain use-cases in single windows16
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technology1. Create a ‘grand vision’ and make the 
business case
Ensure high-level political support exists for trade 
facilitation.  Single windows work best in countries in which 
the leadership is firmly committed to trade facilitation. The 
same is true for blockchain applied in single windows: It has 
a fighting chance to work if its adoption and implementation 
are supported by the highest levels of government.40
Establish a “grand vision” and make the business case 
for stakeholders. The decision to use blockchain requires 
a vision of the benefits that it can generate for border 
agencies and trade facilitation. This initial vision will inform 
further steps, such as specific key performance indicators 
(KPIs), blockchain’s governance model and technology 
architecture and agencies’ reward systems. Since the main 
impediment to blockchain’s adoption tends to be defining a 
business model in which all stakeholders perceive benefits, 
blockchain champions need to spend time and energy to 
develop compelling value propositions for each stakeholder 
group – in this case, border agencies and the private 
sector (Box 4). Focus groups are a useful way to quickly 
understand players’ pain points and preferences. Activities 
and games in which players are encouraged to work 
together can also be useful – such strategies have been 
used to train agencies to use customs software and for port 
ecosystem actors to use a PCS. 
Adopt blockchain in pilots and iterating to improve 
outcomes.  It is useful to define the initial steps towards the 
grand vision as pilots that enable stakeholders to test the 
blockchain technology and explore its benefits in various 
specific use-cases, rather than being locked into using 
it indefinitely. Experimentation is also important in that 
blockchain is a nascent technology in which the benefits 
have yet to come to full view, and stakeholders need to be 
socialized into using it. 
Bring together a multidisciplinary team to implement 
pilots. Implementing blockchain in single windows will 
require multidisciplinary teams of technology experts and 
domain experts in trade facilitation, as well as input from 
private-sector users. 
Define how costs are covered. Questions related to 
funding and burden-sharing should not derail a blockchain 
project before it gets started. It is important to define early 
on how the blockchain project is paid for and articulate that 
to stakeholders.
Partner with development banks for technical advice 
and funding.  Developing countries can tap development 
agencies to bring valuable technical knowledge and 
financial resources into blockchain pilots. Multilateral 
development banks and donors are starting to increase 
their experience in blockchain implementation and can also 
help developing countries learn from each other, cooperate 
and measure blockchain’s effects on trade costs and trade 
flows. For their part, development organizations could 
condition their support on recipient governments’ actions to 
digitize trade documents and processes and report on KPIs 
from the blockchain pilots.2: Create a governance structure, including 
for data, and an implementation plan
Establish a governance structure around blockchain. 
Blockchain’s governance architecture needs to be 
sorted out early on, as many subsequent decisions 
flow from it. This includes the mandate, scope and 
responsibilities of each participating stakeholder, as well as 
understanding how data is shared and which technologies 
are used. It is also important to define from where the 
blockchain application will be managed, a particularly 
important question in multi-country and/or multi-ledger 
implementations. Important approaches include standards Box 4: Lessons learned from piloting blockchain in 
Korean customs and trade ecosystem
 
The Korean Customs Service (KCS) has been highly 
active in piloting blockchain. In 2018, KCS conducted 
three pilot projects: the E-clearance Blockchain 
Project; the Blockchain Cross-Border Project with 
Viet Nam, aimed at enhancing the reliability of shared 
certificates of origin data via blockchain; and the 
Export Logistics Blockchain Project with Samsung, 
Hyundai Glovis, Busan Port Terminal, Shinhan Bank and 
more than 60 Korean companies, aimed at exploring 
whether blockchain could enhance the accuracy 
and transparency of data generated by the logistic 
community.
To pave the way for the pilots, KCS created a dedicated 
division for blockchain’s adoption, and selected as 
project managers staff with a strong understanding 
of blockchain technology. These staff had gained the 
necessary knowledge through training, participation in 
forums and seminars and capacity-building provided by 
blockchain service providers. To develop the pilots, KCS 
worked extensively to interact and engage stakeholders, 
holding many meetings and workshops at which the 
stakeholders could define the data that could be shared, 
and share information related to export logistics and 
their respective business processes. 
KCS’s ICT Development Division led the technology’s 
adoption; the blockchain platform was developed by 
Samsung and KCnet. It was geared to generating and 
sharing information such as trade documents, export 
declarations, bills of lading and letters of credit among 
others. The platform minimized manual work in the trade 
process and greatly improved the transparency and 
reliability of data, as the data is collected from multiple 
sources and is immutable. 
The main driver of success behind KCS’s effort was its 
early realization that the most important challenge in 
using blockchain is not the adoption of the technology, 
but (1) consensus-building on the need for, and 
benefits of, blockchain with internal staff and external 
stakeholders; and (2) extensive dialogues on how 
blockchain will be applied – especially how stakeholders’ 
business processes ought to be updated to best 
facilitate trade when blockchain is used.17
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technologyand solutions such as IDB’s LACChain where countries 
can plug the blockchains in their single windows as nodes 
into an interoperable regional blockchain architecture (Box 
5). Governments that are interested in making their single 
windows interoperable with each other will also need to 
review the interoperability of their regulations and standards. 
Standardize and secure data.  The use of standardized 
data (data semantic, data format and data access protocol, 
perhaps as in the WCO Data Model) ensures that any 
stakeholder’s systems interface seamlessly with the 
blockchain network.41 Blockchain’s governance structure 
should inform how data on a blockchain is secured; for 
example, agency staff’s access to review the data on a 
blockchain is a vulnerability to be managed. Encryption 
techniques used today may be compromised in the future, 
and thus the security management needs to continually 
evolve. Implementations will also need to consider how 
stakeholders’ off-chain data is integrated with on-chain 
data in a secure manner. Mitigating these types of risks 
will introduce some moderate cybersecurity costs. The 
ISO 27000 series of standards regarding the security of IT 
systems can provide general guidance.42
Define reward and accountability systems for blockchain 
adoption.  Blockchain pilots need to be co-owned by 
stakeholders in the agencies that are responsible for their 
implementation. In particular, a sense of co-ownership 
among two IDB departments and beneficiary customs was 
vital to CADENA’s shift and successful implementation. 
Primary staff need to coordinate work through weekly 
meetings, and be rewarded when meeting milestones and 
KPIs, and for transparently measuring impacts. 
Define needs for data storage.  Whether data is stored 
directly on the ledger or off-chain with hashes on the ledger, 
the storage costs will need to be covered. Data storage 
costs can be roughly based on typical data storage costs. 
Consider blockchain’s compatibility with digital 
regulations and establish regulatory sandboxes for 
blockchain. Ultimately, legal frameworks on electronic 
signatures, data privacy and transfer, and internet 
intermediary liability need to be made compatible with 
aspirations for digitization and use of technologies such as 
blockchain. For example, smart contracts, if used, need 
to be embedded in laws that make digital signatures and 
smart contracts enforceable in courts and, if used among 
players from two different countries, are understood in 
the same way in these countries’ legal frameworks. It will 
also be useful to consider a regulatory sandbox approach 
to blockchain, for companies to bring new blockchain 
applications to market without having to comply with the 
gamut of regulations that might otherwise apply.43
3: Build technology architecture and 
integrate technology 
Develop the technology architecture, acquire blockchain 
technologies and integrate blockchain with existing 
databases and technologies.  Blockchain deployment 
requires unique upfront costs to develop the IT Box 5: Enabling blockchain development in Latin 
America and the Caribbean
Over the past five years, different blockchain-based 
solutions have been attempted in the LAC region. Even if 
some of them have been successful at a pilot stage, few 
have scaled. In 2018, IDB Lab, the innovation laboratory 
of the Inter-American Development Bank, launched 
the Global Knowledge Alliance for the Development 
of the Blockchain Ecosystem in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LACChain).
LACChain is aimed at accelerating the development of 
the blockchain network in LAC. It solves several specific 
challenges to blockchain’s scalability in the region: 
limited coordination among network stakeholders in 
exploring an alternative to governance structures; limited 
infrastructure capabilities; lack of standards for scalable 
and interoperable solutions; and high transaction costs. 
LACChain works in four areas: (1) partnerships between 
public-private stakeholders, (2) the technological 
infrastructure, (3) the marketplace of applications, and (4) 
data analytics to measure social impact. 
LACChain is creating a hybrid public-permissioned 
network that combines the features of public and 
permissioned blockchains. It offers networks that 
are decentralized, while requiring that users are 
authenticated and comply with the law, as the 
blockchain will be regulated and there are no transaction 
fees. In late 2018, LACChain launched its first public-
permissioned test-net using the software Quorum, and, 
in 2019, will release a second test using Pantheon.
architecture and to integrate existing systems with the 
newly developed blockchain system. However, these fixed 
upfront costs may be offset by the increased efficiency 
and lower variable costs over time, comparable to 
conventional IT systems. 
Train IT staff and acquire new technical capabilities to 
operationalize blockchain in agencies’ day-to-day work.  
Optimizing blockchain in single windows takes both 
domain expertise and technical know-how. It requires 
the training of agencies’ existing IT personnel – Korea 
Customs Service set up a dedicated team that had to 
undergo training to manage blockchain pilots. For non-IT 
personnel and businesses that use single windows, the 
impacts are minor, as front-end interfaces can remain the 
same or show little change.
4: Manage user identities and data
Test a single, interoperable identity for single window 
users and enable them to make their data portable. A 
blockchain pilot can enable a government to test, perhaps in 
partnership with various public- and private-sector entities, 
the concept of a single digital identity for single window 
users. Enabling companies to make their transactional data 
portable and use it for commercial purposes, such as for 
securing insurance or trade finance, could be tested as a 
standalone use-case or in the context of any one use-case 
to understand how the stakeholders respond. 18
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyCommunicate technology improvements to users and 
ask about their user experience. Single window users 
need to be educated about the benefits of blockchain, and 
their views need to be included in assessments of pilots 
and implementations. 
5: Measure impact and report on it
Develop and track KPIs of single windows powered 
by blockchain.  Blockchain’s impact on single windows 
and trade costs needs to be measured for governments 
to identify improvements enabled by blockchain, make 
the business case for scaling the solution, harvest lessons 
learned and keep agencies and blockchain champions 
accountable. Important KPI measures should at least 
include impacts on border agencies’ operations and 
expenditures and a range of second-order economic 
outcomes, such as impacts on trade facilitation, SME trade 
and trade growth. They could also include the granular 
indicators in the WCO Time Release Study.44 Baseline 
measures should be established before blockchain is 
adopted, and investment in KPI management and reporting 
needs to be made upfront, not after blockchain has 
been piloted. To the extent that several countries adopt 
blockchains in single windows, it is useful to collect similar 
data points – development banks can produce such 
common data. 
6: Iterate  
Assess the pilot and consider ways to improve 
and scale it, including by considering blockchain’s 
emerging capabilities and rethinking its governance.  
Often, blockchain models and governance discussions 
are “frozen in place”, anchored in a certain understanding 
of the technology when it was first tested – even though 
blockchain and its user base are rapidly evolving, offering 
and demanding different functionalities. As they experiment 
with blockchain and other technologies, single windows 
need to keep up with how the technology is maturing, what 
new providers are emerging and which new players are 
adopting blockchain – and ask themselves whether the 
governance and IT architectures that were initially put in 
place continue to optimize outcomes.19
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyThis policy framework has presented real-life problems in 
single windows, taken a sober look at how and whether 
blockchain could solve them, and offered useable guidelines 
for governments to adopt blockchain in single windows. 
This framework has found that blockchain has the 
potential to solve various pain points facing single windows 
and bring new efficiencies and capabilities to border 
agencies. For example, it can be useful in enhancing 
interoperability of national single windows and of agencies 
within a country’s single window, automating contractual 
obligations such as payment of customs duties and fees, 
enabling traceability of products across supply chains, and 
attenuating agencies’ concerns about the trustworthiness 
of data at their disposal. 
However, blockchain’s benefits, just like the benefits of 
single windows, will critically hinge on the rigour of its 
implementation. Governments that want to pilot and test 
blockchain in single windows should have a clear vision 
of how blockchain can advance the attainment of trade 
facilitation objectives; understand stakeholders’ pain 
points and develop a compelling value proposition for 
each stakeholder to adopt blockchain; build a governance 
structure and an enabling legal environment and 
technology architecture while providing clear targets and 
KPIs for blockchain implementation; be flexible to change 
course and iterate to improve outcomes; and, in particular, 
secure high-level political support and collaboration with 
the private sector. 
This framework is intended to pave the way for blockchain 
pilots around the world. The World Economic Forum and 
the Inter-American Development Bank will be working 
to implement proofs of concept with a subset of LAC 
governments to pilot blockchain use- cases, use the 
implementation guidelines discussed here and build 
LAC governments’ capacity to understand and apply 
new technologies on border clearance while sharing the 
lessons learned.Next steps20
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyAppendix
The graphic below walks through an example of how the 
guidelines for operationalizing use-cases (see the earlier 
section on this subject) can be applied. The example refers 
to the Inter-American Development Bank’s CADENA project.
In early 2018, the IDB 
staged a workshop 
to identify three Latin 
American countries’ 
customs pain points 
when sharing data with 
AEO-certified companies
Together with these 
countries’ customs, the 
IDB drafted a vision and 
business case; the aim 
was to contribute to the 
facilitation and securing 
of trade through the 
sharing of each other’s 
AEO certification data in 
a secure fashion in real 
time
Blockchain was identified 
as the technology to 
be validated to create 
efficiency and security in 
the exchange of data 
The project was branded 
“CADENA” (“Chain”)
The IDB funded the pilot 
project and created an 
interdisciplinary team 
with IDB’s trade and 
technology experts 
and beneficiaries – the 
customs administrations 
of Costa Rica, Peru and 
Mexico. Chile joined 
afterwards The pilot project was 
crafted collaboratively 
during the workshop, 
by first learning about 
blockchain as the 
proposed technology, 
and then developing 
common understandings 
of the business 
challenges to be tackled 
This resulted in the 
definition of the 
functionalities, technical 
requirements and 
data management 
requirements for the 
solution, and were 
included in RFP 
specifications
An ad hoc governance 
structure was defined 
for the pilot project, 
consisting of a private 
blockchain ecosystem 
of the customs 
administrations with 
the initial support and 
participation of the IDB 
and the technological 
vendor
Interaction and constant 
feedback among the 
IDB, countries and the 
technology vendor 
were established 
during the design and 
implementation phase 
throughout 2018Together with the 
selected technological 
vendor, an ad hoc 
blockchain architecture 
was adopted for 
validating the exchange 
of data 
Beneficiary customs 
opted out of integrating 
CADENA with legacy 
systems during the pilot, 
to keep the focus on the 
exchange of data
Customs agreed that 
CADENA would be 
enhanced with a Power 
App to enable customs 
officials and AEO-
certified companies to 
access the platform 
through mobile devicesData privacy and user 
identities were managed 
to control access to 
and functions in the 
blockchain, thereby 
preventing the deletion 
or alteration of data and 
enabling audit trails
Portability of user 
identities and data is 
explored in futureApproach developed in 
phases 1 and 2 allowed 
for a fast and measurable 
pilot over the pilot 
project. Among gains:
Accelerated process 
of granting benefits 
to new AEO-certified 
firms in the countries 
of destination for their 
cargo operations 
Increased transparency 
and traceability of 
cross-border data
Strengthened security 
of supply chains by 
facilitating access to 
data of new AEO-
certified companies 
and also to AEO 
suspensions and 
cancellations in real 
time across countries’ 
customs
Increased knowledge 
of the application of 
new technologies 
among customs and 
the broader trade 
communityThe pilot project resulted 
in a globally innovative 
customs management 
system and in several 
lessons learned related 
to the governance, data 
privacy and additional 
functionalities of the 
solution. These will be 
addressed during the 
second phase, CADENA 
v.1
CADENA v.1 will 
catalyse synergies with 
LACChain, a region-wide 
initiative facilitated by the 
IDB to develop a regional 
blockchain ecosystem 
in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
CADENA v.1 will evolve 
towards a model of 
autonomous and 
sustainable governance 
and to one for data 
privacy provisions, by 
benefiting from the 
technology architecture 
provided by LACChain. 
This will further enable 
CADENA’s scalability to 
further customs such as 
that of ColombiaCreate vision and  
business caseCreate governance 
structure, including  
for data, and 
implementation planBuild technology 
architecture  
and integrate 
technology with  
other systemsManage user 
identities  
and dataMeasure impact  
and report on it Iterate21
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain TechnologyAcknowledgements
The World Economic Forum’s Centre for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution and the Inter-American Development 
Bank would like to acknowledge the valuable contributions 
from the individuals below. 
The Global Trade Single Window project involved a global, 
multi-industry and multistakeholder community to co-
design and pilot proofs of concept and then share lessons 
learned in implementing policy frameworks. This report is 
based on numerous discussions, interviews, workshops 
and webinars – and the combined effort of all involved. 
Opinions expressed herein may not necessary correspond 
with those of everyone involved with the project.
Project Team
Inter-American Development Bank
Alejandra Radl , Integration and Trade Specialist
Sandra Corcuera-Santamaria , Customs and Trade 
Facilitation Senior Specialist
Lorena Cano , Open Knowledge Senior Associate 
World Economic Forum  
Ziyang Fan , Head of Digital Trade
Jesse Lin , Project Specialist, Digital Trade 
Nextrade Group LLC
Kati Suominen , Chief Executive Officer
Contributors
Ady Beitler , Inter-American Development Bank
Agnes Budzyn , ConsenSys AG
Avi Dutt , Ministry of Shipping of India
Barbara Kotschwar , Visa
Cecilia Fernandez Ruiz , Everis
Cuitlahuac Baños , Inter-American Development Bank
Emmanuelle Ganne , World Trade Organization (WTO)
Erin English , Microsoft
Gadi Benmoshe , Israel Ports Development  
& Assets Company
Henrik Hvid Jensen , TrustWorks
Jaime Granados , Inter-American Development Bank
Jan Hoffmann , United Nations Conference on Trade  
and Development (UNCTAD)
Jens Munch  Lund-Nielsen, IOTA Foundation
John Bescec , Microsoft
Krista Lucenti , Inter-American Development Bank
Michele Nati , IOTA Foundation
Luca Castellani, United Nations Commission on 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
Nadia Hewett , World Economic ForumNicolas Buhmann , A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S
Pandey Pashupati , World Customs Organization (WCO)
Philippe Isler , World Economic Forum 
Rebecca Liao , SKUchain
Richard Morton , International Port Community  
Systems Association (IPCSA)
Saverio Puddu , Linklaters
Sean Doherty , World Economic Forum
Soichi Furuya , Hitachi
Solomon Anzagra , United Nations Conference on Trade  
and Development (UNCTAD)
Stuart Davis , Latham & Watkins
Theodore Waddelow , Visa
Tomás Deane , Ministry of Production and Labor  
of Argentina
Virginia Cram-Martos , United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Young-Mi Kim , Korean Customs Service
Yves Jobin , Jobin Consult
Interviewees
Aurelio Garcia , Center for International Private Enterprise (CIPE)
Avi Dutt , Ministry of Shipping of India
Beth Frisher , Port of Oakland
Carmen Ivonne Gómez Díaz , Ministry of Commerce, 
Industry, and Tourism of Colombia (MINCIT)
Cecilia Fernandez Ruiz , Everis
Cecilia Valenzuela , Inter-American Development Bank
Eduardo Rodriguez Apolinario , Customs of Dominican 
Republic 
Emmanuelle Ganne , World Trade Organization (WTO)
Frank Heijmann , Customs Administration of the Netherlands
John Bescec , Microsoft
Marco Antonio Siqueira , Federal Revenue Service of Brazil
Rodrigo Contreras Huerta , Inter-American  
Development Bank
Tomás Deane , Ministry of Production and Labor of Argentina
Vincent Annunziato , United States Customs and Border 
Protection
Contacts
For questions about the World Economic Forum’s work  
in Digital Trade, please contact:
Ziyang Fan , Head of Digital Trade,  
Ziyang.Fan@weforum.org
Jesse Lin , Project Specialist, Digital Trade,  
Jesse.Lin@weforum.org 22
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technology1. http://www.unece.org/uncefact/tfrecs.html and the technical note at http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/cf_plenary/2017_Plenary/ECE_
TRADE_C_CEFACT_2017_10E_TechnicalNoteSW.pdf (links as of 18 June 2019).
2. https://untfsurvey.org/world (link as of 18 June 2019).
3. For example, http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_36073_Paperless_Trading_How_Does_It_Impact_the_Trade_System.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
4. http://www.doingbusiness.org/~/media/WBG/DoingBusiness/Documents/Annual-Reports/English/DB17-Chapters/DB17-CS-Trading-across-borders.
pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
5. https://untfsurvey.org/world (link as of 18 June 2019).
6. https://www.slideshare.net/Africanalliance/implementation-of-the-kenya-national-single-window-systemkentradeswc2016 (link as of 18 June 2019).
7. https://www.slideshare.net/Africanalliance/the-single-form-for-foreign-trade-operators-guce-gie-cameroon (link as of 18 June 2019).
8. World Bank’s “Doing Business”, various years.
9. https://blogs.iadb.org/integration-trade/en/how-does-trade-respond-when-borders-are-simplified-via-one-stop-systems/ (link as of 18 June 2019).
10. World Bank “Doing Business” database, http://www.doingbusiness.org/en/data (link as of 18/6/19).
11. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_36073_Paperless_Trading_How_Does_It_Impact_the_Trade_System.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
12. Acceptance of paper or electronic copies of supporting documents required for import, export or transit formalities.
13. https://btca-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/237/english_attachments/Tanzania-Case-Study.pdf?1515010379 (link as of 18 June 2019).
14. https://untfsurvey.org/world (link as of 18 June 2019).
15. To be sure, governments have sought to exchange information in certain regions: They have exchanged information in the ASEAN, as well as some 
data from customs declarations; Australia and New Zealand share electronic information on SPS certificates; and the ministries of transport of Japan, 
China and Korea have a common cargo status to track and query requirements. Some good strides have been made. For example, Nordic and Baltic 
countries have shared data to gain a fuller picture of such patterns as Chinese supplier networks of wood products, to better enforce the EU’s timber 
regulations.
16. https://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/CROSS-BORDER%20SINGLE%20WINDOW%20INTEROPERABILITY.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
17. This is not a new theme: One-third of countries in the UN paperless trade survey have a national legislative framework and institutional arrangements to 
ensure border agencies cooperate with one another.
18. National single windows do not necessarily have the same level of integration. See UNECE recommendation and guidelines on establishing a single 
window: https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/recommendations/rec33/rec33_trd352e.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
19. Interviews with customs and single window operators in the Americas; and https://www.slideshare.net/Africanalliance/challenges-for-an-implementation-
of-an-electronic-single-window-guichet-unique-de-la-cte-divoire, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276605029_Study_on_the_Challenges_
of_Implementing_Single_Window_Concept_to_Facilitate_Trade_in_Sri_Lanka_A_Freight_Forwarder_Perspective, http://www.joebm.com/papers/302-
BM00027.pdf and https://commons.wmu.se/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1648&context=all_dissertations (links as of 18 June 2019).
20. https://untfsurvey.org/world (link as of 18 June 2019).
21. These challenges are quite common in developing nations. See, for example, https://commons.wmu.se/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1648&context=all_
dissertations and http://www.joebm.com/papers/302-BM00027.pdf (links as of 18 June 2019).
22. https://untfsurvey.org/world (link as of 18 June 2019).
23. http://www.joebm.com/papers/302-BM00027.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
24. https://www.slideshare.net/Africanalliance/challenges-for-an-implementation-of-an-electronic-single-window-guichet-unique-de-la-cte-divoire (link as of 
18 June 2019).
25. For excellent analyses of the use of blockchain in single windows, see https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/cefact/cf_plenary/2019_plenary/
CEFACT_2019_INF03.pdf and https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/blockchainrev18_e.pdf. For broader analysis of blockchain and 
technologies as enablers of trade, see https://www.amazon.com/Revolutionizing-World-Trade-Technologies-Opportunities/dp/1503610713/ref=sr_1_1?
qid=1559683158&refinements=p_27%3AKati+Suominen&s=books&sr=1-1 (links as of 18 June 2019).
26. For a good review, see https://www.weforum.org/whitepapers/inclusive-deployment-of-blockchain-for-supply-chains-part-1-introduction (link as of 18 
June 2019).
27. Granted, blockchain’s security is still debated: Some argue that blockchain is a more secure database than others; others claim that it is increasingly 
susceptible to hacking; and still others think that risks could arise if the blockchain network were to be outsourced by the government to a private third 
party or if on-chain data is exported to an off-chain database that then is no longer immutable. Companies developing blockchain technologies are 
strongly urged to improve the security around blockchain, so the security is evolving and improving; much ultimately rests with the security architecture 
surrounding blockchain implementation.
28. For example, in line with the World Customs Organization (WCO) Data Model.
29. See also https://www.bakermckenzie.com/en/-/media/files/expertise/fig/br_fig_blockchainsandlaws_jul17.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).Endnotes23
Windows of Opportunity: Facilitating Trade with Blockchain Technology30. https://www.imda.gov.sg/-/media/imda/files/industry-development/call-for-proposals/trade-trust-rfi_002_final_march21.pdf?la=en (link as of 18 June 
2019).
31. https://www.csis.org/blogs/future-digital-trade-policy-and-role-us-and-uk/blockchain-accelerate-transatlantic-trade (link as of 18 June 2019).
32. https://cryptoslate.com/uk-customs-service-halts-blockchain-border-project-with-brexit-looming/ (link as of 18 June 2019).
33. https://mag.wcoomd.org/magazine/wco-news-87/cadena-a-blockchain-enabled-solution-for-the-implementation-of-mutual-recognition-arrangements-
agreements/ (link as of 18 June 2019).
34. https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/25efdb_ddca049eff6b45bcaab793f8b20223c1.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
35. For example, https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/181101_Suominen_Blockchain_v3.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
36. Such portability of data across domains would be akin to the open banking practices whereby small companies can access and carry their various 
transactional data, such as from online platforms and financial services, to help lenders underwrite their loans, thus opening access to finance for the 
long tail of “thin-file” users. Trade single windows could also become the first-movers and incubators of new national blockchain-based corporate 
identities, simplifying companies’ interactions with national, state and local governments.
37. GTID could as such be recognized across the whole government-business network and eliminate the need for intermediaries’ services providers to 
certify and recertify a business or individual. It would also make it more feasible to designate full data ownership to the trader, which could then share all 
or some relevant information on a transaction to selected stakeholders, such as share the invoice with the buyer and the bank, packing list with freight 
forwarder, compliance documents with government agencies and so on. See https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/05/global-trade-identity-can-be-
the-cornerstone-of-paperless-trade/ (link as of 18 June 2019).
38. https://www.ccn.com/korea-customs-authority-to-test-blockchain-clearance-system-for-imports-exports/ (link as of 18 June 2019).
39. https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/reser_e/session_2c_4_zahouani_saadaoui_dg_taxud_blockchain_v1.0.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
40. This may paradoxically mean that successful implementation of blockchain may be most feasible where its value add is quite low – single windows 
that are already digitized and where players are already interoperating well, as it is in those single windows where players have summoned the political 
wherewithal to overcome the problems that need to be solved for blockchain to be adopted and useful.
41. http://www.wcoomd.org/en/topics/facilitation/instrument-and-tools/tools/data-model.aspx (link as of 18 June 2019).
42. For encryption-related concerns, see existing discussions in the context of bitcoin, such as https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/88/is-bitcoin-
future-proof (link as of 18 June 2019).
43. For example, https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/181101_Suominen_Blockchain_v3.pdf (link as of 18 June 2019).
44. The Time Release Study is an internationally recognized tool to measure the actual time required for the release and/or clearance of goods, from the 
time of arrival until the physical release of cargo, with a view to finding bottlenecks in the trade-flow process and taking the corresponding necessary 
measures to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of border procedures: http://www.wcoomd.org/en/topics/facilitation/instrument-and-tools/tools/
time-release-study.aspxWorld Economic Forum
91–93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland  
Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum, 
committed to improving  
the state of the world, is the 
International Organization for 
Public-Private Cooperation.
 
The Forum engages the 
foremost political, business  
and other leaders of society  
to shape global, regional 
and industry agendas.