A Research Agenda for Cyber  Risk and Cyber  Insurance  
By: Gregory Falco, Stanford University  
Martin Eling, University of St. Gallen  
Danielle Jablanski, Stanford University  
Virginia Miller, Stanford University  
Lawrence A. Gordon, University of Maryland  
Shaun Shuxun Wang , Nanyang Technological U niversity  
Joan Schmit, University of Wisconsin -Madison  
Russell Thomas, RMS and George Mason University  
Mauro Elvedi, University of St. Gallen  
Thomas Maillart, University of Geneva  
Emy Donavan, Allianz  
Simon Dejung, SCOR Reinsurance  
Matthias Weber, SwissRE  
Eric Durand, SwissRE  
Franklin Nutter, Reinsurance Association of America  
Uzi Scheffer, SOSA  
Gil Arazi, FinTLV Ventures  
Gilbert Ohana, FinTLV Ventures  
Herb Lin, Stanford University  
Abstract  
Cyber risk  as a research topic  has attracted considerable academic,  industry and government attention 
over the past 15 years. Unfortunately, research progress has been modest and has not been sufficient to 
answer the “call to action” in many prestigious committee and agency reports.  To date, industry and 
academic researc h on cyber risk in all its complexity has been piecemeal and uncoordinated – which is 
typical of emergent, pre -paradigmatic fields. Further complicating matters is the multidisciplinary 
characteristics of cyber risk. In order to significantly advance the p ace of research progress, a group of 
scholars, industry practitioners and policymakers from around the world present a research agenda for 
cyber risk and cyber insurance, which accounts for the variety of fields relevant to the problem space . 
We propose a cyber risk unified concept model that identifies where certain disciplines of study can add 
value . The concept model can also be used to identify collaboration opportunities across the major 
research questions.  In this agenda, we unpack the major research  questions into manageable projects 
and tactical questions that need to be addressed.  1. Introduction  
In today’s digitally interconnected environment, every company is now a tech  company. 
Every political entity is now a digitally -enabled one. Therefore, digi tal or “cyber”  risk is business 
risk. While this may be a provocative statement to some,  an irrefutable fact is  that digital 
transformation is accompanied by new organizational exposure that needs to be managed 
accordingly . To date, efforts  to evaluate the  complexity of cyber  risk have been piecemeal and 
uncoordinated  – not unlike other emergent fields . This is wasting financial and intellectual 
capital, while also impeding  new markets from flourishing (e.g. cyber insurance). The goal of this 
document is to  propose a research agenda for cyber risk that aligns the interests of industry, 
academia, non -profits, and governments. To be successful, this agenda must resonate with all 
fields studying cyber risk including data science, behavioral science, economics, computer 
science, management science, political science, and law.  
There are hundreds , if not thousands,  of reports, white papers and academic a rticles 
that refer to cyber risk. Cyber risk is a multi -disciplinary issue , therefore ownership  of cyber risk 
as a field of study has  been decentralized across academic fields  that seldom lack coordination . 
Our agenda’s focus is  cyber risk management and cyber insurance for firms and similar 
organizations, individually and also in interdependent networks (e.g. supply  and partner 
networks, critical infrastructure, etc.).  This includes relevant  government and non -profit 
organizations . We do not  address cyber risk for individual people, nor  do we address cyber risk 
for society  at large , including international relations . 
Because of the diverse audience for this research agenda, w e conduct ed an extensive 
feedback exercise where we circulat ed this document  with colleagues across  the globe for  each 
aforementioned field of study . The extensive collaborative process in formul ating t his agenda, in 
part reflected by the variety  of coauthors , yielded a cyber risk intellectual space for each 
discipline. Representatives from each discipline provided detailed commentary on the proposed 
agenda and contributed what they believed to be  the most relevant questions to their field. We  
asked that they categorize their questions in six categories  derived from standard risk 
management process steps . Figure 1 , which we call a Unified Concept Model for Cyber Risk , 
illustrates  the categories relevant to e ach discipline based on their questions.  We hope 
discipline s will be able to  use Figure 1 and the subs equent agenda  as a starting point for their 
cyber risk research , understand how their work fits into the broader cyber risk research 
landscape  and determine which fields could collaborate on topics of shared interest . The 
authors acknowledge the i mperfection of the process to desi gnate topics by disciplines; 
however o ur intention is for this Unified Concept Model  to evolve over time as more 
researchers join the conversation .  
As part of our collaborative  feedback  process, we lea rned that each discipli ne believes  
that their field has the expertise to comprehensively address “cyber risk ”. This is a function of 
the relatively narrow view each field ha s regarding the definition of  the cyber risk  problem set . 
For ex ample, our statistician colleagues  defined cybe r risk as the study of modeling  the 
likelihood of an attack, while political  scientists defined it as the study of international security 
in the context of digital threats. We  believ e that each discipline ’s views are valid,  but that they  
must be contextual ized in a bi gger vision so that cyber risk can be systematically addressed as a 
research area  unto its own right.  The goal of this agenda is not to defi ne cyber risk, bu t aims to 
illustrate  the need for a broad definition and multi -discip linary, collaborative approach to 
address cyber risk as a research field.   
Figure 1 : Cyber Risk Unified Concept Model; outer ring displays 6 umbrella questions; inner ring shows 
potential collaborations on each overarching question b etween the 8 listed disciplines  
The agenda elaborates on  the six big questions identified by the co -authors in the Cyber Risk 
Unified Concept Model , proposes disciplines that could be well -equipped to study them, unpacks a 
variety of related, tactical res earch questions and provides sources as a starting point for each area of 
focus.  These big question s are a variation of the standard five risk management  process steps. The big 
questions include:  
 What constitutes cyber risk ? 
 How should we measure cyber risks?  
 Are there cyber risks that can be avoided?  
 What are the opportunities to reduce cybe r risk?  
 How c an cyber risk be  best  transferred to other parties?  
 How can residual cyber risk be managed  and monitored ? 
2. What constitutes cyber risk ? 
Primary Disciplines: Accounting, Computer Science , Law, Political Science  
There is not one single type of cy ber risk. Cyber risk could come in the form of unintentional 
data leakage , privacy loss , malicious atte mpts to damage digital systems, malicious attempts to steal or 
alter corporate confidential data for economic advantage  or even as disinformation campaig ns. The 
damage could be sporadic or a global damage that affects global digital assets (DDOS). There is an entire 
spectrum of cyber risk an organization can face  ranging from unintentional data leaks to strategic, 
nation -state attacks . The scope of cyber r isk has been difficult to characterize  because t here is 
widespread disagreement about what a cyber event actually entails.  Some organizations consider a 
cyber event to be any unknown connection attempt to their network. Others consider successful 
unauthori zed access to their network a cyber event . Stil l others define a  cyber event as an instance 
when “loss” is experienced. Understandably, it is exceedingly difficult to benchmark security or risk 
across an industry or even within the same organization if eve ryone is using different definitions of an 
event. This issue is compounded by the varying definitions provided by standardization 
organizations such as NIST, ISO and MITRE.   
For the purposes of establishing a cyber risk body of knowledge, it is vital to ha ve clear 
and consistent terminology about cyber events and their impact potential. Disparate definitions 
of a cyber event will limit the ability for consistent reporting and data analysis about cyber risk. 
Further, it could complicate the ability for resea rch studies to build on each other – one of the 
fundamental cornerstones of scientific progress.  
Further complicating matters, the scale and scope of cyber risk is problematic depending on 
choice of boundary for data, computing systems, and stakeholders.  Moving from narrow to broad, here 
are alternative scope statements for cyber risk:  
 A single organization’s cyber risk based on their owned assets.  
 A single organization’s cyber risk encompassing owned asse ts, third -party provider 
assets, public infrastruc ture (e. g. internet service providers) and its supply chain cyber 
risk.  
 A series of organization s’ collective cyber risk that accumulates based on their reliance 
on a common digital asset (e.g. cloud infrastructure).  
 A series of organizations ’ collective  cyber risk that accumulates based on their utility of 
ubiquitous software that shares a common vulnerability.  
 An insurer’s or institutional investor’s accumulated cyber risk based on outstanding 
policies and liabilities for interdependent industries or in terdependent cyber incidents . 
 Reinsurers perspective of cyber risk aggregation and liabilities for interdependent 
industries or interdependent cyber incidents.  
 IoT/SCADA risk as multi -industry catalyzer for cyber risk and attacks.  
Cyber risk is fundamental ly different than other risks faced by businesses and covered by 
insurance (e.g. Property & Casualty, Errors & Omissions, etc.) in two ways.  
First, the causal factors that drive cyber risk change and evolve rapidly  – sometimes in less than 
a year, which i s less than the insurance period for most cyber insurance policies. For a given firm, cyber 
risk can decrease within the insurance period because new security controls or resources have been 
successfully deployed, or vulnerabilities reduced, or the attack surface  has been significantly reduced. 
But for that same firm cyber risk increase because attack surface increases, or security controls 
deteriorate, or new vulnerabilities appear, or because attacker tools and practices have evolved. 
Changing the IT lan dscape of an organization (new software used, new integration with suppliers , 
acquisition of additional companies /integration with such companies’ networks) ) also increases the 
cyber risk during the insurance period.  
Second,  cyber activity does not usual ly follow clear patterns, which might help estimate the 
risk. For example, an advanced attacker who is specifically targeting individual organizations will never 
do the same thing twice. The barrier to modifying an attack is low and since skilled attackers  do not 
want to risk being caught, they change approach. This often makes historical data of little use to assess a 
future risk.  
Regarding cyber events, the time scope (duration) of cyber events and impact is problematic. 
Unlike perils like car accidents, earthquakes and others, a cyberattack even or episode can last for days, 
weeks, or months until it is recognized and stopped. Evaluation of the damages can also take long periods of time, since it is not always known what data was stolen and what uses are planned for the 
stolen information by the attackers.  Cyberattacks can also proceed in stages, either by the same 
attackers or through other attackers with different resources or objectives, who acquire useful 
credentials or other data through “black hat” markets.  
Regarding cyber loss (i.e. impact, damage), the losses could be sporadic and isolated or it could 
be global and widespread. It could include only tangible losses or both tangible and intangible damage.  
A cyber event could be any unknown attempt t o a network or device. Or it might be defined to only 
include successful unauthorized network access. A more narrow definition of cyber event is when an 
economic loss is realized.  
These problematic characteristics can significantly vary across different re gions and business sectors, 
but all are essential considerations in studying cyber risk.  
Related tactical questions include:  
 What are the different types of cyber events  (distinguished by actor, impact, target precision, 
intent) ? 
 What are relevant trends  with respect to the different types of cyber events ?  
Potential Research Projects  
 Document and analyze the evolution of cyber events in relation to how they have impacted 
organizations over the years. Identify potential patterns and trends that can be used to project 
future cyber event threats.  
 Assess the determinants of cyber risk and identify any industry differences.  
 Assess what constitutes material cyber risk for corporate investors.  
 Evaluate how cyber events have and will continue to evolve.  
Sources  
Böhme, Rainer, Stefan Laube, and Markus Riek. "A Fundamental Approach to Cyber Risk Analysis." 
Variance Journal, www. variancejournal. org, online edition (2017).  
Böhme, Rainer. Towards Insurable Network Architectures (Versicherbare Netzarchitekturen). it - 
Information Technology 52(5): 290 -294 (2010)  
Cukier, Kenneth Neil, Viktor Mayer -Schönberger, and Lewis Branscomb. "Ensuring (and insuring?) critical 
information infrastructure protection." Report of the 2005 Rueschlikon Conference on Information 
Policy (200 5). Retrieved from: 
https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/rwp_05_055_viktor_branscomb.pdf  
CRO Forum. “CRO Forum Concept Paper on a proposed categorisation methodology for cyber risk.” 
(2016).  
Department of Homeland Security (US ). Cyber Security Research and Development Broad Agency 
Annoucement (BAA)  11 -02 (Solicitation). (2011). Retrieved from: 
https://www.fbo.gov/utils/view?id=560a331a2f0105f32ca8c1e4f068c5e6  
Eling, Martin. "Cyber Risk and Cyber Risk Insurance: Status Quo and Future Research." Geneva Papers on 
Risk and Insurance 43.2 (2018): 1 75-179. Eling, Martin, and Werner Schnell. "What do we know about cyber risk and cyber risk insurance?." The 
Journal of Risk Finance 17.5 (2016): 474 -491.  
Fisk, Gina, et al. "Privacy princ iples for sharing cyber security data."  Security and Privacy Workshops 
(SPW), 2015 IEEE. IEEE, 2015.   
Ramirez, Robert, and Nazli Choucri. "Improving Interdisciplinary Communication With Standardized 
Cyber Security Terminology: A Literature Review." IEEE Ac cess 4 (2016): 2216 -2243.  
Ross J. Anderson: Liability and Computer Security: Nine Principles. ESORICS 1994: 231 -245 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) “CF Disclosure Guidance: Topic No. 2” on Cybersecurity 
Risk and Cyber Incidents (see: https://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance -topic2.htm ) 
Wang, S., Integrated Framework for Information Security Investment and Cyber Insurance (September 
15, 2017).  https://ssrn.com/abstract=291867   
3. How should we measure cyber risk  and its associated direct and 
latent costs ? 
Primary Disciplines: Data Science, Economics, Management Science   
 
Establishing consistent metrics that can communicate the extent of cyber ris k internally 
and externally is important to understanding an organization’s cyber posture . One of the more  
important reasons to establish metrics is to underst and the cost  and benefit s of investing in 
cybersecurity.  
There will always be tradeoffs to securi ty. Sometimes, it is convenience, other times it is 
a direct cost, and in some cases it is technological progress. The many types of tradeoffs can be 
abstracted into an equation with variables and represented as the level of cyber risk that an 
organization  is comfortable with. Today this equation is formulated ad hoc for individual 
organizations based on point -in-time data. The calculus is then used to assess how much 
spending should be done to manage cyber risk. While these cyber risk equations such as 
presented in the Gordon -Loeb Model could be tactically useful  (i.e., for supporting individual 
decisions),  they do not  capture macro cyber risk trends that could influence an organization’s 
long -term risk management strategy.  
Also, current models fail to capt ure the considerable interdependencies across digitally 
enabled systems and their respective industries. The failure or compromise of a single digital 
system could cause cascading failures and exponential repercussions. This complicates the 
calculus of an organization’s cyber risk. It is unclear where the line should be drawn about 
where one organization’s cyber risk ends and another’s begins. These interdependent digital 
systems lead to  one type of cyber accumulation risk.  
Accumulation risks for cyber can involve  the reliance across several industries  on a 
subset of third -party providers. For example, there is a critical mass of digital capabilities across 
multiple organizations and industries that are  reliant on a handful of  cloud service providers. A 
clou d service provider can be seen as a single point of failure across multiple industries. Should 
one of these digital infrastructure services be compromised, millions of their users will be impacted  globally .1 One such example could be for critical infrastru cture that operates on supervisory 
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. An attack on a SCADA system that controls the electric 
grid could have cascading impacts across sectors. As previously mentioned, risk damages can vary from 
tangible damages a s extreme as human life, to intangible assets like reputation damages and financial 
losses, over a very long period of time.  
The metric used to measure cyber risk by data  science researchers is frequently considered to 
be the expected loss from a cyber bre ach.  However, different metrics (e.g., probability of a loss of a 
given size , variance of potential loss) are sometimes used by researchers in other disciplines.  
Methodologies are needed to improve the modeling of interdependent cyber events so that 
organ izations can better prepare for cyber threats across a given industry or several interdependent 
industries. Further, these models can help evaluate accumulated risk potential.  This research could be 
used by insurers improve estimates risk exposure in port folios and to define risk tolerances.  
Such re search could be leveraged by insurers to calculate risk exposures and define risk 
tolerances.  
 
Related tactical questions include:  
 What type of forward -looking accumulating scenarios are conceivable (e.g. (i) on e attacker exploits 
common hardware vulnerabilities, common software vulnerabilities, common procedural design 
flaws, common human behaviors; (ii) one successful attack on a single company has a ripple effect 
on many companies, industries; (iii) orchestrat ed multiple attacks (similar to 9/11);?  
 How likely are the accumulation scenarios? What is the severity?  
 What are potential interconnections (within / across entities; within / across industries)  
 What economic theories can be transferred to analyze cyber risks and which ones are not 
transferrable?  
 What data is needed to reliably assess the performance of a cyber economic model?  For example, 
independent realizations of risk realizations on networks (I.e., many independent networks of 
comparable type).  
 How c an cyber risk across interdepe ndent industries  be normalized  such that we can compare risks 
across industry ? 
 How can digital interdependencies be measured?  
 How and to what extent, if any, can cyber events be accurately modeled and ultimately predicted 
cons idering past attacks are not necessarily indicative of future ones?  
 Under what circumstances, if any, are degrees of modeling and prediction possible?  
 
Potential Research Projects  
 Define representative extreme – but nevertheless possible – and potentially interdependent and 
accumulating cyber scenarios, determine associated economic and insured industry losses, and 
estimate associated probability ranges . (Work in progress at Stanford  – working title: Can a 
Cyberattack Cause a Financial Crises? ). 
                                                           
1 If all of these users had cyber insurance , the effects could be devastating on the underwriters and 
reinsurers of the policies considering the scale of the accumulated risk.   Interview cy ber insurance providers, , reinsurers and actuaries to understand accumulation 
scenarios they envision. Assess the adequacy of accumulation scenarios used by the insurance 
industry.  
 Investigate the various applications of economic and statistical models to  cyber risk and evaluate 
their effectiveness.  Propose new modeling approache s and existing techniques that appropriately 
cater to the unique challenges of modeling cyber risk.  
 Evaluate the extent of accumulation using a big data/AI platform. (Work in prog ress at FinTLV 
Ventures).  
Sources  
Agrafiotis,I., J.R.C. Nurse, M. Goldsmith, S. Creese, and D. Upton “A taxonomy of cyber -harms: Defining 
the impacts of cyber -attacks and understanding how they propagate”, Journal of Cybersecurity, 2018, 1 –
15 
Anderson, Ro ss, and Tyler Moore. "The economics of information security." Science 314.5799 (2006): 
610-613.  
Bodin, L., L.A. Gordon and M.P. Loeb, “Information Security and Risk Management,” Communications of 
the ACM, Vol. 51, No. 4, 2008.   
Böhme, Rainer, and Galina S chwartz. "Modeling Cyber -Insurance: Towards a Unifying Framework." 
WEIS. 2010.  
Böhme, Rainer, and Gaurav Kataria. "Models and Measures for Correlation in Cyber -Insurance."  WEIS. 
2006.  
Dejung, Simon. “Economic impact of cyber accumulation scenarios.” Swiss Insurance Association SVV 
Cyber Working Group. (2017).  
Eling, Martin, and Jan Wirfs. "What are the actual costs of cyber risk events?." European Journal of 
Operational Research 272.3 (2019): 1109 -1119.  
Eling, Martin, and Kwangmin Jung. "Copula approaches f or modeling cross -sectional dependence of data 
breach losses." Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 82 (2018): 167 -180.  
Eling, Martin, and Nicola Loperfido. "Data breaches: Goodness of fit, pricing, and risk measurement." 
Insurance: Mathematics and Economi cs 75 (2017): 126 -136.  
Falco G., Caldera C. and Shrobe H., "IIoT Cybersecurity Risk Modeling for SCADA Systems," in IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2822842 URL: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8332467&isnumbe r=6702522  
Gordon, L. A., & Loeb, M. P. (2002). The economics of information security investment. ACM 
Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), 5(4), 438 -457.  
Hubbard, Douglas W., and Richard Seiersen.  How to measure anything in cybersecurit y risk. John Wiley 
& Sons, 2016.  
Maillart, Thomas, et al. "Given Enough Eyeballs, All Bugs Are Shallow?." Revisiting Eric Raymond with 
bug bounty markets (2016).  Romanosky, S. Examining the costs and causes of cyber incidents, Journal of Cybersecurity, Vol ume 2, 
Issue 2, 1 Dec 2016, Pages 121 –135 
Ruan, Keyun. "Introducing cybernomics: A unifying economic framework for measuring cyber risk." 
Computers & Security 65 (2017): 77 -89. 
Thomas, R. C., Antkiewicz, M., Florer, P., Widup, S., & Woodyard, M. How bad is  it? – A branching 
activity model to estimate the impact of information security breaches. Workshop on the Economics of 
Information Security (WEIS), Washington, DC. (2013).  
Wang, S., Knowledge Set of Attack Surface and Cybersecurity Rating for Firms in a S upply Chain 
(November 3, 2017).  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3064533  
 
4. Can cyber risks  be avoided?  
Primary Disciplines: Computer Science  and Management Science  
One of the most under -developed areas of research is cyber risk avoidance, which usually 
involves m anagerial decisions at the level of enterprise architecture so that the enterprise is “less risky 
by design”. Of course, the interconnectivity of digital systems today is essential to the success in most 
industries, and therefore not all cyber risks can be  avoided. But too often researchers, industry 
practitioners, and government policy makers take for granted the unchecked expansion of digital 
computing, communications, and interconnection.  
One mechanism to avoid cyber risks is to minimize the  use of compu ting systems  and their 
connectivity . We do not necessarily encourage this, however, it is indeed a risk avoidance mechanism 
that some organizations employ. For example, anecdotally, we were informed that in  several nuclear 
facilities, conscious decisions w ere made to revert to analog devices to avoid cyber risk.  This is not a 
decision to be taken lightly considering the benefits digital devices  afford  (another, slightly “softer” 
practice, is to use internet -disconnected networks  to reduce risk, like the us e in military networks.  
Conversely, deciding to take such networks offline can generate additional cyber risks associated with 
off cycle or custom patches or other work necessary to maintain functionality/operability when a 
network is not readily connected  to the internet.  The unplugging argument does raise  the issue of over -
digitization of assets and the inherent cost/benefit of security to convenience and operational efficiency. 
This becomes an important discussion point for operations managers and those studying digital 
transf ormation.  
Another option  to avoid  risk is by designing and using inherently secure systems. Today most 
devices, networks and systems make use  of technology that was built without security as a priority. This 
issue is now even more p ronounced with the prevalence of internet of things (IoT) devices that are 
designed with low -cost connectivity in mind  (by vendors with little experience in the software sector) . 
Some new approaches to designing and building software and hardware systems e mbody security -by-
design principles. Such principles include practices such as deny -by-default where a system inherently 
disallows processes from running so that the surface area of attack is minimized. The intention of these 
securely designed digital asse ts is to optimize functionality while attempting to guarantee some level of 
security. Further technical advan cements in this area —including those  that can help to reduce the 
sometimes exorbitant cost of such assets —will only help to avoid cyber risks to th e extent the securely 
designed systems are deployed. A persistent challenge to realize the benefits of new technology is 
device lifecycle, where it could be decades (as is the case for industrial systems) before devices are 
replaced and the security of the  system is updated accordingly. Conversely, there is a trade -off: continuously replacing devices to more modern ones, with security implemented, also imposes 
the risk of new vulnerabilities detected and exploited, since new devices are using new 
protocols,  new features and functionality, which exposes to new risks.   
Matters of risk avoidance fall to system operators who can determine the operational 
value of having a digitized asset (and therefore judge if a digital system is necessary) and 
computer scient ists that can design inherently secure systems.  
Although in defined domains, one can argue that it is a best practice to minimize the use 
of connected systems, the global trend and development is forcing society the other way – 
being more connected, using  more technologies and producing more data. Most businesses are 
critically (and increasingly so) dependent on technology and connected channels. Modern life 
and future trends will dramatically increase our dependence on connected technology (e.g. 
connected  and autonomous cars).  
 
Related tactical questions include:  
 What is the utility curve for digital assets when compared with their security tradeoffs?  
 What stakeholders need to be involved in decisions regarding averting cyber risk ? 
 What are new security -by-design principles that can be employed?  
 How can accumulation risk be averted?  
Potential Research Projects  
 Interview organizations that have removed digital assets to avoid cyber risk and derive a list of 
considerations that could help organizations make similar decisions.  
 Research the requirements for and then design an inherently secure industrial controller  that can be 
updated without causing system downtime.  
 Evaluate t he security of the update  process . In many cases, the complexity of the maintenance 
interface (in order to be secure) exceeds the complexity of the primary application.  Establish a 
standardized update process that maintains security while preserving simplicity.  
Sources  
Anderson, R., Böhme, R., Clayton, R., and Moore, T. Security Economic s and the Internal Market. 
ENISA, Heraklion, Greece, 2008.  
Eling, Martin, and Werner Schnell. "What do we know about cyber risk and cyber risk 
insurance?." The Journal of Risk Finance 17.5 (2016): 474 -491.  
Böhme, Rainer. "Cyber -Insurance Revisited." WEIS. 2005.  
Kuypers, Marshall, and Thomas Maillart. "Designing Organizations for Cyber Security Resilience."  
WEIS2018.  
Shetty, Sachin, et al. "Reducing Informational Disadvantages to Improve Cyber Risk 
Management." The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance 43.2 (2 018): 224 -238.  5. Where are opportunities to reduce cyber risk ? 
Primary Disciplines: Behavioral Science, Compu ter Science, Law, Political Science  
The Parkerian hexad outlines six elements of information security organizations should 
consider: confidentiality,  possession or control, integrity, authenticity, availability and utility. The goal of 
fending off attacks theoretically entails preserving the hexad. Increasingly, organizations understand 
that they cannot protect themselves  from and prevent  all threats a ll the time. This raises the need to 
prioritize their systems, networks and data’s security  and evaluate the opportunity to reduce cyber risk 
across the security hexad . Further, the relative importance of confidentiality, integrity and availability 
based o n organizational context must be explored.  
For example, if an organization faces the threat of a data breach versus data corruption – should 
one require more attention than the other? Some experts argue that for personally identifiable  
information  (PII), confidentiality should no longer be a security priority because of the many large -scale 
data breaches that have occurred to date. It is inevitable that personal information will be stolen at 
some point in today’s cybersecurity climate. Therefore, more reso urces should be expended on 
authenticating the integrity of personal information through relational information rather than focusing 
on keeping the information hidden. Of course, these experts would argue that confidentiality should not 
be ignored, but sim ply prioritized accordingly.  It is important to note, however, that such 
deprioritization can have regulatory consequences and potentially create economic loss due to 
fines/penalties  (CCIA and GDPR fines for this). Organizations have finite resources avail able to manage 
cyber threats. Therefore, to properly manage cyber exposure, it is instrumental to study how 
organizations should prioritize assets and their associated cyber risks.  
Beyond prioritizing and securing the most critical assets, concrete steps t owards preventing 
specific cyber events can also be achieved through  threat  information sharing. Intra -industry security 
cooperation could be  an effective cyber event prevention tool. The idea behind information sharing is 
simple. If organization A shares recent attacks with others (B and C) that may use similar digital assets, 
future attacks against B and C could be prevented. Today, Information Sharing Analysis Centers (ISACs) 
which have been established to facilitate cyber event information sharing acros s all critical 
infrastructure sectors have not been equally successful . ISACs are only as effective as the member 
organization’s participation. Some industries , like the financial sector, have member organizations that 
actively participate in information s haring. This in turn improves  the security posture of the entire 
industry. Other sectors have seen less member organization participation.  Studying why some sectors 
engage more with their  ISACs  than others could help improve cyber event prevention in secto rs without 
effective information sharing.  
There is a public good character of cybersecurity, which leads to some typical economical 
underinvestment problems. From an individual’s point of view it might be optimal to reduce 
investments in cybersecurity and public policy might help (or be needed) to get to some minimum 
standards for prevention. In light of the lack of policy direction in this space , it is important to evaluate 
market mechanisms that can have the same effect. Cyber insurance can be an example of this.  
Some sectors already require insurance for daily operations. If cyber event prevention 
requirements  were incorporated into mandated insurance policies, organizations  would need to co mply 
quickly for fear of losing  their operating  license.  Importa ntly though, requiring purchase of  a cyber 
insurance policy  is not the point. R ather forcing a security conversation as part of the underwriting 
process for purchasing cyber insurance can potentially help institutionalize discussions and practices 
concerni ng cybersecurity.  Another market mechanism that some sectors require to indicate a minimum  level of security is 
accreditations and certifications. Accreditations and certifications often require some compliance 
exercises to maintain status which assumes t here is a third -party auditor of security practices that grants 
credentials. Such program are imperfect because they promote a “checkbox” compliance culture where 
many organizations stop worrying about their cyber risks if they complete the certification p rocess. For 
this reason, several market mechanisms are needed to work in concert to reduce cyber risk at scale.  
 
Related tactical questions include:  
 How can specific risk  related to confidentiality, integrity and availability  be reduced?  How can the 
"right " human behavior be achieved?  
 Which mitigation efforts make sense based on a cost / benefit analysis?  
 Who should be responsible for mitigation?  
 Which industries care most about preserving A) Confidentiality, B) Possession or Control, C) 
Integrity, D) Aut henticity, E) Availability, and F) Utility?  
 Which industries have a good cyber hygiene? Who is this related to (or caused by) the type of 
business, market structure, and  the regulatory environment? How can this be assessed  and 
monitored ? 
 What are approach es to determining prioritized assets?  
 What data should be used to prioritize assets?  
 How do risk assessment tools account for prioritized assets?  
 How are shared assets or third -party assets accounted for in prioritizing risk?  
 How should cyber policy  be enf orced ? 
 Should  insurers take on the role of a cyber security standard enforcer?  
 Should hardware and software producers be made liable for the cyber risk of their products?  
 Should providers of cyber security services be held liable for the quality of their services?  
 What other cyber risk practices should be mandatory?  
 What would cyber data collection standards look like that can facilitate risk analyses for various 
purposes (operational risk, insurance underwriting, evaluating impact of cyber hygiene, etc.)?   
 What disclosure considerations should be taken into account when sharing anonymized cyber event 
data?  
 Can we build “best practices” to handle companies’ cyber risk?  
 What would the role of compliance and regulation should there be a chance for global 
comp liance/alliances?  
 What are capital requirements to finance cyber risk?  
 What are response and recovery plans?  
 What kind of scenario training can be conducted to manage cyber loss events?  
 What factors need to be considered for enumerating long -term cyber eve nt consequences?  
 
Potential Research Projects  
 Investigate the extent to which c yber  security standards  should  be mandated. Determine i f cyber 
security is considered a public good  and understand parallels across industries to other public goods.  
 Study the potential unintended consequences of mandating cyber security standards. (Work in 
progress at University of  Innsbruck ).  Explore external incentives for cyber security. Conduct roundtables with industry and policymakers 
(separately) to understand why today’ s incentives are insufficient.  
 Understand the extent of success ISACs have had today. Determine what makes some work and 
others less effective.  
 Conduct a roundtable of stakeholders such as ISAC organizers, trade associations, think tanks and 
industry cyb er data stewards to determine a data collection standard for cyber risk information, and 
how such a standard could be implemented. The stakeholders for the exercise should be selected 
based on the purpose of the data collection standard. Produce a report a ssociated with cyber data 
practices.  
 Interview CISOs to understand how and what cyber data is shared anonymously and determine 
what information is currently being held back for what reasons (e.g. privacy concerns, reputational 
preservation, competitive adv antage, etc.). Evaluate opportunities to minimize these barriers.  
Sources  
Anderson, R., Böhme, R., Clayton, R., and Moore, T. Security Economics and the Internal Market. ENISA, 
Heraklion, Greece, 2008.  
Böhme, R. Security Audits Revisited. In A. Keromytis, ed., Financial Cryptography and Data Security. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 7397, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 129 –147.  
Bandyopadhyay, Tridib, Vijay S. Mookerjee, and Ram C. Rao. "Why IT managers don't go for cyber -
insurance products." Commu nications of the ACM 52.11 (2009): 68 -73. 
Laube, S. and Böhme, R. Strategic Aspects of Cyber Risk Information Sharing. ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR), 50, 5 (November 2017), 77:1 –77:36 . 
McQueen, Miles A., et al. "Time -to-compromise model for cyber risk reduc tion estimation." Quality of 
Protection. Springer, Boston, MA, 2006. 49 -64. 
Refsdal, Atle, Bjørnar Solhaug, and Ketil Stølen. "Cyber -risk management." Cyber -Risk Management. 
Springer, Cham, 2015. 33 -47. 
6. How c an cyber risk be best transferred to other parti es? 
Primary Disciplines: Economics, Law, Management Science, Political Science  
Another problematic aspect of cyber risk is accountability and responsibility. There is serious 
need for more research on how quantified cyber risk might improve accountability and responsibility, 
and also how it might have undesirable consequences.  There are both social and financial definitions an 
implications of risk transfer. The financial definition of “risk transfer” is “a third -party takes responsibility 
for uncertain cos ts or losses, governed by contract, and usually in exchange for a premium or other 
compensation”.   Most often the third -party is an insurance company.  The societal definition of “risk 
transfer” is “another party (second, third, …) takes over accountabili ty and responsibility for the 
uncertain costs, losses, consequences, or remediation efforts.”  Organizations that have cyber risk 
transferred to them are subject to social sanctions such as blame, legal liability, etc. but also can claim 
social responsibil ity and authority such as leadership, sponsorship, and value network orchestration.  
After each cyber event, fingers are pointed within an organization.  More often than not, the 
CISO and/or the CIO take the blame for a cyber event. However, other times a s ystem admin is blamed. 
In rare cases, where a major cybersecurity breach occurs, the CEO or the board of directors are held 
responsible for a breach. Ownership of cyber risk within an organization is generally unclear – even if 
there is a CISO or CIO that is supposed to manage information security. Because cyber risk is a key part of an organization’s overall business risk, cyber responsibility should be distributed across the 
organization. On a micro level, questions about the role of a CISO, where a CISO should sit in an 
organization and the extent of responsibility a CISO has is important to understanding an 
organization’s cyber risk.  
On a ma cro scale, it is important to consider how organizations can transfer cyber 
responsibility  and the associated risk  externally to insurers, capital markets , contracts in 
indemnity and hold harmless agreements, or even the government. Today there are clear gaps 
in understanding how to accurately price the forward -looking cyber risk for a specific 
organization . There are  even bigger  gaps  in understanding how cyber risks can accumulate 
across sectors and interdependent assets.  This has inhibited the insurance industry from 
assuming more of this  risk. As insurers and reinsurers become more confident in the extent of 
these r isks, insurance can become a greater force in helping organizations transfer cyber risk. 
The same can be said for capital markets as cyber risk taker s. However , there are  some  cyber 
events that the private sector may have limited interest i n covering. One example is events 
deemed as “cyber war”.  
Beyond assessing defensive responsibility for cyber risk, it is vital to understand the 
attack dimension  as well. Understanding who the adversary  is, their motive, the sophistication 
and the scale of the attack coul d help to uncover if the attack was an act of war.  Conversely, not 
all cyber risk incurred is the result of a malicious actor, but instead a result of unintentional 
behavior by people with certain access to network, data and systems.  To distinguish the mo tive 
is important because at the point a cyber event is considered an act of cyberterrorism or 
cyberwar, it may become the government’s responsibility to interject and help manage cyber 
risk for private organizations , not dissimilar to what happened after 9/11.  Some cyber risk s and 
their associated causes  will be easier to insure than others. For example,  risks caused by 
unintentional behavior are typically not systematic and do not accumulate across companies in 
the same way that a concerted attack may acc umulate. Therefore, unintentional behavior -
caused cyber risks are likely to be more insurable.  
To date  many cyber insurance policies contain “acts of war” exclusions.  However, there 
are many cyberwar definitions  in use . We expect some of these definitions  to change – and 
possibly consolidate – after a major cyberattack that insurance practitioners consider cyberwar.  
Clarification around understanding both defensive cyber risk ownership , attribution and 
attack context are critical for selecting strategies t o manage different cyber threats. A 
persistently moving target for what is cyberwar will not only hinder the private sector’s ability to 
properly manage their risk, but also limit insurers’ interest in covering cyber risk.  
 
Related tactical questions  inclu de: 
 How and when should cyber risk be transferred to insurance, capital markets or governments?  
 Which risk transfer efforts make sense based on a cost / benefit analysis?  
 Should cyber exposures be covered by specific cyber insurance policies ? 
 Where in an organization should cyber risk responsibility, accountability and liability fall?  
 How should an act of war be defined for cyber?  
 What if there is a string of attacks that together constitute cyberwar, but separately just seem like 
one-off attacks?   How and to what extent i s it feasible for insurers to provide insurance coverage for certain cyberwar 
scenarios?  
Potential Research Projects  
 Determine today’s opportunities to transfer risk and the limitations of transferring cyber risk.  
Identify ways to increase insurability of cyber . Here we can compare cyber risk with other types 
of risks that have been introduced to the insurance marketplace in the past, such as 
environmental degradation, employment practices liability, director’s and officer’s liability, and 
others.  
 Cyberwar and cyber terrorism do not have clear lines in the policy community. Provide a good 
definition of cyber war, incl. a delineation from cyber terrorism  and cybercrime . Evaluate at 
which point governments must intervene.  
 Analyze the economic c ase for various public/private risk sharing  structures for e.g. 
accumulating cyber scenarios that are (i) too great to be absorbed by the private re -/insurance 
market, and/or (ii) events with a terrorism - and war -like character  
Sources  
Biener, Christian, M artin Eling, and Jan Hendrik Wirfs. "Insurability of cyber risk: An empirical analysis." 
The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance 40.1 (2015): 131 -158.  
Bodin, L., L.A. Gordon, M.P. Loeb and A. Wang, 2018. Cybersecurity insurance and risk -sharing. Journal 
of Accounting and Public Policy 37(6): 527 -544 (see: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccpubpol.2018.10.004).  
Eling, Martin, and Jingjing Zhu. "Which Insurers Write Cyber Insurance? Evidence from the US Property 
and Casualty Insurance Industry." Journal of Insuran ce Issues 41.1 (2018): 22 -56. 
Gordon, Lawrence A., Martin P. Loeb, and Tashfeen Sohail. "A framework for using insurance for cyber -
risk management." Communications of the ACM 46.3 (2003): 81 -85. 
7. How can residual cyber risk be managed  and monitored ? 
Primary  Disciplines: Behavioral Science, Economics, Law, Management Science, Political Science  
Regardless of prevention measures that organizations take , there is still some probability that an 
organization will experience a cyber event. Responding to residual cy ber risk is as important as 
preventing the risk. There are multiple components of incident response including internal 
communication, external communication, threat containment, system repair and conducting attack 
post -mortems. Several  organizations believ e that upon being attacked, they can call the FBI or some 
government agency to request help. This is largely a fallacy. As evidenced in several high profile cyber 
events, incident response is managed by third -party consultants, not the government.  Engaging  these 
consultants becomes financially burdensome quickly. Therefore, the financials of residual risk 
management must be carefully studied.  
One major residual risk issue organizations are struggling with is understanding how 
reputational damages manifest o ver time after a cyber event. While the stock price implications of a 
cyber event  have been documented thoroughly , reputational damages long -term are less understood 
which can have indirect impacts on business performance.   
Research is needed across the sp ectrum on residual cyber risks. Operators need better incident 
response playbooks, to include strategies and plans for communicating with various parties —
shareholders, government officials, regulatory authorities, and the public. Executives need a clearer understanding of how much residual risk will cost and how to account for this in fiscal planning. 
Each of these areas can be unpacked yielding many interesting projects that can span across 
disciplines .  
Related tactical questions include:  
 What are capital  requirements to handle residual risk?  
 What are potential recovery plans?  
 What kind of scenario training can be conducted to manage residual risk?  
 What factors need to be considered for enumerating long -term cyber event consequences?  
Potential Research Pro jects  
 Evaluate existing scenario trainings for cyber residual risk. Analyze the extent they cover financial 
risk management versus business continuity.  
Sources  
Choucri, Nazli, Stuart Madnick, and Priscilla Koepke. "Institutions for cyber security: Interna tional 
responses and data sharing initiatives." Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2016).  
Falco, G., Noriega, A., and Susskind, L.. “Cyber Negotiation: A Cyber Risk Management Approach to 
Defend Urban Critical Infrastructure from Cyberat tacks”, The Journal of Cyber Policy. 2019.  Doi: 
10.1080/23738871.2019.1586969  
Gordon, Lawrence A., Martin P. Loeb, and William Lucyshyn. "Sharing information on computer systems 
security: An economic analysis." Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 22.6 (2003): 461 -485.  
Romanosky, Sasha, et al. "Content analysis of cyber insurance policies: How do carriers write policies 
and price cyber risk?." (2017).  
Spanos, Georgios, and Lefteris Angelis. "The impact of information security events to the stock market: A 
systematic literature review." Computers & Security 58 (2016): 216 -229.  
8. Conclusion  
The main takeaway from this research agenda is the need for a multidisciplinary 
research approach to the six umbrella questions that make up the Cyber Risk Unified Concept  
Model  and to begin work on the dozens of related empirical questions. As cyber risk as research 
problem  continues to develop it requires shared understanding within and between 
aforementioned fields, coherence on which disciplines are best suited to tackl e specific problem 
sets, and identification of collaborations with the potential to be most impactful.  
Private industry and public organizations  will benefit greatly from unbiased e fforts to 
understand cyber risk . Disciplines involved with cyber risk rese arch are tasked with working 
together while not overstating their own expertise.  For example, d ata scientists  need to 
evaluate  the data while political scientists  draw inferences from the past and present to lend 
insight on the cyberwar debate, and so on. Not only will effective multidisciplinary cooperation 
provide valuable understanding for cyber risk mitigation, but it will also begin to provide unique 
insights for dealing with cyber incidents. We believe that e ach discipline has a unique role in 
helping  industry and academia make progress towards understanding cyber risk.  Because of 
cyber risk’s interdisciplinary nature, it is essential for each field to evaluate how they fit into the 
broader research agenda.  
 