Big Data, Not Big Brother: 
New Data Protection Laws and the Implications 
for Independent Media Around the World
AYDEN FÉRDELINE
June 2019Big Data, Not Big Brother:
New Data Protection Laws and the Implications 
for Independent Media Around the World
JUNE 2019
ABOUT CIMA
The Center for International Media 
Assistance (CIMA),  at the National 
Endowment for Democracy, works 
to strengthen the support, raise the 
visibility, and improve the effectiveness of 
independent media development throughout 
the world. The center provides information, 
builds networks, conducts research, 
and highlights the indispensable role 
independent media play in the creation and 
development of sustainable democracies. 
An important aspect of CIMA’s work is 
to research ways to attract additional US 
private sector interest in and support for 
international media development.
CIMA convenes working groups, discussions, 
and panels on a variety of topics in the 
field of media development and assistance. 
The center also issues reports and 
recommendations based on working group 
discussions and other investigations. 
These reports aim to provide policymakers, 
as well as donors and practitioners, with 
ideas for bolstering the effectiveness of 
media assistance.
Center for International Media Assistance  
National Endowment for Democracy
1025 F STREET, N.W., 8TH FLOOR
WASHINGTON, DC 20004
PHONE: (202) 378-9700
FAX: (202) 378-9407
EMAIL:  CIMA@ned.org
URL: https://cima.ned.org
Mark Nelson
SENIOR DIRECTOR
Nicholas Benequista
MANAGING EDITOR
Daniel O’Maley
PUBLICATION EDITORABOUT THE AUTHOR
Ayden Férdeline  is a T echnology Policy 
Fellow with the Mozilla Foundation, where 
he researches the ongoing development 
and harmonization of global data protection 
standards. He previously supported the 
Internet Society’s global public policy team 
and was a researcher for the data and 
analytics group Y ouGov. He is an alumnus 
of the London School of Economics and is 
based in Berlin, Germany.Contents
Introduction  .......................................... 1
Cutting Through the Complexity: Privacy,  
Data Protection, and Personal Information  ............... 4
Key Historical Developments in Privacy Law  ............. 6
Understanding Websites and Analytics  
and Balancing Interests  .............................. 12
User T racking by Independent Media Outlets  
in Developing Countries  ............................... 15
Immediate Privacy Gains Are Possible  .................. 20
Conclusion and Recommendations  .................... 22
Appendix A—T racking Domains Identified Through Study  . .24
Appendix B—Small Publishers Studied  ................. 25
Appendix C—Large Publishers Studied  ................. 26
Appendix D—Study Setup and T esting Parameters  ....... 27
Endnotes  .......................................... 28
Cover photo:  Left side, top; © pixinoo / Shutterstock.com1 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevBut what started as a way to improve the user experience came with 
a downside for website viewers: it entailed collecting and processing 
their personal information, often without their knowledge or consent. 
Moreover, the drive to collect data has resulted in many independent 
media outlets in the Global South unknowingly permitting third parties, 
many of which cannot be identified, to invasively monitor their visitors.
Worldwide, citizens and policymakers are increasingly cognizant of 
the risks that the burgeoning data economy poses to personal privacy. 
In recent years, a wave of next-generation data protection laws have 
emerged that seek to restrict the collection, usage, and sharing of 
personal information. This is not necessarily a good news story for 
those news institutions that had successfully harnessed the value of 
analytics to grow advertising revenue or to better understand their 
audiences. These data protection regulations have, by design, severely 
hampered the environment within which many smaller digital media 
outlets operate. While these laws do not entirely restrict the use of 
analytics, they do restrict the use of analytic applications that place 
people at risk of harm. Indeed, there is growing evidence that some of 
the tracking mechanisms employed by digital news sites are potentially 
doing just that.
T o get a better understanding of how new privacy regimes will affect 
media in the Global South, this paper assembles a new set of findings 
on the websites of 50 small, independent news publishers from 10 
developing countries. It shows that third-party trackers are collecting 
audience data when people read articles, write comments, send in news 
tips, and share pieces on social networking platforms. One independent 
publisher in Nigeria, for instance, had 523 third-party cookies on its 
homepage collecting audience information. In total, over 150 companies—
not all of which could be identified—were found to be invisibly tracking the 
visitors to these 50 websites. They were collecting IP addresses, which 
can identify geographic locations, the titles and URLs of news articles 
read, search queries, and other data. Once collected, this information Introduction
For years, the road to news media financial sustainability was said to be 
paved with data—digital news outlets were counseled to collect as many 
details about their readers as possible. Tracking audiences was considered 
essential for optimizing search engine results, creating content that people want 
to read, and supporting targeted advertising to fund journalism. 
Worldwide, citizens and 
policymakers are increasingly 
cognizant of the risks that 
the burgeoning data economy 
poses to personal privacy. 2 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGcould be sold to advertisers or further exchanged with other third parties. 
It could even reach the hands of governments. 
From a media development perspective, the failure of media outlets 
to protect their visitors against invasive tracking by third parties is 
troubling for two reasons. First and most importantly, it places the 
privacy and safety of a publication’s readers in jeopardy. Readers need 
to feel confident that visiting independent news sites, especially those 
covering sensitive issues, will not put them in danger. Second, from a 
business perspective, when publishers give away information about 
their audiences for free, they cede valuable leverage for negotiating with 
advertisers. In essence, the outsourcing of analytics to third parties 
potentially puts readers at risk and weakens a site’s ability to truly take 
advantage of the interactions it has with its readers. Taken together, the 
findings of this study suggest an important new frontier for the media 
development community and the need to build stronger awareness 
about and strategies for managing the threats posed by tracking the 
readers of independent media. 
This report also provides an overview of the latest regulatory 
developments in the data protection field, such as the European 
Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). While much of the 
public debate has been about policy changes in Europe, the impact 
has been much broader in geographic scope. The changes underway 
directly impact independent news outlets in many developing countries. 
This review of new laws is followed by a detailed description of the 
various trackers currently used on news websites, and the ways that 
they potentially come into conflict with new data protection laws 
and regulations. Then, the report analyzes research on web tracking 
technologies used by news media websites in 10 developing countries, 
exposing pervasive tracking that ultimately may not benefit either 
the readers or the news organizations themselves. And finally, it 
concludes with suggestions about how news organizations and other 
media development stakeholders might be able to take advantage of 
the global shift in data protection laws and regulations to strengthen 
independent media. The findings of this study 
suggest an important new 
frontier for the media 
development community and 
the need to build stronger 
awareness about and strategies 
for managing the threats posed 
by tracking the readers of 
independent media. MORE SENSITIVE LESS SENSITIVE
SECRET 
Passwords
Passport Number
Health Data
GPS Coordinates
Religion
Political AffiliationPERSONAL
Name
Home Address
Email Address
Home Telephone 
Gender Identity
Date of Birth  
(in some circumstances)PUBLIC
Username
Language
Device Type
Cookie  
PreferencesANONYMIZED
What I Click
What Websites 
I Visit
What I Search ForNONPERSONAL
Weather or 
Temperature
Energy 
Consumption
3 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevDEFINITIONS
What is privacy?
A generally accepted definition of privacy is “the claim of individuals, groups, or institutions to determine 
for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is communicated to others. ”1
What are data protection laws?
Data protection laws are frameworks that seek to regulate the collection, storage, and processing of 
information about individuals. 
Is all data protected by data protection laws?
No. Data protection laws apply only to personal and sensitive information. Data protection laws do not 
protect nonpersonal data,2 anonymized data, or public data.3 This is an important distinction because 
many common data analytic practices do not use personal information at all.
What is personal information?
There is no universal definition of what is or is not personal information. However, a common definition 
found within many national laws and international agreements modelled after the European Union’s 
GDPR is that personal data “means any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural 
person. ”4 Some data elements very clearly count as personal or secret information, such as a name 
or passport number. But the answer is not so straightforward for other elements. For example, a date 
of birth in and of itself is not personal information. But if that can be combined with a street address 
and one’s gender, it could be used to identify someone, and in that instance should be treated as 
personal information.5Note: While privacy is a disputed concept in law and philosophy, and attitudes toward how personal information is used 
vary from individual to individual, it is generally accepted that some data elements are more sensitive than others. FIGURE 1.   The Range of Consumer Privacy Levels160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1979 1989 1999 2009 March 20199214180134
4 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGMedia companies have also begun using similar data sets to understand 
reader preferences, follow up on stories, and create content that responds 
to audience demand. Personal information has come to be seen by some 
companies as an economic asset to be harvested or as a tool to better 
inform editorial decisions. At the same time, individuals have reported 
feeling powerless to stay in control of how their personal information is 
being used. Increasingly, however, there are regulatory barriers that restrict 
these activities.
As of March 2019, 134 countries had enacted data protection laws,6 
while 26 others7 had drafted legislation with some degree of government 
support. While there are exemptions within many data protection laws 
for journalistic activities like newsgathering, there are almost always 
implications within these laws for the “business side” of media companies Cutting Through the Complexity: Privacy, 
Data  Protection, and Personal Information
As the internet has grown in social and economic importance, more and 
more people have begun engaging with technologies that surreptitiously 
undermine their privacy. Businesses have emerged with business models 
that are based on gathering, using, and selling personal information without the 
data subject’s knowledge or explicit consent. 
Note: The number of countries with data protection laws has risen to 134.
SOURCE:  Graham Greenleaf, “Global Data Privacy Laws 2017: 120 National Data 
Privacy Laws, ” Privacy Laws & Business International Report 145 (2017): 
10-13, https:/ /papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2993035 . 
Supplemented by further research by the author.FIGURE 2.  Number of Countries with Data Protection Laws Personal information has 
come to be seen by some 
companies as an economic 
asset to be harvested or 
as a tool to better inform 
editorial investments. 5 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevand journalistic institutions. These laws are particularly likely to apply 
if a news organization’s website collects data about its audience, loads 
elements onto a webpage from a third party, or uses cookies. It would not 
be feasible for most entities to adhere to the unique laws of 134 countries; 
however, it is also not necessary to do so. Adopting the highest data 
protection standard available is the most straightforward approach to 
compliance. At this time, that standard is the European Union’s General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Achieving compliance with the GDPR 
and its principles of accountability and data minimization would place most 
media organizations in good standing, even if they operate in a different 
regulatory environment.
Although European nations represent a minority of those jurisdictions with 
data protection laws, Europe continues to have an outsized influence on 
the development of data protection laws in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. 
This is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future because the Council of 
the European Union has advised the European Commission that it cannot 
negotiate away privacy rights in trade agreements.8 Countries that wish to 
trade with the European Union, and, in particular, have data flows with the 
trading bloc, will thus face pressure to implement data protection laws that 
are influenced by the European standard. FIGURE 3.  Countries with Data Protection Laws
Note: Most data protection laws apply to both the public and private sectors, but there are 
exceptions. The enforcement of these laws varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. 
SOURCE:  These data are based upon original research and analysis by the author.Law applies to 
both public and 
private sector
Law applies to 
private sector only
Law applies to 
public sector only
Law has unknown 
scope of applicability
No law or no 
data available
Although European nations 
represent a minority of 
those jurisdictions with 
data protection laws, 
Europe continues to have 
an outsized influence on 
the development of data 
protection laws in Africa, 
Asia, and the Americas. 6 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORG
1 There must be no secret record-keeping systems. 
2 Individuals must be able to find out what information 
about them is in a record and how it is used. 
3 Information cannot be obtained for one purpose and then used for 
another purpose without the consent of the individual concerned. 
4 There must exist a right to correct inaccurate records. 
5 Organizations are responsible for ensuring that their 
record-keeping systems are secure and reliable, and 
must take precautions to prevent the misuse of data. 
Following the passage and implementation of the act, the United States 
advocated for these principles internationally. T oday, they can be found 
in every major privacy protection instrument, including the African 
Union Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection, 
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation’s Cross-Border Privacy Rules, 
the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States’ Data Protection Bill, the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Guidelines 
on the Protection of Privacy and T ransborder Flows of Personal Data, the 
Council of Europe’s Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard 
to Automatic Processing of Personal Data, the European Union’s Data 
Protection Directive, and the GDPR.
The GDPR came into effect in 2018. It was a major revision to European 
law that significantly built upon the principles contained within the US 
Privacy Act of 1974 and the values advanced within the EU Data Protection 
Directive of 1995, aiming to prohibit the excessive collection, use, and 
disclosure of personal information without disproportionately impeding Key Historical Developments in Privacy Law
Privacy rules and norms that govern action or inaction related to our personal 
information have been interpreted in a similar way around the world for 
some time. In 1974 the United States adopted the Privacy Act,9 a federal law 
that sought to safeguard information about individuals held by federal agencies. 
The act codified into law the recommendations developed by an independent 
advisory committee in 1973 that had analyzed the consequences of using electronic 
systems to maintain records about people.10 Their report shaped our contemporary 
understanding of information privacy and it remains relevant some four decades 
later. In short, the committee recommended adopting five principles: 
Data protection laws 
are frameworks that 
seek to regulate the 
collection, storage, and 
processing of information 
about individuals. 7 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevcommerce, free expression, or freedom of association. Whether this 
balance was successfully achieved remains hotly debated, but what is 
uncontested is that this legislation forced companies around the world to 
review their data processing activities. 
GDPR in a Nutshell
The GDPR codifies into law a risk-based approach to protecting the privacy 
of natural persons. It requires privacy by design and by default, mandates 
accountability for data controllers, and grants individuals new rights, 
including the rights to erasure and to control and transparency over how 
their personal information will be used. The GDPR states that personal 
information must be retained for the shortest period of time possible and 
that there must be limits on who can access it. It also imposes significant 
restrictions on how and when personal information may be shared with 
third parties. Further, the GDPR grants new protections to sensitive 
information like medical data, and Article 7 states that if an individual 
is asked to consent to a data processing practice, their consent must 
be a “freely given, specific, and unambiguous” indication of their intent. 
Most strikingly, the penalties for noncompliance are set at €20 million 
($22.4 million) or 4 percent of global revenue, whichever is higher, even 
where there is no ill intent on the part of the data controller.
Extraterritoriality
A major difference between the GDPR and other data protection laws is 
that it has extraterritorial effect, meaning that enforcement is theoretically 
possible outside of the borders of the European Union. This has made 
Europe, in the eyes of some, the “world’s data police. ”11 The consequence 
of this is that under the GDPR, even organizations outside of the European 
Union must comply with the GDPR when they process data belonging to 
individuals in the European Union. Because of the global nature of the 
internet, it is easy to imagine a European resident who is protected by the 
GDPR visiting the website of a publisher, say, in Belarus or Mongolia. At 
least in theory according to European Union regulations, that Belarusian 
or Mongolian publisher must adhere to the GDPR if collecting analytic data 
about that European resident. If such extraterritorial enforcement actually 
happens, there would be profound implications here for the digital media 
ecosystem worldwide.
At this point in time it is difficult to know what obligations will actually 
be enforced on entities located outside of the European Union. One of 
the largest ambiguities that the internet presents, when it comes to the 
applicability of legislation, is that it is a space where conventional nation-
state borders do not exist and where traditional modes of interstate legal 
cooperation have struggled to keep pace with the realities of a Web 2.0 The GDPR codifies into law 
a risk-based approach to 
protecting the privacy of natural 
persons. It requires privacy 
by design and by default, 
mandates accountability for 
data controllers, and grants 
individuals new rights, 
including the rights to erasure 
and to control and transparency 
over how their personal 
information will be used. 8 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGworld. This is why earlier data protection laws have been difficult to enforce 
and why the European Union, in the GDPR, has sought to make its legislation 
applicable in all environments. The fear, however, is that this jurisdictional 
overreach could lead to a legal arms race that could have unpredictable 
and unintended consequences. So far, the GDPR’s enforcement bodies 
have been reluctant to impose penalties on data controllers outside of the 
European Union. In one notable example, the United Kingdom’s Information 
Commissioner’s Office sent a letter to the Washington Post  advising that 
its website did not comply with the GDPR, but it did not take any formal 
enforcement action.12 This suggests that, at least for now, the European 
Union will rely on indirect means of enforcing the GDPR outside of its 
borders, incentivizing self-compliance through fear of reputational damage.
GDPR Is the New Global Standard
T en countries outside of Europe have now updated their earlier data 
protection bills to enact many (or all) of the principles contained within 
the GDPR. This trend appears to be continuing, with new or updated bills 
pending in Algeria, Indonesia, Thailand, and T unisia that appear to have 
been modelled after the GDPR. Pakistan, which does not have any data 
protection legislation at present, currently has a bill under consideration 
that would adopt large chunks of the GDPR. 
“I assume that lawmakers just copied and pasted the GDPR and left some 
things out actually, ” said Salwa Rana, legal officer at Media Matters for 
Democracy in Pakistan.13 “And these things were that you need to inform 
the data subject of any leak that takes place, that the data subject has 
the right to be forgotten, and extraterritoriality. ” Rana said the question 
of extraterritorial application is one that remains unaddressed. “This was 
one of the main questions that was raised in one of our consultations: Is 
enforcement of the law going to be limited to Pakistan? The problem is that 
we have the federal investigation authority which is going to be responsible 
for any violations under this law outside of Pakistan, yet under the 
proposed legislation, they haven’t given them any power. ” While the GDPR’s 
exemptions for journalistic activities remain in the proposed bill, media 
organizations in Pakistan have not been actively involved in drafting this 
law. “There hasn’t been much response from media companies, but I feel 
like the way this law is going, they are going to have to begin participating. ”
Regardless of whether or not more countries adopt the GDPR’s provisions, 
given the global nature of the internet and many businesses’ desire to trade 
with member states of the European Union, a need to comply with the 
GDPR has incentivized businesses such as Microsoft to voluntarily adopt 
higher privacy and data protection standards for their entire operations 
worldwide, even where they are under no legal obligation to do so.14So far, the GDPR’s 
enforcement bodies 
have been reluctant to 
impose penalties on data 
controllers outside of 
the European Union. 9 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevGDPR Implications for the Media Industry
Article 4 (7) of the GDPR defines a data controller as “the natural or legal 
person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly 
with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of 
personal data. ” By this broad definition, it is difficult to imagine any media 
organization with either a list of subscribers or a website with analytic 
functions that would not  be considered a data controller. As a result, any 
journalistic institution whose content is accessible to European residents 
will need to think carefully about how the GDPR may impact their 
business development activities or editorial functions. Some potential 
ramifications include the following:
Impacts on Newsgathering
The GDPR states  that the 
… processing of personal data solely for journalistic purposes, or for the 
purposes of academic, artistic or literary expression should be subject 
to derogations or exemptions from certain provisions of this Regulation 
if necessary to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with 
the right to freedom of expression and information.15
While this language provides the media with significant leeway to be able 
to publish journalistic work, it does not assist journalists in accessing 
information for journalistic purposes.
Ioana Avadani, executive director of the Center for Independent 
Journalism in Bucharest, said the GDPR has been used in Romania to 
protect those in positions of power.16 “What we witnessed immediately 
after the GDPR is that institutions started to invoke the GDPR as a 
reason not to release information, ” she said. “They were not keen on 
releasing information before, so what they got is just another reason, and 
they are very happy that this is a legal reason to justify their less-than-
transparent attitude. ” 
Avadani pointed to an example of a protest that occurred in August 2018 
where riot police in Bucharest behaved in a violent manner and physically 
assaulted demonstrators. After a journalist asked who had authorized this 
action, the police invoked the GDPR and refused to name the authorizing 
officer. “It was a clear case of public information, and they still refused 
to say it because they wanted to protect the government, ” said Avadani. 
Their next reaction was to use the GDPR to attempt to force the journalist 
to reveal their source, claiming the police department had an obligation 
under the GDPR to investigate a data breach. “It was not a genuine 
concern for the protection of the police officer’s privacy, it was just a way 
to protect the authorities. ” 
© Urban Fenix / Shutterstock.com
“What we witnessed 
immediately after the GDPR 
is that institutions started to 
invoke the GDPR as a reason 
not to release information…
They were not keen on 
releasing information before, 
so what they got is just 
another reason, and they are 
very happy that this is a legal 
reason to justify their less-
than-transparent attitude.”
— IOANA AVADANI,
Center for Independent  
Journalism in Bucharest10 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGThis is not the only case of the GDPR being abused in Romania. RISE 
Project, a non-profit investigative journalism organization, was threatened 
with a €20 million ($22.4 million) fine from Romania’s data protection 
authority after publishing a post on Facebook that accused a prominent 
Romanian politician of theft. RISE Project subsequently published a letter 
it had received from the National Supervisory Authority for Personal Data 
Processing, which demanded that it disclose within 10 days “how and when 
RISE Project obtained the information ultimately posted to Facebook, who 
their source was, how they stored the documents, and what other personal 
information RISE Project has on [the politician] and their friends, ”17 or 
face a penalty of €20 million. While it is doubtful such a fine would stand 
up in the highest courts of the European Union, for smaller media outlets 
the fear of costly, ongoing litigation could ultimately have a chilling 
effect on journalism.
“Right to Erasure” Impact
The “right to erasure, ” also known as the right to be forgotten, has garnered 
significant attention but is often misunderstood. The right is not absolute, 
with Article 17 (3) of the GDPR offering a public interest exemption 
intended to safeguard against predicted abuses. The problem is that 
the GDPR’s Recital 153 states  that “Member States law should reconcile 
the rules governing freedom of expression and information, including 
journalistic, academic, artistic and or literary expression with the right to 
the protection of personal data pursuant to this Regulation. ”18 This means 
that there could be a patchwork quilt of interpretations for how this article 
should be implemented. Unfortunately, in Romania, the data protection 
authority has settled upon a definition that seems to have prioritized the 
right to privacy over freedom of expression in all circumstances.
Ziarul de Iasi,  a local newspaper in Romania with a circulation of 5,000 
copies per week, received a right to erasure request to delete an article 
from its online archive. After the newspaper refused to remove an article 
from nine years earlier about a public figure who had engaged in improper 
behavior, the National Supervisory Authority for Personal Data Processing 
sent a letter imposing a fine of 3,000 leu ($725) per day until the article 
was deleted. “For a local newspaper this is huge, ” said Avadani. “In this 
particular case, Ziarul de Iasi  is going to challenge the request in court. 
However the editor-in-chief told me if he keeps receiving requests like this, 
he may not be able to afford to keep challenging them. ”While it is doubtful such 
a fine would stand up in 
the highest courts of the 
European Union, for smaller 
media outlets the fear of 
costly, ongoing litigation 
could ultimately have a 
chilling effect on journalism.11 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevImpacts on Internal Operations and Website Functionality
Under the GDPR, data controllers are obligated to ensure that both their 
data processing practices and the data processing practices of third 
parties comply with the regulation. This necessarily requires that media 
organizations more closely scrutinize the activities of the third-party 
vendors they work with. 
Ala’a Alzghoul, an information systems specialist with Arab Reporters 
for Investigative Journalism in Jordan, explained how the GDPR 
prompted his organization to develop internal procedures for assessing 
how third parties handle personal information.19 “For example, we use 
Google Analytics to collect some data for the user experience. Before we 
added their plug-in, we first read the privacy policy of Google Analytics 
and asked for every detail as to what data this tool is collecting, we 
tracked what they actually do, and we mention those details in our 
privacy policy. ” Alzghoul explained that the GDPR also prompted Arab 
Reporters for Investigative Journalism to develop new procedures for 
handling personal information. “T o prevent any data leakages, we moved 
from regular databases to encrypted databases, ” he said. “We have a 
new policy to protect the personal data that we collect, and to prevent 
employees [from] just copying the data onto their laptops. But this 
happened because of the GDPR, not because we were afraid of the laws 
here in Jordan. ”Under the GDPR, data 
controllers are obligated 
to ensure that both their 
data processing practices 
and the data processing 
practices of third parties 
comply with the regulation. 
© pixinoo / Shutterstock.com1
2
3
12 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGUnderstanding Websites and Analytics 
and Balancing Interests
When someone visits a newsstand and buys a printed newspaper, they 
receive a complete product. But when a visitor browses a webpage, 
their web browser does not download one file. Rather, the web browser 
reads the code, downloads the required content from various sources, and 
renders the page. This all happens in milliseconds. The output may appear to 
the reader as one complete package, but more happens behind the scenes 
than many people realize, with content typically being downloaded from both 
first-party and third-party sources.
When the webpage loads, this image is downloaded 
from https:/ /es.mercopress.com/web/img/
mp-logo.png . Because it comes directly from 
MercoPress’s website, it is first-party content.
First-party content does not currently face 
legal or regulatory challenges.
But the ads? They are downloaded from pagead2.
googlesyndication.com/pagead/js /adsbygoogle.js .
Third-party content comes from a different 
source. Because this content comes from 
GoogleSyndication.com and not MercoPress.com, 
it is third-party content.
Third-party content is impacted by the GDPR.First-party content comes from the same location 
as the webpage itself. For example, if you visit 
https:/ /es .MercoPress.com …13 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevWhen content is being downloaded, the browser sends an HTTP request to 
either retrieve information from a server or send data to a server.20 As part 
of this interaction, the server obtains the visitor’s IP address to learn who 
it is interacting with. Y ou could think of an IP address as the return address 
on a letter you mail; it is a unique number that essentially identifies you by 
the device you’re using to connect to the internet, and can be linked to all 
the online activity you engage in on that device. 
When first-party content is downloaded, a website visitor would reasonably 
expect that they are sharing their IP address to access that content. The 
situation becomes murkier with third-party content. Because the website 
viewer’s IP address is being collected by an external source with which 
they do not have a direct relationship—and since these third-party content 
elements can either be invisible, blend into the webpage, or just load on the 
webpage without the individual’s explicit consent—their IP address would 
be collected by a third party without the individual’s knowledge or approval. 
Moreover, it is rare that only an IP address will be captured. While an IP 
address does constitute personal information, it is extremely common 
for third parties to collect information on individuals through cookies, 
web beacons, and application program interfaces, among other technical 
measures, as people browse digital properties. These allow for individuals 
to be targeted in a much more granular manner and to be tracked across 
the entire internet.When first-party content is 
downloaded, a website visitor 
would reasonably expect 
that they are sharing their IP 
address to access that content. 
The situation becomes murkier 
with third-party content. 
How Website Visitors are Tracked
Cookie A cookie is a message that a server sends to a web browser to store on the website visitor’s 
computer. This file is then sent back to the server each time the visitor’s web browser requests 
content from that particular server.
Web beacon A web beacon is a small image, usually one pixel by one pixel in size, that is discretely placed on 
a website to monitor visitor behavior. When the image loads, the web beacon passes information 
along to the server where the image is stored, including the IP address of the computer that 
retrieved the image, the time the web beacon was viewed, the type of browser that retrieved the 
image, and cookie values.
Application 
program 
interfaceAn application program interface determines how different software applications and 
components should interact with others. They are building blocks that website developers can use 
to pull and share data. For instance, Amazon’s Product Advertising application program interface 
allows another website to search Amazon’s product inventory and to then add personalized 
functions to its website advertising Amazon’s products.14 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGHistorically it has even been possible for companies to track website 
viewers without using cookies or web beacons or deploying application 
program interfaces. There are various fingerprinting algorithms that 
have enabled data sets to be analyzed in a manner that, for all practical 
purposes, could uniquely identify an individual with a high degree of 
accuracy. When a visitor downloads a file from a third party, the third 
party necessarily obtains a user agent string (the website visitor’s 
operating system, web browser type, and version number) and accepts 
headers (the type, version, and capabilities of the browser that is making 
the request so that the server returns compatible data). If JavaScript 
is enabled, it can communicate the names of browser plug-ins that 
are installed, and these plug-ins can be called upon to share system-
specific attributes. Many of these attributes are, in and of themselves, 
harmless, but when aggregated, can effectively and easily lead to the 
identification of a user.21 
T o grasp how the tracking of readers involves a variety of distinct and 
independent entities, imagine a scenario in which an individual lands on 
a fictitious new site, NewsWebsite.com, to read an article on nutrition. 
The reader’s presence on the site is collected by Analytics.com, a 
third-party audience measurement tool firm that NewsWebsite.com 
has enabled on its website. Analytics.com collects data from millions 
of websites using cookies, and this data could include the visitor’s past 
shopping behavior, interests, time zone, ethnicity, browser language 
preferences, and gender, among other information. Based on these data 
compiled by Analytics.com, another third-party, Shopping.com, knows 
that the visitor is female, aged 40, and previously spent $60 on a book. 
Shopping.com could now infer that the visitor is likely to be interested 
in hardcover recipe books, and so sends a request to Advertising.com 
to load an advertisement for a hardcover recipe book on the next page 
that the visitor loads on the NewsWebsites.com site. In this scenario, 
personal data about the reader would have been circulated with at 
least four different entities, some of which the reader herself might not 
even know about.
Over the past three years web browsers and mobile devices have 
begun masking header information by default. This reduces, but does 
not entirely eliminate, the potential for reidentification through this 
manner. These changes have arguably been implemented in reaction 
to new privacy regulations like the GDPR, which oblige data controllers 
to provide individuals with an effective means of exercising their data 
rights. Users with older mobile devices or web browsers that have 
not been updated may be particularly vulnerable to identification 
through fingerprinting.There are various 
fingerprinting algorithms 
that have enabled data sets 
to be analyzed in a manner 
that, for all practical 
purposes, could uniquely 
identify an individual with a 
high degree of accuracy. 15 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevHowever, 15 percent of the tracking devices we found on independent 
news websites had no easily identifiable ownership. Some of the most 
pervasive trackers on independent news websites in Kenya, Nigeria, and 
Ukraine, for example, actively masked their identities. In such cases the 
average website visitor would not know who is collecting their personal 
information or for what purpose. At least when the owner of a cookie can 
be identified, users can make contact with them to exercise their rights. 
Overall, the analysis included 100 news websites in Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, 
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Nigeria, Syria, Ukraine, and Uruguay—five small 
publishers and five large publishers in each country. The measurements 
were conducted using the open source OpenWPM platform, which was 
developed by scientists at Princeton University. This tool has been used 
in 22 academic studies, and it allows researchers to systematically and 
reliably quantify, understand, and uncover the ways in which website users 
are tracked across the measured websites.22 The OpenWPM tool was 
deployed using a local virtual private network (VPN) to imitate the website 
experience of a local website visitor (with the exception of Syria, which 
does not have a VPN, where sites were visited using a T urkish VPN).
The small, independent publishers chosen for analysis were selected 
based on recommendations from respected journalists and media 
policy advisors in the field. The ownership structures and funding 
sources of these websites were also taken into account to verify 
their independence. T o be included, the sites also had to be posting 
original content consistently for three or more years. For the large 
publishers, we included the five most visited news websites in the given 
country in January 2019, per Alexa Internet’s rankings. In Uruguay, 
the top three most visited news websites were Argentine, so instead 
the analysis included the five most visited news websites that were 
published out of Uruguay.User Tracking by Independent Media Outlets 
in Developing Countries
This report’s analysis of news websites in developing countries sheds 
light on the pervasiveness of user tracking on these news sites. Of the 
50 small, independent publishers studied, 92 percent contained third-
party tracking devices such as cookies and web beacons. Most of the tracking 
devices whose owners we could identify were transmitting data to the United 
States or the European Union. 
Some of the most pervasive 
trackers on independent news 
websites in Kenya, Nigeria, and 
Ukraine, for example, actively 
masked their identities. In such 
cases the average website visitor 
would not know who is collecting 
their personal information or 
for what purpose.Key Findings
250
200
150
100
50
0
Pubmatic Google Verizon Rubicon Project Brightcove
16 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGWhile the study was not exhaustive, it is significant because it found that over 
150 companies—not all of whom we could identify—were invisibly tracking 
the visitors to these 50 independent news websites. They were collecting IP 
addresses, which can identify one’s geographic location, the titles and URLs 
of news articles read, search queries, and other data. Once collected, this 
information could be sold to advertisers or further exchanged with other third 
parties. Any data that are collected are also vulnerable to being stolen in a 
data breach, or obtained by a government through a court order. 
The situation was no better for large, mainstream media websites in the 
same countries. Overall, 98 percent of the large news websites that we 
analyzed contained third-party cookies. With the exception of websites 
reviewed from Brazil and Nigeria, the large news websites contained more 
third-party cookies than their independent counterparts did.
FIGURE 4.  Top Five Identifiable Tracking Companies on Independent Media Websites
Note: The top five tracking companies across the 50 independent media websites whose ownership could be identified, as 
tested on April 11, 2019. This excludes trackers—some of which would have otherwise made the top five—that operate in an 
opaque manner and do not disclose for whom they are collecting and sending data.92%
of these  
independent media 
websites contained  
third-party  
tracking devices167
unique companies 
are monitoring 
website visitors 
on independent 
media websites523
cookies were found  
on one single 
webpage of an 
independent news 
website in Nigeria1
independent news website 
in Ukraine had been 
compromised by a third party 
and was distributing invasive 
malware to website visitors180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Argentina Brazil Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Nigeria Syria Ukraine Uruguay
Independent Media Mass Media
17 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevUses and Purposes of Tracking Devices
In the analysis of 50 independent news websites, seven common uses of tracking devices were 
identified—along with one uncommon, but problematic, use.FIGURE 5.  Number of Third-Party Trackers (Average on Website Homepage)
Note: With the exception of Brazil and Nigeria, the homepages of large publishers tended to contain more third-party 
trackers than the homepages of small publishers. Test conducted April 11, 2019.
Commons Uses of Tracking Devices (in alphabetical order)
Advertising Displaying online advertisements creates a very significant stream of income 
for many news websites. Tracking devices are commonly used to embed third-
party advertisements and to exchange reader data to display targeted, behavioral 
advertisements. The most common advertising networks we found were PubMatic, 
Google AdSense and Google DoubleClick, and Rubicon Project.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  HIGH 
Audience 
MeasurementNews websites deploy technical measures to determine the number of unique 
website visitors, the number of pages visited, and the average time spent on the 
webpage. Cookies are used to determine repeat visitors and data can be exchanged 
with third parties to build demographic profiles of visitors. The most common 
audience measurement instruments we found were Google Analytics and Adobe 
Experience Cloud.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  MEDIUM 
continues next page18 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGCommons Uses of Tracking Devices (in alphabetical order)
Content Hosting Most news websites use third-party hosting providers, either to host their website or to cache 
content so that it loads more quickly. Common providers include Amazon Web Services and 
Cloudflare. Some publishers use third-party content libraries, such as Adobe Fonts, to improve 
the appearance of their websites. Others use tools like YouTube to host videos because it is 
either cheaper than self-hosting that content, or easier to extend the functionality of their 
websites by turning to a third-party application. In all these instances, when content is being 
loaded through an intermediary, it exposes a visitor’s IP address (or more) to the third party.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  MEDIUM 
Design 
OptimizationNews websites sometimes conduct design experiments using real audiences to understand 
what design changes could keep visitors on their website longer or improve website usability. 
These tools, like Apptimize, Optimizely, and Splitforce, do not typically collect personal 
information and data are usually accessible only by the publisher.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  LOW 
Recommendation 
SystemsSome news websites use content recommendation engines to encourage website viewers to 
remain on the same website, or to visit a partner’s website to read an article that the publisher 
believes the reader will find interesting. These tools are thought to be behind many of the 
opaque tracking devices that we found, as their content changes dynamically and is updated by 
a code that the website owner is unable to closely scrutinize. 
Potential for Privacy Violation:  HIGH 
Social Media 
Share ButtonsMany news websites have embedded social media share buttons into their websites. These 
are intended to facilitate sharing news articles via the most common social media platforms. 
The most common social media share buttons we saw were for Facebook, which, if its button is 
embedded into a webpage, results in audience information being shared with Facebook. Other 
buttons included the Twitter icon and the ShareThis widget.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  HIGH 
Visualizations Some news websites use third-party tools to attractively display their stories, for instance, by 
embedding interactive maps, using Scribd to embed annotated documents into a page, or using 
Tableau to create column graphs or pie charts.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  MEDIUM 
Uncommon Uses of Tracking Devices
Malware 
DistributionOne independent Ukrainian news website was identified as a vector for disseminating malware. 
Malware is software that is designed to allow an unauthorized actor to gain access to a 
computer. It was difficult to decisively attribute the source and creator of the malware being 
distributed, as it actively masked its identity, but this particular content was embedded into the 
Ukrainian website through a third-party advertisement and appeared to be transmitting data to 
servers in Russia.
Potential for Privacy Violation:  HIGH No Tracking
Tracking8%
92%
19 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevNinety-two percent of the independent media websites and 98 percent of 
the mass media websites reviewed contained third-party trackers of some 
kind. In the context of independent media websites, these trackers were 
most commonly deployed for audience measurement purposes, followed 
by advertising and marketing purposes, and then by the inclusion of social 
media share buttons. 
According to Valentina Pavel, who researches data ownership at Privacy 
International, “user tracking and exploitation of data is still the default for 
news websites, but this is changing. ”23 She said readers are looking for 
something else and that publishers can turn data protection principles to 
their competitive advantage. “Be fair and clear to your readers, show them 
you have been thoughtful about the way you are handling their data, and 
collect only the type of data that is necessary for the smooth running of 
the website and explain in plain language why you made those choices. ” 
She noted that large publishers like the New York Times  have dropped 
behavioral advertisements from their websites altogether without suffering 
any revenue impact and believes this has paved the way for smaller 
publications to do the same. “People are looking for real guarantees that 
their data is not going to be exploited, so by all means, don’t sell or share 
user data, and stop or limit using first- or third-party cookies, ” said Pavel. 
“If others do it, why can’t you?”
FIGURE 6.   Third-Party Cookies on Homepages of Independent 
Media Websites
Note: It is important to note that during our test, we did not press the “consent” button 
on websites to permit the collection and use of cookies. Accordingly, these results should 
be read to show that 92 percent of websites tested had third-party tracking devices that 
activated even in the absence of visitor consent.“Be fair and clear to your 
readers, show them you 
have been thoughtful 
about the way you are 
handling their data, and 
collect only the type of 
data that is necessary for 
the smooth running of the 
website and explain in 
plain language why you 
made those choices.”
— VALENTINA PAVEL,
Privacy International20 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGMoving from Third Party to First Party (in alphabetical order)
Advertising Using a third-party ad exchange, like Google AdSense, to fund journalism sites makes 
it impossible to eliminate the privacy risks that these tools present. 
However, a website owner may decide not to use an ad exchange, opting instead to 
handle advertising sales internally. This has been an approach that larger publishers 
have been taking post-GDPR, as it can also result in higher revenue from direct sales 
negotiations. If advertisements are not targeted to the individual website viewer and 
are instead of a general nature, this is fairly simple to resolve. Provided no personal 
information about the website viewers is exchanged with the advertiser, no privacy 
violations can occur. Much, if not all, of the information typically found in a media kit 
about audience demographics does not constitute personal information. 
If personal information is to be exchanged with third parties, a careful assessment 
will need to be conducted before this happens. This assessment must consider both 
the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individuals concerned, their reasonable 
expectations for how and why their personal information would be used, and the 
grounds for why and how the third party would reasonably use those data.
Ease of Migration:  DIFFICULT 
Audience 
MeasurementThere are audience measurement tools that can be self-hosted, such as Cryptolog, 
which allows both internal analytical logging and total control over how long data 
are retained. However, these tools are not as easy to use as third-party ones and are 
not as rich in features. Significant training may be required to learn how to use them 
effectively.
Ease of Migration:  DIFFICULT 
continues next pageImmediate Privacy Gains Are Possible
Around the world, data protection laws and regulations are changing the 
digital ecosystem; by extension, they are changing the online publishing 
world too. Coming into compliance with new data protection laws like 
the GDPR and other applicable regimes can be difficult, and that appears to be 
a leading reason that some website owners have not taken action. 
One simpler mechanism of coming into compliance with the GDPR is to migrate away from using third-
party tools, services, and applications and to instead use self-hosted tools. This immediately limits 
exposure to the data collection and processing practices of third parties, and grants readers a greater 
degree of privacy protection, as information that could lead to their identification will no longer be 
circulating outside of the websites they’re visiting. 21 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevMoving from Third Party to First Party (in alphabetical order)
Content Hosting Not all content needs to be hosted by third parties. For example, if a website uses a 
third-party font library, the site could be changed to use either default browser fonts 
or self-hosted fonts to provide an immediate privacy gain for visitors.
It may not be feasible to self-host all content. Video hosting, for example, can be very 
resource intensive and expensive. However, website owners may wish to investigate 
which third-party video hosts are out there, and how (if at all) they use visitor data. 
YouTube, for example, offers “Privacy Enhancing Mode, ” which “allows you to embed 
YouTube videos without using cookies that track viewing behavior. ”24 However, it is 
disabled by default and so action is required by the website’s publisher to benefit 
from this privacy gain.
Ease of Migration:  EASY 
Design 
OptimizationSelf-hosted design testing tools may not offer all of the functions of those of third 
parties. It might be a better idea to review the privacy policy of any tools that are 
used, and to make sure they respect the privacy of visitors. As most of these services 
are paid tools and involve some kind of contractual relationship, it is likely possible to 
find a design testing tool that does not share or unnecessarily retain audience data.
Ease of Migration:  Possibly Not Necessary 
Recommendation 
SystemsRecommendation engines are a major source of third-party cookies. While they 
may look harmless and may improve the appearance and functionality of a website, 
they can also be Trojan horses, inserting hundreds of third-party trackers into 
every page of a website (including malware, in some instances). These tools can 
also be used to direct viewers to content that belongs to another publisher, or to 
inject misinformation or misleading stories onto your webpage. Website owners 
who cannot develop their own content recommendation engines may be better off 
eliminating the use of these third-party tools altogether.
Ease of Migration:  DIFFICULT 
Social Media 
Share ButtonsSome of the most significant privacy violations we saw came from deploying social 
media share buttons. Embedding a Facebook “like” button into a webpage enables 
that platform to be able to link a user’s reading and browsing history to their 
Facebook account. However, it is not necessary to use Facebook’s default “like” 
button to encourage sharing news articles on Facebook. There are self-hosted social 
sharing plug-ins that transmit less personal information to third parties that may be 
used instead. 
Ease of Migration:  EASY 
Visualizations Many third-party visualization tools offer self-hosted deployments, though some 
technical knowledge may be required to synchronize their visual interfaces with local 
deployment. Others do not pose significant privacy risks because as paid tools they 
offer contractual assurances around how they will or will not use data.
Ease of Migration:  EASY 22 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGIndeed, the findings in this report reveal that the current level of 
preparedness among smaller media companies in the Global South 
to protect their readers from being identified and to protect the 
commercial value of their analytics data is low. Experts consulted for 
this report said that this is unfortunate as many of the most common 
data analytic practices that independent media outlets engage in and 
benefit from do not require the use of personal information at all. 
While it will take additional effort by website operators, safeguarding 
the privacy rights of visitors may be good for business. This, in 
turn, could help improve the commercial viability of independent 
media. Research from the World Economic Forum shows that in 
the $3 trillion global data economy, online news sites are unusually 
well-trusted relative to search engines, social networking platforms, 
and even financial institutions.25 Y et, so far, a handful of players 
like Facebook and Google have led the business of online data 
collection and marketing, which has allowed them to harness the 
value of the data that they have collected from websites whose 
content they do not control. This research reveals that independent 
media websites commonly leak personal information to third parties 
under the following scenarios: when analytic tools are used to 
measure audience demographics, when split tests are conducted 
to experiment with new website design features, when social media 
“share” buttons are embedded into webpages, or when content 
recommendation engines are deployed to personalize a website’s 
content to make it relevant to the reader. 
Maintaining and building upon the high degree of trust that exists 
between a publisher and its readers may be the long-term solution Conclusion and Recommendations
A year after a new wave of data protection regulations such as the European 
Union’s GDPR have come into effect, the websites of media outlets continue 
collecting great volumes of personal information—but often unintentionally, 
and typically for other parties. That so many media institutions have failed to 
safeguard this asset—to both protect the privacy and safety of their readers and 
to be in a better negotiating position with advertisers—suggests that education, 
capacity building, and direct support of independent news outlets is needed to 
improve their analytics activities and ensure that they safeguard reader privacy. 
While it will take 
additional effort by 
website operators, 
safeguarding the privacy 
rights of visitors may be 
good for business. 23 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevto addressing data privacy concerns while simultaneously developing 
an effective business model. “Media sustainability in the long run 
is actually going to be based on your own user base rather than 
that of advertisers, ” said Tanja Maksic, a researcher with the Balkan 
Investigative Reporting Network.26 This, in turn, could result in digital 
publishers developing greater negotiating power and leverage with 
third-party advertising exchanges or, alternatively, being able to sell 
premium subscriptions to readers. “Look at your internal organization, 
what you are collecting, what you are doing with it, how you are 
protecting it, ” said Maksic, “and craft your economic sustainability 
around your user base and meet their demands and their standards. ” 
Louise Marie Hurel, an internet governance researcher at Brazil’s 
Igarapé Institute, agreed. “I think this is inevitable really. Enforcement 
of data protection laws may be ad hoc, but that same degree of 
uncertainty should not mark your relationship with users who are 
accessing your content. ”27
From a media development perspective, news organizations around 
the world need better support and training on how to safeguard their 
valuable audience data, both to protect the privacy rights of their 
readers and for commercial purposes. Practical primers on complying 
with data protection laws and regulations, sharing best practices, 
regularly auditing websites to understand what tracking devices 
are present and what they are doing with data, and developing and 
exchanging benchmarking information could all help smaller media 
outlets find a competitive advantage over the advertising networks and 
platforms that have absorbed the bulk of online advertising dollars to 
date. Ultimately, a new business model for journalism will require both 
savvy use of data and an abiding respect for readers’ privacy.From a media development 
perspective, news 
organizations around the 
world need better support 
and training on how to 
safeguard their valuable 
audience data, both to 
protect the privacy rights 
of their readers and for 
commercial purposes. 24 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGTracking Domain Tracking Company
33across.com 33Across
undertone.com 33Across
securedvisit.com 4Cite Marketing
4finance.com 4finance
acuityplatform.com Acuity
pippio.com Acxiom
addthis.com AddThis
addtoany.com AddToAny
ipredictive.com Adelphic
adform.net Adform
adgrx.com AdGear
adblade.com Adiant
adition.com Adition
adkernel.com AdKernel
admedo.com Admedo
admixer.net Admixer
everesttech.net Adobe
demdex.net Adobe
tubemogul.com Adobe
adotmob.com Adot
adriver.ru AdRiver
akamaized.net Akamai Technologies
amazon-adsystem.com Amazon
turn.com Amobee
adnxs.com AppNexus
metadsp.co.uk Avid Media
avocet.io Avocet
widespace.com Azerion
bettingpartners.com Best Partners
betweendigital.com Between Digital
bidswitch.net BidSwitch
bttrack.com Bidtellect
bidtheatre.com BidTheatre
ml314.com Bombora
brightcove.net Brightcove
e-planning.net Caraytech
cardlytics.com Cardlytics
casalemedia.com Casalemedia
sitescout.com Centro
clevernt.com Clever Advertising
clickagy.com Clickagy
onaudience.com Cloud Technologies
cloudflare.com Cloudflare
cogocast.net Cogo Labs
colpirio.com Colpirio
fwmrm.net Comcast
scorecardresearch.
comComscore
connexity.net Connexity
dotomi.com Conversant
crazyegg.com Crazy Egg 
ctnsnet.com Crimtan
criteo.com Criteo
cxense.com Cxense
videmob.com Cydersoft
dable.io Dable
w55c.net dataxu
dochase.com Dochase
adsymptotic.com Drawbridge
media6degrees.com Dstillery
dtscout.com DTSTracking Domain Tracking Company
sociomantic.com dunnhumby
dyntrk.com Dynadmic
eboundservices.com eBound
emxdgt.com EMX
esquemas.com Esquemas
exelator.com eXelate
tribalfusion.com Exponential
exposebox.com ExposeBox
eyeota.net Eyeota
eyereturn.com Eyereturn Marketing
eyeviewads.com Eyeview
facebook.com Facebook
atdmt.com Facebook
lijit.com Federated Media 
Publishing
fidelity-media.com Fidelity Media
stickyadstv.com FreeWheel
gemius.pl Gemius
genieesspv.jp Geniee
adhigh.net Getintent
getsocial.io GetSocial
doubleclick.net Google
google.com Google
youtube.com Google
gstatic.com Google
groovinads.com GroovinAds
gumgum.com GumGum
histats.com Histats
digitru.st IAB
ibillboard.com iBILLBOARD
id5-sync.com ID5
netmng.com IgnitionOne
360yield.com Improve Digital
impdesk.com Infectious Media
innity.com Innity
innovid.com Innovid
inskinad.com Inskin
insticator.com Insticator
onthe.io IO Technologies
ispot.tv iSpot
izooto.com iZooto
justpremium.com JustPremium
daum.net Kakao
creative-serving.com KPN
latinongroup.com LatinOn
loopme.me LoopMe
crwdcntrl.net Lotame
lytics.io Lytics
list-manage.com MailChimp
mookie1.com Media Innovation Group
media.net Media.net
mathtag.com MediaMath
marketgid.com MGID
bing.com Microsoft
linkedin.com Microsoft
mixmarket.biz MixMarket
narrative.io Narrative
navdmp.com Navegg
agkn.com Neustar
unrulymedia.com News Corporation
toast.com NHNTracking Domain Tracking Company
onesignal.com OneSignal
bluekai.com Oracle
zemanta.com Outbrain
owneriq.net ownerIQ
paypalobjects.com PayPal
paystack.com Paystack
paystack.co Paystack
adrta.com Pixalate
playground.xyz Playground XYZ
powerlinks.com PowerLinks
infogram.com Prezi
pubmatic.com PubMatic
contextweb.com PulsePoint
quantserve.com Quantcast
metype.com Quintype
quora.com Quora
po.st R1Demand
gwallet.com RadiumOne
rating-widget.com RatingWidget
rawgit.com RawGit
recreativ.ru Recreativ
reddit.com Reddit
reembed.com reEmbed
republer.com Republer
reson8.com Resonate Networks
responsivevoice.org ResponsiveVoice
retargetly.com Retargetly
rubiconproject.com Rubicon Project
rundsp.com RUN
scribd.com Scribd
rutarget.ru Segmento
sharethis.com ShareThis
simpli.fi Simpli.fi
sinoptik.ua Sinoptik
serving-sys.com Sizmek
skplanet.com SK Planet
sonobi.com Sonobi
spotify.com Spotify
spotxchange.com SpotX
stackadapt.com StackAdapt
sundaysky.com SundaySky 
survata.com Survata
taboola.com Taboola
tailtarget.com Target Audiences 
and Insights Lab
teads.tv Teads
tapad.com Telenor
tickcounter.com TickCounter
adsrvr.org Trade Desk
tradingview.com TradingView
programattik.com Türk Telekom
twitter.com Twitter
tynt.com Tynt
upravel.com Upravel
advertising.com Verizon
yahoo.com Verizon
uplynk.com Verizon
adtech.de Verizon
weborama.com Weborama
weborama.fr Weborama
pushcrew.com WingifyAppendix A—Tracking Domains Identified Through Study
The following 167 companies were found to be sending data to 246 domain names by way of third-party cookies 
installed on the websites of independent media outlets.25 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevPublisher Country
The Bubble Argentina
Revista Anfibia Argentina
La Izquierda Diario Argentina
El Cronista Argentina
Página/12 Argentina
Publica Brazil
Revista Fórum Brazil
Brasil 247 Brazil
Intercept Brasil Brazil
O Antagonista Brazil
Mada Masr Egypt
Egypt Independent Egypt
Daily News Egypt Egypt
Akhbar el-Yom Egypt
Ahram Online Egypt
Khabar Lahariya India
The Caravan India
Scroll India
The Wire India
The Quint India
Tempo Indonesia
RUAI TV Indonesia
Antara News Indonesia
Tirto Indonesia
Coconuts Jakarta IndonesiaPublisher Country
Thika Town Today Kenya
Africa Uncensored Kenya
Hivisasa Kenya
The Elephant Kenya
Talk Africa Kenya
Daily Trust Nigeria
Premium Times Nigeria
Sahara Reporters Nigeria
TheCable Nigeria
Stears Business Nigeria
Enab Baladi Syria
ANA Press Syria
Shaam News Network Syria
Aleppo Today Syria
Ain Al-Madinah Syria
Ukraine World Ukraine
Euromaidan Ukraine
Novoye Vremya Ukraine
Hromadske Radio Ukraine
Zerkalo Nedeli Ukraine
MercoPress Uruguay
LaRed21 Uruguay
Diario El Telégrafo Uruguay
Brecha Uruguay
Búsqueda UruguayAppendix B—Small Publishers Studied
We analyzed the websites of the following small publishers on April 11, 2019:26 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORGPublisher Country
Infobae Argentina
El Intransigente Argentina
Clarín Argentina
La Nación Argentina
Perfil Argentina
Globo Brazil
Metrópoles Brazil
Jornal do Brasil Brazil
UOL Brazil
Estadão Brazil
Al Gomhuria Egypt
Youm7 Egypt
Sada El Balad Egypt
Al Masry al Youm Egypt
El Fagr Egypt
Times of India India
Manorama Online India
NDTV India
Hindustan Times India
News 18 India
The Jakarta Post Indonesia
Tribun News Indonesia
Detik Indonesia
Kompas Indonesia
Liputan 6 Indonesia
Daily Nation KenyaAppendix C—Large Publishers Studied
We analyzed the websites of the following larger publishers on April 11, 2019:
Publisher Country
Business Daily Kenya
Capital FM Kenya
Kenya Broadcasting 
CorporationKenya
Kenya News Kenya
Punch Newspaper Nigeria
Vanguard News Nigeria
The Guardian Nigeria
This Day Nigeria
P .M. News Nigeria
SANA Syria
Syria Report Syria
Raialyoum Syria
Zamanalwsl Syria
Aks Alser Syria
Ukrainian Independent 
Information AgencyUkraine
Ukrainian News Ukraine
Segodnya Ukraine
Interfax-Ukraine 
News AgencyUkraine
Kyiv Post Ukraine
El País Uruguay
El Observador Uruguay
OK Diario Uruguay
Portal 180 Uruguay
Ecos Diarios Necochea Uruguay27 Big Data, Not Big Brother: New Data Protection Laws and the Implications for Independent Media Around the World   #mediadevSetup
T ests using OpenWPM were initially conducted 
on a sample of 40 websites on March 24, 
2019, and repeated on April 11, 2019, using 
the full group of 100 websites. OpenWPM 
was installed from GitHub using Git revision 
b3ead7e38892095950806e8bcbb2e1129c27ca96.
T ests were performed using the Kubuntu 
18.04 operating system, with Python 2.7 .15rc1 
and Python 3.6.7 and Firefox 67 .0b4. T esting was 
done under VPN connection.Appendix D—Study Setup and Testing Parameters
Testing Parameters
The OpenWPM “demo.py” script was used 
as a template and modified. The value of 
NUM_BROWSER was set to 1 to use only one web 
browser and to be sure that the websites were 
crawled in the given order. The browser was not 
headless. Flash was enabled. Cookie_instrument 
(experimental) was enabled. 
The following is the sequence of commands used 
for each website:
■■Visit the homepage and wait for 120 seconds
■■Dump flash cookies
■■Dump profile cookies
T o prevent data contamination, the previously 
generated SQLite database was deleted before 
each new recording.28 CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL MEDIA ASSISTANCE  CIMA.NED.ORG1 Alan Westin, Privacy and Freedom  (1967), 7.
2 Nonpersonal data include information that does not concern a 
natural person. For instance, a data set of daily temperatures in a 
city would constitute nonpersonal data.
3 Anonymized data include information that was originally personal 
information but has been transformed in such a way that the 
link between it and the natural person has been cut. Many data 
analysis activities are performed on anonymized data.
4 European Union Law, “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection 
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data 
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation),” Article 4 (1), 
April 27, 2016, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
ALL/?uri=celex:32016R0679 . 
5 This is known as the Mosaic Effect. In a study published in Science  
in 2015, researchers found that four data points are enough to 
uniquely and accurately reidentify an individual in 90 percent 
of cases. See Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Laura Radaelli, 
Vivek Kumar Singh, and Alex “Sandy” Pentland, “Unique in the 
Shopping Mall: On the Reidentifiability of Credit Card Metadata,” 
Science  347, no. 6221 (January 2015): 536-539, http://science.
sciencemag.org/content/347/6221/536.full .
6 The number of countries with adopted data protection laws as of 
March 27, 2019, is 134. The geographical distribution of the 134 
laws is the following: Africa (26), Asia-Pacific (22), Europe (54), 
Latin America and Caribbean (23), Middle East (7), and North 
America (2). 
7 In alphabetical order: Barbados, Belarus, Brunei, Dominica, 
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Falkland Islands, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia (substantial revision to existing 
law), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Montserrat, Nigeria, Saint Helena, 
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Virgin 
Islands, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. 
8 Mark Scott and Laurens Cerulus, “Europe’s New Data Protection 
Rules Export Privacy Standards Worldwide,” Politico , January 31, 
2018, https://www.politico.eu/article/europe-data-protection-
privacy-standards-gdpr-general-protection-data-regulation/ .
9 Robert Gellman, Fair Information Practices: A Basic History (April 
10, 2017), available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2415020 .
10 Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data 
Systems, Records, Computers and the Rights of Citizens,  Office 
of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, US 
Department of Health and Human Services, July 1, 1973, https://
aspe.hhs.gov/report/records-computers-and-rights-citizens . 
11 Sarah Gordon and Aliya Ram, “Information Wars: How Europe 
Became the World’s Data Police,” Financial Times , May 20, 
2018, https://www.ft.com/content/1aa9b0fa-5786-11e8-bdb7-
f6677d2e1ce8 .
12 Rebecca Hill, “Washington Post Offers Invalid Cookie Consent 
under EU Rules – ICO,” The Register,  November 19, 2018, https://
www.theregister.co.uk/2018/11/19/ico_washington_post/ .
13 S. Rana interviewed by A. Férdeline via Skype, March 14, 2019.
14 Julie Brill, “Microsoft’s Commitment to GDPR, Privacy and 
Putting Customers in Control of Their Own Data,” Microsoft, 
blog post, May 21, 2018, https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-
issues/2018/05/21/microsofts-commitment-to-gdpr-privacy-and-
putting-customers-in-control-of-their-own-data/ .15 General Data Protection Regulation, “Processing of Personal Data 
Solely for Journalistic Purposes or for the Purposes of Academic, 
Artistic or Literary Expression,” Recital 153, via Intersoft 
Consulting, https://gdpr-info.eu/recitals/no-153/ .
16 I. Avadani interviewed by A. Férdeline via Skype, March 19, 2019.
17 “OCCRP Strongly Objects to Romania’s Misuse of GDPR to Muzzle 
Media,” Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, 
November 9, 2018, https://www.occrp.org/en/40-press-releases/
presss-releases/8875-occrp-strongly-objects-to-romania-s-
misuse-of-gdpr-to-muzzle-media .
18 General Data Protection Regulation, Recital 153.
19 A. Alzghoul interviewed by A. Férdeline via Skype, March 14, 2019.
20 Please note that this is an oversimplification of the process. 
Please refer to the following technical document for a more 
complete explanation of how HTTP requests work: R. Fielding, 
J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, and 
T. Berners -Lee, “Hypertext Transfer Protocol,” IETF, June 1999, 
https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2616.txt .
21 See, for instance, P. Laperdrix,W. Rudametkin, and B. Baudry, 
“Beauty and the Beast: Diverting Modern Web Browsers to Build 
Unique Browser Fingerprints,” 37th IEEE Symposium on Security 
and Privacy, 2016, https://www.ieee-security.org/TC/SP2016 ; 
N. Nikiforakis, A. Kapravelos, W. Joosen, C. Kruegel, F. Piessens, 
and G. Vigna, “Cookieless Monster: Exploring the Ecosystem 
of Web-Based Device Fingerprinting,” 34th IEEE Symposium 
on Security and Privacy, 2013, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/6547132/ .
22 For further information on the intricacies of how the OpenWPM 
tool works, please see the Princeton Web Census website at 
https://webtransparency.cs.princeton.edu/webcensus/ .
23 V. Pavel interviewed by A. Férdeline via email, February 26, 2019.
24 “Turn on Privacy-Enhanced Mode,” YouTube Help, 2019, https://
support.google.com/youtube/answer/171780?visit_id=0-
636595692661723869-3019304114&rd=1 .
25 Vasudha Thirani and Arvind Gupta, “The Value of Data,” 
World Economic Forum, 2017, https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/2017/09/the-value-of-data/ .; In a 2014 poll, 56 percent 
of respondents in countries with less than 25 percent internet 
penetration answered 5, 6, or 7 on a seven-point trust scale 
to indicate that they trust online news sites to protect their 
personal data. This compares with 40 percent trusting search 
engine companies, 37 percent trusting companies that provide 
social networking services, and 29 percent trusting online 
marketers and advertisers. The only stakeholder group more 
trusted than the media were banks and financial institutions, 
who were trusted by 61 percent of respondents. Source: William 
H. Dutton, Ginette Law, Gillian Bolsover, and Soumitra Dutta, 
The Internet Trust Bubble: Global Values, Beliefs and Practices  
(World Economic Forum, 2014), http://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_InternetTrustBubble_Report2_2014.pdf .
26 T. Maksic interviewed by A. Férdeline via Skype, February 8, 2019.
27 L. Hurel interviewed by A. Férdeline in Kobe, Japan, March 13, 
2019.EndnotesCenter for International 
Media Assistance
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY
1025 F STREET, N.W., 8TH FLOOR
WASHINGTON, DC 20004
PHONE: (202) 378-9700
EMAIL: CIMA@ned.org
URL: https://cima.ned.org