 
Journal Pre-proof
Building Cyber Security Awareness in a Developing Country:
Lessons from Myanmar
Lennon Y.C. Chang PhD Senior Lecture ,
Nicholas Coppel CSI Assistant Secretary
PII: S0167-4048(20)30235-2
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101959
Reference: COSE 101959
To appear in: Computers & Security
Received date: 19 September 2019
Revised date: 3 June 2020
Accepted date: 13 July 2020
Please cite this article as: Lennon Y.C. Chang PhD Senior Lecture , Nicholas Coppel CSI Assistant Secretary ,
Building Cyber Security Awareness in a Developing Country: Lessons from Myanmar, Computers &
Security (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2020.101959
This is a PDF ﬁle of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the deﬁnitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its ﬁnal form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
©2020 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
 1 Building Cyber Security Awareness in a Developing Country: 
Lessons from Myanmar  
 
Lennon Y.C. Chang, PhD  
Senior Lecture, School of Social Sciences, Monash University, Australia  
Lennon.chang@monash.edu  
Nicholas Coppel, CSI  
Assistant Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australia  
Nicco2020@yahoo.com.au  
Abstract  
The paper discusses the arguments for inclusion of cybersecurity awareness building in 
development assistance programs. We note that cybersecurity awareness building can 
strengthen the resilience of productivity -enhancing services, such as mobile banking a nd e-
payment systems, and benefit economic growth. We develop a typology of cybersecurity 
strategies involving government, the private sector and the international community. The 
paper describes an Australian -funded program delivered by Monash University t o overcome 
cyber errorism by strengthening cybersecurity capacity and awareness in Myanmar and 
explains how and why it was delivered. Drawing on the program’s experience, the paper 
identifies various challenges to managing an effective program as well as e ight lessons 
learned which might be applicable to other programs. Key among the lessons learned is the 
need for a solid understanding of how the internet is accessed and used in the host country, 
and the need for local content to attract target audience at tention.  
Keywords  
Cyber Errorism; Cyber Security Awareness; Developing Countries; Foreign Aids; Myanmar; 
Cyber Capacity Building  
 
         
          
 2 Introduction  
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) have transformed the way in which we 
live, the way we do business, and the way we communicate. They are drivers of productivity 
gains and economic growth, and are essential for participation in the global e conomy. Most 
of us are enjoying the convenience that the Internet brings. And since the advent of the World 
Wide Web in 1989, ICTs have evolved rapidly. We are now in the age of the Internet of 
Things (IoTs) where almost every machine is connected online, and many services can also 
be transacted through the Internet. The importance of the Internet to the economy and all 
aspects of society has led governments to inclu de the Internet in what they consider to be 
national critical infrastructure.  
However, as t he Internet was originally built for research rather than commercial use, 
security was not taken into consideration in its design ( Chang,  2017; Lessig 1999). With the 
popularity of the Internet, criminals also see the opportunity to commit crime u sing the ICTs 
or by targeting the ICTs. According to the 2017 Internet Crime Report, the Internet Crime 
Complaint Centre (IC3) under the Federal Bureau of Investigation received 301,580 
complaints with an estimated loss of USD 1.418 billion in 2017. (Internet Crime  Complaint 
Center, 2018). In Australia, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet found that 
cybercrim es are costing the Australian  economy “up to $1 billion annually in direct cost 
alone”. (ACIC, 2019).  
Cybersecurity has become a concern for individuals, organisations and states as reports of 
hacking, data theft, system shut -downs, fraud and hate speech create fear and anxiety about 
the use of new technology, the so -called “cybercrime.”  To prevent this, cyber security 
technologies, policies a nd regulations are developed. However, many users do not follow the 
rules and regulations or fail to practi se the  expected  behavio ur while they are using ICTs. 
While most systems are technically secure, a great proportion of cybercrime is enabled by 
“human  error” (Kelly, 2017 ). “Cyber Errorism” , that is , cybercrime and cyber security 
breach es caused by human error or behavio ur, have become key concern s in the field of 
cybersecurity. We are starting to see more resources being allocated to the promotion of  
cyber security awareness  to harden society against cyber errorism .   
Academic study has emerged on the design and effectiveness of cybersecurity awareness 
campaigns. For example, one  study led by the Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre at the 
         
          
 3 University of Oxford assumed (on the basis of a 2013 study on user compliance behavio ur 
towards health information system security) that cyber security awareness campaigns fail to 
change behavi our (Bada, Sasse and Nurse: 201 5). It reviewed current behavioural psychology 
literature and applied psychological theories to awareness and behavio ur in the area of cyber 
security to get an understanding of the reasons why changing cyber security behavio ur is a 
challenge. The study also identified “many psychological theories of behavioural change that 
can be used to make information security awareness methods significantly more effective”. It 
concluded that the following five factors could enhance the eff ectiveness of cyber security 
awareness campaigns:  
● Security awareness has to be professionally prepared and organised  
● Invoking fear in people is not an effective tactic  
● Security education has to be more than providing information to users – it needs to be 
targeted, actionable, doable and provide feedback  
● Once people are willing to change, training and continuous feedback is needed to sustain 
them through the change period  
● Emphasis is necessary on different cultural contexts and characteristics when creating  
campaigns.  
De Bruijn and Janssen (2017) investigate why cybersecurity is not receiving the attention it 
deserves and how cybersecurity awareness can be created. They make the case for evidence -
based framing strategies which can help to increase societal and political awareness of 
cybersecurity. Messages need to be based on facts and be framed in such a way that it is 
explained effectively to the public. Based on the more generic literature on framing and in the 
specific area of global warming, they propos e six strategies which frame cybersecurity in 
such a way that will generate more awareness:  
● Do not exaggerate the problem (this can lead to denial, apathy and fatalism)  
● Make it clear who the villains are (use examples of clear and unambiguous villains)  
● Give the fight against cybersecurity a face (put the heroes in the spotlight)  
● Connect cybersecurity to values other than security alone (eg economic benefits)  
● Personalise for easy recognition (different messages for multiple audiences)  
● Connect to other tangible and clear issues (eg the threat of IS, Islamic State).  
These early studies are mostly concerned with improving the effectiveness of the messaging 
in cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Other studies have focused on the need for 
         
          
 4 cybersecurity capaci ty building in developing countries (Muller, 2015, and Klimburg and 
Zylberberg, 2015) and its role in international cybersecurity governance norm development 
(Homburger, 2019). Although cybersecurity awareness raising and capacity building is now 
featuring  in a number of development assistance programs,  there is no academic study on the 
challenges in delivering them effectively.  
This paper provides a detailed account of the implementation of a donor -funded cybersecurity 
awareness campaign. Drawing on recent experience in Myanmar – a country where only 
since 2014 has Internet access become feasible – this paper evaluates the rationale for 
development assistance being directed at cybersecurity. Drawing further on the experience of 
an Australia n-funded program to strengthen cybersecurity capacity and awareness in 
Myanmar, it identifies various challenges to managing an effective program as well as eight  
“lessons learned”. Key among the lessons learned is the need for a solid understanding o f 
how the Internet is accessed and used, and the need for local content to attract target audience 
attention . 
Development of the Internet in Myanmar  
An estimated 3.6 billion people, about half the world’s population, are Internet users and 
most of these ar e in the Asia region (World Internet Statistics). And among these, Myanmar 
has experienced one of the fastest increases in the number of Internet users. In 2014, the 
mobile telecommunications market was opened to international service providers and Qatar’s  
Ooredoo and Norway’s Telenor were successful tenderers  breaking the monopoly previously 
held by the state -owned MPT (Myanmar Posts and Telecommunications). Since July 2014 , 
MPT has been a joint operation with Japan’s KDDI Corporation and Sumitomo Corporat ion. 
With the introduction of competition, the price of a Subscriber Identification Module (SIM) 
card dropped from around US$2,000 in 2009 to around US$1 in 2015. With this significant 
fall in the entry barrier to mobile telephony, together with access t o cheap handsets from 
China, the uptake in mobile phones surged. Telenor had 17.232 million mobile subscribers in 
2018 while Ooredoo reported it had over ten million active subscribers in February 2019.  
In January 2017, a third international license  was issued to Mytel, a joint venture between a 
consortium of eleven Myanmar companies operating under the name Myanmar National 
Telecom Holding Company (23%), Star High Public Company Limited (28% - part of the 
military -owned and managed conglomerate Myan mar Economic Corporation) and Vietnam’s 
         
          
 5 military -run and largest mobile network operator Viettel (49%) (Mytel , nd). It launched its 
4G-only network in June 2018. Mytel quickly reached 5 million subscribers and expects to 
double its Myanmar subscriber base to 10 million by the end of 2019 ( Vu and Nguyen, 2019) . 
Mobile financial services have also experienced phenomenal growth in recent years. Wave 
Money, a joint venture between Telenor, FMI, Yoma Bank and Yoma Strategic Holdings, is 
the leading provider of mobile financial services in Myanmar. It moved approximately 
US$1.7 billion in remittance in the first half of 2019. According to the company, more than 
11 million people have used the Wave Money platform to send and receive money, buy 
airtime, pay util ity bills and process digital payments ( Wave Money, 2019) . 
While Myanmar is one of the fastest growing mobile markets it also stands out for its lack of 
safe online practices. The low level of cyber security awareness among its internet users and 
low cap acity in government and IT dependent institutions make “cyber errorism”, cybercrime, 
cyber bullying and the online spread of hate speech serious risks for which Myanmar is ill -
prepared:  
“In economies characterised by low internet penetration rates and few resources 
devoted to fighting cyber -crimes, formal institutions related to such crimes tend to be 
thin and dysfunctional. A cyber -criminal is less likely to be stigmatised in such  
economies. Moreover, organisations’ and individuals’ technological and behav ioural 
defence mechanisms are likely to be weaker. Many people in developing economies 
are also attracted into cyber -crime because of high unemployment and low wages.” 
(Kshetri, 2010, p.1057)  
It is difficult to know the extent of cybercrime and malicious c omputer activity in Myanmar 
as no systematic research or survey has been undertaken. For the purposes of this paper, 
cybercrime refers to all breaches of cybersecurity and malicious computer -related activity 
irrespective of whether it is considered an offe nce under current laws. Commercial 
information security companies and organisations (such as Symantec, AV -test and Trend 
Micro) use malicious computer activity statistics to quantify cybercrime and information 
security problems. And Microsoft detects malic ious software globally through computers that 
run Microsoft real -time security software and produces its Microsoft Security Report . 
However, Myanmar is not included in any of these surveys (Chang, 2017, p.138) . 
         
          
 6 While Myanmar is not included in these surveys, there is evidence of cybercrime and 
malicious computer activity in Myanmar. Immediately before Myanmar’s 2010 national 
elections, the country’s main Internet provider, the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, 
came under a large Distributed Den ial of Service (DDoS) attack (an attack which makes the 
targeted system unavailable by flooding its bandwidth). In 2013, Google warned media 
organisations covering Myanmar that their Gmail accounts might come under state -sponsored 
attack (O’Toole , 2013).  
Other malicious activity includes sets of computers  hacking targeting specific entities to steal 
their data. For example, malware such as PLATINUM and Gamarue are particularly 
prevalent in much of Southeast Asia. While there is no verifiable evidence of th eir presence 
in Myanmar, it would be complacent to assume that Myanmar is somehow immune to 
malicious activity. Other forms of cybercrime have been detected in Myanmar. In 2014, five 
foreigners were accused of ATM scamming using cloned ATM cards and, in an  unrelated 
incident, a Bulgarian national was arrested for allegedly stealing US$38,500 from ATMs.  
With the development of e -payment and online banking in Myanmar, these types of 
cybercrime can be expected to increase.  
Notwithstanding the newness of wide access to the Internet in Myanmar, there is evidence of 
significant hacktivism. In January 2016, in response to the Thai Government’s arrest of two 
Myanmar migrant workers accused of murdering two tourists at Koh Tao, internet vigilantes 
(netilantes) launc hed a massive DDoS attack on nearly 300 Thai Government websites and 
brought many of them down. The Myanmar netilante group, Blink Hacker Group, is believed 
to be responsible for the attacks (Long 2016). Also in 2016, the Myanmar hacktivist group 
Cyberroot  and other hackers launched DDoS attacks on Bangladeshi Government websites in 
response the Bangladeshi Cyber Army’s “declaratio n of war” against Myanmar alleging 
mistreatment of Rohingya Muslims (Coe 2016). A report on cyber “maturity” (as 
demonstrated by  the presence, effective implementation and operation of cyber -related 
structures, policies, legislation and organisations) in the Asia Pacific region ranked Myanmar 
as least “mature” among the ten ASEAN member states, and placed Myanmar at 21 out of the 
25 cou ntries surveyed (ASPI , 2017) . 
Without safe online practices there is significant risk in introducing electronic voting, e -
government and e -payment systems in Myanmar. Globally, the majority of cybersecurity 
         
          
 7 breaches are caused by human error, rather t han the vulnerability of the computer system or 
hardware ( Kelly, 2017 ), there is a need to focus on the human factors to cyber security.  
The majority of people in Myanmar are new to the internet and less likely than well -
established users in other countrie s to be aware of the necessity to protect themselves online. 
As a result of this lack of awareness, easily preventable cybercrimes such as loss of mobile 
money, hacked social media accounts, and money stolen from bank accounts are , according 
to Myanmar cyb er security firms,  common in Myanmar. These could easily be prevented 
simply by raising user safety awareness.  
Combatting cybercrime and malicious computer activity  
Grabosky  (2016:123) states that “one of the most important strategies for the prevention and 
control of cybercrime is to increase public awareness of the risks that private individuals and 
institutions face, and how best to minimize them.” Other important strategi es include 
government and private sector cooperation, legislation to criminalise the various forms of 
cybercrime, the global harmonisation of cybercrime laws, and international cooperation 
including the development of capacity among criminal justice profes sionals to deal with 
cybercrimes (Chang &  Grabosky, 2017).  
Cybersecurity capacity building has been defined as “support and assistance aiming at 
empowering individuals, communities and governments to reduce risks stemming from 
access and use of informatio n and communication technologies. ” (Homburger, 2019, p.227). 
The Event Report of a European Union Institute for Security Studies’ seminar on capacity 
building in cyberspace reported that there was general agreement “that capacity building is 
something that  should leave recipient countries with the ability to enjoy the benefits of 
cyberspace, including in the economic and social domains”  (EUISS, 2013, p.2) . 
The various strategies can be mapped in the typology in Figure 1 below.  
(Insert figure 1 around here)  
In the typology, optimal cyber security is represented by the central area where all the circles 
overlap. It encompasses all stakeholders and all strategies, indicating that the various 
strategies are not options to choose  from but all are important to pre vent and control 
cybercrime. This leads program managers to ask whether their programs should embrace all 
         
          
 8 the strategies and, if this is not possible, is it reasonable to allocate scarce development funds 
to strengthen cybersecurity incompletely, in the fu ll knowledge that a major cyber security 
incident is a risk to the program? Precisely because cyber security is everybody’s business, it 
is difficult for even a well -funded and designed program to address each strategy. And there 
are some strategies that a re best addressed at the government -to-government level, rather than 
by a contracted implementing partner. For example, encouragement to sign and ratify the 
Council of Europe’s Convention on Cybercrime (Budapest Convention), which encourages 
signatories to  harmonise domestic criminal substantive law and procedural law and to 
establish a fast and effective regime for international cooperation (Chang , 2012) is likely to 
be more effective when government officials from a signatory donor country acknowledge 
and engage their counterparts. Similarly, international cooperation involving police and 
security agencies is traditionally undertaken at the police -to-police or agency -to-agency level, 
drawing on the mutual trust and respect that has been built through a his tory of cooperation 
on other matters.  
It is important that cybersecurity development assistance is a priority in the donor country. To 
be effective, it cannot simply be a priority within a development agency, it needs to be a 
whole -of-government priority a nd there needs to be coordination between the relevant 
government agencies. If this proves to be difficult then coordination with other donors is an 
opportunity to ensure that through collective efforts as many as possible of the strategies for 
the prevent ion and control of cybercrime in the recipient country are a ddressed.  
Australia’s International Cyber Engagement Strategy  
In October 2017, Australia’s then Minister for Foreign Affairs launched Australia’s 
International Cyber Engagement Strategy  (Commonwealth of Australia,  2017). The 
Minister’s Foreword to the Strategy  said it “sets out Australia’s plan to promote confidence in 
the online environment, increase economic opportunities, reduce losses attributable to 
cybercrime, minimise the risks of s trategic miscalculation in cyberspace, promote multi -
stakeholder Internet governance, protect human rights online and deliver sustainable 
development outcomes.”  
The Strategy  identifies the Internet as a vehicle to advance established development prioritie s, 
including human rights, sustainable development and inclusive economic growth. The 
Internet provides “an unparalleled opportunity for online democratic participation and the 
         
          
 9 promotion, protection and fulfillment of human rights…Beyond the realisation of  human 
rights, connectivity and the uptake of digital technologies also act as a profound enabler of 
sustainable development and inclusive economic growth”.  
Having situated cyber engagement within the domain of development assistance, the Strategy  
commits Australia to  
“build their technical, legislative and institutional capacity to fight cybercrime. This 
will not only preserve our neighbours' economic growth, but also prevent the creation 
of cybercrime safe havens... Such capacity building also equips cou ntries to 
participate more constructively in international discussions on the future of 
cyberspace.”  
In May 2016, before the launch of the International Cyber Engagement Strategy , the Minister 
for Foreign Affairs announced the establishment of a Cyber Cooperation Program  to support 
the engagement strategy , especially across the Indo -Pacific region. Homburger (2019) 
situates cybersecurity capacity building in the realm of the debate on international norms. She 
argues that capacity building is necessary t o make adherence to internationally agreed norms 
feasible, but it can also serve as a tool for fostering donor state’s interests in recipient states. 
She notes  that China and Russia favour a new universally accepted International Code of 
Conduct on Informa tion Security formulated within the UN framework, while the United 
States and EU member states promote the EU -drafted Budapest Convention (promoting use 
of existing international law and governance based on freedoms, human rights and the 
openness of cybers pace) (Chang, 2012; Homburger, 2019: 233 -234, 237).  
Among all ASEAN member states, the Philippines is the only country that has ratified the 
Budapest Convention. However, Myanmar and most other member states have enacted 
legislation to regulate cybercrime based on the provisions of the Budapest Convention 
(Chang, 2017: 142 ; Chang, 2020 ). ASEAN has its own agreements and forums that provide 
an opportunity for cybercrime cooperation. Indeed, the founding principle of ASEAN is to 
promote regional peace and sta bility and to promote active collaboration and mutual 
assistance on matters of common interest (ASEAN Declaration, 1967). In 2004, the Joint 
Communique of the Fourth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime recognised 
cybercrime as a transnational crime affecting ASEAN’s security and urged effective legal 
cooperation (ASEAN 2004). Cooperative and emergency response procedures to maintain 
         
          
 10 and enhance cybersecurity and to prevent and combat cybercrime are also a part of the Plan 
of Action to Implement  the Joint Declaration on ASEAN -China Strategic Partnership for 
Peace and Prosperity (2016 -2020) (ASEAN 2015). ASEAN Telecommunication and IT 
Ministers meetings have also been a driver for cyber collaboration, including agreement in 
2003 that all member st ates should establish national Computer Emergency Response Teams. 
The ASEAN ICT Masterplan 2015 goal to make ASEAN a global ICT hub incorporates a 
number of initiatives, including to raise cybersecurity awareness through public education 
(ASEAN 2015). The various ASEAN cyber initiatives have contributed to Myanmar’s 
cybersecurity development, although being a party to a regional initiative in itself is 
inadequate without effective implementation to make it meaningful and useful.  
A constraint on active coll aboration on cyber matters is the digital divide – the vastly 
different levels of cyber maturity among the ASEAN member states. The digital divide is 
defined by the OECD as “the gap between individuals, households, businesses and 
geographic areas at differ ent socio -economic levels with regard both to their opportunities to 
access information and communication technologies (ICTs) and to their use of the internet for 
a wide variety of activities” (OECD 2001). Narrowing the digital divide is considered to be 
an important step towards economic development  (Evers and Gerke 2013) .  
Myanmar Cyber Security Awareness Raising  
The project “Strengthening Cyber Security Capacity and Awareness in the Indo -Pacific 
Region: Australia and Myanmar” was one of the first to be funded by the Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade under Australia’s Cyber Cooperation Program  and Internation al 
Cyber Engagement Strategy . Led by  Monash University, and i n collaboration with the 
National Cyber Security Centre, the Myanmar Computer Emergency Response Team 
(MMCERT) and private internet security company Kernellix, the Program was designed to 
strengt hen Myanmar’s cyber security capacity and raise cyber security awareness among 
government officials, IT practitioners/industry and the general public. Recognising that 
although each of these groups  was vulnerable to “cyber errorism”, they  had different nee ds 
which  the Program targeted : 
● A social media campaign, “Cyber  BayKin” (baykin means safety in Burmese), to raise public 
awareness ; 
● A facilitated workshop in Nay Pyi  Taw for government officials to identify their needs and 
         
          
 11 build professional networks across ministries  
● Creation of a private sector cybersecurity alliance to foster information sharing and formation 
of industry views to feed into the drafting of regulatio ns and legislation  
● Lectures to students at Myanmar’s Universities of Computer Studies . 
A campaign hub group , co-founded by Dr Lennon Chang  from Monash University  and Mr 
Ye Th ura Thet from Kernellix,  was created as a local organization to design and manage the 
program, including by first identifying types of cybercrime in Myanmar that were in greatest 
need of being addressed, and identifying the potential victims. Key messages, program design 
and part ner agency selection followed.  
During the approximately six months long research phase of the program, many meetings and 
panel discussions were held with stakeholders from government ministries, financial 
institutions, telecom companies, local and internat ional tech companies, and IT academics. 
Several main issues were identified, some of which were surprising to non -Myanmar 
participants:  
o New to the internet/social media:  the m ajority of people in Myanmar are relatively new 
to social media and still unaware of some of the dangers of online hate speech or smear 
campaigns. Most o nly know about Facebook and think Facebook is synonymous with the 
internet. They do not have the basic know -how to use the internet and tend to use 
Facebook as their only source  of news and information, which makes them very 
vulnerable to fake news . 
o Lack of technology literacy: many customers are not technically capable of setting up 
their various internet user accounts. They will often buy their mobile phone at a shop and 
have a ll their email, social media, mobile money accounts set up by shop clerks. 
Similarly, with online banking, they will let the bank staff set up their account with a PIN 
number or password and not change them afterwards. This type of naïve consumer 
behaviour  not only makes it easy for hacking in general but also results in numerous cases 
of internal theft within financial institutions.  
o Lack of regulation and policy: there are some broader issues that need to be addressed 
at the policy level, such as lack of a  coordinated effort to draft and implement cybercrime 
laws. At present hackers who steal money online have little risk of getting caught, and 
face no serious consequences even if they are caught.  
         
          
 12 o Lack of resources: banks and businesses often lack resources  to prevent online theft and 
reduce its impact on their bottom line.  
o Cultural stigma in Myanmar:  Generally speaking, people in Myanmar do not seem to 
care about privacy as much as people do in Western countries. They believe it’s bad to 
keep secrets from family and friends. This attitude then translates into their online 
behaviour. Users do not bothe r to use the most basic safety measures such as use secure 
passwords, lock mobile phone screens, or protect their banking information.  
o Need for self -empowerment:  users do not see the importance of preventing themselves 
from becoming victims.  
As part of the  social media strategy, instead of using cyber security campaign material from 
other jurisdictions , Myanmar comic characters were created to engage the Myanmar 
audience. The CyberBayKin  comic strip has seven characters  (Figure 2) : four women, two 
men and a stray dog. The central character is Mi Kay, a female university student specialising 
in cybersecurity. She is the heroine who can solve all the cybersecurity and hacking problems 
of others. Phwar Cho is a woman over sixty years of age who likes to use he r mobile phone to 
access Facebook and to share posts. May Se is a younger woman, around 30-year-old, and a 
wealthy company owner. She likes to use her mobile phone and tablet for online shopping. 
Thar Noe is the hacker. He causes trouble for others and has plenty of spare time at work. 
May Shal is an 18-year-old, female, first year university  student who likes to take selfies and 
who checks -in wherever she goes. She is popular on Facebook and Instagram. Kwee Kyaw is 
an over 30-year-old male with a good income and holds a senior corporate position. He uses 
gadgets (smart watch, mobil e phone, tablet and laptop) and various online services (including 
Facebook, Twitter, online gaming and Youtube). The stray dog, Ga Lit, gets along with all 
the characters other than the hacker, Thar Noe.  
(Insert Figure 2 around here)  
There is a strong  tradition of reading comics in Myanmar and a thriving community of 
cartoonists and illustrators. By creating original and local content, the campaign aimed to 
reach the most unaware internet users, old and young, urban and rural, directly through social 
media and public outreach events  (see figure 3) . By combining internationally proven tactics 
and Myanmar -specific content in Myanmar language with cultural sensitivity, the campaign 
aimed to reach as many internet users as possible.   
         
          
 13 (Insert figure 3 around  here)  
A Facebook page has been used as the main channel to distribute the comics 
(https://facebook.com/cyberbaykin ). Facebook is synonymous with  the Internet in Myanmar . 
Almost all internet users in Myanmar are Facebook users. It is also the best way to engage 
internet  users from both urban and remote areas.  Comic books were also printed for 
dissemination , especially to remote area s. 
The campaign was launched on 11 June 2018, and in the twelve months since then the 
Facebook page had attracted more than 7,500 organic likes. Thirteen comics were produced 
in the first year. Each comic reached around 15,000 users on Facebook with the comic on 
phishing reaching 158,700 users1. The Facebook followers number is increasing steadily 
without any buy -in likes or paid advertisement. The CyberBaykin  campaign has been listed 
on the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s eLearning course on cybercrime as a 
good example of a cyber security awareness campaign . (See 
www.unodc.org/elearning/en/courses/course -catalogue.html#cyber , accessed on 22 August 2019.  
Content only accessible to registered institutions.) .  
Messages  
Identified campaign topics included, but were not limited to, phishing, hacking, changing 
passwords, personal information protection, cyber bullying, hate speech and online stalking.  
Several key messages featured strongly in the campaign:  
o There is a strong likelihood of getting hacked if you don’t protect  your safety online (risk)  
o Cybercrimes can be prevented (action)  
o High cost of inaction (financial or data loss)  
o What is cyber bullying (recognition)  
o Stop hate speech (sensitize), and propose response tactics  
Within the generalized framework proposed by Bada, Sasse and Nurse  (2015),  the 
CyberBaykin comic strip campaign was professionally prepared and organi sed, it avoided 
creating fear, it provided actionable and doable information, the information campaign was 
                                                
1 As of 30 May 2020, there were 25,370 organic like s and some comics reached more than one million 
Facebook users.  
         
          
 14 sustained for over a year, and it was sensitive  to the different cultural context and 
characteristics of Myanmar. The CyberBaykin campaign, while not consciously informed by 
the de Bruijn and Janssen  (2017)  evidence -based framing strategies, is well -aligned with five 
of the six strategies they propose for cybersecurity campaigns. The CyberBaykin comic strip 
campaign was not based on fear, it’s clear who the villain and heroes are (Thar Noe and Mi 
Kay respectively), the societal benefits of cybersecurity awareness are key messages, and the 
use of local, identifiable characters ma de for a strong message framing strategy.   
Myanmar Cybersecurity Awareness Conference  
As can be seen from the typology of cyber security strategies  (Figure 1) , there is an important 
role for government to play in ensuring cybersecurity. In Myanmar, the newness of 
widespread access to the Internet has also meant that awareness of cybersecurity issues 
among government officials is not high and consequently cybers ecurity legislation and 
regulation are underdeveloped. Furthermore, the highly siloed nature of the bureaucracy in 
Myanmar has not encouraged information sharing and cooperation among Ministries. To help 
overcome these problems and in response to a request  from the Myanmar Cybersecurity 
Centre, one two-day Cybersecurity Awareness Conference was held in Nay Pyi  Taw, 
Myanmar’s capital (26 -27 November 2018). The conference program was derived from 
multiple meetings and panel discussions with cybersecurity stakeholders in Myanmar over a 
six-month  period. The conference aimed to strengthen the institutional  capacity of the 
Myanmar Cyber Emergency Response Team (MMCERT) and government network 
administra tion officials from multiple ministries. It also aimed to foster dialogue between and 
within ministries. The conference was opened by the Union Minister of Tra nsport and 
Communications, indicating a new level of government interest in the topic.    
The conference program included keynote speeches and presentations by six international 
and two Myanmar speakers, with simultaneous interpretation. Each presentation was 
followed by a Q&A session. A mixed panel discussion was held at the end of each day to 
facilitate exchange among government officials, academics, cybersecurity experts, industry 
representatives and educators. The conference attracted over 200 participa nts consisting 
mainly of government officials and network administrators, and representatives from the 
private sector and academia.  The post -conference survey of participants revealed broad 
satisfaction and requests from government agencies for follow -up conferences.  
         
          
 15 More than ten networking events were organised during the first year of the project to help 
players in Myanmar’s IT security industry build connections and form relationships. This led 
to the eventual establishment in July 2019 of the Myanmar Information Security Association. 
The Association will help build the trust and cooperation that underpins incident reporting 
and will facilitate public/private sector collaboration, including on the formulation of 
cybersecurity and cybercrime strategy, policy and legislation.  
Cyber security and safety ed ucation  
Over the two years of this program, e leven workshops/seminar s were provided to university 
students , including at the University of Computer Studies (UCS) Yangon, UCS Mandalay 
(twice), UCS  Pyay, UCS Taungoo , UCS Dawei, University of Information Technology 
(twice), Yangon  University (twice), and Parami Institute. More than 800 students were 
trained on cybe r security law , ethics  and awareness . More than half of the participants were 
female.  The topics were sel ected and prepared in collaboration with local university lecturers 
and the materials were given to the lecturer for their future use. The campaign team also 
helped with  professional comments on the establishment of  the Myanmar ICT curriculum and 
the drafting of Myanmar  cyber laws . 
Role of cybersecurity in an aid program  
Most economists would agree with the statement that “economic growth is the engine of the 
escape from poverty and material deprivation” (Deaton , 2013, p.327) and also that 
“institutions that provide dependable property rights, manage conflict, maintain law and order, 
and align economic incentives with social costs and benefits are the foundatio n of long -term 
growth” (Rodrik , 2003, p.10). For this reason, much development as sistance is focused on 
capacity building and institutional strengthening. Cybersecurity awareness raising and 
capacity building is congruent with the broader development objec tive through a 
strengthening of the resilience of the enabling environment for economic growth. 
Cybersecurity is essential for confidence in the integrity of mobile banking, e -government 
and e -payment systems which facilitate the internal transfer of resou rces from wealthier 
urban areas to poorer rural communities. In the words of the Australian Government, “the 
uptake of digital technologies also act[s] as a profound enabler of sustainable development 
and inclusive economic growth .” (Commonwealth of Austra lia, 2017) . Thus, cybersecurity 
capacity building can be viewed in the context of the traditional concept of capacity building 
         
          
 16 and accompanying donor -recipient relationships between developed and developing 
economies (Homburger , 2019, p.225).  
Under OECD De velopment Assistance Committee (DAC) definitions, no military equipment 
or services is reportable as Official Development Assistance (ODA). Anti -terrorism activities 
are also excluded (OECD , nd). Cybersecurity has dimensions that strengthen the security of a 
country from foreign interference, including from cyber attack. This paper is concerned with 
the other dimensions of cyber security that go to the heart of strengthening governance with 
positi ve development and gender equality outcomes in developing countries. Cybersecurity 
assistance to the Ministry of Defence, the armed forces and counterterrorism agencies is not 
the focus of the CyberBayKin program in Myanmar, nor of this paper.  
 Gender  
The Australian Government’s aid program lists ten targets at the strategic level to ensure its 
aid program is well managed, achieving value -for-money and making progress in delivering 
key Government priorities. The fourth target - empowering women and girls – is “more than 
80 per cent of investments, regardless of their objectives, will effectively address gender 
issues in their implementation” (DFAT , 2014 ). Progress on this target “might mean ensuring 
women participate in decision -making throughout implementa tion, identifying and pursuing 
opportunities for women to be employed through an investment, or addressing particular 
challenges to implementation”.  
There is no tension between this target and the objective of cybersecurity awareness. For 
cybersecurity awareness to be implemented effectively it must include all people with access 
to the internet, including through the use of smartphones. According to W ave Money, women 
in Myanmar are 30 per cent less likely than men to own a smartphone and 39 per cent less 
likely to use mobile internet for affordability, technology literacy and personal safety reasons. 
At the same time , Myanmar women manage 80 per cent o f the more than 41,000 Wave shops 
throughout Myanmar, earning agent commissions ( Wave  Money, 2019 ). An effective 
cybersecurity awareness campaig n must ensure that it is reaching women and girls.  
It is not sufficient to argue that the technology is gender neutral and women and girls are 
targeted no differently from men in technical campaign materials. For example, the choices 
made in depicting citi zens in campaign materials need to avoid gendered role models that 
         
          
 17 might stereotype males as teachers or as the masters of technology and reinforce social norms 
that exclude women. Women and girls need to be reached by the campaign materials for them 
to respond to the messages. Inclusion in the benefits from the enhanced protection that comes 
from adopting cybersecurity messages contributes to their economic empowerment and 
lessened cyber bullying, as well as to the effectiveness of the campaign. Cybersecur ity is 
maximised when everyone adopts cybersecurity practices.  
Demonstration of progress on this target in the cybersecurity awareness campaign in 
Myanmar has been straightforward. The central charact er in the comic strip created to 
disseminate awareness of risks and remedies to cybersecurity, Mi Kay, is a female IT expert 
and teacher. She is the heroine who gives advice to hapless victims on how to protect and fix 
devices vulnerable to hacking, financial fraud or mis -use such as on -line hate speech and 
cyber bullying. She gives the fight against cybercrime a face, one of the ways messages need 
to be framed to be effective (de Bruijn and Janssen, 2017). The portrayal of a woman in this 
role was a natural fit: the vast majority of teachers in Myanmar are fem ale and women are 
seen in important cybersecurity roles.  
Similarly, the Myanmar Cybersecurity Awareness Conference (26 -27 November 2018, Nay 
Pyi Taw) included female professors of computer science, ministers and senior officials as 
presenters and panellis ts. Approximately 65 per cent of the audience were female and from 
the public sector (Nay Pyi Taw is the newly created capital city and very much a government 
town). Enhancing women’s voice by using the skills and talents of Myanmar women 
advances both gen der equality and cybersecurity.  
Sustainability  
Ongoing relevance is central to the sustainability of the Myanmar Cybersecurity Awareness 
campaign. If the public’s interest in the campaign falters or declines then its effectiveness 
diminishes, and donor in terest in it will also decline. Interest in the campaign can be readily 
measured using the standard metrics of Facebook: number of likes and number of shares. 
These metrics can reasonably be regarded as proxies of the public’s demand for information 
on cyb ersecurity. To be sure, the metrics can be influenced by the campaign itself through 
payments to Facebook to “boost” visibility of the posts. While boosting has not been a part of 
the campaign strategy to date, it c ould be used to target a particular aud ience, such as women 
and girls, or to promote awareness of a particular issue such as cyber bullying.   
         
          
 18 It should not matter that funds are used to boost the visibility of the Facebook posts. The 
objective of the awareness campaign is to make as many peopl e as possible aware of risks, 
precautions and remedies related to malicious internet -based activity. Boosting is a legitimate 
and effective way of achieving that objective and may be considered for CyberBayKin  in the 
future.  While DFAT funding for this particular project was exhausted in mid -2019, the 
project has continue d with funding from local and international donors. This recognises that 
cyber security awareness raising is an ongoing task, partly because the message nee ds to be 
continuously reinforced and partly because every day there are new internet user s who need 
awareness training.  
 
In the world of development assistance, success breeds success. Donors want to ensure that 
their aid program is well -managed, achieving  value -for-money and making progress in 
delivering key government priorities. This is enshrined in Australia’s aid program and both 
“Working with the most effective partners” and “Ensuring value for money” are two of the 
program’s ten targets (DFAT 2014). A known and proven partner is generally preferred over 
an unknown and untested potential partner. Strengthened cybersecurity in the Indo -Pacific 
region is a key government priority ( Commonwealth of Australia,  2017) supported through 
Australia’s Cyber Cooperation Program  in the Indo -Pacific.  
Other donors, seeing what can be accomplished and which local organisations to  partner  
safely with, are willing to follow. This is an important achievement. There is much 
uncertainty when launching into a new fie ld of development assistance for the first time in a 
developing country. The pioneering development agency, in this case Australia’s Department 
of Foreign Affairs and Trade, lowers the entry barriers for followers. The identification of 
trusted and proven local partners, the engagement of both the public and private sectors, the 
evidence of local ownership, and the visibility of the program all appeal to potential program 
managers and capitals alike.  
There is risk in this too. Especially in capitals, develo pment programs on cybersecurity are 
seen as an opportunity to project an image of the donor as advanced and technologically 
sophisticated. There is little incentive for donor coordination when this is a motive . Similarly, 
program managers in development ag encies can be tempted to project an image of 
themselves as innovative and in tune with emerging priorities by developing a cybersecurity 
         
          
 19 program within their overall program. Because cybersecurity is a relatively new area for 
development assistance program s in Myanmar, the donor coordination groups that exist on 
the ground for established sectors such as education and health do not yet exist for cyber 
programs. There is, therefore, a risk of poor or non -existent donor coordination, duplication 
and competiti on for the time and resources of the few government officials, industry players 
and NGOs concerned with cybersecurity. The donor that identifies these risks can also 
mitigate them, primarily b y establishing an in -country donor coordination mechanism 
dedic ated to cybersecurity.  
Ultimately, the sustainability of a cybersecurity awareness campaign comes from the 
awareness itself. At this point, awareness of the importance of cybersecurity leads to new 
legislation and inclusion in school curricula, training pr ograms and in telecommunication and 
mobile banking company promotional material.  The EUISS cyberspace capacity building 
seminar report (2013:3) “agreed that we will have achieved good, sustainable and scalable 
capacity building  when the need is understoo d at all levels – among the citizenry, 
government, and institutions”. When this level of understanding is reached, local ownership 
is dominant and donor assistance might more usefully be targeted at Myanmar’s numerous 
and often remote ethnic minorities or geographic areas not otherwise reached by a broad -
based, Myanmar -language campaign.  
One of the mo re encouraging outcomes from the DFAT -funded cybersecurity capacity and 
awareness program has been the speed with which key private sector players gained an 
appreciation of the on -line risks to their customers and their business. In August 2019 
Telenor Myanm ar announced that it had partnered with Plan International, an independent 
development and humanitarian organisation working to advance children’s rights and 
equality for girls, to launch “Myanmar’s first nationwide Digital Literacy, Online Safety and 
Resilience Project”. The partners will also work with the Ministry of Education “to integrate 
online safety digital modules into the government education curriculum to prepare youths for 
a digital Myanmar” ( www.telenor.com.mm/en/article/telenor -myanmar -and-plan-
international -join-hands -improve -digital -skills -myanmar accessed 23 August 2019 ). In 
November 2018, Telenor Myanmar announced the start of a free Digital Schools program to 
provide basic computer literacy and safe internet training to 100,000 students. The 
announcement said Telenor had already trained over 130,000 students in core smartpho ne 
and computer skills and its safe internet programs had educated over 220,000 government 
         
          
 20 school students on using the internet effectively and safely 
(www.telenor.com.mm/en/article/telenor -commences -free-digital -school -program -train-
100000 -students -accross -country accessed 23 August 2019 ). 
Ooredoo, which has over 10 million active subsc ribers, is collaborating with GSMA (a trade 
body that represents the interests of mobile network operators worldwide) and Facebook in a 
101 Digital Literacy campaign to teach its customers through a simple online video how to 
use the internet safely and re sponsibly ( see https://ooredoo.com.mm/portal/en/digitalliteracy , 
accessed on 23 August 2019). The state -owned MPT announced in October 2017 that it 
planned to conduct 110 free seminars (in addition to the 195 conducted since the previous 
year). MPT said it  “aims to encourage knowledge growth amongst the country’s growing 
number of connected communities on the issues of unsafe online activities, security and how 
to manage unintentional data consumption for a more enjoyable experience”. Topics to be 
covered i ncluded “proper mobile usage and etiquette, internet safety, how to securely 
navigate the online environment from threats and deter cyberbullying, harassment, as well as 
safeguard one’s personal data in a connected world” ( MPT, 2017) ). MPT also supports a  
program to train trainers to be able to teach computer literacy ( MPT, 2019 ). 
The activities sponsored by mobile telephony operators are intended to enhance the customer 
experience. Concomitant with digital safety awareness is an enhanced understanding of the 
range of activities – including financial services – that can be undertaken with a mobile 
phone. They deepen the relati onship between the mobile service provider and the customer, 
enhance the customer’s experience and strengthen the company’s brand loy alty. This is good 
for the company while at the same time benefitting the customer and improving the enabling 
environment for economic development and inclusive growth . 
Lessons learned  
Several themes and lessons learned can be drawn from the experience of introducing a 
cybersecurity awareness campaign in Myanmar which might be of value to the design and 
implementation of further programs in Myanmar as well as programs in other countries , both 
developed and developing . 
Lesson 1:  Understanding context.  No two countries are identical in terms of cybersecurity 
awareness, extent of cybercrime and malicious computer activity, and capacity to deal with 
         
          
 21 these matters. For this reason, country level programs can be strategically focused and more 
effective th an regional or global programs. The first step in the design of a country -level 
cybersecurity awareness program is to establish a good understanding of the local context. 
This can be done by consulting recent reports or studies (if they exist) and by consu lting local 
stakeholders.  
Lesson 2:  Understanding stakeholders.  Potential stakeholders include government agencies, 
corporations, the not -for-profit sector and the citizenry. Building relationships with these 
groups is not straightforward. Governments ca n be suspicious of foreign interference or 
intelligence activity identifying system weaknesses and other vulnerabili ties. The private 
sector and not -for-profit sector will have individuals with information and views on cyber 
security risks and activities, but the issues are too new and the situation changing too fast for 
industry associations or peak bodies to have a se ttled view on the situation and on what needs 
to be done. Relationships and trust need to be built to avoid creating suspicion.  
Lesson 3: Bu ild a public -private partnership.  Both the government and private sectors have 
an interest in the security of cyberspace and should be involved in policy planning, incident 
reporting, awareness raising and other strategies to prevent and combat cybercrime and 
malicious computer activity. A public -private partnership is a key component in effective 
cybersecurity awareness programs.  
Lesson 4:  Coordinate with other donors.  Notwithstanding its newness, there is a need for 
donors in this area to coordinate their activities to avoid duplication and conflicting 
objectives.  
Lesson 5:  Identify or create a local partner.   A local partner can engage a broader range of 
stakeholders  than an English language -only contractor whose engagement is confined to an 
educated elite or constrained by slow and stilted communication through an interpreter. A 
local partner is also likely to more readily build trust with local stakeholders.  
Lesson 6:  Use or create local content.  A cybersecurity awareness campaign needs local 
content to be culturally sensitive and effective. To simply translate campaign material 
produced for another context risks using material that does not resonate with the local target 
audience either because the issues are different or less relevant or because the absence of 
local identifiers makes it harder to engage.  
         
          
 22 Lesson 7:  Identify problems and solutions.  It is too easy to simply identify problems such as 
the risk of cyber crime or the absence of adequate cybersecurity legislation without proposing 
a pathway forward. Cybersecurity is a new field involving technical concepts and regulatory 
approaches that many people in both developed and developing countries have difficulty 
comprehending. Even well -researched reports can end up on a bookshelf. A good donor -
recipient partnership is focused on implementation to achieve results.  
Lesson 8 : It’s not a one -shot activity. Cyber security awareness raising is an ongoing task  as 
the me ssage needs to be regularly reinforced and as every day there are new internet users .   
Conclusion  
There is a place for projects to strengthen cybersecurity capacity and awareness in 
development assistance programs. They help protect citizens from cyber bullying, hate 
speech and theft, and they strengthen the institutions that combat cybercrime and mali cious 
computer activity. They also help ensure the robustness of productivity -enhancing services 
such as mobile banking, e -government and e -payment systems. The limited academic 
research on cybersecurity awareness programs has proposed strategies, largely around 
framing the message, to increase the effectiveness of campaigns  and the policy argument for 
locating  cybersecurity awareness campaigns within official development assistance programs 
and the challenges and risks attached to those programs from a pra ctitioner’s perspective.  
In this paper, t he first donor -funded cybersecurity awareness campaign in Myanmar  is 
described, analysed , and a number of practical lessons are drawn out which might have a 
more general applicability.  While no formal assessment has been undertaken  on the 
effectiveness of the program , the statistics of the likes and reaches on Cyber Baykin 
Facebook page, media reports , UNODC curriculum  and the continuing support from local 
and international donors, is evidence supporting the view that Cyber Baykin has helped  
promot e cyber security awareness and  capacity  building  in Myanmar.  
A key finding is that for a campaign t o be effectiv e it needs  to understand  and be designed 
around  the individual country situation, especially its level of “cyber maturity”, and cultural 
factors. The program is considered sustainable when a wareness of the importance of 
cybersecurity leads to new legislation and inclusion in school curricula, training programs 
and in telecommunication and mobile banking company promotional material.  Early 
         
          
 23 evidence of this occurring in Myanmar is presented.  However, f urther funding will be needed 
to elevate the project to create more significant impact to Myanmar society  in cyber security 
awareness, education and capacity.  
Credit Authour Statement  
 
Lennon Y.C. Chang : Conceptualization, Writing - Original draft preparation, Writing - Reviewing 
and Editing.  
Nicholas Copple : Writing - Original draft preparation, Writing - Reviewing and Editing  
 
Declaration of  interests  
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  
 
References  
Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC) 2019. Cybercrime . Retrieved 5 August 
2019 from https://www.acic.gov.au/about -crime/organised -crime -groups/cybercrime.  
Australian Strategic Policy Institute  (ASPI) (2017).  Cyber Maturity in the Asia -Pacific 
Region 2017 . Canberra: Australian Strategic Policy Institute.  
ASEAN (1967). The Asean  Declaration (Bangkok Declaration) Bangkok, 8 August 1967. 
Retrieved 27 August 2019 from https://asean.o rg/the -asean -declaration -bangkok -
declaration -bangkok -8-august -1967/ . 
ASEAN (2004). Joint Communique of the Fourth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on 
Transnational Crime (AMMTC), Bangkok.  Retrieved 27 August 2019 from 
https://asean.org/joint -communique -of-the-fourth -asean -ministerial -meeting -on-
transnational -crime -ammtc -bangkok/  
ASEAN (2015). Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declara tion on ASEAN -China 
Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (2016 -2020).  . Retrieved 27 August 2019 
from https://www.asean.org/storag e/images/2015/November/27th -summit/ASEAN -
China%20POA%20%202016 -2020.pdf  
Bada, M., Sasse, A.M. and Nurse, J. (2015)  Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns: Why do 
they fail to change behavior? . Retrieved 27 August 2019 from 
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:cfed4907 -d32a -4450 -b075 -ad37477b10d8  
Chang, L.Y.C. (2012) Cybercrime in the Greater China Region: Regulatory Responses and 
Crime Preventi on across the Taiwan Strait. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.  
Chang, L.Y.C. (2017), “Cybercrime and cyber security in ASEAN”, in Liu, J., Travers, M. and 
Chang, L. (eds) Comparative Criminology in Asia  (Pp. 135 -148). New York: Springer.  
         
          
 24 Chang, L.Y.C. (2020) , “Legislative Frameworks Against Cybercrime: The Budapest Convention 
and Asia ”, in Holt T., Bossler A. (eds) The Palgrave Handbook of International Cybercrime 
and Cyber deviance . Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.  doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-
90307 -1_6-1 
Chang, L.Y.C. & Grabosky, P. (2017). “The governance of cyberspace”, in Drahos, P. (ed) 
Regulatory Theory: Foundations and Applications  (Pp. 533 -551). Canberra: ANU Press.  
Coe, J (2016). The cyber wars. Frontier  Myanmar , 5 January 2016.  Retrieved 15 August  
2019 from https://frontiermyanmar.n et/en/features/the -cyber -wars . 
Deaton, A . (2013).  The Great Escape – Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality . 
Princeton: Princeton University . 
Commonwealth of Australia  (2016 ). Australia’s Cyber Security Strategy . Canberra: 
Commonwealth of Australia  
Commonwealth of Australia (2017 ). Australia’s International Cyber Engagement Strategy . 
Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia  
de Buijn, H. and Janssen, M. (2017), “Building cybersecurity awareness: The need for 
evidence -based framing strategies”, Government I nformation Quarterly , 34:1 -7. 
DFAT (2014) Making Performance Count – enhancing the accountability and effectiveness 
of Australian Aid. Retrieved 27 August 2019 from https://dfat.gov.au/about -
us/publications/Pages/making -performance -count -enhancing -the-accountability -and-
effectiveness -of-australian -aid.aspx   
Evers, Hans -Dieter and Gerke , Solvay (2013). Local Knowledge and the Digital Divide: 
Focus on Southeast Asia . Brunei Darussalam: Institute of Asian Studies, University 
Brunei Darussalam.  
Grabosky, P. (2016). Cybercrime . Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Homburger, Zine (2019) The Nec essity and Pitfall of Cybersecurity Capacity Building for 
Norm Development in Cyberspace, Global Society , 33(2):224-242, DOI: 
10:1080/13600826.2019.1569502  
Kelly, R. (2017). Almost 90% of cyber attacks are caused by human error or behavior. Chief 
Executive , 3 March 2017. Retr ieved 27 August 2019 from 
https://chiefexecutive.net/almost -90-cyber -attacks -caused -human -error -behavior/   
Klimburg, A. and Zylberberg, H (2015) Cyber Security Capacity Building: Developing 
Access . Norwegian Institute of International Affairs Report No. 6.  Oslo: Norwegian 
Institute of International Affairs.  
Kshetri, N. (2010) “Diffusion and Effects of Cyber -Crime in Developing Economies,” Third 
World Quarterly , 31(7):1057 -1079.  
Long, K. (2016). Govt. firms dismiss hacking report. MM Times, . Accessed November 2016.  
         
          
 25 MPT (2017) MPT Commences Next Mobile Seminar Series To Further Promote Safe Mobile 
Usage and Internet Security . Retrieved 23 August 2019 from 
https://www.mpt.com.mm/en/mpt -commences -next-mobile -seminar -series -promote -
safe-mobile -usage -internet -security/#  
MPT (2019) MPT Celebrates My anmar New Year With Nationwide Donation Activities 
Preserving Myanmar’s Tradition . Retrieved 23 August 2019 from 
https://www.mpt.com.mm/en/mpt -celebrates -myanmar -new-year-with-nationwide -
donation -activities -preserving -myanmars -tradition/  
Muller, Lilly Pijn enburg (2105) Cyber Security Capacity Building in Developing Countries: 
Challenges and Opportunities, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs Report No. 3. 
Oslo: Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.  
Mytel  (nd). About us. Retrieved 27 August 2 019 from  https://mytel.com.mm/about/  
1503794155695 . 
Vu, K. and Nguyen, K. (2019). RPT -Vietnam's Viettel seeks to double Myanmar customer 
base – CEO. Reuters, 7 January 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019 from 
https://www.reuters.com/article/vietnam -viettel/rpt -vietnams -viettel -seeks -to-double -
myanmar -customer -base-ceo-idUSL3N1Z703O   
OECD (2001 ). Understanding the Digital Divide . Paris : OECD.  
OECD (nd). Official development a ssistance — definition and coverage. Retrieved 27 August 
2019 from https://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/  
officialdevelopmentassistancedefinitionandcoverage.htm .    
O’Toole, B. (2013) “Email hacking exposes cybercrime in Myanmar”, MyanmarTimes , 20 
February 2013. Retrieved 25 August 2019 from https://www.mmtimes.com/national -
news/4168 -email -hacking -exposes -cybercrime -in-myanmar.html .  
Rodrik, Dani (ed)  (2003) , In Search of Prosperity – Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth . 
Princeton : Princeton University Press.  
Niels Nagelhus Schia (2018) “The cyber frontier and digital pitfalls in the Global South .” 
Third World Quarterly , 39(5):821-837, DOI: 10:1080/01436597.2017.1408403  
Wave Money (2019). Wave Money announce stellar growth in H1 2019. Retrieved 27 
August 2019 from https://www.wavemoney.com.mm/wp -content/uploads/htd_Press -
Release_Wave -Money -Half-Year -2019_Eng -Version_FINAL.pdf   
 
 
 
 
         
          
 26  
 
Figure 1:  Typology of cyber security strategies  
 
 
 
Figure 2 Characters of CyberBaykin  
 
 
Government  
Formulating national cyber strategy  
Formulating  adequate cyber 
security and cybercrime law and 
policy 
Cyber capacity building  
Education  
 
International 
Community  
Support/assistance on cyber 
capacity building  
Sharing experience  
Budapest Convention  
International 
cooperation/collaboration  
 
Private Sector  
Self-regulation  
Incident reporting  
Public -private collaboration  
Educating users/clients  
         
          
 27  
Figure 3 Mi kay and password  
  
         
          
 28  
Dr Lennon Yao -chung Chang is a Senior Lecturer in Criminology in the School of Social Sciences at 
Monash University, A ustralia. He is Vice -chairman of the Asia Pacific Association of Technology 
and Society which he co -founded in 2014. He was previously Assistant Professor of Criminology in 
the Department of Applied Social Sciences at City University of Hong Kong (2011 -2015). His book 
Cybercrime in the Greater China Region: Regulatory Responses and Crime Prevention  (Edward 
Elgar, 2012) is about the nature and range of responses to cybercrime between China and Taiwan. His 
research is highly topical and he has been invited by  the governments of Canada, Taiwan, Korea, and 
Hong Kong to discuss his research findings with senior national security, foreign policy and policing 
staff. He was awarded his PhD by the Australian National University in November 2010.  
 
Nicholas Coppel, CSI  
Assistant Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australia  
Nicco2020@yahoo.com.au  
Mr Nicolas Coppel CSI was a former Australian Ambassador to Myanmar. He is Senior career 
diplomat with expertise in foreign affairs, governm ent relations, international trade, international 
development assistance and public policy, especially in relation to South East Asian and Pacific 
Islands countries.  
 
 
 
         
         