FAQs for regulators, supervisory 
authorities and digital financial 
services providers
August 2018
Photo: Sudipto Das CYBERSECURITY FOR MOBILE FINANCIAL SERVICES© CGAP 20182Today, nearly 80percent ofthedeveloping world’s population owns amobile
phone .Asmobile phones have become common inlow-and middle -income
countries, they have become effective delivery channels forfinancial services to
poor people, especially those living inrural andremote areas thatlack financial
services infrastructure .
However, mobile financial services canputconsumers atriskoffraud ifproper
cybersecurity measures arenotinplace .The riskisheightened indeveloping
countries, where consumers rather than providers generally bear thecost of
fraud .Mobile financial services canmeaningfully advance financial inclusion,
buttodosothey must bereliable andtrustworthy .
This slide deck answers some ofthe most frequently asked questions
regulators, supervisors, mobile network operators (MNOs), anddigital financial
services (DFS) providers have about vulnerabilities inmobile financial services
andcountermeasures thatcanbetaken toaddress data security .Preface© CGAP 20183Contents
This deck provides anoverview ofcybersecurity issues inmobile financial
services .Itaddresses thesecurity ofDFS provider’s own systems andservices
aswellasthesecurity ofthemobile networks they usetodeliver their services,
thesecurity ofthephones thatcustomers usetoaccess their services, andthe
implications thismight have forthesecurity oftheoverlaid mobile financial
service, andofthecustomers’ personal data andfinances .
Inaddition, thedeck provides regulatory and supervisory authorities with the
information they need toassure themselves ofthecybersecurity oftheservices
they oversee ;andtohighlight toDFS providers allofthose areas they should
beconsidering .That said, thisisnot, and cannot be,anexhaustive list.Itis
instead ajumping offpoint formore thorough investigations .© CGAP 2018Contents  
1Introduction: Fraud in mobile financial services 5 -7
2Are mobile networks secure enough for financial services? 8 -15
3Are mobile phones secure enough for financial services? 16 -22
4Are app -based transactions more secure than USSD -or 
SMS -based transactions?23 -26
5How can DFS providers secure their systems and 
transactions?27 -40
6What can regulators and supervisors do to ensure the 
security of DFS systems?41 -45
7Recommendations 46 -49
4© CGAP 20185When Jonathon glanced athis mobile
phone, henoticed thewords “NO SERVICE”
onthescreen .This didn’t worry him since
hismobile network occasionally went down .
Afewminutes later, hisphone reconnected
tothenetwork andhethought allwaswell.
Later thatday, hedecided tousehismobile
money account tobuyacupofcoffee, but
thepayment failed .When hechecked his
balance, hefound thattheentire amount he
thought was inhisaccount —justyesterday,
hehadmore than $100—wasgone .Introduction: Fraud in mobile financial services
Photo: AJ Rudin© CGAP 2018Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
6(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkInJonathon’s case, someone attacked theMNO’s systems todeplete his
account .Butcriminals canexploit numerous vulnerabilities inthelifecycle of
amobile -based financial transaction, asfinancial information flows across
multiple systems thatmay notbeadequately secured .Introduction: Fraud in mobile financial services
DFS Systems
Internal flow of data 
within a systemExternal flow of data 
between systems© CGAP 2018Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
7(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkBy answering frequently asked questions about cybersecurity in mobile 
financial services, we will look at key vulnerabilities along a financial 
transaction’s journey through these systems, starting with the mobile network.Introduction: Fraud in mobile financial services
DFS Systems
Internal flow of data 
within a systemExternal flow of data 
between systemsAre mobile networks secure 
enough for financial 
services?© CGAP 20189Mobile network security
Before aconsumer’s financial information passes through themobile network
totheDFS provider, itisalready vulnerable toseveral types ofattacks .
1
Eavesdropping by 
external hackers
Hackers intercept 
communications between 
a mobile phone and a cell 
tower.2
Eavesdropping via fake 
network base stations
A fake mobile network 
disguised as a legitimate 
one allows criminals to 
intercept communications 
to cell towers.3
Exploitation of roaming
A mobile network’s 
roaming service is 
misused to launch attacks 
from anywhere in the 
world.
4
Insider eavesdropping
MNO staff and 
contractors listen to 
communications 
between
cell towers and an 
MNO’s systems.5
Other insider threats
Sophisticated criminals 
inside an MNO or DFS 
provider eavesdrop on 
communications between 
internal systems.© CGAP 2018
Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkDFS Systems101. Eavesdropping by external hackers
External criminals intercept communications between DFS customers’ mobile phones andacell
tower, including calls, text messages, USSD sessions, and mobile data, including PINs and
passwords .Then, they usecustomers’ login credentials inSIM swaps orother attacks toinitiate
fraudulent financial transactions .This isalocalized attack limited tocustomers connected toa
particular celltower .Itallows hackers toview, butnotalter, transactions .
HOW ITWORKS :Eavesdropping byExternal Hackers© CGAP 2018
Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkDFS Systems112. Eavesdropping via fake stations
External criminals route financial transactions through fake base stations thatlook likerealones to
customers’ phones .Ifthefake station’s signal isstronger than therealstation’s (usually because
it’scloser toacustomer), itcan capture thecustomer’s DFS session .When this happens,
criminals canview andchange transaction recipients andamounts .They canalso steal PINs and
passwords and use them later inSIM swaps orother attacks torequest transactions from
customers’ accounts .This isalso alocalized type ofattack .
HOW ITWORKS :Eavesdropping Through Fake Network Base Stations© CGAP 2018123. Exploitation of roaming
When customers useroaming services, they connect totheir home network viaanother MNO’s
network .Exploiting thelinks between MNOs that facilitate roaming, anexternal attacker can
impersonate anMNO orDFS provider bysending andintercepting textmessages, pushing USSD
sessions tocustomers, orlistening tovoice calls.These tactics canbeused togetacustomer to
change their PIN(which canbecaptured using oneoftheother methods discussed) ortocapture
aone-time PINsent viaSMS, allowing aDFS account tobehijacked .
HOW ITWORKS :Exploitation ofRoamingNetwork 
operator’s 
IT servicesHome 
network 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
Other 
network 
operations 
systemsDFS 
Customer’s 
Mobile Phone
DFS Systems© CGAP 2018
Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkDFS Systems134. Insider eavesdropping
MNO staff andcontractors areable toconduct centralized attacks thatsimultaneously affect all
DFS customers using amobile network .They canintercept calls, textmessages, USSD sessions,
and mobile data sessions, and then use stolen PINs and passwords toinitiate financial
transactions from customers accounts .Because MNO insiders canseetheactivities ofalltheir
customers, rather than justindividuals orthose connected toaparticular tower, they canidentify
andtarget anMNO’s wealthiest customers forattacks .
HOW ITWORKS :Insider Eavesdropping© CGAP 2018
Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
systemDFS Customer’s Mobile Phone
(At the MNO’s main premises)Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesNetwork 
operations 
systemsMobile network base station
(distributed around the country)Mobile Network Operator’s Systems
InternetRadio
networkDFS Systems145. Other insider threats
Insiders atMNOs orDFS providers canintercept communications within andbetween MNOs’ and
DFS providers’ systems, including textmessages, USSD sessions, and mobile data sessions .
Attackers canobtain customers’ PINs andpasswords andusethem inSIMswaps orother attacks
torequest transactions from customers’ accounts .These centralized attacks cansimultaneously
target allofaDFS provider’s customers who areusing aparticular mobile network .
HOW ITWORKS :Other Insider Threats from MNOs andDFS Providers© CGAP 201815Importance of mobile network security
Criminals can attack mobile 
networks in many ways, potentially 
reducing the reliability of mobile 
financial services. However, this 
does not mean that DFS providers 
should stop using mobile networks 
to reach their customers. 
Instead, they should implement 
strong security measures. They 
should never rely on someone else 
(i.e., the MNO) to do this for them. 
Later sections of this deck set out 
minimum protections to improve the 
security of financial transactions.
Photo: Trung Vo ChiAre mobile phones secure 
enough for financial 
services?© CGAP 201817Mobile phone security
Mobile phones enable customers to access 
DFS. They are an important element in ensuring 
the security and confidentiality of customers’ 
accounts. It is vital that:
•Hackers cannot access phones to see what 
is stored on them.
•DFS data and transactions, including PINs, 
cannot be eavesdropped.
Properly securing mobile phones requires action 
not only from DFS providers, but from phone 
manufacturers and customers, who should be 
made aware of their responsibilities.DFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
system
© CGAP 201818Feature phones
Feature phones are the most affordable 
mobile phone option. They remain 
dominant in low -income countries and 
among poor populations.They do not contain much sensitive 
information and cannot be 
manipulated remotely, so there is not 
much of an incentive to hack them.
However, feature phones lack 
encryption, so they cannot protect 
against lack of security in the mobile 
network.Use of a properly designed SIM 
Toolkit app can help address the 
security gap; an alternative is 
enhanced transaction monitoring 
by the DFS provider.© CGAP 201819Smartphones
Smartphones are sophisticated computers connected to 
mobile networks that are built from the ground up with 
security in mind. Nonetheless, flaws still occur.
•Smartphone manufacturers should make fixes 
available whenever a flaw is found. Some are 
better than others in this regard. Many do not 
provide security updates once the phone is more 
than two years old.
•Smartphone owners should update their 
phone’s software as soon as a new version is 
available. Some smartphone owners remove 
security controls (i.e., “rooting” or “jailbreaking”) 
because they do not like the constraints they 
impose. Sometimes they do not understand the 
security implications.DFS providers 
should never 
allow devices with 
compromised 
security to access 
their services.© CGAP 201820How to make phones more secure
Ideally, DFS applications should operate in a secure 
execution environment (SEE). An SEE is an electronic 
version of a bank vault. It is a secure place to keep 
customers’ money. Every mobile phone, including feature 
phones, has at least one SEE: the SIM. But access to the 
SIM is controlled by the MNO.
Smartphone manufacturers can (and do) build their own 
SEEs into phones. But it is complex for DFS providers to 
access these SEEs, with multiple issues relating to 
handset ownership and cryptographic key distribution. 
Consequently, these SEEs are typically used only by the 
manufacturer (e.g., “Apple Pay”, “Samsung Pay”, etc.)
This means SEEs are not available to DFS providers, 
so they must look elsewhere to secure their apps.DFS APPSEEs are a great 
idea, but for 
commercial and 
technical reasons 
they are not available 
for use by DFS 
providers.© CGAP 201821How to make phones more secure
DFS customers should:
•Make sure other people can’t use their phones, 
by using a PIN or a biometric to control access.
•Install updates as soon as they become available.
DFS providers should:
•Provide a suitably secured app and not offer 
services through a device’s browser, if possible. 
•Control access to the app by using a PIN or a biometric. 
(This also applies to feature phones , where access is 
via USSD or via an app hosted on the SIM Toolkit.)
•Update the app to address any security 
shortcomings as they are discovered, and push 
updates out to customers.
When payments are embedded within another app through an application 
programming interface (API), the embedded payment app must continue to 
manage its own security, as is the case with any API -led payments service.© CGAP 2018DFS smartphone app developers should find other 
means of protecting their services and their customers:
•Encrypt the app.
•Break up the app’s cryptographic keys into small 
parts and hide them around the app, rebuilding only 
when needed.
•Obfuscate (hide) the purpose of data used, using 
suitable development tools.
•Develop the app to operate in smartphone’s 
sandbox, where available (i.e., a technological 
sandbox, not a regulatory sandbox).
22How to make phones more secureAre app -based transactions 
more secure than USSD -or 
SMS -based transactions?24App-based transactions have 
fewer vulnerabilities
Smartphone apps are the best option:
•Smartphones support well -understood techniques to enhance app 
security.
•However, most of the lower -income and un(der)banked do not use 
apps.SMS is little better:
•Like USSD, it is unencrypted.
•Using SMS for “two -factor authentication” is bad practice because 
SMS can be snatched out of the air by a hacker misusing the 
roaming service.
•Old SMS messages are stored on the handset for people to read.
•The sole exception is the use of SIM Toolkit Apps that do 
their own encryption of SMS.USSD has major security vulnerabilities:
•No security from customer’s handset right through to MNO’s back 
office systems, allowing hackers to eavesdrop account details 
and PINs.
•A hacker can push a USSD session to the customer in a way that 
looks like the DFS provider is contacting them. They can ask the 
customer to change their PIN, which can then be captured.
•Never more secure than using an app.No DFS provider should 
rely on the security of 
the mobile network or 
the mobile phone .
Best practice is to provide 
their own end -to-end 
security or, where this is 
not possible, follow 
alternative approaches.
DFS 
appSIM
Phone 
operating 
system
© CGAP 2018A SIM swap is the transfer of a mobile phone number from its original 
SIM to a new SIM. It is an important service that allows customers to 
keep their number and account after acquiring a new SIM card (e.g., 
because the old one got lost or they switched providers), but it is often 
misused to defraud DFS agents and customers. In fact, it is the most 
common risk for USSD -and SMS -based DFS. It does not apply to 
app-based services (including SIM Toolkit).
25SIM swap fraud is a major problem 
for USSD and SMS
SIM swaps are 
particularly problematic 
if the DFS provider is 
not an MNO , as these 
providers often have a 
limited understanding of 
mobile network 
technology.
SIM swaps often follow 
eavesdropping attacks, in 
which criminals capture 
DFS customers’ login 
credentials. The SIM 
swaps allow the criminals 
to hijack customers’ 
accounts using the stolen 
PINs.
The victim’s phone dies 
when their SIM is 
swapped to another 
controlled by criminals.The criminals then 
transfer the victim’s 
money to themselves 
and their associates.The SIM is swapped 
back to the victim, 
whose phone comes 
back to life with an 
empty wallet.© CGAP 201826SIM swap fraud can be counteracted
Swaps should be disabled for SIMs that belong to 
prominent individuals or that are part of the DFS service 
(SIMs of agents and employees), unless senior 
management approval is obtained. 
Multiple SIM swaps within a short period should 
be disabled.
Every DFS provider that is not an MNO should foster a 
good relationship with all of the MNOs in their country, 
not least in order to restrict and monitor SIM swaps.SIM swap fraud can be prevented through simple controls:How can DFS providers 
secure their systems and 
transactions?© CGAP 2018
Banks Other external 
service providers
DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternetDFS SystemsFocus on insider threats first
Although hacking attacks and fraud 
perpetrated by agents generate the most 
media coverage, the most successful 
attacks in terms of the total value of 
money defrauded are insider jobs by 
DFS provider staff.
DFS providers’ cybersecurity efforts should 
focus on insider threats first. Otherwise, 
they risk financial loss, loss of customer 
confidence, and potentially bankruptcy. 
28© CGAP 2018Cybersecurity can be undermined by 
malicious staff. DFS providers should 
conduct appropriate background 
checks when recruiting staff. Checks 
should include:
•Police or criminal records
•Credit reference checks 
to identify excessive debt
29How to mitigate insider threats
Background checks should apply 
to all senior staff and any staff 
involved in:
•Accessing or configuring 
the DFS platform
•Financial activities
•Customer -facing rolesTip 1: Know your staff
© CGAP 2018Internal controls are only effective if staff members 
can be reliably identified and if their interactions 
with the DFS platform can be controlled. 
Two-factor authentication for staff login:
•Require staff to login using a username and 
password along with an additional factor, such 
as a scannable QR code.
•Do not use SMS -based methods. 
•Staff in sensitive positions should use a key fob 
that generates temporary passcodes.
Logging of logins: 
•Record all login attempts, successful or not.
30How to mitigate insider threats
Username
Password
Log InTip 2: Staff authentication
© CGAP 201831How to mitigate insider threats
Money transfer functions should be carefully controlled 
through:
•Role -based access. Someone whose job does not 
involve money transfers cannot access the 
functionality. 
•Maker/checker controls. A junior staff member can 
make, but not check or approve, transfers. A 
manager cannot make, but can check/approve, 
transfers.
These controls should be reinforced by recording 
logins and by making investigation and auditing tools 
available to senior management.makerJunior 
staff
checkerManagerTip 3: Role -based access and auditability
© CGAP 2018Carefully defined and implemented business 
processes not only improve a business’s 
operations, they mitigate staff error, over -reliance 
on key staff, and lack of knowledge sharing.
Processes are best developed and operated 
using a business process management 
service . They should include a set of control 
points , such as:
•Transaction value beyond which additional 
authorization is required
•Particular person that is required to carry 
out a function
•Time of day when a function may only be 
performed (e.g. ,during office hours)
32How to mitigate insider threats
Tip 4: Processes and control points
© CGAP 2018Making sure recorded transactions, the values in customers’ 
accounts, and the overall value in the bank accounts are in agreement 
is crucial to maintaining the financial integrity of a DFS service. Many 
well-known insider jobs could have been detected earlier through 
rigorous reconciliation and reporting.
Reconciliation has two main functions:
•Ensure all customer balances are secured by real funds 
in a bank account.
•Indicate potential fraud perpetrated by breaching 
cybersecurity controls and controls for the creation of 
value.
33How to mitigate insider threats
Tip 5: Regular reconciliation of accounts
© CGAP 2018Adopt measures to protect against third -party 
threats
Once a DFS achieves a degree of 
success, it will attract the attention of 
external hackers .Attacking the service 
directly offers potentially greater rewards 
than attacking agents or customers.
The most effective means of doing this 
involve electronic attacks (hacking into 
networks and systems via the internet) or 
physically accessing the service by 
visiting the provider’s site.
Protections against all the various means 
of attack must be in place.
34DFS 
Provider’s 
SystemsInternet
Network 
operator’s 
IT servicesInternet© CGAP 2018It is important that DFS providers verify the 
integrity of their suppliers and understand the 
risks that arise from suppliers’ internal activities 
or their relationships with third parties, which 
might, for example, make them subject to 
coercion to provide improper access to DFS 
providers’ information.
This vetting process should be a regular part of 
annual due diligence. It also requires a 
common understanding of the division of 
responsibilities and liabilities in case of fraud. 
35How to mitigate insider and third -party threats
Tip 1: Know your suppliers
Cryptography is crucial for the operation of DFS and 
for data protection and privacy. It helps ensure the 
confidentiality and integrity of communications 
among:
•A DFS provider and its customers, suppliers, and 
other external parties
•A DFS provider’s staff and inter -process systems
All data must be encrypted in transit and at rest .
All transactions and staff activities must be logged
for future auditing or investigations.
36How to mitigate insider and third -party threats 
Tip 2: Encryption
© CGAP 2018In addition to the detection and prevention of fraud, active, automated 
transaction monitoring can contribute to a DFS provider’s anti -money 
laundering/combatting the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) compliance 
obligations.
37How to mitigate insider and third -party threats
Implement active, 
automated 
transaction 
monitoring and 
alert functions. Appoint a fraud officer to 
monitor transactions, 
submit suspicious 
transaction reports, and 
support further 
investigations.Transaction investigation 
tools with ”follow the 
money” functionality can 
be leveraged for rapid 
investigation 
of potential crimes.Tip 3: Active, automated transaction monitoring
© CGAP 2018Physical security is the first step in ensuring cybersecurity 
and limits the opportunity for the subversion of cyber -controls. 
Well-managed data centers focus equally on physical and 
cybersecurity . At a minimum, physical security involves:
•There is only one, strictly controlled entrance to DFS 
providers’ premises.
•Other entrances are secured, and fire exits have alarms.
•All rooms are secured with biometric locks, require touch in 
and touch out to avoid tailgating, and access is restricted 
based on job function.
38How to mitigate insider and third -party threats
•Staff in customer -facing roles or in the finance department are not allowed to 
have their mobile phones with them on the premises; phones should be stored 
in metal lockers during working hours.
•Video surveillance and 24 -hour recording of all areas (cameras must face 
away from screens that might show sensitive information).Tip 4: Physical security
© CGAP 2018Physical security measures also apply to visitors:
•Check and log visitors’ identities.
•Do not permit visitors to bring anyelectronic equipment into 
operational areas. 
•In non-operational areas only , mobile phones and laptops may be 
allowed. However, the serial numbers of laptops should be logged, 
and providers should check to ensure visitors leave with the same 
equipment they brought. Switching laptops is the fastest method of 
stealing data.
•Ensure visitors are accompanied by a staff member who is 
responsible for their conduct. 
•Continually remain aware of visitors’ activity:
▪Do not let visitors wander unaccompanied.
▪Do not let visitors insert USB drives or other devices into company 
laptops, printers, etc.
39How to mitigate insider and third -party threats
Tip 4: Physical security (Cont.)
© CGAP 2018Every DFS service should undergo an external 
cybersecurity review before launch and at regular 
(annual) intervals after launch. Findings, including 
the vulnerabilities identified and recommended 
countermeasures, should then be presented to the 
DFS provider’s senior management team. 
Supervisors should require DFS providers to 
undergo these external cybersecurity reviews, to 
report the final results and their action plans to 
supervisors, and to implement effective and efficient 
countermeasures in a timely manner. 
40How to mitigate insider and third -party threats
Tip 5: Cybersecurity reviews
What can regulators and 
supervisors do to ensure the 
security of DFS systems?© CGAP 2018The aspiration should be a service that provides its own end -to-end, 
industrial -grade security:
•Using a properly -secured smartphone app
•Encrypted SMS, using a SIM Toolkit app hosted on the SIM, works 
for both feature phones and smartphones
42Should regulators allow DFS?
In most lower -income countries, this is not possible because of:
•Low smartphone penetration
•The DFS provider may not be able to place an app on customer SIMs
Therefore, any DFS provider must implement and use sophisticated 
monitoring processes and facilities in order to counter fraud.Yes, but they should require certain security measures.
Due to the additional risk incurred by using USSD, when assessing a 
service that relies on this technology, supervisors should place particular 
emphasis on the quality, availability and continuous use of such essential 
monitoring facilities by DFS providers.© CGAP 2018Technical standards need to be 
set, but they must also be 
dynamic to reflect:
•Continual evolution of best 
practices 
•Emergence of new threats
•Recent technologies and 
protocols
•New approaches to mitigation
43Create an expert body to issue and update 
security standards
Instead of technical standards, 
regulators should specify:
•An expert body that issues security 
standards (such as a national or 
regional cybersecurity authority or 
NIST’s Information Technology 
Laboratory)
•Requirements to conform to 
this body’s security standards
•An inspection/audit regime
•A mechanism for responding to 
new threatsFinancial sector regulators should notattempt to set technical standards 
for DFS cybersecurity management. Only cybersecurity experts should set 
technical standards on security.© CGAP 201844Consider liability of DFS providers
DFS providers’ liability
Regulators should consider the liability issues that might arise if 
security standards are not followed, especially if noncompliance 
results in financial loss. Issues to consider include:
•Mandatory communication to the authority and affected 
customers
•Requirements to refund the losses from customers’ accounts
•Potential liabilities for customers’ consequent losses
Regulators may allow lower technical security standards (including, 
for example, USSD) by balancing the higher risk with stricter liability. 
For example, regulators can require a customer complaint about 
fraudulent activity in their account to result in immediate refund (into 
escrow1; with escrowed payments being either returned or forwarded 
to the customer after investigation).
1In this context, an escrowed payment is held in an account under the control of a trusted third party (not the DFS provider);
at the end of an investigation, the trusted third party will release the money, either to the customer or to the DFS provider .© CGAP 201845Consider responsibility of supervisors
Supervisory authorities have a data security 
responsibility, too.
Sensitive data supplied by DFS providers to the 
supervisory authorities, including data about their 
customers, should be subject to many of the same 
internal cybersecurity measures that are required 
of DFS providers.Recommendations© CGAP 2018Regulators should:
•Identify a center of cybersecurity excellence; national, regional or 
international.
•Work with this center to define technical cybersecurity standards 
for the delivery of mobile financial services.
•Obtain a commitment that those standards will be maintained and 
updated as new cybersecurity threats emerge and technology 
advances.
•Define policy that references these standards.
47Regulators© CGAP 2018Supervisory authorities should 
•Engage DFS providers in a program of continuous improvement. 
•Adopt a comprehensive data security supervisory program , including
▪Monitor DFS providers’ compliance with the cybersecurity regulations.
▪Require annual cybersecurity review reports from DFS providers, review 
reports, issue notices requiring improvement where required, and monitor 
actions relating to those notices.
Such reviews should be carried out by qualified third parties, though 
this role may be undertaken by internal auditors as the capacity is 
developed.
▪Visit DFS providers’ operational centers to verify that the process and 
control points that have been documented are being followed, and to 
verify that the active transaction monitoring (including AML monitoring) 
described in slide 37 is in place.
▪Review suspicious transaction reports (STRs) received from DFS 
providers, comparing them to those received from the rest of the financial 
sector, and act if they differ significantly in either expected numbers of 
reports, or the level of detail provided.
48Supervisory authorities© CGAP 2018DFS providers should:
•Assess their exposure to risk and improve countermeasures 
where necessary.
•Annually engage a qualified third-party to carry out a risk 
assessment and cybersecurity review. Submit the report to 
supervisory authorities.
•Focus equally on technological controls and process controls.
•Engage regularly with supervisory authorities as part of a program 
of continuous improvement.
•When assessing liabilities to customers, a DFS provider should 
give reasonable consideration to any identified security 
weaknesses and the consequent issues around fairness to 
customers.
49DFS providersStay connected with CGAP
www.cgap.org @CGAP Facebook LinkedIn
© CGAP 2018www.cgap.org
www.cgap.org
