See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/347920471
Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing
Cou ntries
Chapt er · Januar y 2021
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-71059-4_115-2
CITATION
1READS
894
2 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Digit al So vereignty and A utonomy  View pr oject
Mapping Gender -based V iolenc e and Ac cess t o Justic e: R e-traditionalisation in Liberia (GENTR A) View pr oject
Niels Schia
Nor wegian Instit ute of Int ernational A ffairs
50 PUBLICA TIONS    253 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Niels Schia  on 01 F ebruar y 2021.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.D
Digital Vulnerabilities and the
Sustainable Development
Goals in Developing Countries
Niels Nagelhus Schia and Johann Ole Willers
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs
[NUPI], Oslo, Norway
Synonyms
Cyber frontier ;Cybersecurity ;Cybersecurity
capacity building ;Digital dividends ;Digital pit-
falls;Digitalization ;Sustainable Development
Goals, SDGs
Definition
How does digitalization lead to new kinds of
global connections and disconnections in the
developing countries? And which role does digi-
talization play for the UN ’s Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals? This entry focuses on cybersecurity
capacity building (CCB) and the sustainability of
development processes in developing countries.
Dividends and Vulnerabilities
New information and communication technolo-
gies (ICT) are contributing to growth anddevelopment in developing countries through
increased productivity by providing public and
private services to people in rural and poor areas
and by promoting new economic and social
opportunities to people living in developing coun-
tries. The connections between technology and
growth have been con ﬁrmed through statistics
on the use of information technology, and the
extent to which countries are connected correlates
with increases in GDP (World Bank 2016 , p. 3).
Donor countries and international organizations
seize on digitalization as an opportunity to ﬁght
poverty.
Carl Bildt, former prime minister and foreign
minister of Sweden, is among those who have
argued that information technology (IT) has the
potential to become the most important tool for
development to billions of people living in Africa
and Asia (Bildt 2015 ). While the bene ﬁts from
Internet connection and digitalization are evident,
there are still many hurdles that have to be dealt
with before most people in developing countries
can enjoy extensive use of the Internet. The need
to build an accurate environment for technology
before business can begin to thrive and then reap
the bene ﬁts of digital connectivity has been
emphasized by international organizations and
policy-makers (see ITU 2012 ; World Bank
2016 ). Further research has pointed out the similar
direction, like the Dalberg Report ( 2013 ) which
highlights how core infrastructure requires an
environment not just with mobile and Internet
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure , Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development
Goals, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71059-4_115-2access, but also with electricity, skills, knowledge,
education, and awareness of corruption.
Establishing a well-functioning Internet economy
is thus dependent of a set of conditions for usage,
such as costs, education, and relevance of ser-
vices. These conditions are in turn in ﬂuenced by
the degree of access, relevance, availability, and
attractiveness. Traditional development policy
and projects might, therefore, become central ele-
ments for bridging the digital divide.
However, digitalization in countries that suffer
from lack of development, poor governance, and
poverty might provide new breeding grounds for
organized crime, terrorism, and cyber security
challenges. Thus, a new dimension of social vul-
nerability follows in the wake of the development
opportunities offered by the digital revolution.
Baseline studies have demonstrated the gap
between development goals and intentions in
donor policies on the one hand, and digital vul-
nerability and cyber security in developing coun-
tries on the other (See: https://www.itu.int/net4/
wsis/sdg/Content/wsis-sdg_booklet.pdf and
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Docu
ments/UN-PAN95707.pdf in particular
bulletpoint 4).
Developing countries are implementing digital
solutions and increasing digital connectivity at a
rapid pace. The potential for economic and socie-
tal growth is enormous. However, the trend
toward digitally enabled growth also creates dig-
ital vulnerabilities and risks that need to be
addressed. Cyber capacity building is the process
that covers these efforts. How does digitalization
lead to new kinds of vulnerabilities in the Global
South, and how are they relevant for the Sustain-
able Development Goals? This entry sets out to
explore how these questions have been discussed
in extant literature about cybersecurity capacity
building in the Global South and identi ﬁes areas
in need of more research and attention.
Cyber Capacity Building and Digital
Development
Digital development is a key driver of economic
and societal growth in the Global South. Increasedconnectivity and access to digital solutions can
help public administrations to provide better ser-
vices and provide improved business opportuni-
ties resulting in faster economic growth and more
jobs (World Bank 2016 ).
Digitalization also affects how donor countries
can contribute assistance to sustainable develop-
ment and to help achieve the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals. There is broad consensus about the
importance of connecting developing countries to
digital networks, so as not to widen the gaps
between rich and poor states (Heeks 2014 ; Prin-
ciples for Digital Development 2019 ; World Bank
2008 ). Digital technology and connectivity are a
cornerstone in almost every societal sector such as
business and trade, communication and informa-
tion, and education and health. But at the cyber-
frontier, new types of vulnerabilities emerge
(Schia 2018 ). Developing countries often have
low levels of regulatory capacity and are therefore
especially vulnerable to exploitation. Cyber Secu-
rity Capacity Building (CCB) seems set to play an
increasingly important role in future foreign pol-
icy considerations and government programs
(Schia 2016 ).
CCB can be understood as an “umbrella con-
cept for all types of activities (e.g. human
resources development, institutional reform or
organisational adaptations) that safeguard and
promote the safe, secure and open use of cyber-
space ”(Pawlak 2014 ). Alexander Klimburg and
Hugo Zylberberg de ﬁne CCB as pursuing a three-
fold aim: First, to provide a foundation for devel-
oping countries to reap digital dividends as access
to cyberspace has become essential to social,
economic, and political stability; second, to
strengthen the global security landscape by limit-
ing the number of safe havens for cybercriminals.
Developing countries are increasingly becoming
hosts to the infrastructure and actors behind mali-
cious cyber activities. Bridging the digital divide
is therefore important also with regard to
responding to national security and various types
of cyber threats in donor countries. And third, to
advance and promote a model of digital gover-
nance that is rooted in the notions of openness,
freedom, and security, which has become increas-
ingly important as the international debate about2 Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countriesgoverning the Internet is becoming increasingly
politicized. Many developing countries hold
swing-state positions in this political landscape,
and their in ﬂuence and importance are likely to
grow.
International Mandate and Relation to
the Sustainable Development Goals
Whereas digital development became an increas-
ingly prominent feature of development work
throughout the 2000s (Heeks 2002 ,2010 ; World
Bank 2008 ), digital vulnerabilities and risks were
typically not included systematically in these
efforts.
In 2010, the United Nations ’Group of Gov-
ernmental Experts (UN GGE) recognized cyber
capacity building as being of “vital importance to
achieve success in ensuring global ICT security,
to assist developing countries in their efforts to
enhance the security of their critical national
information infrastructure, and to bridge the cur-
rent divide in ICT security ”(United Nations
2010 ). The subsequent 2013 report linked
this voluntary measure to “contribute to the
achievement of Millennium Development Goal
8, to “develop a global partnership for
development ””(United Nations 2013 ). The most
recent 2015 report reiterated the importance of
CCB and doubled the scope dedicated in the
ﬁnal document (United Nations 2015 ). Despite
the prominence of CCB throughout the GGE
reports, cybersecurity has yet to be addressed
systematically in the Security Council. None of
the permanent members have brought cyber to the
UNSC, and other countries –for instance, Lithu-
ania and the Netherlands –have considered intro-
ducing cybersecurity issues in the Council, but no
action has followed. One recent members-elect,
Estonia, raised the issue and organized an Arria
meeting in May 2020 to discuss it (Tikk and Schia
2020 ).
Nonetheless, CCB has received increasing
awareness from international organizations. For
example, the OECD emphasized “a need for better
alliances and partnerships with like-minded coun-
tries or allies, including facilitating capacity build-
ing of less developed countries ”(2012, p. 13), andthe Principles for Digital Development recognize
privacy and security as fundamental building
blocks of digital development projects (Principles
for Digital Development 2019 ). Consequently, it
is expected that CCB will develop into “one of the
most important activities within the security/
development nexus ”(Klimburg and Zylberberg
2015 , p. 5).
CCB has thus become a recognized issue of
concern both within international politics more
broadly as an essential component to foster the
resilience and security of digital technologies, and
as a central aspect for digital development. Robert
Morgus concludes that “[t]echnology can aid in
the attainment of every SDG. But in order to fully
reap the immense bene ﬁts of connectivity and
digitalization, the technology that underpins it
must be secure and the people that use it must
understand how to do so responsibly and
securely ”(Morgus 2018 , p. 13). CCB is hence
not an end in itself. Rather, it is a cross-cutting
concern across all SDGs.
Whereas the 2010 UN GGE Report
highlighted the importance of CCB for interna-
tional cooperation and partnership (MDG 8), reli-
able and secure digital technologies are equally
crucial as a factor contributing to economic
growth and ending poverty and hunger (SDG 1
& 2) (Qiang et al. 2009 ; World Bank 2008 ).
Thereby, Internet access and digitalization can
afford more people to enjoy decent working con-
ditions and increased income (SDG8) and boost
innovative capacity with few requirements for
expensive initial investments (SDG 9). Digital
solutions can give access to more and better health
services (SDG 3) and improve educational oppor-
tunities around the globe (SDG 4). Further, as
water and energy supplies (SDG 6 & 7) are
increasingly digitalized, the reliability and quality
of access depend increasingly on the ability to
secure the underlying critical information infra-
structure, often in the form of public-private part-
nerships (Kvochko inPawlak 2014 , p. 43).
Additionally, immediate access to information
provides an important layer of public control and
scrutiny to political institutions, holding institu-
tions to account and driving peace and justice
(SDG 16). Responsible use of digital technologies
is of outmost importance, and states in the GlobalDigital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries 3North and South need to develop international
norms and practices that ensure that digital tech-
nologies are not used to suppress and survey
domestic opposition and activists, and to ensure
a free and open Internet.
Digital Risks in the Global South
Digitalization is not simply a matter of joining
cyberspace: It is a question of selective forms of
global connection in combination with disconnec-
tion and exclusion. The trajectory of digitalization
in the Global South diverges in various ways from
that of more industrialized countries. As relative
late adapters of digital technologies, developing
countries engage in “technological leapfrogging, ”
which in turn is interlinked with the risk of new
and unprecedented societal vulnerabilities. This
risk results from the lag between technology
development, on the one hand, and societal capac-
ity and management of this technology, on the
other hand, characterized by scholars as a societal
“hollowness ”caused by rapid digitalization pro-
cesses (Kshetri 2010 , p. 153). This hollowness
refers to weak or inadequate institutions, policies
and strategies, poor organizational and individual
defense mechanisms, lack of standards, greater
recruitment to cybercrime due to high unemploy-
ment and low wages, and a lack of capacity and
legal frameworks to manage risks and vulnerabil-
ities in the society.
Many developing countries have no published,
ofﬁcially recognized national cybersecurity strat-
egies, or designated overarching units or institu-
tions to coordinate national cybersecurity (Schia
2018 ). Additionally, many of these countries also
lack institutions to oversee and protect their digital
critical infrastructure and thus also formal collab-
oration between the government and owners of
critical assets. The governments ’focus is often on
becoming digital, and cybersecurity is not their
priority right now.
This has implications for the ability of devel-
oping countries to address cybercrime and protect
national critical infrastructure against digital
attacks. Cybercriminals often deliberately operate
through jurisdictions with low or nonexistingcybercrime legislation, making use of jurisdic-
tional arbitrage to avoid legal consequences for
their malicious action. As cybercrime is transna-
tional, low regulatory capacity in developing
countries can produce negative rami ﬁcations
even in the most advanced digital economies.
For example, Internet scamming and fraud origi-
nate overwhelmingly in regions with low cyber
enforcement capability such as Nigeria. The
Budapest Convention on Cybercrime provides a
framework to harmonize national laws in order to
prevent cybercriminals from operating with impu-
nity. Developing countries have, however, been
slow to sign on to the convention and often lack
the necessary law enforcement capacity to enforce
the legislation. Peters and Jordan ( 2019 ) argue
that global awareness about the importance of
capacity building for cybercrime has not trans-
lated into political will among donor countries.
Consequently, they conclude, the global enforce-
ment gap remains largely unaddressed as techni-
cal, operational, and strategic capabilities are
lacking.
Leapfrogging digital technologies have also
implications on the infrastructure of connectivity
in the Global South. Digital connectivity can be
divided into three aspects –often referred to in
terms of the World Bank ’s“three miles ”approach:
theﬁrst mile is the level where the Internet enters a
country, the middle mile is where the Internet
spreads through the country, and the last mile
is where the Internet reaches the end users.
Additionally, an “invisible mile, ”involving
important but less visible elements necessary for
maintaining the integrity of these three levels, is
often included in this division of infrastructure.
Much has been done in African countries to
improve the ﬁrst mile and the international gate-
way –the point where countries connect to the
global Internet. Since 2009, thousands of kilome-
ters of undersea broadband cables along the coasts
of East Africa (e.g., SEACOM) and West Africa
(e.g., WACS) have been bringing faster Internet
to the continent, providing countries such as
Djibouti, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Kenya,
Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal,
South Africa, Sudan, and Tanzania with high-
speed services. Nonetheless, many developing4 Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countriescountries rely on very few or just a single Internet
Exchange Point (IXP), connecting the country to
the global Internet infrastructure. These countries
are particularly vulnerable to disruption and gov-
ernmental control as all data traf ﬁc in and out the
country ﬂows through a single gateway (Schia
2018 ).
The middle mile refers to the national Internet
backbone and intercity networks. The quality of
these often depends on the degree of competition
between public and private actors in the country.
The rules of market competition vary from one
country to another, affecting the user side of dig-
ital networks and infrastructure. Liberalizing the
market for the middle mile is an effective way of
providing open access to end users but, as the
World Bank has pointed out, this entails the risk
“that the most popular routes –say, between the
two main cities –are‘superserved ’while the rest
of the country is underserved ”(Schia 2018 ).
A crucial difference to developed countries is
that in the Global South, the last mile is rarely
served through ﬁxed copper cables. Instead, local
access to networks is dominated by wireless alter-
natives. Whereas the Global North had achieved
almost universal ﬁxed-line access before wireless
technology was introduced, most countries in
the Global South have never built ﬁxed-line
networks. This has severe consequences for
the usage and performance of Internet access.
Wireless networks tend to be more expensive
and rarely offer ﬂat-rate pricing and offer slower
speeds. Hence, the World Bank concludes that
“many developing countries are stuck with a sec-
ond-class internet that may fail to deliver the
expected bene ﬁts, especially for business users ”
(World Bank 2016 , p. 208). Slow Internet connec-
tions can also be a security risk. For example,
distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks are
more dif ﬁcult to mitigate as occurred in Myanmar
during the run-up to the 2010 general elections.
Types of CCB Projects
CCB includes a range of projects with the aim to
address digital risks in recipient countries. These
can be divided into ﬁve overarching thematiccategories: policy and strategy; culture and soci-
ety; education and skills; regulation; and stan-
dards (Bellasio et al. 2018 ). The Global Cyber
Security Capacity Centre at the University of
Oxford has developed the “Capacity Maturity
Model (CMM) ”to assess a nation ’s current capac-
ity and needs across these ﬁve categories (Global
Cyber Security Capacity Centre 2016 ). Policy and
strategy projects are concerned with the develop-
ment of national cybersecurity strategies, incident
response teams, critical infrastructure protection,
crisis management, defense capability, and crisis
redundancies. Projects with a cultural and societal
focus aim to improve public knowledge about
reporting mechanisms and privacy rights.
Educational projects target both the population at
large through awareness-raising campaigns and
develop programs to train quali ﬁed specialists
locally. Legal and regulatory projects support
recipient countries with the development and
implementation of legal frameworks to, for
example, curb cybercrime. Last, projects with a
standard dimension promote adherence to inter-
national standards such as cryptographic proto-
cols and technical security controls.
However, focusing on a whole-of-society
approach implies a risk of implementing too
fragmented efforts to cybersecurity capacity
building. This risk has been raised by scholars
such as Calandro and Berglund who make the
point that a lack of coordination between CCB
actors may undermine the success of such pro-
jects. If this could be overcome, CCB could exert
greater in ﬂuence on cyberspace governance than
the development of international treaties
(Calandro and Berglund 2019 ).
Actors in CCB
CCB projects include typically three actor catego-
ries: funders, recipients, and implementers. A
national or international funding agency provides
the resources to ﬁnance a given project. It is not
uncommon that these are different from national
development agencies. For example, Patryk
Pawlak and Panagiota-Nayia Barmpaliou observe
that the diplomatic and law enforcement agenciesDigital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries 5dominate the CCB community (Pawlak and
Barmpaliou 2017 ). Further, it has been argued
that “as the risks and the security environment
evolve, traditional development actors no longer
hold the monopoly or are well-equipped to pro-
vide the support required. Consequently, other
actors –including the military and law enforce-
ment agencies –are forced to step in ”(Pawlak
2017 ). In addition to funding, methodological,
technical, and infrastructure support is often pro-
vided (Morgus 2018 ).
The second actor type is the recipient state or
region that receives this funding based on an
agreed project design. Oftentimes, CCB projects
have a regional scope as, for example, the S3SA
project, covering the Southern African region.
Other projects are global in outlook but target
individual countries for speci ﬁc projects such as
the World Bank ’s Global Cybersecurity Capacity
Building Program that covered countries in the
Western Balkan, Western Africa, and Central
Asia (World Bank 2019 ).
The third actor type covers those organizations
that implement projects and provide technical
assistance. A range of consultancy ﬁrms
provide technical expertise to assist recipient
states in the development of national strategies,
educational programs, and protection of critical
infrastructure. There is signi ﬁcant variation
among implementing consultancy ﬁrms. Small
and specialized consultancies are typically
contracted for clearly de ﬁned project areas.
Globally operating large consultancies on the
other hand can be contracted for entire projects,
steering the implementation across different pro-
ject layers and regions. The World Bank ’s Global
Cybersecurity Capacity Building Program relied,
for example, for the entire project period across
regions on a consortium of Deloitte and the Tele-
com Strategy Consultants (World Bank 2019 ). In
addition to consultancies, academic and non-
governmental institutions can take on roles within
the implementation process. Like funding agen-
cies, these actors can provide methodological and
technical support and are often critical actors for
the identi ﬁcation of needs in recipient states and to
organize stakeholder consultations.There are, however, a range of other actors
involved in CCB projects. International organiza-
tions such as the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United
Nations Of ﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
the International Telecommunications Union
(ITU), and Interpol all play their part in facilitating
capacity-building projects. An important part of
their work is to provide best-practice guidance
such as the ITUs “Digital Identity Roadmap ”or
the multistakeholder “Guide to Developing a
National Cybersecurity Strategy. ”The Global
Forum for Cyber Expertise (GFCE) represents
an additional actor with the aim to facilitate coor-
dination among the multiple CCB actors. Funded
by the United Kingdom and the Netherlands in
2015, the GFCE brings together public of ﬁcials,
international organizations, development agen-
cies, research institutes, and private companies
to facilitate the development of a global agenda
for CCB and avoid duplications of efforts (GFCE
2015 ).
Dilemmas of CCB
Several scholars have noted that development
agencies have been slow in addressing digital
risks (Hohmann et al. 2017 ; Morgus 2018 ).
Located at the nexus between security and devel-
opment work, several dilemmas have plagued
efforts to disseminate cybersecurity capacity.
The EU Operational Guidance on Cybersecu-
rity Capacity Building discusses several of these
dilemmas (Pawlak 2018 ,p p .4 1 –46). First, cyber-
security efforts often face –if only indirect –
questions about the balancing of security and
human rights. Encryption illustrates this dilemma.
Affording citizens an additional layer of precau-
tion to prevent unauthorized access to informa-
tion, encrypted communication frustrates the
work of law enforcement and intelligence ser-
vices. A more general concern is the dual-use
nature of cyber capabilities: “the dif ﬁculty in
constraining the potential misuse of equipment
or skills delivered for purely defensive purposes
weighs heavily on decisions to provide assis-
tance ”(Pawlak 2017 , p. 2). The fear is that the6 Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countriescapacity, once disseminated, is out of control of
the donor state and might be used for purposes
that undermine the human rights situation in the
recipient state.
A second dilemma is identi ﬁed in relation to
the reconciliation of differing and at times contra-
dictory ideas about sovereignty, legitimacy, and
approaches to Internet governance. The past years
have seen a growing con ﬂict over the Internet
governance model. On the one hand, many
Western countries advocate for a continued
decentralized multistakeholder model with lim-
ited authority for state actors. On the other hand,
an alliance of countries led by China and Russia
favors an approach rooted in national sovereignty
with a greater emphasis on state responsibilities to
control and if necessary limit the ﬂow on infor-
mation. The increasing tension over questions
of governments ’role and legitimacy has led
Alexander Klimburg to proclaim the “Yalta
Moment, ”marking the start of a “cold war for
internet governance ”(Klimburg 2013 ). With
many developing countries holding a swing-state
position on this issue, this dilemma clearly speaks
to the geopolitical dimension of CCB. A related
dilemma relates to the domestic governance of
law enforcement and intelligence services, requir-
ing a balancing of oversight and transparency. Too
much transparency constrains operational effec-
tiveness, but too little oversight provides a fertile
ground for misuse and overreach of mandate.
Challenges to CCB
Adding to these inherent dilemmas in capacity
building, CCB also faces challenges that are
more closely linked to the nascent nature of this
policy issue. Among these is a challenge to coor-
dinate between stakeholders to avoid a duplica-
tion of efforts; a need for better integration among
stakeholders to facilitate learning across policy
communities and ensure project success; a short-
age of implementers; the importance of locating
local partners; and a shortage of funding.
The coordinative challenge weighs heavily on
CCB. Early efforts have resulted in a fragmented
coverage of CCB and unnecessary duplications ofeffort (Hohmann et al. 2017 ; Pawlak 2014 , p. 17;
Pijnenburg Muller 2015 , p. 7). The Global Forum
for Cyber Expertise was established to facilitate a
more coordinated approach, bringing stake-
holders across the globe together and acting as a
clearing house for CCB projects. Relatedly,
because CCB projects often include stakeholders
from various policy communities –spanning tech-
nical, law enforcement, diplomatic, and develop-
ment sectors –coordination between actors needs
to cross sectors and knowledge structures,
constraining systematic learning and project eval-
uations. Given the diversity of actors involved,
CCB projects are not merely technical processes.
Instead, Pawlak and Barmpaliou argue that CCB
is“charged with political assumptions and objec-
tives, ”sometimes resulting in clashing ideologies,
and note the rise of the “politics of CCB ”(Pawlak
and Barmpaliou 2017 ). Zine Homburger shows
how this goes beyond the focus on western states
and addresses CCB efforts of China and Russia
(2019 ).
A direct example of clashing ideologies is the
poorly integrated development community in
CCB efforts (Klimburg and Zylberberg 2015 ;
Morgus 2018 ; Pawlak and Barmpaliou 2017 ).
“Most experts point to development actors ’
uneasy relationship with cyber security capacity
building. [ ...] Moving forward, the technical
expertise of cybersecurity professionals should
ideally be integrated with the procedural experi-
ence on capacity building in the development
community ”(Hohmann et al. 2017 , p. 23). With-
out the enrollment of the development commu-
nity, it is more dif ﬁcult to identify local project
partners and create project ownership and avoid
supply-driven project designs –a central factor in
ensuring the long-term sustainability of capacity-
building projects (Eade 1997 ). A third challenge
has been a general lack of implementers
(Pijnenburg Muller 2015 ), which can be traced
back both to a global shortage of cyber experts
and to a lack of funding opportunities within
CCB. Morgus ( 2018 ) estimates global annual
CCB funding to be in the “range from roughly
US$50 million to roughly US$1 billion, with the
mean estimate far closer to the lower end of that
spectrum. ”(p. 29). One important factorDigital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries 7constraining higher funding levels has historically
been uncertainty as to the quali ﬁcation of CCB
projects as development aid within the DAC
guidelines and hence contributing to a donor
country ’so f ﬁcial development assistance
(Hohmann et al. 2017 ; Klimburg and Zylberberg
2015 ). Private sector actors face thus little incen-
tive to invest into the nascent ﬁeld of CCB.
While the discussed challenges have had major
inﬂuence on the hitherto development of CCB as a
key issue within the security/development nexus,
they can be mostly attributed to the emerging
nature of the ﬁeld.
Conclusion
This entry has drawn on the extant literature on
cybersecurity capacity building in order to high-
light connections between digitalization and the
Sustainable Development Goals. New kinds of
societal vulnerabilities are emerging, and new
power relations are being forged. By emphasizing
(trans)formation and continuity, we have shed
light on the connections between digitalization,
economic growth, and cybersecurity. This triple
knot indicates a development where the “haves ”
can reap digital dividends, leaving the “have-
nots ”behind. The growing digitalization of the
Global South also entails a need for greater devel-
opment assistance and engagement. Further,
bridging the digital divide requires analogue foun-
dations, knowledge, awareness, and a digital envi-
ronment in which the focus on cybersecurity will
be increasingly important.
Digitalization and cyber security as new global
challenges are becoming increasingly central to
the organization of development assistance –with
consequences for billions of people in the devel-
oping world. With the emergence of digitalization
and cyber security challenges, the transfer of
knowledge and experiences from traditional
donor countries to the developing countries
becomes crucial, perhaps even more important
than the transfer of funding. In the long term,
this development may contribute to more equal
partnerships, in which the interests of donors as
well as of recipient countries are safeguarded.Clearly, there is a potential for more focused
and systematic scholarly research and data collec-
tion that could underpin donor countries and help
to facilitate programs and processes for dealing
with the challenges of the cyber frontier. Building
cybersecurity capacity in existing local polities
and communities and understanding how these
become (trans)formed through their entanglement
with global digital connections, international pol-
icies, and regulations are more important than
ever. This calls not only for more research and
data collection, but also for better inclusion of
developing countries in global arenas where inter-
national norms and global governance on cyber-
space are being produced.
The distinct properties of cyberspace –it has
no borders, has few rules, and involves the free
ﬂow of information –trigger new kinds of chal-
lenges with regard to international politics, secu-
rity politics, sustainable development, and
implementation of the SDGs. This examination
has highlighted the technological, organizational,
and human dimensions as well as the local,
national, regional, and international levels of dig-
italization. Managing such challenges will require
an in-depth understanding of the democratic,
social, and economic development contexts on
which cyberspace depends. Building capacity in
cybersecurity represents a relatively new political
ﬁeld not properly included in the UN ’s SDGs or
even in the World Bank ’s2016 World Develop-
ment Report. Donor countries can continue their
long-term foreign policy traditions by incorporat-
ing a new policy ﬁeld.
Cross-References
▶Accessibility as a Precondition for Sustainable
Development
▶Development of New Skills
▶Governance Innovation
▶Innovation Networks
▶Innovation Process and Product
▶Risk-Based Approach to Sustainable
Infrastructure
▶Smart Cities8 Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries▶Technological Solutions and Upgrade the Tech-
nological Capabilities
▶Value Chain of Infrastructures
▶Value Chain of Infrastructures (Construction
Supply Chain)
▶Vulnerability Assessments
References
Bellasio J, Flint R, Ryan N, Sondergaard S, Monsalve C,
Meranto A, Knack A (2018) Developing cybersecurity
capacity: a proof-of-concept implementation guide.
RAND, Santa Monica. https://doi.org/10.7249/rr2072
Bildt C (2015) Development ’s digital divide. Project syn-
dicate. http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/
sustainable-development-goals-digital-divide-by-carl-
bildt-2015-08
Calandro E, Berglund N (2019) Unpacking cyber-capacity
building in shaping cyberspace governance: the SADC
case
Dalberg (2013) Impact of the Internet in Africa:
establishing conditions for success and catalysing
inclusive growth in Ghana, Kenya ,Nigeria and Sene-
gal.http://www.impactoftheinternet.com/pdf/Dalberg_
Impact_of_Internet_Africa _Full_Report_April2013_
vENG_Final.pdf
Eade D (1997) Capacity-building: an approach to people-
centred development. Oxfam, Oxford
GFCE (2015) Launch of the global forum on cyber exper-
tise in The Hague Declaration on the GFCE
Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre (2016)
Cybersecurity capacity maturity model for nations
(CMM). Oxford
Heeks R (2002) Information systems and developing coun-
tries: failure, success, and local improvisations. Inf Soc
18(2):101 –122. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01972240290075039
Heeks R (2010) Do information and communication tech-
nologies (ICTs) contribute to development? J Int Dev
22(5):625 –640. https://doi.org/10.1002/jid
Heeks R (2014) Future priorities for development infor-
matics research from the Post-2015 development
agenda. Development 57. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0736-5853(84)90003-0
Hohmann M, Pirang A, Benner T (2017) Advancing cyber-
security capacity building implementing a principle-
based approach. Global Public Policy Institute
(GPPi), Berlin
Homburger Z (2019) The necessity and pitfall of cyberse-
curity capacity building for norm development in
cyberspace. Glob Soc 33(2):224 –242. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13600826.2019.1569502
ITU (International Telecommunication Union) (2012)
Impact of broadband on the economy. https://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/treg/bro adband/ITU-BB-Reports_
Impact-of-Broadband-on-the-Economy.pdfKlimburg A (2013) The Internet Yalta. Retrieved from
https://s3.amazonaws.com/ ﬁles.cnas.org/documents/
CNAS_WCIT_commentary-corrected-03.27.13.pdf?
mtime¼20160906082142
Klimburg A, Zylberberg H (2015) Cyber security capacity
building: developing access. Norwegian Institute of
International Affairs, Oslo
Kshetri N (2010) Diffusion and Effects of Cyber-Crime in
Developing Economies. Third World Quarterly 31
(7):1057 –1079
Morgus R (2018) Securing digital dividens –
mainstreaming cybersecurity in international
development
Pawlak P (2014) Riding the digital wave: the impact of
cyber capacity building on human development.
EUISS, Paris. https://doi.org/10.2815/43313
Pawlak P (2017) Building capacities for cyber defence.
EUISS, Paris. https://doi.org/10.2815/379783
Pawlak P (2018) Operational guidance for the EU ’s inter-
national cooperation on cyber capacity building. Euro-
pean Union, Luxembourg. https://doi.org/10.2815/
38445
Pawlak P, Barmpaliou P-N (2017) Politics of cybersecurity
capacity building: conundrum and opportunity. J Cyber
Policy 2(1):123 –144. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23738871.2017.1294610
Peters A, Jordan A (2019) Countering the cyber enforce-
ment gap: Strengthening global capacity on cyber-
crime. Journal of National Security Law & Policy 10:
487
Pijnenburg Muller L (2015) Cyber security capacity build-
ing in developing countries: challenges and opportuni-
ties. NUPI, Oslo
Principles for Digital Development (2019) Principles.
Retrieved January 21, 2020, from https://
digitalprinciples.org/principles/
Qiang CZ-W, Rossotto CM, Kimura K (2009) Economic
impacts of broadband. In: Information and communi-
cations for development 2009: extending reach and
increasing impact. World Bank, Washington, DC, pp
35–50
Schia NN (2016) Teach a person how to surf: Cyber secu-
rity as development assistance. NUPI Report
Schia NN (2018) The cyber frontier and digital pitfalls in
the global south. Third World Q 39(5):821 –837.https://
doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2017.1408403
Tikk E, Schia NN (2020) The role of the UN Security
Council in cybersecurity: international peace and secu-
rity in the digital age. In Tikk E and Kerttunen M (eds.)
Routledge Handbook of International Cybersecurity.
Routledge, London
United Nations (2010) A/65/201. United Nations, New
York
United Nations (2013) A/68/98*. United Nations, New
York
United Nations (2015) A/70/174. United Nations, New
YorkDigital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries 9World Bank (2008) Global economic prospects –technol-
ogy diffusion in the developing world. World Bank,
Washington, DC
World Bank (2016) Digital dividends. In: World develop-
ment report. World Bank, Washington, DCWorld Bank (2019) Global cybersecurity capacity program
–lessons learned and recommendations towards
strengthening the program. The World Bank, Washing-
ton, DC10 Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing Countries
View publication stats