• Cyberattacks targeting public health and the health sector have increased significantly since 
the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, resulting in disruption to the operations of 
domestic  healthcare systems and services, theft of medical records, and significant financial 
losses, elevating the need to bring cybersecurity to the forefront of the development agenda.  
• Low preparedness – resulting from insufficient cybersecurity investment and awareness in 
developing countries generally and from the unprecedented challenges presented by a pandemic 
specifically – renders low- and medium-income countries particularly at risk of paralyzing attacks.  
• A sectoral-centered approach is needed to bolster cybersecurity within the health domain, 
using the historically strong development of cybersecurity in the financial sector to offer 
lessons to fortify the health sector against threats. This sectoral capacity building must be 
anchored to a strong foundation and enabling environment provided by a central national 
cybersecurity agency whose capacity must also be built and fortified to support the health sector.  
• A broad conceptualization of cybersecurity to include elements of malicious information campaigns 
will help facilitate a focus and better management of this rapidly developing phenomenon.  
• The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the need to establish cybersecurity as a core element 
of the digital development agenda in the 21st century, and yields a unique clarity and opportunity 
to accelerate the safe and effective development and adoption of e-health solutions and telehealth 
platforms, particularly in low- and middle-income countries – paving the way towards further digital 
development of the health sector.
1
Analytical Insight
Key Findingsworldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentHOW COVID-19 HAS EXPOSED 
CYBER RISKS IN THE HEALTH 
SECTOR
Why a Paradigm Shift is needed for 
Building Cybersecurity ResilienceJuly 2020 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 12
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentCYBERATTACKS DURING COVID-19
While much of the discourse on cybercrimes and 
cyberattacks during COVID-19 has focused on 
individuals, businesses, and government agencies 
more generally, the narrower domain of public 
health and the health sector has experienced 
an exponential increase in attacks during this 
same time period. This has demanded a greater 
analytical assessment to inform a re-calibrated 
response where necessary. Cyber criminals have 
exploited the circumstances of the pandemic 
during a time when digital connectivity, reliance 
on digital applications, and an urgent demand for 
information about confronting the virus are at an 
all-time high.  The health sector was an early target, 
experiencing a 150% increase in cyberattacks in the 
first two months of 2020,  including a significant 
uptick in attacks against hospital infrastructure in 
particular.  This compounded what was already an increasing trend of cyberattacks in the health 
sector, which in 2019 had a 60% increase in threat 
detections amongst healthcare organizations in the 
United States alone.  While historically many of 
these attacks against the health sector were focused 
on gaining access to public health records and 
personally identifiable information, the targets and 
objectives have now diversified more broadly to also 
include attacks against vaccine research institutions 
as well as misinformation campaigns around public 
health messages. Significantly more investment 
and sectoral focus is needed to raise awareness 
and build cybersecurity capacity, particularly in 
developing countries. The experience of COVID-19 
has accelerated the need to elevate cybersecurity as 
a core component of the development agenda and 
precipitated a unique opportunity to do so.
FIVE MOST COMMON FORMS OF MALICIOUS CYBER ACTIVITY  
TARGETING THE HEALTH SECTOR DURING COVID-19
In order to understand the relationship between 
targets and risks in the Health sector during 
COVID-19, it is important to review a basic 
taxonomy of the types and forms of cyberattacks, 
including their technical characteristics, purpose, 
and objectives.  While there are many types of 
cyberattacks, the list below distills this broader catalog down to the most common forms of malicious 
cyber activity that have targeted public health and 
the health sector during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
including malware, phishing, ransomware, denial-
of-service attacks, and various types of malicious 
information-related campaigns.1
23
4
5 678910 11ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 13
TYPE OF ATTACK DEFINITION
MalwareA form of malicious code that is designed to damage or disrupt a 
computer system, or to gain unauthorized access into a system. Malware 
can manifest in a variety of form, the most common being viruses, 
worms, Trojan horses, and spyware.
Phishing & Spear PhishingAn attempt by perpetrator to acquire sensitive data through fraudulent 
solicitation - most often using emails and websites. Spear phishing is a 
more targetted version of phishing that involves well-researched victims, 
social engineering, and personalized messages to gain trust.
RansomwareA type of malware intented to block access to a computer system, files,  
or data until a ransom is paid
Denial-of-Service (DoS) &  
Distributed Denial-of-Services 
(DDoS)Prevent authorized access to resources and content for a certain amount 
of time. For certain time-critical operations - which are ubiquitous 
throughout healthcare - even a delay lasting milliseconds can yield 
significant damage.
Malicious Information  
Campaigns- Misinformation:  Information that is false but not created with the 
intention of causing harm. 
- Disinformation:  False information that is intentionally used to cause 
harm.
- Mal-information:  Information based on reality that is used to cause 
harm.
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment
TOP FIVE TRENDS REGARDING TARGETS FOR 
CYBERATTACKS IN THE HEALTH SECTOR
The five most common targets of cyberattacks in the health sector during the COVID-19 pandemic have been 
hospitals and health centers, domestic and international public health organizations, vaccine companies 
and research institutions, individuals, and contact tracing apps. Each of these targets is associated with a 
distinct set of risks and vulnerabilities, as described below:Hospitals and health centers including their computer 
systems, infrastructure, and healthcare workers have 
been a  top target for cyberattacks, with criminals 
exploiting weak security systems and architecture, 
according  to Interpol.    This has led the  international 
policing agency to issue a ‘Purple Notice’   warning to 
police in 194 countries about the increasing  threat to 
healthcare facilities during COVID-19.  The fact that 
these healthcare facilities are also filled with ill and 
vulnerable patients whose health conditions may be 
dependent upon digitally-enabled treatment and care 
makes them a prime target for ransomware in particular. 
With a heightened stress environment caused by the 
pandemic, hospital dependency on uninterrupted 
digital connectivity renders their staff more likely to 
accept the conditions of ransomware in order to avoid 
the potentially lethal consequences of not complying 
with a cyber criminal’s request. A lack of dedicated 
cybersecurity staff along with absent training and 
awareness amongst hospital staff on cyber resilient 
behaviors further exacerbates this phenomenon. This 
so-called ‘insider threat’ has been further amplified in 
some countries like the United Kingdom, where there 
has been extensive hiring of temporary staff, including 
a re-hiring of retired workers, to meet the demands of 
the pandemic. Even experienced health workers can 
lack awareness of the latest cyber risks in the health 
sector, particularly risks associated with the increased 
use of remote consultations and tele-health platforms. 
In just the first few months of the COVID-19 pandemic 
countries all over the world experienced attacks on their 
hospitals’ and health centers’ digital assets, including 
France, Spain, Thailand, and the United States.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
4
Source 1:  Ruhl, C. 2020. “Note to Nations: Stop Hacking Hospitals.” Foreign 
Policy. April 6. See https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/04/06/coronavirus-
cyberattack-stop-hacking-hospitals-cyber-norms/
Source 2:  Cimpanu, C. and Z. Day. 2020. “Czech hospital hit by cyberattack 
while in the midst of a COVID-19 outbreak.” ZD Net. March 13. See https://
www.zdnet.com/article/czech-hospital-hit-by-cyber-attack-while-in-the-
midst-of-a-covid-19-outbreak/
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentTrending Target #1: Hospitals & health centers
BOX 1:  CYBERATTACK AGAINST HOSPITAL IN  
CZECH REPUBLIC
On March 13, 2020 the Brno University 
Hospital ¬in the Czech Republic was hit by a 
cyberattack, threatening not only the lives of  
patients inside, but also the country’s broader 
pandemic response due to its containment of  
one of  the country’s largest COVID-19 testing 
laboratories. The ransomware forced staff  at 
the hospital to shut down their digital network, 
cancel scheduled surgeries, and transfer 
patients to other hospitals. As dangerous as this 
attack was, its relatively early timing during 
the global pandemic undoubtedly served as a  
warning to act  for other hospitals  and health  
centers with significant cyber vulnerabilities – 
both within the Czech Republic, and across the 
globe.12
13
14
15Internationaland domestic public health institutions 
and organizations  have also been focal points of 
attacks. The World Health Organization (WHO) is 
the most  prominent international health institution 
that has been targeted, with attack attempts 
increasing by 500% over the same  period in the year 
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.    Email addresses 
and passwords of staff members have been leaked 
online following successful attacks.  The United 
States has experienced  attacks  at the national and 
regional levels, with  the US Department of Health and Human  Services experiencing a  sharp increase 
in DDoS attacks,  while the Champaign-Urbana 
Public Health District in Illinois was attacked with 
ransomware.   Though data that was stored on cloud 
servers was not breached in Champaign-Urbana, 
the ransomware did manage to block access to files 
for staff for a period. Cyber criminals have also 
exploited the trusted reputations and brands of 
prominent public health agencies by referencing 
them in the subject lines of emails and the URLs of 
fraudulent or malicious websites.
This category refers to organizations primarily 
involved in vaccine research, which includes 
universities, publicly administered organizations, 
private companies, and public-private partnership 
ventures. Criminals in this group are often thought 
to be supported by nation-states aiming to gain a 
lead in finding a vaccine, though publicly  available 
support for these claims are difficult to verify or 
assess.   In July 2020 the United Kingdom’s National 
Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) announced a major 
malware attack dubbed APT29 against organizations 
involved with vaccine research in the United 
Kingdom, the United States, and Canada, with the 
likely aim of ‘stealing information and intellectual property relating to the development and testing of 
COVID-19 vaccines’ .  Another example of a such 
an attack includes the Hammersmith Medicines 
Research organization, a British medical facility that 
was on standby to assist with coronavirus vaccine 
testing, having previously been involved with testing 
for an Ebola vaccine.   While research findings and 
patented intellectual property for  pharmaceutical 
drugs and vaccines have long  been a target of 
attack prior to the pandemic for both commercial 
entities and nation-states to gain a competitive edge, 
COVID-19 has broadened the focus of this criminal 
activity to not just coronavirus vaccines but also 
treatment drugs.
While individuals have always been targets for 
cybercrime, the significant increase in the amount of time spent interfacing with digital platforms through 
telework and e-learning content has concomitantly 
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
5
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentTrending Target #2: International & domestic public health organizations
Trending Target #3: Vaccine companies, research institutions, & bio-tech businessess
Trending Target #4: Individuals16
1718
19
2021
22
23raised their exposure to potential cyberattacks, 
particularly malware and malicious information 
campaigns. Anxiety around the pandemic has been 
exploited by cyber criminals, who have disguised 
phishing emails as being sent from reputable 
organizations such as the WHO, Johns Hopkins 
University, or the U.S. Center for Disease Control  
(CDC), or  referenced these institutions in email 
subject lines or file attachments to prompt the 
downloading of  malicious code. In one week alone 
in April 2020, Google’s Gmail service identified 18 
million daily malware and phishing emails related 
to COVID-19, combined with another 240 million 
daily COVID-19 related spam messages.   Promises 
of COVID-19 cures, health advice, or updated 
situational reports and tracking maps have also 
been used to trick individuals into various forms 
of cyberattacks.  For example, malicious websites 
have been developed that mimic the ubiquitous and 
oft-cited Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 case 
map, infecting site visitors with information-stealing 
trojan type viruses.  More sophisticated forms of 
malware have been deployed through common telework platforms used  by health sector employees 
working from home, most notably through virtual 
private-network (VPN) applications and popular 
productivity applications. 
Another occurrence that has been observed in this 
category during COVID-19 has been malicious 
code intended only to destroy files rather than 
facilitate financial gain on the part of the attacker; it 
remains unclear to what extent these type of attacks 
lacking financial gain were merely deployed as tests 
for future attacks, or for other reasons.   Other forms 
of cyberattacks against individuals have been in the 
form of malicious information campaigns regarding 
virus source, prevention, symptoms, diagnosis, and 
treatment of COVID-19 in order to create confusion 
and distrust amongst people and institutions, as 
well as cause actual harm.   This has led to mass-
poisonings in Iran and Nigeria and even deaths 
in USA from the ingestion of cleaning products 
to overdoses of non-proven treatment drugs like 
hydroxychloroquine.
Contact tracing apps may be one of the more 
innovative tools for flattening the curve for 
infections, but they come with considerable risk due 
to varying degrees of exposure to cyber criminals. 
These apps have been deployed through both mobile 
platforms and websites, and have been developed 
in very different time periods, with later apps 
benefiting from additional lessons about possible 
vulnerabilities in earlier deployed data and system architecture. The utility of these apps relies on the 
sharing of both location information and personal 
information – including medical data – to track 
down individuals who may have had contact with an 
infected person. In addition, the data from these apps 
helps inform the development of analytical models 
that explain behavioral patterns in an infected 
population, and the development of predictive 
models used to estimate the statistical likelihood and Trending Target #5: Contact tracing Apps
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
6
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment25
2627
24
28
29Source 1:  Soltani, A.,  Calo, R., and  C. Bergstrom. 2020. “Contact-tracing apps are not a solution to the COVID-19 crisis.” Brookings Institute. April 27.  
See https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/inaccurate-and-insecure-why-contact-tracing-apps-could-be-a-disaster/
Source 2:  Gould, M. and G. Lewis. 2020. “Digital contact tracing: protecting the NHS and saving lives. NHS Blogs. April 24.  
See https://www.nhsx.nhs.uk/blogs/digital-contact-tracing-protecting-nhs-and-saving-livesBOX 2:  BACKLASH AGAINST GOVERNMENT-LED CONTACT-TRACING APP IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
On April 29th, 2020, hundreds of  scientists and academics from the fields of  computer science and information security 
and privacy and based at British universities signed a petition urging the NHSX unit of  the government to reevaluate the  
benefits of  a contact tracing app they were developing against the broader range of  costs. These costs included threats to 
information theft through cyberattacks  and security vulnerabilities. This petition was notable due to the expertise, standing, 
and influence of  the signatories, who implored the government to limit the scope of  data collection to only  what is necessary 
for the specific task of  tracing, and omit other data  that is either easy to collect or simply ‘nice-to-have’. They also urged the 
government to ensure no database developed alongside the app that would enable de-anonymization of  users who did not self-
report being infected. This petition echoed concerns declared in an earlier petition signed by scientists and researchers from 
around the world and released as a joint statement for all governments considering contact-tracing apps. The government 
has since published the app’s open-source code, and committed to publishing the key security and privacy designs.location of new infection hotspots. They most often 
rely on Bluetooth technology to detect proximity 
between individuals, where one has self-reported 
a positive infection. Vulnerabilities to information 
theft manifest at three distinct stages which include 
the data entry and collection stage, the data sharing 
stage, and the data storage stage. One of the most 
notable areas of contention around data storage has 
been whether it ought to manifest in a decentralized 
manner on local devices (as proposed jointly by 
Apple and  Google and initially advocated by the Government of Germany), or a local centralized 
database (as developed by and advocated for by 
the Government of France and initially the United 
Kingdom, before the British government decided to 
switch over to the decentralized model advocated by 
Google and Apple).        Each type of aforementioned 
data storage architecture has since been designed, 
and it remains  to be  seen which will enable the  
most damaging manipulation and theft of data by  
cyber criminals.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
7
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment3031
32As the first wave of the COVID-19 infections begins to flatten in many countries and the bigger picture of 
cyber risk in the health sector becomes clearer, three global themes are emerging. These themes challenge 
the traditional approaches to cybersecurity, and suggest the need for a paradigm shift in how this threat is 
effectively managed in healthcare and the public health sector in particular.
COVID-19 has demonstrated that a deeper sectoral-
focused approach is now needed, which will not only 
prioritize this sector and bring it to the forefront, 
but also help facilitate the tailored solutions needed 
to protect against such a vast range of threats which 
includes malware and financially motivated attacks, 
as well as malicious information campaigns. Here, 
the successful cyber capacity development in the 
financial sector in many countries provides a useful 
template for how governments, health organizations, 
and other relevant stakeholders can help facilitate a 
sectoral-focused approach complementary to the development of a national cybersecurity backbone. 
In order to succeed, this sectoral capacity building 
must be anchored to a strong foundation and 
enabling environment provided by a central national 
cybersecurity agency, along with a mechanism  
for robust communication and learning between 
these institutions and other government agencies. 
A budget and funding mechanism for capacity 
building in healthcare is also critical for success, 
as many governments lack the financing that was 
provided by banks for the finance sector.
– in order to enable governments and other 
stakeholders including online social media platforms 
to more effectively manage it. Orchestrated 
misinformation campaigns have leveraged COVID-19 and broader health-related themes 
to spread virally through social media to create 
confusion and distrust amongst people, as well as 
cause actual  harm.  False or misleading medical 
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
8
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentTHREE GLOBALLY EMERGING THEMES THAT CHALLENGE 
THE STATUS QUO APPROACH TO CYBERSECURITY
A national approach to developing cybersecurity capacity is no longer sufficient to 
build the capacity needed in the health sector to protect against cyber-attacks.
Malicious information campaigns must be re-conceptualized as core elements of a 
new cybersecurity regime – particularly within the health  sector 1
2
33advice and coronavirus cures have been a particularly 
common and dangerous phenomena that have 
spread across the globe at an unprecedented scale, 
leaving countries struggling to cope. While there are 
examples of countries like Romania    which have 
attempted to regulate the spreading of malicious 
information (often dubbed ‘fake news’ in the policy 
announcements) by asking telecommunications 
operators to intervene, or the Philippines  which 
developed a COVID-19 information task force 
to control and report on instances of it, it is the 
Israeli classification of disinformation and mal-information which provides a powerful example of 
action using a limited cyber regulatory mechanism, 
balanced against the nation’s valued freedom of 
speech principles and democratic norms. While 
Israel originally limited this regulation to the 
national election campaign in 2019, this model can 
be used to design an application for the health sector 
to enable the government to force online platforms 
operating within the country to block similar forms 
of malicious public health information, particularly 
during pandemics and other public health crises.
Source:  Library of Congress. 2020. “Government Responses to Disinformation on Social Media  Platforms: Israel.” Legal Library of Congress Reports. Updated March 16.   
See https://www.loc.gov/law/help/social-media-disinformation/israel.phpBOX 3:  ISRAEL’S APPROACH TO CONTROLLING MALICIOUS INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS
While multiple legislative proposals in Israel have called for the inclusion of  controls around disinformation and mal-
information within cybersecurity regimes, none have been codified into law. However, the Central Election Committee 
has enabled this conceptualization of  cybersecurity to apply to both the April 2019 national election and the September 
2019 national election. This electoral sector application was motivated by actual cyber-attacks and foreign intervention 
against political players, undoubtedly connected to Israel’s broader geopolitical situation. These interventions sparked fears 
of  attempts by both domestic and foreign players to spread false or misleading information through online social media 
platforms intended to sway electoral outcomes. The policy resulted in Facebook and Google taking steps to coordinate 
compliance around certain types of  election-related information. The specific, targeted sectoral scope provides an insightful 
example of  how a similar response for targeting public health can be formulated, even if  limited temporally to the period of  
a public health crisis.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
9
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment34
35There are multiple examples of successful 
cybersecurity coordination between countries 
globally in other sectors and domains, such as 
telecommunications and finance – often to facilitate 
necessary cross-border transactions.  One particular 
sub-domain within the health sector that will 
require a similar level of multi-lateral coordination 
across borders is with contract tracing apps, and 
their associated data protection policies (health 
and medical related data at the very least). One 
model has already been developed for the European 
market, also known as the Common EU toolbox for 
Member States, which is a gold-standard  for contact 
tracing app data policies, interoperability standards, 
and governance guidelines.  In practice however, 
neighboring countries  in Western Europe have 
taken very different approaches to data architecture 
and managing cyber vulnerabilities, with Germany, 
Italy, and Denmark applying the peer-to-peer 
model of distributed data storage on mobile handsets, contrasting sharply with the Government 
of France which has taken a centralized-database 
approach for their nationwide COVID-19 app data. 
As noted earlier the United Kingdom switched 
between approaches in June 2020, and it remains to 
be seen whether other countries will also shift their 
approach towards that of neighboring countries. 
As these apps are still in development in many 
countries, it is an opportune time to encourage and 
facilitate as much regional coordination as possible 
not just for contact-tracing apps, but other cross-
border data flows such as malicious public health 
information content creation and consumption.  
This critical need for multi-lateral coordination in 
app development and data security policies will only 
grow with time, as these contact-tracing apps will 
inevitably be used again to manage future waves 
of COVID-19, as well as other infectious disease 
outbreaks.
While new themes have emerged challenging 
the traditional and insufficient approaches to 
cybersecurity in the health sector, the specific 
technical solutions for best practices are mostly 
known and still hold in the case of COVID-19. 
Here, the greatest impact of the novel coronavirus pandemic in 2020 has been to underscore the 
importance of these technical best practices and 
provide further empirical support to expedite 
cybersecurity awareness and capacity-building 
programs in national health sectors. These technical 
solutions include:
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
10
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentA third emerging theme from the experience of COVID-19 that challenges the 
traditional uncoordinated approach to cybersecurity is the need to facilitate multi-
lateral coordination in capacity building not just at the national level – but on 
domestic health sectors more  specifically .3
CYBERSECURITY SOLUTIONS FOR THE HEALTH SECTOR36• Establishing and fortifying security operational centers (SOCs) and information sharing and analysis 
centers (ISACs) for the health  sector  to provide centralized information on the latest threats. This also helps 
coordinate expertise, as well as response support.
• 
• Implementing health sector-focused vulnerability scans and penetration  testing  of hospitals and healthcare 
centers’ digitally connected systems and network infrastructure, including medical machines and devices as well 
as cloud computing platforms and both mobile and web-based telehealth applications.
• 
• Designing and implementing health sector-focused awareness campaigns  which include information about 
general cybersecurity and vulnerabilities for healthcare workers as well as citizens, and also awareness campaigns 
on how to identify and respond to different types of malicious information campaigns.
• 
• Integrating best practices around data collection, storage, and sharing by contact tracing apps , which is 
narrowly limited to only the data that is needed to achieve the specific objective of contact tracing, and which 
ensures that anonymized information of non-infected individuals cannot be de-anonymized. 
• 
• Integrating best practices for privacy standards around health and medical data with best practices around 
data security for Internet of Things (IoT) solutions and 5G-supported cybersecurity networks in the health 
sector.  This will become increasingly important as telework and telehealth platforms, as well as hospital and health 
center information and communication infrastructure become increasingly reliant upon these technologies in 
the coming years.
• 
• Investing in private sector solutions and forging public-private partnerships with cybersecurity firms to 
compliment public sector responses.  Governments that already partner with the private sector should seek 
more tailored solutions for the health sector and create new partnerships with security firms that have a proven 
track-record with building cyber resilience for this sector.
For developing countries, including low-and 
medium-income economies, the COVID-19 
pandemic has dramatically underscored the need 
to prioritize building cybersecurity capacity within 
the health sector and represents a rare opportunity 
to establish cybersecurity more broadly as a core element of the 21st Century’s development agenda. 
This further precipitates the need to mobilize the 
requisite funding mechanisms and multi-lateral 
coordination needed to facilitate global capacity 
building and maximize cybersecurity on a global 
scale so that gaps in the weakest national link of a MAJOR OPPORTUNITY FOR DEFINING CYBERSECURITY  
AS A CORE DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
11
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentThis article benefited from the contributions of Natalija Gelvanovska-Garcia , Senior Digital Development 
Specialist; Sandra V . Sargent , Senior Digital Development Specialist; Bertram Boie , Senior Economist; 
and Rami Amin , Consultant.
The authors would like to thank the following colleagues from across the World Bank Group for their 
review and suggestions: Anat Lewin , Senior Digital Development Specialist; and Jane Treadwell , Lead 
Digital Development Specialist.
The authors would also like to thank external peer reviewers including: Saira Ghafur , Lead for Digital 
Health, Institute of Global Health Innovation at Imperial College London.digitally-connected network cannot  be compromised 
and exploited to spread further harm throughout 
globally connected networks. The UN High Level 
Panel on Digital Cooperation – convened by the 
Secretary General to provide recommendations on 
how the international community can work together 
on cybersecurity issues – is a useful starting point  
for developing a global framework for cybersecurity 
coordination.  The globally-shared experience of 
COVID-19 – particularly in terms of cybersecurity 
risks for all five categories of targets noted in this 
article – can help fast-track this discussion among 
the United  Nations General Assembly. Other 
globally coordinating mediums such as multilateral 
development banks can also be leveraged to ensure 
cybersecurity capacity building is able to access 
adequate financing as well as specialist knowledge.
Future healthcare systems and services will 
increasingly depend on data and advanced digital technologies. Further cybersecurity capacity 
building of this sector will therefore be required to 
enable countries, citizens, and healthcare institutions 
to accelerate the safe adoption and mainstreaming of 
the latest digitally-enabled healthcare technologies, 
including not only innovative e-health solutions and 
telehealth platforms, but also robotic technologies, 
drones, and IoT devices enabled by 5G networks. 
With a cyber-resilient environment containing 
up-to-date cybersecurity solutions and practices 
within and across public health institutions and the 
health sector more broadly, the shared experience of 
COVID-19 provides a unique, clear, and crucially a 
politically-feasible opportunity to make significant 
progress towards overcoming critical development 
challenges around public and individual health and 
infrastructure objectives.
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
12
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopmentACKNOWLEDGMENTS37  Kent, C. 2020. “Cyber attacks targeting health sector surge amid COVID-19 crisis. ” Verdict Medical Devices News. March 16. See https://
www.medicaldevice-network.com/news/coronavirus-cybersecurity/
  Miller, M. and O. Beavers. 2020. “Hospitals brace for increase in cyberattacks. ” The Hill. April 19. See https://thehill.com/policy/cyberse -
curity/493410-hospitals-brace-for-increase-in-cyberattacks
  Kujawa, A. et al. 2019. “Cybercrime Tactics and Techniques. ” Malwarebytes CTNT Report. November. Report available at https://resourc -
es.malwarebytes.com/files/2019/11/191028-MWB-CTNT_2019_Healthcare_FINAL.pdf
  INTERPOL. 2020. “INTERPOL launches awareness campaign on COVID-19 cyberthreats. INTERPOL. May 6. See https://www.interpol.
int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/INTERPOL-launches-awareness-campaign-on-COVID-19-cyberthreats
  M. Uma and G. Padmavathi. 2013. “ A survey on various cyber attacks and their classification. ” International Journal of Network Security, 
Vol. 15, (5), p390-396.
  Definition of ‘malware’ borrowed from the glossary published by the Computer Security Resource Center at the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology in USA. See https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/malware
  Definition of ‘phishing’ borrowed from the glossary published by the Computer Security Resource Center at the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology in USA. See https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/phishing
  Definition of ‘spear phishing’ borrowed from Kaspersky’s Resource Center. See https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-center/definitions/
spear-phishing
  Definition of ‘ransomware’ borrowed from the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency at the Department of Homeland Securi -
ty in USA. See https://www.us-cert.gov/Ransomware
  Definition of ‘denial of service’ borrowed from the glossary published by the Computer Security Resource Center at the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology in USA. See https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/denial_of_service
  Ireton, C. and J. Posetti. 2018. “Journalism, ‘Fake News’ and Disinformation: Handbook for Journalism Education and Training. ” UNES -
CO. See https://en.unesco.org/fightfakenews
  INTERPOL. 2020. “Cybercriminals targeting critical healthcare institutions with ransomware. ” INTERPOL. April 4. See https://www.
interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/Cybercriminals-targeting-critical-healthcare-institutions-with-ransomwareREFERENCES
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
13
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12  An Interpol ‘Purple Notice’ is an international request for member countries to seek or provide information on modus operandi, objects, 
devises and concealment methods used by criminals. Further details available on the INTERPOL website; See https://www.interpol.int/en/
How-we-work/Notices/About-Notices
  INTERPOL. 2020. “Cybercriminals targeting critical healthcare institutions with ransomware. ” INTERPOL. April 4. See https://www.
interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/Cybercriminals-targeting-critical-healthcare-institutions-with-ransomware
  Taylor, P . 2020. “COVID-19-themed cyber attacks hit healthcare bodies. ” Pharmaphorum. April 15. See https://pharmaphorum.com/
news/covid-19-themed-cyberattacks-hit-healthcare-bodies/
 WHO. 2020. “WHO reports fivefold increase in cyber attacks, urges vigilance. ” WHO News Release. April 23. See https://www.who.int/
news-room/detail/23-04-2020-who-reports-fivefold-increase-in-cyber-attacks-urges-vigilance
  Ibid.
 Stein, S. and J. Jacobs. 2020. “Cyber-Attack Hits U.S. Health Agency Amid Covid-19 Outbreak. ” Bloomberg. March 16. See https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-16/u-s-health-agency-suffers-cyber-attack-during-covid-19-response
  Pressey, D. 2020. “C-U Public Health District’s website held hostage by ransomware attack. ” The News-Gazette. March 11. See 
https://www.news-gazette.com/news/local/health-care/c-u-public-health-district-s-website-held-hostage-by/article_2daded -
cd-aadb-5cb1-8740-8bd9e8800e27.html
  Sanger, D.E. and N. Perlroth. 2020. “U.S. to Accuse China of Trying to Hack Vaccine Data, as Virus Redirects Cyberattacks. ” The New 
Y ork Times. May 10. See https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/10/us/politics/coronavirus-china-cyber-hacking.html
  GCHQ. 2020. “ Advisory: APT29 targets COVID-19 vaccine development. ” National Cyber Security Centre, United Kingdom GCHQ. July 
16. See https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/files/Advisory-APT29-targets-COVID-19-vaccine-development.pdf
  Winder, D. 2020. “COVID-19 Vaccine Test Center Hit By Cyber Attack, Stolen Data Posted Online. ” Forbes. March 23. See https://www.
forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2020/03/23/covid-19-vaccine-test-center-hit-by-cyber-attack-stolen-data-posted-online/#ea8b3fd18e55
 Alert (AA20-126A). 2020. “ APT Groups Target Healthcare and Essential Services. ” Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 
Alerts. May 5. See https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/AA20126A
  Kumaran, N. and S. Lugani. 2020. “Protecting businesses against cyber threats during COVID-19 and beyond. ” Google Cloud Blog. April 
16. See https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/protecting-against-cyber-threats-during-covid-19-and-beyond
  Ranger, S. 2020. “Microsoft: Beware this massive phishing campaign using malicious Excel macros to hack PCs. ” ZDNet. May 22. See 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/microsoft-beware-this-massive-phishing-campaign-using-malicious-excel-macros-to-hack-pcs/
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
14
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment19
20
21
22
23
24
2513
14
15
16
17
18 Health Sector Cybersecurity Coordination Center (HC3). 2020. “HC3: Fake Online Coronavirus Map Delivers Well-known Malware. 
American Hospital Association. March 10. See https://www.aha.org/guidesreports/2020-03-18-hc3-fake-online-coronavirus-map-delivers-
well-known-malware-march-10-2020
  Cimpanu, C. and Z. Day. 2020. “There’s now COVID-19 malware that will wipe your PC and rewrite your MBR. ” ZDNet. April 2. See 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/theres-now-covid-19-malware-that-will-wipe-your-pc-and-rewrite-your-mbr/
  United Nations Department of Global Communications. 2020. “UN tackles ‘infodemic’ of misinformation and cybercrime in COVID-19 
crisis. United Nations. March 31. See https://www.un.org/en/un-coronavirus-communications-team/un-tackling-%E2%80%98infodem -
ic%E2%80%99-misinformation-and-cybercrime-covid-19
  Spring, M. 2020. “Coronavirus: The human cost of virus misinformation. ” BBC News. May 27. See https://www.bbc.com/news/sto -
ries-52731624
  Kelion, L. 2020. “Coronavirus: France set to roll out contact-tracing app before UK. ” BBC News. May 28. See https://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-52832279
  Kelion, L. 2020. “UK virus-tracing app switches to Apple-Google model. BBC News. June 18. See https://www.bbc.com/news/technolo -
gy-53095336
  Montalbano, E. 2020. “Malicious actors could potentially harvest data over the air and use it to shake confidence in the public-health 
system, EFF says. ” Threatpost. April 29. See https://threatpost.com/google-apple-contact-tracing-system-cyberattacks/155287/
  United Nations Department of Global Communications. 2020. “UN tackles ‘infodemic’ of misinformation and cybercrime in COVID-19 
crisis. United Nations. March 31. See https://www.un.org/en/un-coronavirus-communications-team/un-tackling-%E2%80%98infodem -
ic%E2%80%99-misinformation-and-cybercrime-covid-19
  ANCOM. 2020. “ ANCOM va aplica masurile din Decretul privind instituirea starii de urgenta pe teritoriul Romaniei. ” National Authority 
for Management and Regulation in Communications of Romania (ANCOM). March 17. See https://www.ancom.ro/ancom-va-aplica-ma -
surile-din-decretul-privind-instituirea-starii-de-urgenta-pe-teritoriul-romaniei_6251
  DICT. 2020. “DICT, PNP to combat fake news on Covid-19 with Kontra Peke. ” Republic of the Philippines Department of Information 
and Communications Technology. April 5. See https://dict.gov.ph/dict-pnp-to-combat-fake-news-on-covid-19-with-kontra-peke/ 
  EC eHealth Network. 2020. “Mobile applications to support contact tracing in the EU’s fight against COVID-19: Common EU Toolbox 
for Member States. ” European Commission. April 15. Version 1.0. See https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/covid-19_
apps_en.pdf
  Details of the United Nations High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation are available at https://www.un.org/en/digital-cooperation-panel/
ANALYTICAL INSIGHT -  NOTE 1
15
worldbank.org/ digitaldevelopment26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37Analytical Insight
DIGITAL  DEVELOPMENTworldbank.org/digitaldevelopment