        
 
 
 
154 
  
IDENTITY CRIME IN THE DIGITAL AGE: MALAYSIAN 
AND MAURITANIAN LEGAL FRAMEWORKS  
 
Sidi Mohamed Sidi Ahmed  
PhD Candidate , AIKOL, IIUM  
(Email: kaldbkar@yahoo.com ) 
 
Accepted date : 05-05-2019    
Published date : 11-07-2019  
  
To cite this document:  Ahmed, S. M. S. (2019). Identity Crime in The Digital Age: Malaysian 
and Mauritanian Legal Framework. International J ournal of Law, Government, and 
Communication , 4(15), 1 54-165.  
DOI:  10.35631/ijlgc.4150016  
____________________________________________________________________________ _____ _________  
Abstract:  Legally speaking, a crime is an action or omission punishable by law and it takes 
many forms, e.g., crimes against people, property and so forth. Identity crime is one of those 
crimes that could affect financial institutions, individuals or even the whole society.  Identity 
crime impacts include, inter alia, emotional and psychological, financial and security ones.  In 
its basic meaning, identity crime i s a term used to refer to all forms of unlawful activities 
(stealing, fraud ulently using, modifying, etc.,) done under the identity of persons (names, 
passports, bank accounts , etc. ). The term ‘identity’ includes all information relating to persons 
(natural or legal) such as name, address, email, phone number, bank account, unifo rm and 
such like.  These types of crimes are not new but there is no doubt that the availability of 
information and data in the virtual world flourishes identity related -crimes and makes them 
easier to be committed.  Like other countries in the world, Mala ysia and Mauritania have 
general and specific provisions for combatting identity related -crimes and bringing offenders 
to justice. This paper discussed the concept of identity crime, then analysed and examined laws 
related to the matter in the legal system s of the two countries and assessed the efficiency and 
capability of th ose laws to combat this serious crime. Moreover, it made a comparison between 
the two systems and suggested some steps to be taken to improve the existing laws governing 
identity crime in the countries. This research is a doctrinal research depending on both primary 
and secondary related sources. It is argued and believed that a study such this will positively 
contribute to the field of legal studies as it is examining an aggravated crim e (identity crime) 
from a comparative perspective.   
 
Keywords:  Identity Crime, Digital Age, Laws, Malaysia, Mauritania     
___________________________________________________________________________  
 
Introduction   
The words of ‘crimes’ and criminals are well -known to both laymen and experts for their bad 
and harm effects on the society and its members. Identity crime is one of those crimes that could 
have a negative impact on financial institutions, individuals or e ven the whole society.  In its 
basic meaning, identity crime is a generic or an umbrella term used to refer to all forms of 
unlawful activities which targeted identities (names, passports, bank accounts, emails, etc.,) of 
Volume: 4 Issues: 1 5 [June , 201 9] pp. 154-165] 
International Journal of Law, Government and Communication  
eISSN: 0128 -1763  
Journal website: www. ijlgc.com  
 
        
 
 
 
155 
 persons (natural or legal) such as  identity theft, fraud and so forth.  Identity related  crimes  are 
not new but there is no doubt that the availability of information and the dependence on it in 
the digital age flourish these types of crimes, open the appetites of the criminals and make such 
crimes  easier to be committed than before.  When criminals get personal information of 
someone, they can use such information in many ways such as draining bank accounts, opening 
new utility accounts, getting medical treatment on the victim’s health ins urance (Federal Trade 
Commission, 2019)  and such like. The most dangerous and probably surprising things with 
identity crime could be the wide range of its victims whom could be governments, corporations 
and individuals regardle ss of their ages, gender, education, literature, income and such like  
(Lawson, 2011) .  Identity crime is not a petty crime, but it is a serious crime that could cause 
financial, psychological, and other impacts to its victims (The International Centre for Criminal 
Law Reform and Criminal Justice Policy (ICCLR), 2011) .  For example, the victims of this 
crime in the United States (US) in 2017 was 16.7 million and its cost was $17 billion  (IA 
Pascual, 2019) .  Moreover, identity fraud which is part of identity crime costs  the United 
Kingdom around £ 1.2 billion yearly  (Wall, 2013) . The above indicates that identity crime in 
the information age is a c hallenging problem that deserves to be legally dealt with.  Thus, 
around the globe, laws and regulations have been enacted or revised to combat th ose growing 
crimes.  Malaysia and Mauritania have general and specific provisions that can be employed to 
curb identity crime and bring offenders to courts. This paper attempts to discuss the concept of 
identity crime and then analyse and examine laws related to it in the legal systems of the two 
countries to assess the efficiency and capability of th ose laws to c ombat this serious new -old 
crime in the digital environment.   
 
Methodology  
This research is a doctrinal research depending on both primary and secondary related sources.   
It employs both analytical and comparative approaches to analyse and then compare some legal  
provisions applicable to identity crime in the two countries .  It will draw a comparison between 
the two systems and recommend for improvement when that is relevant. This research is based 
on data collected from primary sources such as some stat utes of the two countries.  It also uses 
data and information of secondary sources such as books, journals, Internet databases and such 
like.  
 
It is argued and believed that a study such this will positively contribute to the field of legal 
studies as it is discussing an aggravated crime (identity crime) from a comparative perspective.   
 
Definition of Identity Crime  
Comprehensive understanding any terminology requires knowing the meaning of its words 
separately and jointly. Accordingly, defining the phras e of ‘identity crime’, necessitates 
knowing the meaning of both ‘identity’ and ‘crime.’  Linguistically speaking, the word identity 
denotes the process of providing information about a person or an object.  For example, while 
identity as a noun represents or explains “who you are or what your name is” and also “the 
qualities that make someone or something what they are and different from other people”, the 
meaning of ‘identify’ as a verb is  “to recognize someone and be able to say who they are” and 
“to rec ognize something and understand exactly  what it is”  (MACMILLAN English 
Dictionarry, 2002) .  In the academic sense, Jaishankar, asserted that identity crime is a mutual 
concept that can be grouped into three categories, namely a personal, social and legal identity 
(Jaishankar, 2008 ) .  For example, the personal identity  is related “to the self as experienced by 
the individual” and social identity is the self in the eyes of other members of the society.  The 
third category is the legal identity which is defined as “the way in which an accumulation of         
 
 
 
156 
 information distingui shes one individual from all others”  (Jaishankar, 2008 ) .  The word crime, 
on the other hand, denotes “something… against the law”, something… morally wrong” or 
“illegal behaviour in general” (Oxfor d Wordpower, 1999, p. 178) .  The legal meaning of crime 
is not far from the linguistic one as it is defined as “ an act (or sometimes a failure to act) that is 
deemed by statute or by the common law to be a public wrong and is therefore punishable by 
the state in criminal proceedings  (Oxford Dictionary of Law, 2003, p. 128) . When identity and 
crime are combined’, they are called ‘identity crime’, a term that  “refers to all forms of 
wrongdoing conducted under the guise of another person’s identity, as well as to preparatory 
acts involving the collection, manipulation and trading of identity information ” (Lawson, 2011, 
p. 111) .  Moreover, one of the most comprehensive definition of identity crime could be the 
one that sees it  as  “a cycle with five distinct phases: (1) unauthorized or illegal acquisition of 
identifying data or items (e.g., cards or documents); (2) transfer of the  initially acquired 
identifying data or documents; (3) manipulation of the data or items (e.g., through alteration, 
compilation, or forgery/counterfeiting); (4) transfer of the manipulated data or items; and (5) 
use of the data or items for fraud or concea lment of criminal identity” (The Cross -Border Crime 
Forum, 2019, p. 2) .  The above quoted definitions include common key elements such as the 
object of identity crime (data or information), the act (acquiring data, using or  manipulating it, 
etc.), mental elements (obtaining and using information, etc., indicate the mental element) and 
missing authorization by victim s. These four mentioned elements “ are required for the 
development of a criminal law provision in defining the structure. (Gercke, 2011, p. 31) . 
 
As can be deduced from the above, the term “identity crime” is used to refer to all unlawful 
activities agains t identities (passports, bank accounts, etc.,). Identity crime is not the only used 
term, but there are various terms and expressions that have been used in different places to 
describe misusing identities such as ‘identity crime’ (in Australia), ‘identity  theft’ (in the UAS) 
and ‘identity fraud; as in the UK  (Sidi Mohamed Ould Mohamed, 2015) .   
 
This paper adopts the term identity crime and uses it as a generic term to cover various crimes 
against identities in different separat ed stages. As an illustration, identity crime here used to 
include all unlawful activities involving information related to persons (including legal and 
natural ones).  Such lawful activities could be forging, altering, stealing, destroying, using and 
such like. The discussion will mainly focus on the legal frameworks of the studied countries 
(Mauritania and Malaysia).  Looking identity crime in separated  stages  allows to judge criminal 
activities in distinct stages.  For example, some criminals could be engaged in collecting 
information while others may go further and manipulate or use such information to commit 
further crimes. Thus, discussing identity crime in all those stages and knowing the applicable 
provisions, if any, could help curb th ose serious crimes and mitigate their bad impacts.  The 
next paragraph will be dedicated to the nature of identity crime and its subject matter.   
  
The Nature of Identity Crime  
In the previous section it is mentioned that identity crime revolved around using identiti es of 
others for gaining unlawful benefits or committing crimes under  their names.  As identities and 
personal information become essential elements of the information age, they become a target 
of criminals who wish to take advantages and privilege that su ch identities grant to their holders.  
Identities or information which are targeted in identity crime depend on the nature of the crime 
that offenders want to commit. For example, if the perpetrator wants to steal money from a 
victim’s account or fake iden tity documents, he would look for financial and personal 
information related to that matter. In general, information that is protected by different national 
laws and usually targeted by identity -criminals includes the flowing three categories:  (1)         
 
 
 
157 
 names, addresses, date of birth, marital status, death certificate, ID cards, passports, or 
immigration documents, drivers’ licenses, social security numbers, health insurance number, 
fingerprint, voice print, retina image, iris image, or DNA profile; (2) credit or debit card 
numbers, financial institution account numbers and written signature and such like; (3) e-mail 
login, e -mail or web browsing passwords, mac-address or IP -address, electronic or digital 
signature, and usernames  (Gercke, 2011) .  This targeted information can be divided into three 
categories. One is information related to the person himself (name, ID card, etc.,), information 
pertaining to his financial interests (bank accounts, credit card numbers, etc.,) and finally 
information t hat can be used to get or infringe his personal and financial information (e -mails, 
IP-address, etc).  
 
There are various tactics that have been used by criminals to get and collect identity 
information.  These tactics range from very simple ways to highly  sophisticated ones in which 
the criminals use high technology to collect information .  In general, identity -related 
information can be obtain through digital and non -digital methods.  In the digital method, 
criminals employ various technologic tactics inc luding, inter alia, p hishing: “a criminal 
mechanism employing both social engineering and technical subterfuge to steal consumers’ 
personal identity data and financial account credentials” (Jaishankar, 2008 , p. 11) , skimming: 
“copying information from the magnetic strip on credit cards while they are used for  purchasing 
goods or withdrawing money from the ATMs” ( Shun -Yung Kevin Wang , 2011, p. 8) , hacking: 
“unapproved utilization o f computer and system assets” or in other words it is “the act of 
changing computer equipment and programming to achieve an objective outside of the maker's 
unique reason”  (Sunil Kumar , 2018, p. 2253)  and Malicious Soft ware: “any software that are 
being used for disturbing normal system functions, collect important information, or can access 
to private  computer systems”  (Milan Jain , 2014) . 
 
The non -digital method includes, for instance, redir ection of mail which enables offenders to 
access documents sent through it; theft such as theft of wallets, passports, etc., dumpster diving, 
shoulder surfing; listening for oral disclosures of personal identity or watching, using public 
available informat ion in books or newspapers and such like, and insider attacks such as bribing 
employees to provide identity information about victims  (Gercke, 2011) .  
 
In fact, the availability of data in the digital world and the vulnerability of such data to be leaked 
ease the job of identity -criminals and enable them to accumulate databases about potential 
victims. For example, in one of the biggest data breaches  in the history, three billion of Yahoo 
users’ “accounts were hacked in a 2013 data theft”  (Jonathan Stemple , 2017) . and the leaked 
data included names, email addresses, date of birth, telephone numbers etc  (Yahoo, 2016) . 
Regarding data breach in the studied countries and in Malaysia particularly, there was a report 
about the leakage of “roughly 46.2 million mobile phone numbers from Malaysian telcos  and 
mobile virtual network operators (MVNO)” and other important databases stored by some 
organizations in 2017 (Lowyat.net, 2017) .  The same resource reported that those data is being 
offered for sell and thus such data become s subject to various unlawful misuse by malicious 
people.  
 
Information (identities) related to natural or legal persons can be used to commit various crimes 
such as identity theft, identity fraud and so forth.  For example, the International Centre for 
Criminal Law Reform and Criminal Justice Policy ( hereinafter, ICCLR)  found that identity 
criminals can use identifying information in the following illegal activities: (1) selling identity 
information to other criminals for use in identity -related crime, (2)  accessing and using the         
 
 
 
158 
 victims’ credit or debit cards and taking over their bank accounts, (3) opening new financial 
accounts, loans or mortgages in the victim’s name, (4) obtaining a passport or other identity 
documents in someone else’s name, obtaining  government benefits and services using the 
victim’s name, (5) concealing their identity while travelling illegally, smuggling drugs, 
engaging in money -laundering, terrorism etc., and (6) misleading law enforcement or court 
officials by directing them to t he wrong persons  (The International Centre for Criminal Law 
Reform and Criminal Justice Policy (ICCLR), 2011) . 
 
 The above usage of identities includes using them for  financial and non-financial purposes. 
However, some reports showed that 74% of the stolen information used to commit financial 
identity theft crime (Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC), 2013) . Thus, types of identity 
crime vary depend on the us age of stolen identities by the criminals.   For example, identity 
crime includes, among other things, identity theft and identity fraud.  Identity theft and identity 
fraud can be used interchangeable by some or separately in which identity theft means the  act 
of obtaining personal identity information and identity fraud refers to the act of utilizing such 
information by the criminals.  ( Shun -Yung Kevin Wang , 2011)  
 
The discussion indicates that identity crime in the digital age could be considered one of the 
serious crimes that could threaten both society and its members.  The coming section will look 
at identity crime from legal perspective.      
 
Law and Identity C rime  
Identity takes its importance from being a method or instrument that distinguishes persons or 
objects from each other and thus “humans make sense of the world and people understand and 
act toward each other depending on identities” (Sarah J. McCarthey , 2002) .  It (identity) has 
many aspects such as social, commercial, technological, and legal ones and most aspects of 
identities are subject to identity -related crimes. For example, the tale of Imrou‟ al -Qais (a 
famous Arabic poet) can be  taken as an example of social identity crime in the past  (Mostapha 
Abd al -Shafi, 2004) .  According to the tale, the poet  swore not to marry any woman unless she 
answers some questions correctly. He got  many wrong answers but in one dark night  he met a 
very intelligent young lady with her  father and she answered his questions perfectly. Without 
delay, he proposed to marry her  and the proposal was accepted. At the agreed time, the poet 
and his helper  took one hundred camels and some furnishings and went to the lady ‘ s family. 
Unfortunately, the  helper  decided to commit identity crime throughout by throwing his master 
inside a water well and  impersonating him. In the end of the drama, the helper  arrived at t he 
lady‘s  house, introducing himself as the famous poet who has come for his wife  (Mostapha Abd 
al-Shafi, 2004) . 
 
In the present era, legal identity is essential because it enables a person to enquire his rights and 
access to public and private services. Without a valid legal identity, one cannot easily travel or 
access financial or other services, et c. According to Emily Finch, legal identity serves dual 
purposes;  it enables individuals to authenticate themselves and provides their historical 
continuity as individuals -here and now’ by connecting them with events in their past, e.g. credit, 
employment history  (Finch, 2007) .  Due to the innumerable advantages they are granting to the 
holders, identities especially the legal ones are being targeted by criminals who want to benefit 
from the privilege they offer to the holders.  As response to this, law in different parts of the 
globe grants some protection to identities either by special provisions or by general ones.  For 
example, the Canadian  Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C -46-, s.402.2) criminalizes misusing 
of identities by stating that “everyone commits an offence who knowi ngly obtains or possesses         
 
 
 
159 
 another person’s identity information in circumstances giving rise to a reasonable inference that 
the information is intended to be used to commit an indictable offence that includes fraud, deceit 
or falsehood as an element of the  offence.”  
 
In Malaysia and Mauritania, there is no piece of law under the name of ‘identity crime law’, 
but instead some provisions of the existing laws in the countries can be employed to curb 
identity -related crimes as the paper aims to point out in the  coming paragraphs.  Identity crime, 
as mentioned in the definition section, includes separated crimes such as unauthori sed or illegal 
acquisition of identifying data, manipulation of the data and use of the data for fraud or 
concealment of criminal identi ty.  All th ese acts could be combated either by traditional 
provisions such as those found in Penal Codes or by especial provisions enacted for the 
information age such as com puter crimes or data protection laws which both come to protect 
data including pe rsonal data in the information age.  Before talking about identity crime in light 
of Malaysian and Mauritanian existing statutes, some similarities and dissimilarities between 
the two countries will be drawn in order to facilitate assessment of laws relati ng to identity 
crime in the countries ’ legal systems.  
 
Technological Aspects  
Regarding the development of information and communication sectors which play an important 
role in identity -related crimes today, when compare to Malaysia, it could be fair to say that 
Mauritania is suffering from the lack of advancement in technological -related sectors. The gab 
can clearly be seen in the percentage of the Internet users in the two countries.  For example, 
the Internet World Stats showed that the percentage of Internet users in Mauritania and 
Malaysia in 201 9 are 17. 4 % and 7 7.3 % respectiv ely (Internet Word Stats, 2019) .  The table 
below explains this is more details.  
 
Country  Population  Internet 
User  Percentage  
Malaysia  32,454,455  25,084,255  77.3 %  
Mauritania  4,661,149  810,000  17.4 %  
Table 1 : Internet Users in Mauritania and Malaysia in 2019  
 
 In terms of data breach reports, statistics  and press news show that there are great incidents of 
data leakage in Malaysia  (Lowyat.net, 2017)  and (Malaysia Computer Emergency Response 
Team (MyCERT), 2018) .  Moreover, it is said that one of every 10 Malaysians is affected by 
identity theft  (RAO, 2018) . In Mauritania, however, there is no available reports about data 
breach, but the Maur itanian press began to report stories and incidents which indicate that 
identity -related crimes and computer crimes in general could be a major problem that will face 
the country in the future.  As an example, the police arrested a foreign man and a Maurita nian 
man and his wife in one incident of forgery. In detail of this incident, the forger claimed to be 
a relative of the Mauritanian couple and that his father died.  After investigation, the police 
discovered the fact and arrested all of them  (Mohamed, 2014) .  
 
Legal Systems  
As opposed to the Mauritanian legal system which mostly depend s on rules derived from the 
Islamic Shariah especially  the Maliki’s  School of Thought, “ the role which Islamic law now 
plays in the [Malaysian]  system is extremely limited”  (Ahmad, 2007 ) .  Another distinction 
between the two systems could be that while Mauritania  inherited French Civil Law legal 
system, Malaysia inherited the Common law legal system.  Keeping the abov e distinction in         
 
 
 
160 
 mind, the following is analyzing some aspects of identity crime such as illegal acquisition of 
identifying data, manipulation of the data and use of forge d identit ies to commit crimes in both 
legal systems.  
 
Collecting Identifying Data  
As explained before, identity criminals have many ways and tools to obtain personal data of 
their victims.  Some of this method are explicitly illegal such as stealing the information while 
others are not. In the Malaysian legal framework, there are some p rovisions protecting personal 
and financial information and prohibiting an authori sed disclosure of such information and they 
can arguably be used to curb identity crime.  One of these laws is the Computer Crimes Act 
(CCA) 1997 which aims “to provide for o ffences relating to the misuse of computers.” For 
example, sections 3 and 4 of the CCA criminalise unauthorised access to computer materials 
and unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate further offence respectively.  
Moreover, section 4 of t he CCA makes it is clear that commission of further offence include 
“an offence involving fraud or dishonesty, or which causes injury as defined in the Penal Code.”  
These provisions seem to cover some digital methods used by criminals to collect identifyi ng 
information about their victims such as hacking  (Sunil Kumar , 2018)   and Malicious Software  
(Milan Jain , 2014)  because they are involving accessing computers or computer systems in 
unauthorised  manners and as some mentioned t he term unauthori sed access is conventionally 
known as hacking.  (Azmil, 1997) . other important  laws that can be used to combat financial -
identity crime in Malaysia could be the Financial Services Act (FSA) 2013 and the Islamic 
Financial Services Act (IFSA) 2013.  For example, these Acts prohibited disclosing information 
related to accounts or affairs of all customers.  The prohibition includes the officers and 
directors of the financial institutions  and others  (FSA 2013, s 145; IFSA 2013, s 133.) .  Since 
financial identities such as information relating to customer accounts are the most wanted 
information  (Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC), 2013) , it can be said that t hese Acts could  
help minimising identity crime in its first stage.  Another protective mechanism could be the 
obligation imposed by Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA) 2010  on data users especially the 
disclosure and security principles. The  disclosure pr inciple (S. 8) of the Act prohibited 
disclosing personal data without the consent of the data subject for any purpose other than the 
collected purpose and its related purposes.  The principle serves the fight against identity crime 
in that it can prevent o r at least minimi se the inside jobs (disclosing personal information by 
the staff).  Moreover, the security principle obliges data users to take practical steps to secure 
the data (PDPA, s. 9).  
 
In Mauritanian side, there are also provisions of laws that can be used to combat identity crime 
in its early stages.  Accordingly, some traditional laws such as the Penal Code (July 9 - 1983) 
and the penal provisions found in other especial laws will generally govern matters relating to 
identity crime and cybercrimes in the country.  In this regard, the criminal provisions mentioned 
in the Mauritanian Code of Civil Status (hereinafter the Code) (Law No. 2011 -003, issued on 
January 12, 2011)  can act as a preventive tool against identity crime in its first stage: collecting 
identities. This Code aims to establish and organise the procedure and conditions related to 
issuing and recording events of civil status (birth, marriage, divorce, death, etc.) and secured 
documents related to that status (s. 1 of the Code).  For example, the Code explains and 
organises the way of issuing identity -related documents, criminalises providing false statement 
or perjury therein and prohibits subm itting personal information to anyone other than the owner 
or his legal agent or representative (s. 26 and 63 of the Code).  All these can arguably help 
minimise identity crime as it helps keep identity -related information in the right hand.          
 
 
 
161 
 Additionally,  the Code imposes heavy penalties on offenders.  As an example, punishments for 
making false statement or witness for issuing false documents are imprisonment for a term 
range from six to ten years and a fine of 2.500.000 to 4.000.000 of the  Mauritanian cu rrency, 
Ouguiya (MRO) in addition to civil right deprivation.  Moreover, issuing documents to those 
who are not entitled to them is a crime that is punishable by imprisonment (of five to eight 
years) and fine (range from 2.2000.000 to 3.5000.000 of MRO) as  well as deprivation of civil 
rights.  Moreover, the Code also imposes double of the above punishments in cases where the 
crime is committed by an officer or the beneficiary is a foreigner.  Additionally, the Mauritanian 
Law No. 007 -2016 Concerning cybercr imes also comes with some provisions that can be used 
to combat identity crime  in the virtual word .  For example, section 4 of this cybercrimes law 
prohibits interception of information and punishes such act by imprisonment and fine.  
Moreover, section 6 o f it also prohibits unauthori sed access to computer systems and punish es 
such act .   The se various  laws could help protect identities from leakage to criminals’ hands 
and then bring identity -criminals to justice in case of any breach t hose regulatory rules .   
 
Bearing in mind that identity crime starts with the acquisition of victims’ information, the above 
provisions are arguably useful tools offered by the legal systems of Malaysia and Mauritania 
and those laws can be used to curb identity crime in the di gital age as they help protecting 
information from being leaked and fallen into criminal hands.   
 
Forging and Using Identifying Data  
Identity -criminals collect information about their targeted victims to use it in fraudulent ways 
with or without changing  it. For example, passports and others travelling documents are usually 
targeted by criminals because they enable offenders to facilitate travel after committing crime 
or help them initiate new ones as well as to avoid prosecution in multiple jurisdictions  (The 
Cross -Border Crime Forum, 2019) . Fortunately, these types of crimes can fall under laws such 
as the Malaysian Passport Act 1966 which criminalises using forged passport or internal travel 
document, impersonation or represe nting oneself falsely; and knowingly producing false 
document for gaining passports (s 12 & 12B).  All these and other provisions such as those in 
the Malaysian Births and Deaths Registration Act 1957 criminalising forging birth -certificates 
(s. 36)  could fight identity crime . The birth certificate is one of the identification documents 
that are usually targeted by identity criminals. Another important piece of law that can help 
combat identity crime in Malaysia is the Penal Code which prohibits fraud, impe rsonation, and 
forgery.  For example, section 463 of the Penal Code defines forgery to include any person who 
makes false document or part of a document with the intention to commit fraud.  
 
In its side, Mauritania has some provisions that can apply to some identity -criminal activities  
in the real world such as forging and using forged identities.  Such provisions could be useful 
as criminals have used forged identities to deceive and gain undeserved benefits and privilege.   
For instance, several Articl es of the Mauritanian Penal Code are devoted to forgery crimes.  As 
an illustration, Articles 149 and 150 make it illegal to forge or use forged identity documents 
including travel documents such as passports and visas etc. and impose harsh  punishments on 
those who are involved in the process of forgery.  In the Code, the term ‘forgery’ includes, inter 
alia, false statements, impersonating false names or attributes, and giving false information  
(section 150).   The wider scope of this definition and the var iety of the documents included in 
it could be useful in fighting against identity -related crimes because these crimes can virtually 
include all types of identities.  For the forgers, punishments range from imprisonment (6 months 
to 3 years) and fine (MRO 5 ,000-150,000).  Regarding gaining and using false identities, the 
punishments also include imprisonment (3 months to 2 years) and fine (MRO, 5,000 to 50,000).           
 
 
 
162 
  
In one rare reported identity crime case in Mauritania, a Mauritanian woman sentenced to 
impri sonment for one year and a fine of two million of MRO after committing the crime of 
forgery  (Mohamed, 2014) . In this case, the Court of Misdemeanors found that the convicted 
woman sold identity of her dead daughter to a foreign  woman to enable her to register as the 
woman’s daughter and get the Mauritanian nationality. This case could have an important 
impact on the issue of identity crime in the country because it may help bring the attention of 
stakeholders (law enforcement, j udge, legislative bodies, etc.,) in the country to new types of 
crimes (buying and selling identities).  Furthermore, general provisions relating to violation of 
the Shariah are another tool that can be used to curb identity crime in the absence of special  
Mauritanian laws in the matter.  For example, Article 306 of the Penal Code mentioned that 
anyone who violates the sanctity of the Shariah (the sanctity of Allah) or helps others to do so 
shall be punished.  The term ‘violation of the sanctity of the Shar iah’ includes doing any 
prohibited thing or refraining from doing any obligation.  If Article 306 reads in light of Article 
449 of the Penal Code which referred to the Shariah in all matters that omitted in the Code, it 
can be also argued that the Article (Art.  306) can be applied to all issues violating the Shariah 
including identity -related crimes that violate established Shariah rules.  
   
Discussions and Recommendations  
Generally speaking, it  can be said that the two countries have some legal provisions that can be 
used to combat identity crime in the real world in cases where identities of the victims are used 
to create forged documents such as passports, birth certificates and so forth. Howe ver, the 
efficiency of offline laws (laws enacted to deal with real crimes  as opposed to crimes occur in 
computers  and the Internet , etc.,) in dealing with the online world (computer crimes, etc.,) 
where most identity -related crimes take place nowadays ca n be questioned  because these laws 
were primarily enacted to deal with traditional offences relating to documents and thus they 
may not easily accommodate  crimes in the digital age in which the offenders use sophisticated 
technology to commit such crimes .  From here the paper recommends the two countries to 
extend the traditional provisions or create new ones that can effectively deal with crimes in the 
virtual world including identity crime in its different stages.  
 
 It is worthy to state here that the legal systems in the two countries are not at the same level of 
advancement. To be precise, the Malaysian legal system is generally more advanced and up -to-
date (Duryana Mohamed , 2012)  than its counterpart in Mauritania at least in cyberlaws: “the 
legal issues that are related to utilize of communications technology, concretely "cyberspace", 
i.e. the Internet”  (Animesh Sarmah, at al, 2017) .  For example, the Malaysian National Cyber 
Security Agency (NACSA)  stated that cyberlaws in Malaysia consist of the Computer Crimes 
Act 1997, Digital Signature Act 1997, Telemedicine Act 1997, Communications and 
Multimedia Act 1998, Electronic Commerce Act 2006, Electronic Government Activities Act 
2017, PDPA 2010, Ant -Fake News Act 2018, in addition to Penal Code and Copyright 
(Amendment) Act 1997  (The NACSA) . These laws provide some kinds of protection to 
different aspects of cyberspace and som e of them can be used to combat identity crime as 
discussed elsewhere  in this paper.  
 
 In contrast, the Mauritanian legal system can be described as underdeveloped system that still 
relays on traditional laws to deal with sophisticated matters such as identity crime in the digital 
world. Despite the above, the Mauritanian legal system inclu des some cyberlaws such as  the 
Mauritanian Law No. 007 -2016 Concerning Cybercrimes  and also provisions enacted 
especially for protecting biogeographic or biometric data related to individuals.  Some of th ose         
 
 
 
163 
 provisions can be found in the Code of Civil Sta tus (Law No. 003 -2011). This Code prohibits 
an unauthorised access to the National Register of Population (NRP) which includes the 
biogeographic and biometric data related to population of the country and imposes heavy 
penalties on offenders such as impris onment for terms from 5 to 10 years and fine from 15 to 
30 million of MRO  (section 66) . Moreover, the Code makes it illegal to copy, publish, delate, 
modify, etc., such information included in the NRP and punishes such acts by life imprisonment 
and fine fr om one hundred and five thousand to two hundred and ten thousand million of the 
MRO  (section 67) .  
 
Surprisingly, when the punishment mentioned in the Mauritanian Code compares with its 
equivalent in the Malaysian Computer Crimes Act 1997, the former seems  to be more painful 
than the later. For example, while the Mauritanian Code uses the term “and” which means both 
imprisonment and fine are imposed on the offenders, the Malaysian Act uses the phrase, “or” 
which gives a choice to the courts to choose either  imprisonment and fine or one of them.  
Another manifest of difference can be observed in the penalties themselves.  For instance, the 
Mauritanian Code mentions the minimum and maximum of imprisonment and fine, but the 
Malaysian Act mentions only the maxim um for both.  Practically, t his means that while 
Malaysian courts can impose imprisonment for a term of one month, etc., on offenders who 
unauthori sedly access to computer materials  (S 3 CCA) , the Mauritanian courts cannot impose 
imprisonment for a term le ss than five years in th e same crime -unauthorised access to computer 
materials  (s. 66 of Code of Civil Status) . 
 
Concluding Remarks   
Identity crime in the digital age brings challenges to traditional laws and such challenges should 
be recognised in order to take proactive reforming steps towards solutions. This paper was 
dedicated to definition of identity crime, its nature and the capability of current legal systems 
of Mauritania and Malaysia to efficiently deal with identity -related crimes.  In the defin ition 
section , the paper found that identity crime in its basic meaning means using identities of others 
(passports, names, bank accounts, etc.,) to commit crimes under their names or steal their 
monies and such like. The criminals use many tactics includi ng technological ones such as 
phishing, hacking, etc., and traditional methods like stealing documents containing the 
information. Identity crime has many forms (financial and non -financial etc.,) and names   such 
as identity theft, identity fraud and iden tity crime which is chosen by some to cover all crimes 
relating to identities.  
 
 Regarding the law perspective, identity crime is an old crime that flourish es in the digital age. 
The existing legal systems in Mauritania and Malaysia have traditional provi sions that can be 
used to deal with types of identity -related crimes and modern provisions that can be useful in 
combating identity crime in the digital environment. As identity crime is a dangerous crime that 
could cause damage to individuals, financial organisations  and other critical interests, this paper 
suggested that provisions related to this crime in Malaysia and Mauritania should be updated 
to efficiently deal with identity crime in its different stages.  This can be done either through 
revising th e current laws or enacting special laws for identity crime and crimes occur in the 
virtual world.  The nature and scope of the suggested provisions should be drafted after taking 
advice of the law enforcement, legal and technological experts and other stak eholders who have 
a clear picture of the digital world and what is happening on it.    
 
         
 
 
 
164 
 References  
Ahmad, S. S. (2007 ). Malysian Legal System  (2 ed.). Singapore: LexisNexis.  
Animesh Sarmah, at al. (2017, June). A brief study on Cyber Crime and Cyber Law’s of India. 
IRJET , p. 1633.  
Azmil, S. (1997). Crimes on the Electronic Frontier: Some Thought on the Computer Crimes 
Acts. Malaysian Law Journal (MLJ) , vii. 
Duryana Mohamed . ( 2012). Investigating Cybercrimes Under the Malaysian Cyberlaws and 
the Criminal Procedure Code: Issues and Challenges. MLJ, 6 , iv. 
Federal Trade Commission. (2019, March 13). Warning Signs of Identity Theft . Retrieved from 
Identity Theft.gov: https://www.i dentitytheft.gov/warning -signs -of-identity -theft.  
Finch, E. (2007). The Problem of Stolen Identity and the Internet. In Y. Jewkes (Ed.), Online 
Crime.   
Gercke, M. (2011). Legal Approaches to Criminalize Identity Theft. In UNODC, Handbook on 
Identity -relate d Crime.  New York: United Nations.  
IA Pascual, e. a. (2019, March 16). 2018 Identity Fraud: Fraud Enters a New Era of 
Complexity . Retrieved 7 30, 2018, from JAVELIN: 
https://www.javelinstrategy.com/coverage -area/2018 -identity -fraud -fraud -enters -new-
era-complexity.  
Identity Theft Resource Center (ITRC). (2013). Identity Theft Resource Center, 2012 Breach 
List. Identity Theft Resource Center. Retrieved March 18, 2019, from idtheftcenter.org: 
https://www.idtheftcenter.org/images/breach/Breach_Report_2012.pdf.  
Internet Word Stats. (2019, March 31). Usage and Population Statistics . Retrieved May 2, 
2019, from Internetworldstats.com: https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm  
Jaishankar, K. (2008 , January -June). Identity related Crime in the Cyberspace: Examini ng 
Phishing and its impact. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 2 (1), 10 –15. 
Jonathan Stemple , J. (2017, OCTOBER 4). Yahoo says all three billion accounts hacked in 
2013 data theft.  Retrieved March 18, 2019, from REUTERS.  
Lawson, P. (2011). Identity -related Crime Victim Issues: A Discussion Paper. In UNODC, 
Handbook on Identity -related Crime  (pp. 107 -168). New York: United Nations.  
Lowyat.net. (2017). 46.2 Million Malaysian Mobile Phone Numbers Leaked From 2014 Data 
Breach.  Retrieved March 18, 2019, from Lowyat.net: 
https://www.lowyat.net/2017/146339/46 -2-million -mobile -phone -numbers -leaked -
from2014 -data-breach/.  
MACMILLAN English Dictionarry.  (2002). Macmillan Publishers Limited.  
Malaysia Computer Emergency Response Team (M yCERT). (2018). MyCERT Incident 
Statistics.  Retrieved March 19, 2019, from MyCERT: 
https://www.mycert.org.my/statistics/2018.php.  
Milan Jain , P. (2014). Techniques in Detection and Analyzing Malware Executables: A 
Review. IJCSMC, 3 , 939 -935. 
Mohamed, S. M . (2014). Identity Crime in Digital Environment: A Comparative Study 
Between the Common Law and The Shariah as Applied in Mauritania. (Unpublished 
master dissertation, IIUM) . 
Mostapha Abd al -Shafi. (2004). Diwan Imrou Al -Qais  (5 ed.). Beirut: Dar al -Kotob al-Ilmiyah.  
Oxford Dictionary of Law  (5 ed.). (2003). Oxford University Press.  
Oxford Wordpower.  (1999). New York: Oxford University Press.  
RAO, M. (2018, 4 11). One in 10 M’sians fall victim to identity theft . Retrieved May 2, 2019, 
from themalaysianreserve.com: https://themalaysianreserve.com/2018/04/11/one -in-
10-msians -fall-victim -to-identity -theft/          
 
 
 
165 
 Sarah J. McCarthey , E. (2002, April/May/June). Identity matters. Reading Research Quarterly, 
37(2), pp. 228 –238. 
Shun -Yung Kevin Wang , W. (2011). The Evolutional View of the Types of Identity Thefts and 
Online Frauds in The Era of the Internet. Internet Journal of Criminology , 1-21. 
doi:ISSN 2045 -6743 (Online)  
Sidi Mohamed Ould Mohamed, S. (2015, October -November ). The Shari’ah Approach to 
Criminalise Identity Theft. Pertanika J. Soc. Sci. & Hum. (S), 3 (4/5), 171.  
Sunil Kumar , D. (2018). Hacking Attacks, Methods Techniques and Their Protection 
Measures. IJSART, 4 , 2253. Retrieved 7 24, 2018, from http://apo.org.au: 
https://web.archive.org/w eb/20110501063145/http://www.crimecommission.gov.au/p
ublications/crime -profile -series/_files/identity -crime.pdf  
The NACSA. (n.d.). Malaysian Cyber Laws.  Retrieved March 19, 2019, from NACSA.GOV : 
https://www.nacsa.gov.my/legal.php.  
The Cross -Border Crime F orum. (2019, March 17). Identity -Related Crime: A Threat 
Assessment.  Retrieved 07 23, 2018, from Publicsafety.gc.ca : 
https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/archive -dntt-rltd-crm-
2010/archivedntt -rltd-crm-2010 -eng.pdf.  
The International Centre f or Criminal Law Reform and Criminal Justice Policy (ICCLR). 
(2011). Responding to Victims of Identity Crime: A Manual for Law Enforcement 
Agents.  British Columbia, Canada: The International Centre for Criminal Law Reform 
andCriminal Justice Policy (ICCLR).  
Wall, D. S. (2013). Future Identities: Changing Identities in the UK - the Next 10 Years.  
London: The Crown.  
Yahoo. (2016, December 14). Yahoo Security Notice December 14, 2016 . Retrieved 7 24, 2018, 
from YAHOO HELP: https://help.yahoo.com/kb/account/previ ously -announced -
company -december -sln27925.html. 23  
 
 