Integrating  
Cyber Capacity   
into the 
Digital Development 
Agenda
November 2021COPYRIGHT © 2021 Global Forum on Cyber Expertise Foundation  
Wilhelmina van Pruisenweg 104  
2915 AN, the Hague  
Netherlands  
 
This report was written by Melissa Hathaway and Francesca Spidalieri. The report was 
commissioned by the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) and funded by the 
World Bank’s Digital Development Partnership (DDP). DDP offers a platform for digi -
tal innovation and development financing, bringing public and private sector partners 
together to advance digital solutions and drive digital transformation in developing 
countries. For more information, please visit:  
www.digitaldevelopmentpartnership.org . 
The information, interpretation, and examples set out in this report do not constitute 
official or informal opinions or positions of the GFCE, its Secretariat, its members and 
partners, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, its Board of Exec -
utive Directors, staff, or the governments it represents. Neither the GFCE nor the World 
Bank may be held responsible for the use which may be made of the information con -
tained therein.
Except as otherwise noted, the use of this work is authorized under the Creative Com -
mons Attribution 3.0 IGO license (CC BY 3.0 IGO) https:/ /creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/3.0/igo/ . This means that the material may be copied, distributed, trans -
mitted, and adapted for any purpose provided the source is appropriately acknowl -
edged and changes are indicated. 
Copyrighted images that appear in this report belong to their respective owners. These 
images are not available for use under the CC BY 3.0 IGO license terms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is the result of significant contributions from across the broader digital 
development and cybersecurity communities, including Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs), national and international development agencies, international and 
non-governmental organizations, and government officials responsible for or involved 
in designing, implementing, and evaluating digital development projects and/or cyber -
security capacity building activities. The report was written by Melissa Hathaway and 
Francesca Spidalieri. The report was edited and designed by Sherry Loveless.
The authors extend their appreciation to the World Bank staff and the Global Forum on 
Cyber Expertise (GFCE) Foundation who participated in internal discussions and review 
of this report. The authors would also like to thank all the organizations and agencies 
interviewed (see Annex I) for taking the time to provide input and/or peer review for 
this report. The authors accept responsibility for any errors or inaccuracies in this report.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
2This report identifies pathways to bridge  
the development community to the 
cybersecurity capacity building community.
iStock.com/piranka 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
3ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Melissa Hathaway is globally recognized 
as a thought leader in the fields of cyber-
security and digital risk management and 
has relationships with the highest levels 
of governments and international institu -
tions, including NATO, the ITU, the OAS, 
and the World Bank. She has a distin -
guished affiliation at the Harvard Kennedy 
School’s Belfer Center for Science and 
International Affairs. Internationally, she 
advises programs and research initiatives 
at the Center for Asymmetric Threats 
Studies — National Defense College in 
Sweden; the Digital Science Institute — 
European School of Management and 
Technology in Germany; the Centre for 
International Governance Innovation 
in Canada; the  Kosciuszko Institute in 
Poland; and the CyberLaw Research Pro -
gram at Hebrew University in Israel. 
Ms. Hathaway served in two Presidential 
administrations where she spearheaded 
the Cyberspace Policy Review for Presi -
dent Barack Obama and led the Compre -
hensive National Cybersecurity Initiative 
for President George W. Bush.  She built 
a broad coalition from within the Exec -
utive Branch for two Presidents, devel -
oping a cybersecurity strategy covering 
unprecedented scope and scale that facil -
itated revolutionary improvements for the 
United States to secure and defend its crit -
ical national infrastructures. She received 
the National Intelligence Reform Medal in September 2009 and the National Intelli -
gence Meritorious Unit Citation in Decem -
ber 2011 for her leadership. 
As President of Hathaway Global Strat -
egies, she consults Fortune 500 com -
panies on cybersecurity, enterprise risk 
management, and technology assess -
ment. She helps organizations under -
stand their most critical assets, services, 
and data; maps digital risks to the organi -
zation’s business, financial, and risk objec -
tives; and advises clients regarding indus -
try leading practices, emerging cyber 
threats, policy initiatives, regulation, legis-
lation, court decisions, and other indus -
try matters that may affect their current 
and future business. Having served on the 
board of directors for four public compa -
nies and three non-profit organizations, 
and as a strategic advisor to a number of 
public and private companies, Ms. Hatha -
way brings her clients a unique combina -
tion of policy and technical expertise, as 
well as board room experience that allows 
her to help clients better understand the 
intersection of government policy, devel -
oping technological and industry trends, 
and economic drivers that impact acqui -
sition and business development strategy 
in this field.
Ms. Hathaway holds a B.A. degree from 
the American University in Washington, 
D.C. She has completed graduate studies 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
4in international economics and technol -
ogy transfer policy, and is a graduate of 
the US Armed Forces Staff College, with 
a special certificate in Information Oper -
ations. She publishes regularly on cyber -
security matters affecting companies and 
countries; these articles can be found here: 
https:/ /www.belfercenter.org/person/
melissa-hathaway . Follow Ms. Hathaway 
on Twitter at: @CyberReadyIndex.
Francesca Spidalieri  is a highly creden -
tialed cybersecurity professional with 
a decade of experience in cyber pol -
icy development, cyber risk manage -
ment, and strategic planning. As a cyber-
security consultant for Hathaway Global 
Strategies, she provides strategic con -
sulting services to business executives 
and senior government officials on global 
security trends, emerging cyber threats, 
enterprise risk management, and cyber -
security-related policies, laws, and reg -
ulatory matters affecting business deci -
sions. Ms. Spidalieri is also an Adjunct 
Professor for Cyber Policy at the Univer -
sity of Maryland’s School of Public Policy 
and at Salve Regina University, where she 
teaches graduate courses on cyber pol -
icy, cyber defense strategy, and the pros -
pects and challenges of digital transfor -
mation and technological innovation. In 
addition, she is the Co-Principal Inves -
tigator for the Cyber Readiness Index 
2.0 project at the Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, and a non-resident Senior 
Fellow for Cyber Leadership at the Pell 
Center for International Relations and 
Public Policy at Salve Regina University. 
Ms. Spidalieri serves also as  a cyber-
security subject-matter expert for  the 
World Bank,  the International Telecom -
munications Union, the Global Forum on 
Cyber Expertise, and the EU CyberNet, 
and advises programs and research initia -
tives at other research institutes in Europe, 
including the Center for Cyber Security 
and International Relations Studies at the 
University of Florence in Italy and the Kos -
ciuszko Institute in Poland. Her academic 
research and publications have focused 
on cyber leadership development, cyber 
risk management, digital transforma -
tion, and national cyber preparedness 
and resi lience. She lectures regularly at 
cyber-related events in the United States 
and Europe and contributes to journal 
articles and other publications on cyber-
security matters affecting countries and 
organizations worldwide. Ms. Spidalieri 
holds an M.A. in International Affairs and 
Security Studies from The Fletcher School 
at Tufts University, a B.A. in Political Sci -
ence and International Relations from the 
University of Milan, and has completed 
additional cyber security coursework at the 
U.S. Naval War College’s Center for Cyber 
Conflict Studies. Follow Ms. Spidalieri on 
Twitter at: Twitter: @Francesca_cyber.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
5ACRONYMS
5G  Fifth Generation of Mobile Communications  
AI  Artificial Intelligence  
CBM  Confidence Building Measure  
CCB  Cyber Capacity Building  
CERT  Computer Emergency Response Team  
CISO/CIO Chief Information Security Officer/Chief Information Officer  
CSIRT  Computer Security Incident Response Team  
DAC  Development Assistance Committee (OECD)  
DCO  Development Coordination Office (United Nations)  
DDP  Digital Development Partnership (World Bank)  
DPGs  Digital Public Goods  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GFCE  Global Forum on Cyber Expertise  
GP  Global Practice (World Bank)  
ICS  Industrial Control Systems  
ICT  Information and Communications Technology  
IoT  Internet of Things  
ISAC  Information Sharing and Analysis Center  
ISAO   Information Sharing and Analysis Organization  
LAC  Latin America and the Caribbean  
LDC  Least Developed Countries  
MDB  Multilateral Development Bank  
MNOs  Mobile Network Operators  
ODA  Official Development Assistance (OECD)  
OECD  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  
PoC  Point of Contact  
RC  Resident Coordinator (United Nations)  
SDGs  Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations)  
SOC  Security Operation Center  
WB  World Bank  
WDR  World Development Report  
WSIS  World Summit on the Information Society  
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
6TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
VISION AND MISSION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Aim and Objectives  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Sponsors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Methodological Approach and Recommendations Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Target Audience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Stakeholders/Experts Interviewed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1. INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2. BACKGROUND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1 Origins and Evolution of the International Development Community . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2 Origins and Evolution of the Cybersecurity Community  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.3 Defining “Cyber Capacity Building” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3. BRIDGING THE DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY AND THE CYBERSECURITY COMMUNITY  . . 28
3.1 Understanding the Gaps Between Digital Development  
Assistance and Cybersecurity Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2 Cybersecurity and Digital Resilience are Not Viewed as a  
Necessary Component of Development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3 Supply vs. Demand and Exporting Capabilities vs. Building Indigenous Capacity . . .32
3.4 Bringing Transparency to Digital Development and CCB Activities . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.5 Lack of Local Data, Trends, and Field Research to Make a Compelling Argument  . .35
4. CREATING DIGITAL PUBLIC GOODS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5. BENEFITS OF INTEGRATING CYBERSECURITY, DIGITAL RESILIENCE, AND  
CYBER CAPACITY INTO DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDAS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.1 Examples of Where Cyber Capacity Efforts Bridged to Digital Development  
or Where Digital Development Efforts Brought Increased Cybersecurity Maturity  . .44
6. KEY RECOMMENDATIONS: INTEGRATING CYBERSECURITY AND DIGITAL  
RESILIENCE INTO THE BROADER DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDA  . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.1 Call for Stakeholders Action to Bridge Digital Development and Cybersecurity  . . . 50
6.2 Call for Greater Cooperation and Coordination Among Donors and Implementors . .54
6.3 Explore Potential Venues for Bridging the International Development Community  
with the Cybersecurity Capacity Building Community  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
APPENDICES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Annex I:  Organizations interviewed and related digital development  
            and/or CCB activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Annex II: Development and CCB-related Frameworks and Reports Consulted . . . . . . . . 78
ENDNOTES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
7EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Digitization and connectivity yield unques -
tionable benefits, includ ing improv ing 
competi tiveness, productivity, efficiency, 
inno vation, and modernization; generat -
ing more revenue; and advancing human 
and social development. This is why pro -
moting digital transformation has become 
a priority for sustainable development 
and why organizations like the United 
Nations, large donor organizations, and 
countries involved in development assis -
tance are prioritizing digitization as one 
of the key enablers of inclusive and sus -
tainable economic growth and develop -
ment. Yet, rapid digital transformation 
– underpinned by affordable communi -
cations and cheap devices – has intro -
duced new risks and vulnerabilities that 
cannot be ignored. Organizations and 
countries alike are becoming increas -
ingly concerned about the misuse of digi -
tal technologies that might lead to critical 
infrastructure failures, financial destabi -
lization, increased surveillance, human 
rights abuses, disinformation, data exploi-
tation, and other negative impacts on 
public health and safety. 
It is important to recognize that digitiza -
tion and resilience are two sides of the 
same coin. The digital development com -
munity and the cybersecurity community 
share related goals of strengthening digi -
tal capacity building, including the ability 
to effectively use advanced technologies 
while simultaneously ensuring that citi -
zens remain safe, protected, and produc -
tive online. Despite these similar aims, the 
two communities operate primarily within 
their own disciplines, rarely partner, and 
embed cybersecurity activities within 
digital development projects. This report identifies pathways to bridge the devel -
opment community to the cyber security 
capacity building community.
Multiple benefits can arise from integrat -
ing cybersecurity, digital resilience, and 
cyber capacity into digital development. 
At a foundational level, decision-makers 
need to gain a deeper understanding of 
the threats emanating from the poten -
tial misuse of information and communi -
cations technologies (ICTs) and emerging 
technologies, such as becoming tools for 
unauthorized surveillance, disinformation, 
digital authoritarianism, data exploita -
tion, espionage, etc. This understanding 
can guide the development community 
in supporting countries’ digital adoption 
and increasing their maturity in maxi-
mizing the use of new digital technolo -
gies as enablers of sustainable and secure 
development. On a more practical level, 
it is clear that integrating these aspects 
into development programs would lead 
to achieving better outcomes; streamlin -
ing processes/eliminating duplication of 
efforts/maximizing resources; and build -
ing stronger resilience, safety, security, 
and trust into recipient countries’ digital 
transformation projects.
This report is the result of significant 
contributions across the broader digital 
development and cybersecurity commu -
nities, including Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs), national and international 
development agencies, international and 
non-governmental organizations, and 
government officials responsible for or 
involved in designing, implementing, and 
evaluating digital development projects 
and/or cybersecurity capacity building 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
8activities. The recommendations provi-
ded in this report are intended to help 
multi lateral organizations and other 
donors investing in digital development 
and cyber capacity building (CCB) activ -
ities to integrate cybersecurity and digi-
tal resilience throughout the lifecycle of a project,  identify areas where they can 
partner, build mechanisms to de-risk 
their investments, build stronger and 
enduring digital infrastructures and proj -
ects, and accelerate the safe adoption of 
technologies to meet the intended out -
comes of the SDGs. 
A few recommendations stand out.
1. The development and cybersecurity communities need to update their “playbook” 
for the digital era by connecting cybersecurity and digital resilience to the econo mic 
aspirations, digitization strategies, and development priorities of recipient coun -
tries. Digital capacity building must be more needs-driven and tailored to individual 
and national circumstances, and better coordinated globally. Tailored programming 
and approaches based on a demand-driven signal and the political, economic, and 
social context of a recipient country is central to ensuring the long-term sustain -
ability and scalability of any capacity building efforts. Providing sufficient funding 
should also remain an important objective.
2. The cybersecurity narrative in the context of international development should be 
reframed in terms of digital resilience, safety, trust, sustainability, and risk manage -
ment rather than security.
3. The OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) should add “digital resil -
ience” to the eligibility criteria for Official Development Assistance (ODA) as part of 
the peace and security activities to enable cybersecurity-related assistance. 
4. To ensure the continuity and sustainability of a project (e.g., continuity of the 
program, staff, equipment, etc.), funds should be programmed into the country’s 
national budget. Both the development community and recipient countries see 
ICTs as long-term capital assets and expenditures, rather than commodities that 
will need updating and replacing within a five to ten-year period. ICTs that are still 
in use and no longer supported by hardware and software updates make the re -
cipient country more vulnerable to digital risks. This vulnerability leaves a critical 
shortfall in a program’s sustainability and its ability to achieve the desired resilient 
outcomes. A digital development project’s total-cost-of-ownership and ICT refresh 
must, therefore, be included in project formulation and programmed into assis -
tance packages.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
95. The development and cybersecurity communities should invest in the development 
of “Digital Public Goods” (universal tools and instruments) that can be shared and 
applied broadly.
6. Growing a cybersecurity skilled local labor force/talent pools and indigenous capa-
city should be a key objective of any digital development project. This requires 
address ing many related challenges, including the affordability of cyber certifica -
tions, the need to reform school and university curricula, and the need to identify 
and cultivate local talent and commercial implementors. 
7. Funding should be allocated to students and local institutions in order to build knowl -
edge of local ecosystems, culture, and digital risks to society. Local data, trends, 
statistics, and field research that characterize the threat within a country or region 
can provide compelling evidence to drive economic and political arguments as to why 
cyber security is an important and necessary component of digital development.
8. Development organizations should be used as a conduit to raise cybersecurity aware -
ness and build capacity in low- and middle-income countries. While digital risks stem -
ming from increased reliance on ICTs and the expansion of e-services, digital systems, 
and platforms may not be prioritized, the development community has established 
connections and better understanding of local challenges within these countries and 
can offer particular insights and valuable relationships with local “implementors.”
9. Duplication of efforts should be avoided by developing greater coherence and 
coordi nation between stakeholders. Scalable approaches and solutions are need -
ed as well as innovative platforms and pilot projects that identify on-the-ground/
local partners to implement the necessary actions and improve coordination efforts 
with local authorities. The practice of favoring “darling countries” that receive mul -
tiple offers of foreign aid from different donors, while neglecting “orphan countries” 
should be evaluated to maximized development resources more broadly. 
10. There are a number of venues that should be leveraged to bridge the international 
development community with the cybersecurity capacity building community. Net -
working the networks may lead to cybersecurity becoming an integral activity within 
digital development and help both communities achieve more resilient outcomes.  
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
10VISION AND MISSION
AIM AND OBJECTIVES
This report aims to bridge two commu -
nities – the broader development com -
munity and the cybersecurity capacity 
building community – to achieve more 
resilient outcomes by ensuring incorpo -
ration of cybersecurity and digital resil -
ience into digital development activities. 
This report is a product of the partnership 
between the World Bank and the Global 
SPONSORS
The World Bank (WB) has been work -
ing to help over 100 developing countries 
and countries in transition to embrace 
the importance of scientific and techno -
logical innovation for meeting sustain -
able development challenges and for 
accelerating human progress. In 2016, the 
World Bank’s World Development Report 
(WDR) on Digital Dividends , a cardi -
nal document in the development com -
munity that is often used to drive overall 
community strategy, explicitly acknowl -
edged the importance of cybersecurity 
as an international development concern. 
For the first time in a WDR, the impor -
tance of managing digital risk was enu -
merated, as the report noted, “some of 
the perceived benefits of digital technol -
ogies are offset by emerging risks.”1 
In 2019, the World Bank’s General Coun -
sel Sandie Okoro, during her remarks at 
the Council of Europe’s Octopus Confer -
ence, clearly stated the Bank’s commit -
ment to be “at the forefront of helping Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) Foun -
dation, who recognize the importance 
of including cybersecurity, digital resil -
ience, and cyber capacity building (CCB) 
as components of development projects. 
They also understand that advocates are 
needed to promote the eligibility of these 
activities for assistance in the broader 
development agenda.
[its] members participate in the global 
digital economy [and] take advantage of 
globally connected markets in this dig -
ital age.” She also acknowledged “the 
challenges faced by both developed 
and developing countries in ensuring 
the safety and security of their citizens,” 
specifically noting the need to support 
“global cybersecurity, including building 
capacity to combat cybercrime” as key 
enablers of these efforts and the Bank’s 
development mandate.2 
The 2021 WDR on Data for Better Lives 
emphasized the need for low- and 
middle-income countries to adopt “over -
arching safeguards for cybersecurity and 
cybercrime” as part of their legal and 
regulatory frameworks in order to estab -
lish “trust in the data ecosystem for both 
personal and non-personal data” and 
ensure “the security of the network infra -
structure and elements over which data 
flow.” The report states that those safe -
guards should be “established, effectively 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
11implemented, and continually updated in 
response to new risks or deficiencies.”3
Today, the majority of World Bank’s 
projects have an ICT or digital compo -
nent, and this number has continued to 
increase in the post-pandemic world. The 
World Bank began working on cyber-
security as part of its technical assistance 
in the early 2010s (e.g., Morocco, 2011). 
In 2016, cybersecurity became a major 
focus area with the launch of the Global 
Cybersecurity Capacity Program. This 
Program aligns with the World Bank’s 
commitment to promote widespread 
sustainable development and aims to 
enhance the cyber security capacities of 
developing countries through technical 
assistance and capacity building activi -
ties such as convening policy dialogues, 
preparing national cybersecurity assess -
ments, and creating knowledge products 
like the Combatting Cybercrime Toolkit 
(developed in partnership with a number 
of organizations).4 In addition, the World 
Bank has initiated projects to increase 
countries’ capacities to respond to cyber 
threats posed to their public systems and 
infrastructure, and to develop best prac -
tices to minimize the effects of malicious 
cyber activities on the financial sector.
In August 2021, the World Bank launched 
a Cybersecurity Multi-Donor Trust Fund, 
developed as an associated trust fund 
under the broader Digital Development 
Partnership (DDP) umbrella program.5 
The fund aims to better define, under -
stand, articulate, structure, and system -
atically roll out the cybersecurity devel -
opment agenda. The emerging work 
program intends to offer comprehensive cybersecurity capacity development, 
including developing global knowledge, 
country assessments, technical assis -
tance, capacity building, and training 
supported by necessary infrastructure 
and technology investments.
Inspired by the vision that every citizen of 
the world must reap the benefits of ICTs 
in an open, peaceful, and secure digital 
world, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the 
Netherlands led the launch of the Global 
Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) at the 
2015 Global Forum on Cyberspace. In 
2020, the GFCE spun off into an indepen -
dent foundation. The GFCE is an interna -
tional, multi-stakeholder, and consultative 
forum committed to strengthening cyber 
capacity and growing expertise globally 
through international collaboration and 
cooperation. The GFCE developed the 
Cybil Portal , an online platform that cata -
logues expertise, tools, publications, and 
CCB projects.6 Today, the GFCE serves 
as a global platform for countries, inter -
national organizations, and private com -
panies to identify and exchange success -
ful policies, practices, and ideas for cyber 
capacity building and to communicate 
these activities globally. It also functions 
as a clearinghouse to match requests for 
cyber capacities with potential funders 
and expert implementors. The GFCE 
structures its work around five themes 
of cyber capacity,  which were first out -
lined in the 2017 “ Delhi Communiqué on a 
GFCE Global Agenda for Cyber Capacity 
Building ,” namely: 1) Cyber Security Pol -
icy and Strategy; 2) Cyber Incident Man -
agement and Critical Infrastructure Pro -
tection; 3) Cybercrime; 4) Cyber Security 
Culture and Skills; and 5) Cyber Security 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
12Standards.7 While not an exhaustive list 
of capabilities that a country or organiza -
tion must implement to achieve a desired 
level of cyber resilience, the GFCE identi -
fied these capacity building themes as a 
baseline reference for good cyber prac -
tices internationally.
The World Bank joined the GFCE in sup -
port of the overarching development 
angle of cybersecurity capacity building 
and supports the “GFCE Cyber security 
Capacity and Platform” project, which 
aims to promote greater collaboration 
and deeper knowledge in cybersecurity. 
To this end, the World Bank is working 
closely with the GFCE to bring together 
important stakeholders from govern -
ments, academia, the private sector, and 
the development community to: 1) pro -
duce cutting-edge research on newly 
evolving cybersecurity topics; 2) facilitate 
knowledge sharing mechanisms and net -
working opportunities through the Cybil 
portal and other venues; 3) provide 
an avenue to better understand the cybersecurity challenges faced by devel -
oping countries; and 4) engage in capac -
ity building activities.
In June 2021, the GFCE and the World 
Bank came together to identify pathways 
to bridge the development community to 
the cybersecurity capacity building com -
munity and create mechanisms by which 
digital development could see the ben -
efits of incorporating cyber security into 
their projects and initiatives to achieve 
more resilient outcomes.  
This report highlights some of the 
key challenges and benefits of incor -
porating cybersecurity, digital resil -
ience, and cyber capacity building into 
the broader development agenda. The 
report also features several best prac -
tices and bridging venues and activities 
that could facilitate tighter alignment 
and collaboration between the digital 
development and cybersecurity capac -
ity building communities and among 
initia  tive donors and implementors. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS FORMULATION
Based on primary and secondary data 
and information sources, this report 
builds upon existing literature on digital 
development and cyber capacity build -
ing frameworks, methodologies, and 
capacities within the multi-stakeholder 
and international GFCE Community and 
beyond, including MDBs and interna -
tional organizations like the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) and the 
European Union (EU). Primary data was collected over 40 semi-structured inter -
views with selected experts and organi -
zations involved in the design and imple -
mentation of digital/ICT development 
projects and/or cybersecurity initia -
tives (see list in Annex I). Additional pri -
mary data was obtained through a World 
Bank workshop (“roundtable discussion”) 
including representatives involved in dig -
ital development lending operations and 
technical assistance projects from the 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
13World Bank’s Digital Development (DD) 
Global Practice. Secondary data was col -
lected through the GFCE’s Cybil  Por -
tal of cyber capacity building projects, 
additional open-source research, and the 
interviews with community stakeholders 
and experts who provided publicly avail -
able and confidential sources and sup -
porting documentation, including strat -
egies, methodologies, toolkits, primers, 
guidance notes, and other reports.
Interview findings and observations were 
supplemented by additional desk research. 
This report identifies successful programs 
and highlights digital public goods to 
showcase where cybersecurity and cyber 
capacity building efforts were incorpo -
rated into digital development projects, 
TARGET AUDIENCE
The target audience of this report is MDBs, 
international and non-governmental organi-
zations, field workers, experts, government 
policymakers, and officials responsible 
for or involved in designing, implement -
ing, and evaluating digital development including those funded/implemented by 
regional and international organizations, 
as well as by national govern ments and 
other major donors. Other success stories 
include digital development projects that 
increased cyber security maturity of an 
entity or country, and digital infrastruc -
ture investment projects that embed -
ded cybersecurity and digital resilience 
de-risking mechanisms (safeguards). 
The data collected through the inter -
views and desk research was analyzed to 
identify and recommend best practices 
(effective methods) to incorporate cyber-
security, digital resilience, trust, sustain -
ability, safety, and risk management into 
digital development programs and lend -
ing operations.
projects and/or cyber security capacity 
building activities. Additionally, the find -
ings formalized in this document can be 
of value to cybersecurity policy experts 
and researchers at the national and inter -
national levels.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
14STAKEHOLDERS/EXPERTS INTERVIEWED
The following GFCE Members8 and additional international non-governmental 
institutions, regional organizations, MDBs, and government representatives parti-
cipated in the semi-structured interview process to inform the project:
• African Union Commission (AUC);
• Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank (AIIB);
• Australia National University (ANU);
• Australian Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (DFAT);
• Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation;
• Council of Europe (CoE);
• CREST;
• Digital Public Goods Alliance (DPGA);
• DiploFoundation (Diplo); 
• Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
• European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD);
• European Commission (EC);
• European Investment Bank (EIB); 
• German Federal Office for 
Information Security (BSI);
• GFCE Foundation; 
• Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB);
• International Criminal Police 
Organization (INTERPOL);
• International Telecommunications 
Union (ITU); 
• Islamic Development Bank (IsDB);
• Israel National Cyber 
Directorate (INCD);
• Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and International Cooperation; • Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA); 
• Korea Development Bank (KDB);
• Korea International Cooperation 
Agency (KOICA);
• MITRE Engenuity;
• Norwegian Institute of 
International Affairs (NUPI);
• Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD);
• Organization for Security and 
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE); 
• Organization of American States (OAS); 
• UK Foreign, Commonwealth & 
Development Office (FCDO); 
• UN Development Coordination 
Office (DCO); 
• UN Development Program (UNDP); 
• UN Executive Office of the 
Secretary-General (EOSG); 
• UN Institute for Disarmament 
Research (UNIDIR);
• UN Office for Disarmament 
Affairs (UNODA);
• UN Office of the Secretary-General’s 
Envoy on Technology (OSET); 
• UN Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC); 
• U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID); 
• U.S. Department of State; and the
• World Bank.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
151 INTRODUCTION
Innovative technologies of the twen tieth 
century have profoundly transformed 
society and the global economy. Nations 
and corporations alike have embraced, 
adopted, and embedded information 
and communications technologies (ICTs) 
into their networked environments and 
infrastructures and realized phenomenal 
business and economic growth through 
improved services, increased productiv -
ity, and decreased costs. Global economic 
growth today is increasingly dependent 
upon the rapid adoption of ICTs and inter -
net uptake. As of 2021, 4.66 billion people 
were connected to the internet (59.5% of 
the global population) and the global dig -
ital economy represented about 20% of 
the world’s GDP, with ICTs as a principal 
driver of social and economic growth. 
Digitization and connectivity yield un ques -
tion    able dividends, including im prov -
ing competitiveness, productivity, effi -
ciency, innovation, and modernization; 
generating more revenues; and advanc -
ing human and social development. This 
is why promoting digital transformation 
has become a priority for sustainable 
development  and why organizations like 
the United Nations, large donor organiza -
tions, and countries involved in develop -
ment assistance are prioritizing digitiza -
tion as one of the key enablers of inclusive 
and sustainable economic growth and 
development. In the last decade, in par -
ticular, these entities have allocated sig -
nificant funds toward the use of digital 
technologies as part of their development 
assistance for lower- and middle-income 
countries to help them increase their par -
ticipation in the global economy; bridge divides between developed and devel -
oping countries; tackle global challenges 
such as poverty, hunger, and inequality; 
and accelerate human well-being.
Despite the clear benefits of embedding 
digital technologies into society and the 
economy, organizations and countries 
alike are also becoming increasingly con -
cerned about the misuse of digital tech -
nologies that might lead to critical infra -
structure failures, financial destabilization, 
increased surveillance, human rights 
abuses, disinformation, data exploita -
tion, and other negative impacts on peo -
ple’s health and safety. Cyber incidents 
are increasing in volume, scope, and 
sophistication. As UN Secretary-General 
Guterres noted, “the pandemic has ush -
ered in some of the most intrusive sur -
veillance technologies we have ever seen, 
together with a significant increase in 
cynical ransom  ware attacks on hospitals 
and healthcare facilities,”9 all the while 
malicious actors continue to steal sensi -
tive data, knock businesses offline and, in 
some cases, destroy the ICTs that power 
businesses and essential services. 
Moreover, digital risks are also reinforcing 
and magnifying existing fault lines, includ -
ing social and economic inequalities, and 
amplifying the “digital divide” between 
the connected and unconnected. As both 
the development and cybersecurity com -
munities try to address some of these 
challenges, focus is still insufficient on 
building resilience and growing human 
and institutional capacity, particularly in 
developing countries.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
162 BACKGROUND
after the Second World War, the United 
States Point Four Program, and the large 
scale support for economic stability in the 
countries on the periphery of the Com -
munist bloc of that era.”10 The success of 
the Marshall Plan and the establishment 
of the International Bank for Reconstruc -
tion and Development (World Bank) and 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
in the mid-’40s provided the additional 
impetus for the development of this 2.1  Origins and Evolution of the 
International Development 
Community
Just after World War II, a network of 
national and international aid agencies, 
programs, and related institutions and 
donors emerged that today constitutes 
the international development commu -
nity. Its foundations were rooted in four 
distinct initiatives, including “the develop -
ment activities of the colonial powers in 
their overseas territories, the institutions 
and programs for economic co-operation 
created under United Nations auspices 
The cybersecurity “communities of practice” 
emerged from different disciplines (e.g., law 
enforcement, technical, foreign policy, human 
rights). Cyber capacity building emerged as an 
international policy concept in the first decade of 
the 21st century, when a handful of countries and 
international organizations began to include it 
within policy documents and national strategies.The international development 
community — which spans national and 
international development agencies 
to Multilateral Development Banks 
(MDBs), to other large philanthropic 
donors and private foundations 
— began using the concept of 
“capacity building” in the 1990s. 
iStock.com/marchmeena29
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
17responsible for administering economic 
assistance to developing countries (as in 
Germany). In the meantime, DAG turned 
into a permanent Development Assis -
tance Committee (DAC) responsible for 
setting the financial terms, conditions, 
and criteria for donor countries’ devel -
opment aid worldwide.
In 1969, DAC adopted the concept 
of “Official Development Assistance” 
(ODA) to identify official transactions 
made with the main objective of “pro -
moting and specifically targeting the 
economic development and welfare of 
developing countries.” This set of rules 
and criteria for ODA-eligible activi -
ties (so-called “DAC-ability”) is con -
sidered the “gold standard” of foreign 
governments’ assistance, and remains 
the main source of financing for devel -
opment aid today .12 These criteria spe -
cifically exclude “military aid and pro -
motion of donors’ security interests,” 
which is noteworthy because this often 
excludes some donor countries’ cyber -
security-related assistance.
Most of the development aid provided by 
donor countries and international orga -
nizations in the earlier years was dedi -
cated to the financing of basic infrastruc -
ture – roads and railroads, dams, power broader community dedicated to help -
ing less-developed countries through 
external assistance. 
As more countries gained independence, 
several multilateral organizations (e.g., 
Inter-American Development Bank [IDB], 
Organization of American States [OAS], 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development [OECD]) and spe -
cialized UN agencies (e.g., International 
Labour Organization [ILO], UN Chil -
dren’s Fund [UNICEF], World Health 
Organization [WHO], UN Development 
Programme [UNDP]) were established 
“to promote social progress and better 
standards of life” and “to employ inter -
national machinery for the promotion of 
the economic and social advancement of 
all peoples.”11 In 1960, a dedicated Devel -
opment Assistance Group (DAG) was 
created under the aegis of the OECD 
(then, still called Organisation for Euro -
pean Economic Co-operation) to serve 
as a forum for consultations among aid 
donors on assistance to less-developed 
countries. The establishment of DAG 
was part of an extraordinary upsurge 
of related institutional developments 
in the early 1960s that laid the founda -
tion of the current aid system. This entire 
decade was designated by the UN as the 
“United Nations Development Decade.” 
Several developed countries also began 
to establish their own foreign assistance 
agencies, like the U.S. Agency for Inter -
national Development (USAID), Cana -
dian International Development Agency 
(CIDA), Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA), and the Swedish Interna -
tional Development Authority (SIDA); or 
ministries/departments for development 
cooperation (as in France and Italy); or 
other development assistance programs The OECD Development Assistance 
Committee’s (DAC) eligibility 
criteria for Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) are considered 
the “gold standard” of foreign 
governments’ assistance, and 
remain the main source of financing 
for development aid today. 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
18plants, telecommunications systems, etc. 
– for the reconstruction of war-ravaged 
countries. In the early-1970s, the World 
Bank and other development financing 
institutions introduced technical assis -
tance (e.g., agricultural development, 
food production, disaster relief, etc.) 
into their development tool offerings 
to countries in the process of develop -
ment, and expanded their lending oper -
ations to educational activities and other 
fields that could further contribute to 
socio-economic development.13 In 1971, 
the UN established the category of least 
developed countries (LDCs) and incorpo -
rated special measures in favor of these 
most vulnerable countries as part of its 
“International Development Strategy for 
the Second UN Development Decade.”14 
The focus of foreign assistance continued 
to expand to support building modern 
infrastructure development, industrializa -
tion, refugee protection, and knowledge 
projects in the late 1970s, reflecting 
increased attention to problems of pov -
erty, unemployment, and inequality. They 
fundamentally recognized that meeting 
“basic human needs [was] not a substi -
tute for, but an essential component of, 
more economic growth which involves 
modernization, provision of infrastruc -
ture, and industrialization.”15 The notion 
of sustainable development appeared in 
1987 in the UN Brundtland Commission 
Report “Our Common Future,” where it 
was defined as “development that meets 
the needs of the present without com -
promising the ability of future genera -
tions to meet their own needs.”16 All of 
this paved the way for increased invest -
ments in building local human and institu -
tional capacity, promoting national policy 
reforms, and creating the conditions for 
long-term sustainable economic growth and social development. Other important 
notions introduced in aid policy formula -
tion included participatory development, 
environmental sustainability, and the pro -
motion of human rights. 
In the 1990s, the international develop -
ment community – which, by that time 
spanned from national and international 
development agencies, to Multilateral 
Development Banks (MDBs), to other 
large philanthropic donors and private 
foundations – began using the concept of 
“capacity building. ” Since then, this com -
munity has also played an important role 
in providing access to affordable tele -
communications to enable internet use 
driving digitization and enabling inclu -
sive and sustainable economic growth 
and development. The 2003 and 2005 
World Summit on the Information Soci -
ety (WSIS) called specifically for cyber 
capacity building (CCB) to support devel -
opment. However, the field of CCB, with a 
few exceptions, continued to evolve out -
side of the development umbrella.17
The concepts and notions introduced in 
aid policy formulation evolved into the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
agreed to in 2015 by the UN General 
Assembly, and adopted by all UN mem -
ber countries as part of the “ UN 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development .” 
These 17 interlinked global goals include: 
SDG1 on Ending Poverty; SDG2 on Ending 
Hunger; SDG3 on Ensuring Good Health 
and Well-Being; SDG4 on Quality Educa -
tion; SDG5 on Achieving Gender Equal -
ity; SDG6 on Clean Water and Sanitation; 
SDG7 on Affordable and Clean Energy; 
SDG8 on Decent Work and Economic 
Growth; SDG9 on Industry, Innovation, 
and Infrastructure; SDG10 on Reduced 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
19impact of the internet, data, artificial 
intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT), 
cloud computing, and other transforma -
tive technologies directly on the SDGs. 
These activities range from e-bank -
ing and e-money solutions to increased 
access to financial services, in particular 
in rural areas, and improve financial inclu -
sion (SDG10), to AI and machine learning 
to improve energy efficiency and reduce 
electricity costs (SDG7), to increased 
internet access that allows more people 
to enjoy decent working conditions and 
increased income (SDG8), to digital solu -
tions in healthcare to provide people with 
access to increased and improved health 
services (SDG 3), to better educational 
opportunities around the globe (SDG 4). 
Reports and the work of special high-
level panels and commissions all support 
the notion that digitization can accelerate 
realization of all SDGs,20 and can become 
the most important development tool 
for billions of people living in develop -
ing countries.21 The 2030 UN Agenda also 
created a “Multi-stakeholder Forum on 
Science, Technology, and Innovation” to  
promote capacity building activities to 
develop, transfer, and disseminate rele -
vant technologies for the SDGs .
Today, most international institutions (e.g., 
European Union, Economic Commission 
for Latin America and the Caribbean), UN 
specialized agencies, as well as countries 
from LDCs and small-island developing 
states (SIDs) to larger developed nations 
have integrated the SDGs into their respec -
tive development agendas and strategies. 
For example, the International Telecommu -
nications Union (ITU) – the UN specialized 
agency responsible for all matters related 
to ICTs – has aligned its strategic and oper -
ational plans to specific SDGs (i.e., SDGs Inequalities; SDG11 on Sustainable Cities 
and Communities; SDG12 on Responsi -
ble Consumption and Production; SDG13 
on Climate Action; SDG14 on Life Below 
Water; SDG15 on Life on Land; SDG16 on 
Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions; 
and SDG17 on Partnership for the Goals.18 
Each SDG includes a digital compo -
nent, although some SDGs are more 
digitally-oriented than others (e.g., SDG 
4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 16). The connections between 
digital technology and growth have been 
demonstrated through statistics on the 
use of ICTs, and the extent that countries 
are connected correlates with increases 
in their GDP (according to the World 
Bank, every 10% point increase in inter -
net connectivity in a developing coun -
try increases its GDP growth by 1-2%).19 
Additional studies have highlighted the 
UN Image
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
204, 9, 11, 16, and 17).22 The work of the Euro -
pean Bank for Reconstruction and Devel -
opment (EBRD) explicitly contributes to 14 
of the 17 SDGs (their Annual Review 2020 
provides specific case studies that indi -
cate which SDGs their projects support).23 
Even the OECD’s Official Development 
Assistance criteria recognize the impor -
tance of aligning allocation of develop -
ment aid to implementation of the SDGs. 
Moreover, digitization increasingly affects 
how national or international funding 
agencies, development financing institu -
tions, and other donor organizations “con -
tribute assistance to sustainable develop -
ment and to help achieve the SDGs. There 
is broad consensus about the importance 
of connecting developing countries to dig -
ital networks, so as not to widen the gaps 
between rich and poor states.”24 How -
ever, the funding needs have never been 
greater to ensure progress toward deliv -
ering on the global demand for physical 
and digital infrastructure to achieve the 
SDGs. “The UN estimated that the funding 
gap for building the [digital] infrastructure 
in developing countries is over one tril -
lion dollars annually . Official Development 
Assistance (ODA), even during the record 
year of 2020, amounted to only 161 bil -
lion dollars.”25 Multiple organizations have 
called for better cooperation and coordi -
nation among donors to fund the SDGs, 
ensure “trusted digital connectivity,” and 
bridge the digital infrastructure financing 
gaps in developing countries.In 2020, the UN reiterated the SDG goals 
in its “ Roadmap for Digital Cooperation ” 
and emphasized the need to strengthen 
human and institutional digital capac -
ity building, including development of 
digital skills, “effective use of advanced 
and emerging technologies,” ability to 
advance broadband access, adoption, and 
meaningful use and “ensuring that indi -
viduals stay safe, protected and produc -
tive online.”26 It recognized that “digital 
capacity building must be more needs-
driven and tailored to individual and 
national circumstances, and better coordi -
nated globally.” The roadmap set out spe -
cific objectives as a way forward, includ -
ing: 1) developing Digital Public Goods 
Platforms to share digital public goods, 
engage talent, and pool data sets; 2) cre -
ating a broad multi-stakeholder network 
to promote holistic, inclusive approaches 
to digital capacity building with a “clearing 
house function” embedded within the UN 
system to better direct support requests; 
and 3) growing the on-the-ground UN 
presence to enhance support of national 
capacity building efforts and to amplify 
country-level support (See Annex I).27 
Digital capacity building, however, has 
remained separate from the concept of 
“cyber capacity building” and when con -
ducted without proper consideration for 
cybersecurity and digital resilience could 
actually be antithetical to CCB’s aims. "Digital capacity building 
must be more needs-driven 
and tailored to individual and 
national circumstances, and 
better coordinated globally."
"The UN estimated that the 
funding gap for building the 
[digital] infrastructure in 
developing countries is over 
one trillion dollars annually."
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
21“Baseline studies have demonstrated [a 
persistent] gap between development 
goals and intentions in donor policies on 
the one hand, and digital vulnerability and 
cybersecurity in developing countries on 
the other.”29
2.2  Origins and Evolution of the 
Cybersecurity Community
Separate from the broader develop -
ment community, there is an ever-ex -
panding cybersecurity community – “a 
loose community of practice consisting 
of government agencies (from ministries 
of foreign affairs to ministries for devel -
opment and telecommunication regula -
tors), intergovernmental organizations, 
nonprofit/nongovernmental organiza -
tions, [technical incident responders, 
law enforcement officials tackling cyber -
crime, civil society trainers,] and private 
companies.”30 This community grew out 
of the technical discipline of computer 
science in the late 1970s and was mostly 
focused on tackling cybercrime and pro -
viding law enforcement training (crimi -
nal justice community) or offering tech -
nical assistance for incident response 
(incident management community). The 
latter has evolved into a broader com -
munity of technical experts (IT and net -
work managers) who provide essential 
security services and respond to secu -
rity problems and malicious activities 
against networked infrastructures. They 
are a community of passionate people 
that include former government and law 
enforcement officials, academics, ethical 
hackers, civil society, and other experts 
who champion efforts that help ensure 
the ICT environment remains “open, 
secure, stable, accessible and peaceful.”31 Building digital capacity encompasses 
everything from expanding broadband 
access and internet connectivity, to auto -
mating and digitizing industry sectors 
and critical infrastructures, to providing 
e-government services, to developing the 
skills and attitudes needed to meet the 
demands of a digital society. But “dig -
italization in countries that suffer from 
lack of development, poor governance, 
and poverty might provide new breed -
ing grounds for organized crime, terror -
ism, and cybersecurity challenges, [and] 
these digital vulnerabilities and risks 
need to be addressed.”28 Nonetheless, the 
more technical and security-related cyber 
issues, including cybercrime, critical infra -
structure protection, and data protection 
and privacy, have yet to be mainstreamed 
into the development thinking – especially 
into sectoral projects not strictly digi -
tal (e.g. health, energy, transport). This is 
due, in part, to the perception that cyber 
issues are linked to national security, mil -
itary, law enforcement, or intelligence 
efforts, and, therefore, should fall outside 
the scope of Official Development Assis -
tance (ODA eligibility criteria). Even the 
World Bank and other international orga -
nizations that may not be constrained by 
ODA criteria have only recently begun 
to recognize that cybersecurity and dig -
ital resilience should be a part and par -
cel of “development” in the digital age. 
International organizations have 
only recently begun to recognize 
that cybersecurity and digital 
resilience are an essential element 
of development in the digital age.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
22In the last two decades, the foreign pol -
icy and internal affairs community and 
the defense community, typified by Minis -
tries of Foreign Affairs, Ministries of Inte -
rior (or similar), and Ministries of Defense, 
respectively, have also become increas -
ingly active actors in cyber capacity build -
ing activities around the world. In this con -
text, cybersecurity assistance has become 
a foreign policy tool that can influence 
domestic policy, deepen market access, 
and promote the adoption of specific stan -
dards or technology, such as those for 5G 
or AI systems. As expected, these coun -
tries align their foreign assistance funding 
to their national security and/or economic 
priorities and target specific countries 
and regions of the world that align with 
their strategic interests.
The human rights community also plays 
an important role in defending rights and 
freedoms online, including protecting pri -
vacy, enabling freedom of expression and 
freedom of association, preventing dis -
crimination and incitement of violence 
against vulnerable communities, ensuring 
the right to a fair trial, advocating for child 
online protection, and assuring access to 
online services and information. In the 
last decade, the human rights community 
– comprising governments, international 
and local civil society organizations, and 
human rights experts around the world – 
has been sounding alarms and bringing 
attention to existing and potential human 
rights violations through the misuse of 
digital technologies such as social media, 
autonomous intelligent systems, and 
other tracking and monitoring technol -
ogy. The UN via its Special Rapporteurs, 
as well as the Council of Europe (CoE), 
have reiterated several times through their respective official documents and 
resolutions that the rights that exist in the 
analogue world also extend to the digi -
tal world and that “universal human rights 
apply equally online as offline.” Their 
advocacy also focuses on “the need to 
keep human rights and human agency at 
the centre of technological development 
and the imperative to improve coopera -
tion on digital security and trust.”32
All these various cybersecurity “com -
munities of practice” work at times 
together and other times separately to 
grow human, technical, and organiza -
tional capacity to address “essentially 
the same interconnected set of cyber 
challenges, [but] approach them from 
different angles with distinct mandates, 
aims, and cultures.”33 This has created a 
fragmented approach toward address -
ing the misuse of ICTs and digital tech -
nologies internationally. Each sub-dis -
cipline of the cybersecurity field has a 
strong network of individuals, but few of 
these people are connected to all of the 
sub-disciplines. This lack of coherence 
contributes “to the absence of an over -
arching global public policy narrative 
that connects the different communities’ 
interests and elevates cyber policy to a 
strategic, cross-cutting issue for global 
policy leaders.”34 Unfortunately, the dis -
connect between these loosely con -
nected communities of practice (arising 
from their distinct aims, mandates, and 
cultures) has cascaded down to create 
fragmentation within the cyber capacity 
building ecosystem, where various orga -
nizations involved in cybersecurity proj -
ects continue to use CCB activities to 
pursue their own aims and mandates.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
23Given the strong push to achieve the SDGs 
– and the availability of foreign assistance 
from multi-national donors, many gov -
ernments in the developing world have 
begun to embrace digitization and digi -
tal technologies to foster their own eco -
nomic growth and social development. 
However, “the trajectory of digitaliza -
tion in the Global South diverges in var -
ious ways from that of more industrial -
ized countries. As relative late adopters 
of digital technologies, developing coun -
tries engage in ‘technological leapfrog -
ging,’ which in turn is interlinked with the 
risk of new and unprecedented vulnera -
bilities.”35 These governments’ focus is on 
becoming more digitally connected, and 
cybersecurity is not necessarily a priority. 
As a result, many of these countries often 
lack the legal and regulatory frameworks 
to adequately combat cybercrime, and 
the indigenous expertise or the trained 
personnel who understand the digital 
threats within their country and who can 
effectively manage cyber risks and vul -
nerabilities in their society. 
They also often lack adequate institu -
tional capacity (e.g., designated overar -
ching units or competent authority that 
can set up the cybersecurity agenda and 
coordinate national efforts). This capac -
ity gap can undermine the demand for 
digital resilience or requests/understand -
ing of why cybersecurity activities are 
an important component of their digital development agenda.36 Because countries’ 
rapid digitization was not accompanied 
by adequate investments in cybersecurity 
and resilience, they are now experienc -
ing greater vulnerabilities and malicious 
activities that are causing harm to their 
national critical infrastructure and services 
and to their citizens. As lower- and mid -
dle-income countries become even more 
digitized and reliant on ICTs, understand -
ing digital threats and developing local 
institutional and workforce capacity to 
harness and manage their digital transfor -
mation and mitigate related risks become 
indispensable components of a growing 
digitized economy and society. It is also 
important to recognize that increased 
internet connectivity and digitization can 
lead to economic prosperity and sustain -
able development, but only if the internet 
and the ICT infrastructure that underpin 
them are safe, secure, and resilient.37 
Despite their related goals, however, the 
digital development community and the 
cybersecurity community continue to oper -
ate primarily in their own disciplines. There 
are a number of reasons for this disconnect 
– some intentional and some accidental.As lower- and middle-income 
countries become even more 
digitized and reliant on ICTs, 
understanding digital threats and 
developing local institutional 
and workforce capacity to 
harness and manage their digital 
transformation and mitigate 
related risks become indispensable 
components of a growing 
digitized economy and society.Many governments in the 
developing world are focused 
on becoming more digitally 
connected, and cybersecurity 
is not necessarily a priority.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
242.3  Defining “Cyber Capacity 
Building”
Cybersecurity preparedness/readiness, 
digital resilience, and cyber capacity 
building have become a growing prior -
ity for those seeking assistance – both in 
developed and developing countries.38 
The need to align and expand cyber-
security and digital resilience efforts has 
been growing exponentially as the scope, 
volume, and sophistication of cyber inci -
dents, state-sponsored attacks, ransom -
ware, supply chain compromises, and 
digital disruptions increases. 
Cyber capacity building emerged as an 
international policy concept in the first 
decade of the 21st century, when a hand -
ful of countries and international orga -
nizations began to include it within pol -
icy documents and national strategies. 
As awareness of the concept grew, a 
core cyber capacity building community 
started to develop around it, bringing 
together those original parent communi -
ties (e.g., law enforcement, technical, for -
eign policy, human rights) that had been 
pioneers in undertaking CCB activities. 
Nonetheless, “the ‘niche’ nature of cyber -
security in the global policy agenda” has 
kept these issues relegated to a smaller 
community of experts or practitioners, 
and “negatively impacted the integration 
of cyber capacity building into the devel -
opment agenda.” 39 This is not helped by 
the fact that the concept of cyber capac -
ity building remains an amorphous term. 
No consistent definitions nor internation -
ally agreed-upon standards or frame -
works exist to define what should be 
included within this term or who should 
be responsible for these efforts. During the desk research and several 
interviews conducted to inform this 
report, it emerged that major stakehold -
ers in both the cybersecurity and the 
development communities have out -
lined different – sometimes overlapping 
– CCB themes, topics, principles, pillars, 
dimensions, or sets of activities that they 
include in their specific “buckets of capa-
city” (see Figure 1 on page 26). These 
concepts span from creating or adapting 
organizations to promoting institutional 
reforms, to establishing cyber incident 
management plans, to developing human 
resources, and more. Figure 1 depicts a 
variety of activities included as part of 
cyber capacity building by major interna -
tional organizations and donor countries. 
At least one definition from the litera -
ture describes international cybersecurity 
capacity building as “an umbrella concept 
for all types of activity in which individu -
als, organizations or governments collab -
orate across borders to develop capabili -
ties that mitigate risks to the safe, secure 
and open use of, and relationship with, 
the digital environment.”40
Interestingly, the country of Israel has 
adopted the broadest definition of cyber 
capacity, including: building the capac -
ity of government organizations to 
defend themselves from cyber risks; the 
capacity of regulators and govern ment 
agencies to guide, control, regulate, and 
support their own organizations and 
those they oversee; the capacity of the 
state to monitor, mitigate, and respond 
to national-level cyber threats through 
national and sectoral CERTs, CSIRTs, 
SOCs, ISACs, ISAOs, and other expert 
centers; the development of institu -
tional, legal, and regulatory capacity; 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
25Figure 1: CCB themes, topics, principles, pillars, or dimensions as defined 
by organizations/agencies within the cybersecurity community.ITU Cybersecurity 
Strategy/
FrameworksDevelop National 
CSIRT
& Conduct 
CyberDrillsFacilitate Access  
to existing 
resources to 
develop national 
legislation to 
combat cybercrime
(i.e., Combatting 
Cybercrime 
Toolkit)Combat SPAM 
(Solutions and 
Awareness)Technology 
StandardsInclusivity  
of women 
and youth 
(workforce 
development, 
Child Online 
Protection)
GFCE
(themes)Cybersecurity 
Strategy and 
PolicyCyber Incident 
Management 
and Critical 
Infrastructure 
ProtectionCybercrime Cybersecurity Culture 
and Skilled WorkforceCyber 
Security 
Standards
European 
Commission 
(pillars)Strategic 
FrameworkIncident and Crisis 
ManagementCriminal Justice in 
CyberspaceCyber Hygiene and 
Awareness
African Union Cybersecurity 
Policy and 
Strategy 
(national 
strategies, 
assessments, 
cyber diplomacy)Cyber Incident 
Management & 
Critical Information 
Protection  (national 
computer security 
incident response)Cybersecurity Culture 
& Skills  (cybersecurity 
awareness, education 
and training, workforce 
development)
OAS
(pillars)Policy 
Development 
(development 
of national 
or regional 
cybersecurity 
strategies)Technical Capacity 
Development 
(critical infrastructure 
protection, 
development of 
CSIRTs, training and 
cyber exercises)Research and Outreach  
(development of 
technical documents, 
toolkits, & research-
based reports to 
guide stakeholders on 
current developments, 
cybersecurity 
problems, and key 
challenges in the 
region)
IDB Provide 
funding to LAC 
governments 
to develop 
cybersecurity 
strategies, policy, 
and initiativesTechnical Assistance  
(critical infrastructure 
protection, 
development of 
CSIRTs/SOCs, 
training, information 
sharing, incident 
response)Cybercrime Cybersecurity 
Research, Knowledge 
Dissemination, and 
Outreach  (societal 
issues, cybersecurity 
education and 
awareness, workforce 
development)
U.S. State 
DepartmentCybersecurity 
Strategy and 
PolicyIncident 
Management
(coordinate 
cybersecurity watch, 
warning, response, 
and recovery efforts)Fight Cybercrime  
(updating criminal 
laws, procedures, 
and policies)Cybersecurity Culture 
and Skills (increasing 
awareness of citizenry 
and industry of 
their critical role in 
protecting cyber 
systems [following UN 
GA Resolutions 57/239 
and 58/199])Increase 
government-
industry 
collaboration  
(public-
private 
partnerships) 
to manage 
cyber risk 
and share 
knowledge
UK
(dimensions)Policy and 
StrategyIncident 
ManagementCybercrime Culture and Society
Education, Training 
and SkillsStandards 
and 
Technology
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
26the capacity to collaborate with other 
countries to share information and pro -
mote collective defense; and supply side 
market capacity – the ability to develop 
products, services, and capabilities to 
prevent, manage, and respond to cyber 
risks (including industrial capacity, aca -
demic capacity, and the development of 
a professional workforce) and to trans -
fer/export Israeli know-how, innovation, 
technologies, and expertise abroad.41 
Perhaps even more important is that there 
is no common definition of even the word 
“capacity” between the development com -
munity and the cybersecurity community. 
According to the Merriam-Webster dic -
tionary, the word “capacity” is defined as: 
“one’s mental or physical ability” or “the 
facility or power to produce, perform, or 
deploy.” Some organizations also define it 
as enhancing individual and institutional 
knowledge and skills to address (policy) 
challenges. Neither the development nor 
the cyber security communities, however, see “capacity building” in the same way. 
Some view it as technical assistance or 
strictly training programs and digital skills 
formation, whereas others view it as con -
nectivity. Very few organizations view 
capacity building as the whole gamut – 
institutional, governance, legal, technical, 
and operational capacity development. 
Because they do not have a common 
definition of what “capacity” is or how it 
should be developed, they often talk past 
each other. 
The rest of this report highlights some of 
the key challenges and benefits of incor -
porating cybersecurity, digital resilience, 
and cyber capacity building into the 
broader development agenda. It also fea -
tures some good practices and identifies 
select bridging venues and activities that 
could facilitate tighter alignment and col -
laboration between the two communities 
and among donors and implementors 
of both digital development and cyber 
capacity building initiatives.
Very few organizations view capacity building as the whole 
gamut – institutional, governance, legal, technical, and 
operational capacity development. Because they do not 
have a common definition of what “capacity” is or how it 
should be developed, they often talk past each other.No Common Definition of Capacity
iStock.com/Pgiam
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
273 BRIDGING THE DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY 
AND THE CYBERSECURITY COMMUNITY
often seen as an activity best delivered by 
those with expertise from the military, law 
enforcement, or intelligence disciplines. 
This is antithetical to how the develop -
ment community operates and delivers 
assistance. Because cybersecurity capac -
ity has associations with the security sec -
tor, cybersecurity capacity building would 
be better framed in the context of “digi -
tal” resilience, safety, trust, sustainabil -
ity, and risk management, linking security 
with sustainable economic development 
and human rights. 
Moreover, these two communities do not 
typically frame their activities in the con -
text of the broader economic objectives 
or specific needs and circumstances of 
the countries where they fund projects, 
digitize infrastructures, or hope to build 
capacity – nor do they usually coordi -
nate their respective capacity building 
efforts on the ground. There are a num -
ber of reasons for this lack of partner -
ship – some of which are intentional, and 
some accidental.Cybersecurity capacity building 
should be framed in terms of “digital” 
resilience, safety, trust, sustainability, 
and risk management, linking 
security with sustainable economic 
development and human rights.  3.1  Understanding the Gaps 
Between Digital Development 
Assistance and Cybersecurity 
Activities
Despite having related goals of strength -
ening digital capacity building, includ -
ing the ability to effectively use advanced 
technologies while at the same time 
ensuring that citizens remain safe, pro -
tected, and productive online, the digital 
development community and the cyber -
security community operate primarily 
within their own disciplines. They rarely 
partner and embed cybersecurity activi -
ties within digital development projects. 
This is partly because they do not see that 
digitization and resilience are two sides 
of the same coin. Building digital capac -
ity encompasses a wide range of activi -
ties that span from expanding broadband 
access and internet connectivity, to facili -
tating participation in the digital sphere, to 
modernizing industries and critical infra -
structures with advanced technologies 
that are dependent on internet connectiv -
ity. Digital capacity has a positive narra -
tive – it benefits society. Yet, rapid digital 
transformation – underpinned by afford -
able communications and cheap devices 
– has introduced new risks and vulnera -
bilities that cannot be ignored. The cyber -
security community, which can be more 
technical and more security-oriented, 
views these threats to networked infra -
structures and society as risks that must 
be managed. Cybersecurity, therefore, is 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
28not be carried through the life cycle of the 
project. As a result, most organizations 
are not building the necessary de-risking 
processes or safeguards (similar to envi -
ronmental or social safeguards) into their 
procurement, assistance, or investment 
operations to manage cybersecurity/
technology-related risks. 
Yet, even when cybersecurity or digital 
resilience are considered or embedded in 
the formulation of a project, there is often 
an internal disconnect between the pol -
icy people and the programmatic people 
dedicated to a given project – within both 
the development and cyber security com -
munities. In addition, national or interna -
tional funding agencies and other large 
donors do not always have the right 
“implementors” for their projects/lend -
ing operations. This sub-community of 
organizations that implement projects 
and provide technical assistance range 
from global consultancy firms to small 
and specialized consultancies, to inter -
national organizations (e.g., OSCE, ITU, 
UNODC), to academic and non-govern -
mental institutions. However, it is difficult 
to find implementors who will instinctively 
include cybersecurity or de-risking mech -
anisms in the project, especially if it was 
not part of their contract requirements or 
budget allocation. Moreover, the imple -
mentors who have become translators 3.2 Cybersecurity and Digital 
Resilience are Not Viewed as 
a Necessary Component of 
Development
The broader international development 
community is beginning to recognize that 
cybersecurity and digital resilience are 
important components of development. 
While the development community con -
tinues to invest hundreds of millions of dol -
lars in developing countries to achieve the 
SDGs by building “smart” infrastructures 
and digitizing greater portions of society, 
the assistance projects have not placed 
the necessary attention (or de-risking 
mechanisms) to the heightened and novel  
digital risks that come with digitization 
and increased use of ICTs. First, there is 
a knowledge gap. MDBs do not see old-
school infrastructure projects as digital 
and, therefore, do not build in de-risking 
measures. “Development donors are hes -
itant to fully embrace cyber security as a 
development issue.”42 Instead, this com -
munity sees digital technologies as a nec -
essary means to accelerate the achieve -
ment of the SDGs and does not necessarily 
appreciate the “dark side of the innova -
tions.”43 The risks of the misuse of digital 
technologies, including becoming tools 
for cybercrime, unauthorized surveillance, 
promoting disinformation, enabling digi -
tal authoritarianism, exploiting data, facil -
itating espionage, etc., and how they 
could harm their development projects 
and goals are not top of mind. Coupled 
with the knowledge gap is a communi -
cation challenge. Digital risks to projects 
come in many forms and usually have a 
technical underpinning. If risks are not 
evaluated and communicated at the for -
mulation of a project, the translation may Most development organizations 
are not building the necessary 
de-risking processes or safeguards 
into their procurement, assistance, 
or investment operations 
to manage cybersecurity/
technology-related risks. 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
29between stakeholders within the develop -
ment and the cybersecurity communities 
are not necessarily equipped to commu -
nicate the technical nuances. Understand -
ing the specific needs of a country or 
region and knowing how to navigate 
highly politicized cyber-related issues 
are key skills. For example, implemen -
tors should remain impartial. If a recipi -
ent country needs to reform or update its 
cybercrime legislation, the implementor 
should know, and be able to communicate 
the differences and similarities of existing 
regional conventions or agreements (i.e., 
Council of Europe’s Convention on Cyber -
crime vs. Shanghai Cooperation Organi -
zation’s Agreement on Cooperation in the 
Field of Information Security vs. African 
Union Convention on Cybersecurity and 
Personal Data Protection).
Highly publicized cyber incidents have also 
further politicized the already complex 
topic of cybersecurity from a geo political 
perspective. When the national rail trans -
portation is knocked offline in Iran, or the 
Ministry of Justice is ransomed in South 
Africa, or the oil and gas pipeline and food 
supply is ransomed in the United States, 
these events are seen within the ambit of 
national security, national defense (mili -
tary), criminal justice (law enforcement), 
or as an intelligence problem. Addition -
ally, cybersecurity is often entangled 
with data protection/privacy, trade and 
competition, and/or other geostrategic 
issues (e.g., Chinese vs. American vs. Rus -
sian technologies). Therefore, cyberse -
curity is often perceived as too political, 
and avoided as a focus area or investment 
line by donors across the board. Moreover, 
“because development spending can be 
perceived as zero-sum, money spent on 
cyber security could be seen as taking 
away from money potentially invested in alleviating other development stress -
es.”44 These circumstances, thus, both ele -
vate the political sensitivity of digitization 
and have an indirect negative effect for 
international organizations or countries 
who want to provide foreign aid but are 
unable to include it as part of their devel -
opment assistance because it falls outside 
the scope of the DAC criteria for Official 
Development Assistance. To circumvent 
this situation, in the Asia Pacific, the 2018 
“Boe Declaration on Regional Security” 
was helpful in up-leveling cyber security 
as a cross-cutting issue and a develop -
ment priority for investment and collab -
oration in the Pacific (Strategic Focus 
Area 5 is dedicated to “Cyber-enabled 
Crime and Cyber security”).45 This showed 
that, ideally, cybersecurity can become 
an integral component of the develop -
ment agenda – beginning with the design 
of any new development project – and, 
can be considered an eligible develop -
ment assistance criterion for foreign aid 
and development support if it has the 
right political backing and buy-in. (DAC 
would still need to update its ODA eligibil -
ity criteria to include “cybersecurity” and/
or “digital resilience.”) Other countries, 
including the U.S., UK, Germany, Israel, 
and Estonia have found other pathways to 
fund cyber security initiatives (e.g., devel -
opment of institutional capacity, cyber-
security training for government entities 
or police forces, rapid incident response 
assistance, cybersecurity awareness cam -
paigns, cyber hygiene education, and 
more) as part of their development assis -
tance programs or as special items out -
side ODA-eligible programs (e.g., U.S.-
funded cybersecurity activities in Georgia 
via NATO’s Partnership for Peace pro -
gram). In the case of the UK, for exam -
ple, assistance funding for CCB activi -
ties was allocated by designing projects 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
30whose primary objective is to support 
delivery of the SDGs and that do not work 
with military or intelligence agencies (but 
can work with police). However, these 
approaches are not necessarily scalable 
by a small group of Ministries of Foreign 
Affairs who are pioneering the use of ODA 
funding for CCB activities, and incorporat -
ing cybersecurity and digital resilience is 
still not considered foundational to digi -
tal development by the broader develop -
ment community.
Recipient countries are also faced with a 
similar challenge, and may not appreciate 
the increased exposure to cyber risk that 
comes with digitization. Therefore, recipi -
ent governments may not request cyber -
security or digital resilience enhancing 
capacity when accepting donor funds/
grants/loans to support their digital trans -
formation and developing their digital 
agenda. “In part due to the perceived com -
plexity of cybersecurity, some recipients 
of development assistance – the stake -
holders who largely drive the direction 
of spending – struggle to include cyber -
security in their development investment 
strategies.”46 This is also partly because 
the recipient country may lack aware -
ness of why cybersecurity matters to its 
digital transformation or lack innovative 
approaches to its own strategy/policy 
development and simply wants to copy 
what other larger countries have devel -
oped and that is perceived as successful. 
However, many developing countries can -
not absorb the best practices developed 
by other more advanced countries. 
Moreover, both the development com -
munity and recipient countries see ICTs 
as long-term capital assets and expendi -
tures, rather than commodities that will need to be updated and replaced within a 
five to ten-year period. This leaves a crit -
ical shortfall in the sustainability of a pro -
gram and its future fragility, because it 
can no longer be used safely. For example, 
many developing countries cannot afford 
the longer-term costs to sustain institu -
tions (e.g., national cybersecurity agency, 
national CERT/SOC) or the workforce sal -
ary requirements incubated and funded 
using development loans or donors’ 
money. A digital development project’s 
total-cost-of-ownership and ICT refresh 
must, therefore, be included in project for -
mulation and programmed into assistance 
packages. The future sustainability of 
these projects also requires the recipient 
country to embed ICT commodity refresh, 
new systems upgrades, workforce training 
and retention, etc., into their national bud -
geting process. 
Both the development community and 
the cybersecurity community need to 
think ten years out when developing a 
project involving digital technologies 
and ensure its sustainability as a basis of 
programming/lending. If continued costs 
have not been considered and incorpo -
rated into the recipient country’s national 
budget to support the local workforce, 
to update or replace equipment or soft -
ware, or to buy licenses after the first 
five to ten years, then the programs/Both the development community 
and recipient countries see 
ICTs as long-term capital assets 
and expenditures, rather than 
commodities that will need to 
be updated and replaced within 
a five to ten-year period.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
31perceived shortfalls of a recipient country 
with a supply-driven approach, and uses 
a standard set of activities (e.g., develop -
ment of national cybersecurity strategies, 
establishment of CERTs/CSIRTs, devel -
opment of cybercrime legislation, etc.) 
that more advanced countries have and 
believe should be prioritized by devel -
oping countries. The CCB community 
does not regularly take a more strategic 
approach – including listening to the real 
needs of the recipient country – to meet 
the specific country demands or short -
falls. A cultural, historical, and socially 
nuanced evaluation should be considered 
when solutions are offered. Even the UN 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation recog -
nized that “one of the primary challenges 
to date is that a large part of digital 
capacity-building has been supply-driven 
as opposed to needs-based.”48 
This set of predetermined activities that 
the CCB community continues to “sup -
ply” is part of an “ outdated” playbook  that 
needs to be updated to the digital era and 
tailored to individual and national circum -
stances. Many of the people and organiza -
tions interviewed for this report stressed 
the need to connect cybersecurity and 
digital resilience with the economic aspi -
rations, digitization strategies, and devel -
opment priorities of recipient countries. 
This is a key area for digital cooperation 
among the donor and CCB communities. 
A related problem is that many developed 
countries have adopted an export model 
for capacity building. They are exporting institutions developed become unsus -
tainable or obsolete after depletion of the 
initial funds occurs. In most cases, devel -
opment aid or other types of low-interest 
loans for CCB activities simply end up 
becoming an extra financial burden on 
the recipient country. In order to sustain 
capacity, the development community 
and the cybersecurity capacity build -
ing community need to ensure that pro -
grams in recipient countries incorporate 
the sustainment funds (e.g., continuity 
of the program, staff, equipment, etc.) 
into the country’s national budget. Digi -
tal capacities broadly should be elevated 
into the government budget and become 
a recognized contribution to the coun -
try’s GDP as the digital economy grows.47
3.3 Supply vs. Demand and 
Exporting Capabilities vs. 
Building Indigenous Capacity
Sustainability – the ability to maintain a 
certain rate or level of capacity – requires 
focus upon developing an indigenous abil -
ity to maintain, support, and defend digi -
tal or cybersecurity investments. However, 
the cybersecurity capacity building com -
munity mostly continues to address the "A large part of digital capacity-
building has been supply-driven 
as opposed to needs-based."Both the development community 
and the cybersecurity community 
need to ensure that a digital 
development project’s total-cost-
of-ownership and ICT refresh 
are included into the project 
formulation and programmed into 
assistance packages, and that the 
sustainment funds for the continuity 
of the development program, staff, 
equipment, etc. are incorporated 
into the country's national budget.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
32Cybersecurity and digital 
resilience activities should be 
connected with the economic 
aspirations, digitization strategies, 
and development priorities 
of recipient countries.
knowledge, tools, people, and capabili -
ties, rather than building robust indi genous 
capacity as part of their aid programs. 
Some donor activities are intended to 
project national influence to meet foreign 
policy objectives, fulfill economic man -
dates, and extend corporate operations 
(and influence) into the recipient countries, 
but they rarely involve local experts or build 
on existing local communities, structures, 
or grassroots networks. “In many cases, 
cybersecurity [or digital] capacity builders 
– donor government representatives, their contractors, corporations, and sometimes 
nonprofits – fly in, conduct a workshop or 
training session, and leave. While this is not 
universally the case and some projects or 
programs involve more extended in-coun -
try engagement, these projects appear to 
be the exception rather than the rule.”49 
Many recipient countries have raised these 
issues, pointing out that donors only occa -
sionally ask the local community (e.g., 
political, commercial, or academic lead -
ers) what they need or conduct a baseline 
assessment of what they have. In some 
cases, various foreign entities may have 
conducted multiple assessment stud -
ies. However, some assessments remain 
unpublished, while others are open only 
to the commissioning government, are not 
publicly available, or are not built upon 
further because they were only meant to 
justify the continuation or expansion of 
development or CCB projects.
★Facilitate growing  
cybersecurity skilled 
local labor force and 
indigenous capacity.
√ Address affordability of cyber certifications; 
√ Reform school and university curricula; and 
√ Identify and grow local talent and 
commercial implementors.
iStock.com/tumsasedgars
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
33Establishing an understanding of the politi -
cal, technical, and social maturity and capa-
city to absorb help is an important first step 
to building capacity. Indeed, sustain able 
socio-economic-technical change requires 
an understanding of the political, cultural, 
and economic context in which a digital 
intervention or CCB initiative takes place. 
Therefore, “having a local sense” and 
developing “digital solutions [and cyber -
security activities] designed with knowl -
edge of local ecosystems and culture” is 
crucial.50 Tailored approaches can deter -
mine the extent to which capacity build -
ing efforts can be adaptable and scalable. 
However, because so many current pro-
jects do not involve local experts or build 
on existing local communities/struc -
tures, indigenous capacity is not being 
created.51 This lack of local capacity – 
cybersecurity professionals equipped 
with robust tools – has led many recip -
ient countries to outsource services to 
meet their cybersecurity needs and thus, 
perpetuate the export model.52 Unfortu -
nately, the donor community is also per -
petuating this export model.
3.4 Bringing Transparency to Digital 
Development and CCB Activities
To maximize resources, avoid duplica -
tion of initiatives (which is expensive 
and inefficient), and/or find potential 
synergies, the donor organizations or 
countries should first understand who 
else is supporting the recipient country. They should conduct an assessment of 
other ongoing or forthcoming develop -
ment and/or CCB projects in the coun -
try or region before designing, funding, 
or implementing their new digital devel -
opment and/or CCB projects to bet -
ter serve that country. This assessment 
could precede or occur concurrently 
with a digital risk/maturity assessment 
of the country or sector under consider -
ation for foreign assistance.
Donors involved in digital development 
and/or CCB activities fall primarily into 
two main categories: multilateral orga -
nizations or foundations and nation-
states (bilateral donors). International 
organizations, MDBs, and foundations 
base their digital development lending 
opera  tions or technical assistance proj -
ects on their mandate. Some have a spe -
cific focus region, like the OAS and IDB 
for Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Others, such as EBRD, prioritize emer-
ging economies, while the EU prioritizes 
Africa and Europe’s eastern and south -
ern neighborhood. Donor countries tend 
to priori tize their foreign assistance fund -
ing to their national foreign policy and 
economic interests and, therefore, target 
specific countries/regions of the world 
that support those interests. These dif -
ferent approaches have also contributed 
to what has become termed a group of 
“darling countries” (e.g., Kenya, Ukraine, 
Vietnam), which receive multiple offers of 
foreign aid from different donors, versus a 
group of “orphan countries” (e.g., Soma -
lia, Syria, Yemen, Sudan) that is rarely the 
focus of foreign assistance by developed 
countries or donor organizations, par -
tially because of their territorial conflicts.
If donor organizations’ digital develop -
ment initiatives and CCB activities were Establishing an understanding 
of the political, technical, and 
social maturity and capacity to 
absorb help is an important first 
step to building local capacity. 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
34more visible to each other project and 
responsible entity, some of these chal -
lenges could be mitigated. “To overcome 
these challenges, two aspects are cen -
tral: greater coherence and coordination 
in capacity-building efforts; and a con -
certed effort at scaling up solutions.”53 
Local communities should be deeply 
involved and consulted in the very plan -
ning of these actions and in the shap -
ing of activities based on what makes 
sense and what can/will be sustain -
able, while donor organizations should 
do more to coordinate their efforts and 
develop cooperation policies, co-invest -
ments, hand-off mechanisms, and busi -
ness models tailored to the specific 
needs of a country/region – which, in 
turn, would help increase the sustainabil -
ity, adaptability, and scalability of proj -
ects. “Holistic, inclusive approaches that 
bring together existing initiatives, United 
Nations entities, regional and subregional 
bodies, and other relevant organizations 
that promote digital capacity-building 
are necessary to improve support for 
governments and other stakeholders.”54
The UN Development Coordination 
Office (DCO)55 maintains Resident Coor -
dinators  (RCs) in each of the UN pro -
gram countries, resulting in a vast on-the-ground presence. These RCs 
are the key conduit for supporting UN’s 
activities for sustainable development, 
which could also be a natural point of 
visibility for other donors. It can “con -
nect the dots” and help donor organiza -
tions understand the activities underway 
in the recipient country and potentially 
highlight underserved needs. In particu -
lar, RCs have a convening authority and 
influence in their country of operations 
and could serve as the natural conveyor/
aggregator among other donors, as well. 
The RCs are responsible for coordinat -
ing programs on the ground across all 
UN agencies, which provides them with 
the most-centrally coordinated view of 
all the UN programs in a given country. 
They can also receive additional requests 
or signals from recipient governments 
and guide those requests to the right 
agency that can provide the right kind 
of support. 
3.5  Lack of Local Data, Trends, 
and Field Research to Make a 
Compelling Argument
Developed countries use data to drive 
decisions. Local data, trends, statistics, 
and field research that characterize the 
threat within a country or region can pro -
vide compelling evidence to drive eco -
nomic and political arguments as to why 
cybersecurity is an important and neces -
sary component of digital development. 
Nonetheless, having reliable, accessible, 
and up-to-date data on digital risks and 
cyber threats remains a challenge, par -
ticularly for developing countries. Data 
are needed to better understand and 
characterize the threats and risks associ -
ated with ICT adoption, internet uptake, 
and digitization without incorporating 
risk-reduction activities. Different approaches to digital 
development lending operations 
and foreign assistance funding 
have contributed to the practice 
of favoring “darling countries” 
that receive multiple offers 
of foreign aid from different 
donors, while neglecting “orphan 
countries” that are rarely the 
focus of foreign assistance.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
35The few available reports and statistics on 
cyber-related issues in developing coun -
tries still cite western sources and are not 
based on local data sets from the region/
country. Moreover, finding, aggregating, 
and disseminating the right data (e.g., 
cost of cybercrime/ransomware and its 
impacts on society) remains challenging even for more developed countries. The 
OECD, a well-known knowledge hub 
for data and analysis, has a formalized 
reporting system to collect specific data 
from bilateral and multilateral providers 
of development cooperation to develop -
ing countries, but also struggles to find 
the necessary data to estimate the cost of 
cybercrime (methodological and empiri -
cal issues).56
Engaging different local stakeholders – 
including governments, civil society, and 
academia – to cooperate on data produc -
tion and use, and dedicating funding to 
local universities or researchers to gather 
local evidence and necessary data or to 
conduct trend analysis may help generate 
local buy-in.Local data, trends, statistics, and 
field research that characterize 
the threat within a country or 
region can provide compelling 
evidence to drive economic and 
political arguments as to why 
cybersecurity and digital resilience 
are important and necessary 
components of digital development. 
Generate local buy-in by gathering  
local data and conducting trend analysis 
iStock.com/metamorworks
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
364 CREATING DIGITAL PUBLIC GOODS
Some organizations involved in digi -
tal development and/or cyber capacity 
building have started to develop “Digital 
Public Goods” (DPGs).  These univer -
sal tools and instruments can promote 
sharing of best practices and assess -
ment tools; identify talent, and pool data 
sets; serve as a “clearinghouse” to better 
direct requests for support (e.g., GFCE); 
enhance support to national capacity 
building efforts; and amplify country-level 
support (e.g., CREST). These types of 
efforts can serve multiple communities, 
allowing the focusing of funding toward 
developing countries’ greatest needs. 
Even the 2020 UN Roadmap for Digi -
tal Cooperation acknowledged the need 
for the global community to “undertake 
a concerted global effort to encourage 
and invest in the creation of digital pub -
lic goods [such as] open source software, 
open data, open AI models, open stan -
dards and open content,” as a way to help 
support and accelerate the SDGs.57 There 
are a number of efforts already underway 
to develop DPGs that emerged during the 
interview process, including: 
 ЈThe Gates Foundation  is funding proj -
ects to create “digital public goods” 
(e.g., institutional and operational 
capacity; frameworks/tools to mea -
sure the maturity of the cybersecurity 
ecosystem of a country and/or specific 
sectors; good practice guides on how 
to create a CERT/SOC, how to lead the 
procurement of security services and 
products, how to hire the right person -
nel, and how to train the local workforce, 
among others). Examples include: a. The African Union-GFCE  Collaboration 
on “Enabling African countries to iden -
tify and address their cyber capacity 
needs.”58 As part of this two-year col -
laborative project (2020 - 2022), the 
GFCE serves as Secretariat to an Afri-
can Coordinating Committee  that 
includes relevant organizations from all 
55 African countries that have a stake in 
CCB. The goal is to enable these coun -
tries to better understand cyber capac -
ities and support them in strengthen -
ing their cyber resilience. In particular, 
the project intends to: 1) bridge “foun -
dational” expertise (supply-driven 
approach) and grow a trusted com -
munity of cyber leaders from the dif -
ferent African countries; 2) iden -
tify relevant cyber capacity gaps on a 
national and sub-regional level in Afri -
can countries, and enable these coun -
tries to prioritize, address, and commu -
nicate their national cyber capacity in a 
tailored way; and 3) foster coordination 
and increase international collabor-
ation between (existing) cyber capac -
ity building efforts in Africa. The proj -
ect focuses on three  key CCB themes: 
1) Cyber Security Policy and Strategy  
(i.e., Strategies , National Assessments , 
Confidence Building Measures and 
Norms, Cyber Diplomacy); 2) Cyber 
Incident Management & Critical Infor -
mation Protection  (i.e., National Com -
puter Security Incident Response ); and 
3) Cyber Security Culture & Skills  (i.e., 
Cyber Security Awareness , Education 
and Training , Workforce Development ). 
The project and final report will come 
to fruition in 2022.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
37b. The CREST Cybersecurity Maturity 
Model Assessment  is a freely access-
ible, affordable, sustainable, and 
scalable framework to measure the 
maturity and financial inclusion of the 
cybersecurity ecosystem of a coun -
try across five dimensions: 1) National 
Cybersecurity Strategy & Capabilities; 
2) Cybersecurity Information Shar -
ing; 3) Cybersecurity Service Provi -
sion; 4) Cybersecurity Professional 
Development; and 5) Banking Sec -
tor Risk Posture. The resulting coun -
try assessments can be used to com -
pare country sector organizations, 
identify good practices and areas of 
common concern, monitor the impact 
of investments, and define clear, mea -
surable objectives for improvement. 
CREST, an international not-for-profit accreditation and certification body, 
has made building capacity in the 
global cybersecurity market its main 
mission. It is working to identify other 
good practice guidance /Digital Pub -
lic Goods as part of its capacity build -
ing efforts to support maturity level 
improvement in all areas of the cyber -
security ecosystem, especially finan -
cial inclusion.59 Their available good 
practices guidance includes: 1) How to 
establish an effective cybercrime unit; 
2) How to create a CERT/SOC; 3) How 
to re-skill/up-skill the workforce; and 
4) How to procure cyber products and 
services (i.e., “Service Selection Plat -
form” to help governments, regula -
tors, and buyers in identifying trusted 
suppliers that can deliver high-quality 
technical security services).
Image provided by CREST
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
38c. The CyberLab-Africa initiative  – a 
colla bor ation between Carnegie Mel -
lon University’s (CMU) CyLab and 
CMU-Africa that aims to improve 
access to financial technologies and 
to build public trust in those technol -
ogies. This investment consists of five 
primary initiatives implemented via a 
network of university partnerships in 
Africa. In one research area, the CMU 
team conducts assessments of the cur -
rent cyber security landscape among 
African FinTech operators to better 
understand the cyber readiness of the 
sector and to evaluate the maturity 
of financial inclusion. This leads to an 
evaluation of the digital identity infra -
structure (based on a Modular Open-
Source Identity Platform or MOSIP) 
for identity management – a predicate 
to fielding a test deployment of the 
MOSIP identity management platform 
at CMU-Africa. They also use the results 
of these assessments to develop open-
source tools for threat intelligence 
sharing and diagnosis to enable net -
work operators (e.g., of digital iden -
tity systems like MOSIP) to outsource 
the detection of malicious activity to 
trained professionals. Finally, they are 
designing training programs for cyber -
security workforce development, with 
a particular focus on identifying female 
participants who may not already be in 
cybersecurity-related roles.60
 ЈThe Digital Impact Alliance  (DIAL) – a 
“think, do, replicate” tank housed at the 
United Nations Foundation with a mis -
sion to help countries accelerate their 
digital transformation and responsi -
ble data use journey and to “overcome 
the systemic barriers preventing digi -
tal solutions from going to scale.” DIAL 
serves as a neutral broker, bringing together government, industry, and 
other development stakeholders to 
promote new solutions to old prob -
lems. One of the primary ways DIAL 
promotes new solutions for historically 
underserved regions and populations 
worldwide is by leveraging big data 
analytics to support sustainable devel -
opment. They aggregate and analyze 
relevant data gathered by mobile net -
work operators (MNOs) to shed light 
on how data and digital technology 
can transform the development and 
humanitarian sectors and help to solve 
some of the most intractable devel -
opment problems.61 The Gates Foun -
dation, the UK Foreign  and Common -
wealth  Development Office (FCDO), 
U.S. Agency for International Devel -
opment (USAID), the Swedish Interna -
tional Development Agency (Sida), and 
the United Nations Foundation founded 
this initiative in 2015.62 
 ЈThe Digital Public Goods Alliance  
(DPGA) – “a multi-stakeholder initia -
tive with a mission to accelerate the 
attainment of the sustainable develop -
ment goals in low- and middle-income 
countries by facilitating the discovery, 
development, use of, and investment 
in digital public goods.”63 The Alliance 
defines DPGs as “open source software, 
open data, open AI models, open stan -
dards, and open content that adhere to 
privacy and other applicable laws and 
best practices, do no harm by design, 
and help attain the SDGs,” and pro -
motes DPGs to create a more equitable 
world. They maintain the DPG Standard 
and Registry, in which they curate avail -
able DPGs based on their usefulness 
and robustness. They also financially 
support DPG capacity building activ -
ities and oversee DPGs pathfinding 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
39pilots (e.g., the Global Digital Library; 
platforms to aggregate and layer sec -
tor-specific health data; etc.) in low- 
and middle-income countries that can 
inform the creation of new DPGs aimed 
at building local capacity or support 
existing DPGs that are locally managed 
through adaptation and implementa -
tion. In addition, the DPGA convenes 
expert communities of practice (CoPs), 
which are groups of experts who work 
to discover, assess, and support the 
advancement of DPGs with high poten -
tial for addressing critical development 
needs.64 Incubated by the government 
of Norway and the UN Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), the DPGA relies on engage -
ment and leadership from pathfinder 
countries, private sector technology 
experts, think tanks, governments, phil -
anthropic donors, international imple -
menting organizations, and the UN. 
The Rockefeller Foundation is integrally 
involved in this initiative.
 ЈThe World Bank , in partnership with 
seven other organizations including 
CoE, ITU, and UNODC, has developed a 
Cybercrime Toolkit  dedicated to build -
ing capacity among policy-makers, legis -
lators, public prosecutors, investigators, 
and civil society in developing countries 
in the policy, legal, and criminal justice 
aspects to better combat cybercrime. 
This resource includes a Toolkit that 
synthesizes good international practice 
in combating cybercrime; an Assess -
ment Tool for countries to evaluate their 
current capacity (or lack of capacity) 
to combat cybercrime and to highlight 
priority areas to direct capacity build -
ing resources; and a Virtual Library with 
materials provided by partner organi -
zations and other participants to share 
information, experience, and expertise 
on combating cybercrime.65 ЈThe GFCE  hosts the Cybil Portal  – the 
largest database of existing CCB meth -
odologies, frameworks, expert organ-
izations, and projects, and a knowledge 
hub that brings together stakeholders 
from the cyber capacity building com -
munity to collaborate on and share CCB 
research and initiatives.66 It also serves 
as a clearinghouse to match needs for 
cyber capacities with offers of support 
and help to connect donors, beneficia -
ries, and implementors.
 ЈUSAID  has recently released a 
“Cybersecurity Primer”  for missions 
and for implementing partners that 
shows how to incorporate cyber-
security and digital resilience safe -
guards throughout USAID’s Program -
ming Cycle. This tool provides an 
overview of why cybersecurity and 
digital resilience should become a 
first-order strategic and operational 
priority across all phases of a proj -
ect design and implementation in 
order to ensure digital sustainability 
and resiliency. The Primer is intended 
to increase awareness and provide a 
basic understanding of cybersecu -
rity, cyber threats trends by sector, 
and digital resilience as they relate to 
development programming for USAID 
staff, which can serve as a resource to 
help streamline cyber security into the 
broader development community.67
 ЈThe UK FCDO developed a Digital 
Access Diagnostic  tool, as part of its 
Digital Access Programme (DAP), to 
conduct detailed country assessments 
to determine the most relevant invest -
ments of their DAP development aid. 
These country diagnostics look at the 
current state of the country under 
three main areas: 1) digital inclusion; 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
402) capacity of government, society, 
and the economy to manage cyber 
risks; and 3) status of the local digi -
tal economy. The resulting assessment 
and business case serve to guide the 
FCDO in tailoring their DAP program 
to the specific needs of the recipi -
ent countries (i.e., Brazil, Kenya, Indo -
nesia, Nigeria, South Africa) and to 
diversify the delivery models across 
three pillars (in-house delivery, out -
sourced delivery, or a mix of the two). 
This diversification also helps keep 
the program flexible, sustainable, and 
adaptable to current circumstances 
(e.g., increased use of telemedicine 
and remote learning during COVID-19 
crisis). What is most unique about this 
tool, and the overall DAP program, is 
its focus on the local digital economy, 
the enablers for digital inclusion, and 
the development of sustainable digital 
solutions that can be applied locally – 
as an example of “tech for good.”
 ЈThe UNDP  developed a Digital Read -
iness Assessment  (DRA) tool (they 
conducted a first pilot in Kosovo68) 
to provide rapid, high-level insights 
into a country’s digital strengths and 
weaknesses; to map out the shape, 
pace, and types of transitions happen -
ing; and to identify what can be done 
to accelerate digital transformation 
efforts and agendas of a country, while 
ensuring an inclusive, whole-of-society 
approach to digital development – to 
“leverage digital to achieve the SDGs .” 
The tool starts with a survey, followed 
by a longer-term, thorough consulta -
tive process. The resulting assessment 
provides a detailed Digital Readiness 
Index of the country for each of the key 
pillars (i.e., Infrastructure, Government Services, Regulations69, Business, Peo -
ple) of the UNDP Whole-of-Society 
Digital Transformation framework. The 
UNDP uses this tool as a basis to dis -
cuss possible UNDP support. I t serves 
as a top-level framing that could 
encompass other frameworks, and as 
an “entry point” to increase engage -
ment with the country’s government 
and i mprove coordination and clarity 
to drive a whole-of-government and 
whole-of-society approach to digital 
transformation .70 
Image provided by UNDP - draft version, November 2021Inclusive Whole-of-Society Digital  
Transformation Framework
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
41 ЈThe DiploFoundation has devel -
oped a tool to map how digital tech -
nologies can facilitate the successful 
implementation of each of the sus -
tainable development goals (SDGs), 
and provides specific examples of 
broad digital transformation initia -
tives and local measures that can 
support the realization of specific 
SDGs. For instance, “ #eSkills4Girls ,” 
an initiative based on cooperation 
between several actors, namely, 
the G20, UNWomen, OECD, ITU, 
UNESCO, and the German Federal 
Ministry for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (BMZ), seeks 
to contribute to SDG 5 on Gender 
Equality, in particular in developing 
countries, by sharing information, 
recommendations, and good prac -
tices on digital inclusion of women. 
Platforms such as “ Ecubi”  in Mexico 
or the “ Too Good to Go”  applica -
tion in Europe are currently used to 
fight food waste, but also to distrib -
ute excess food to those in need at 
the local level and, therefore, con -
tribute to SDG 2 on Ending Hunger. 
Other local projects such as the 
“e-Rezeki”  and the “ eUsahawan ” 
launched by the Malaysia Digital 
Economy Corporation promote 
SDG 1 on Ending Poverty by help -
ing individuals acquire digital skills 
and find work online.71
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
42According to the ITU, at least 127 coun -
tries have published a national cybersecu -
rity policy or strategy72 and many of these 
countries have also articulated their focus 
on building a strong digital economy. 
While a positive development, it is also 
important that countries align their digi -
tal (economic) development agenda with 
their cybersecurity priorities, thus bring -
ing heightened attention to the need to 
secure critical digital dependencies and 
to identify specific companies, services, 
infrastructures, and assets that, if harmed, 
would have grave economic and national 
security consequences on the country.73 
The recommendations within this report 
are intended to help multilateral organiza -
tions and other donors investing in digital 
development and cyber capacity building 
√  Decision-makers need to gain a deeper 
understanding of the threats emanating 
from the potential misuse of ICTs and 
emerging technologies (e.g., tools for 
cybercrime, surveillance, disinformation, 
digital authoritarianism, data exploitation, 
espionage, etc.). This understanding can 
guide the development community in 
supporting countries’ digital adoption and 
increasing their maturity in maximizing 
the use of new technologies as enablers 
of sustainable and secure development.
√  Integrating cybersecurity insights and 
activities into development programs 
would lead to achieving better outcomes; 
streamlining processes/eliminating 
duplication of efforts/maximizing resources; 
and building stronger resilience, safety, 
security, and trust into recipient countries’ 
digital transformation projects.BENEFITS OF BRIDGING5 BENEFITS OF INTEGRATING CYBERSECURITY, 
DIGITAL RESILIENCE, AND CYBER CAPACITY 
INTO DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDAS
activities to integrate cybersecurity and 
digital resilience throughout the project 
lifecycle; to identify areas where they can 
partner and build mechanisms to de-risk 
their investments; to build stronger and 
enduring digital infrastructures and proj -
ects; and to accelerate the safe adoption 
of technologies to meet the intended out -
comes of the SDGs. Risk mitigation, in 
particular, is essential to effective and sus -
tainable digital development programs.
There are multiple benefits of integrat -
ing cybersecurity, digital resilience, and 
cyber capacity into digital development. 
At a foundational level, decision-mak -
ers need to gain a deeper understand -
ing of the threats emanating from the 
potential misuse of ICTs and emerging 
iStock.coml/-Antonio-
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
43technologies (e.g., tools for cyber -
crime, unauthorized surveillance, disin -
formation, digital authoritarianism, data 
exploitation, espionage, etc.). This under -
standing can guide the development 
community in supporting countries’ dig -
ital adoption and increasing their matu -
rity in maximizing the use of new tech -
nologies as enablers of sustainable and 
secure development. On a more practical 
level, based on the interviews conducted 
with stakeholders responsible for digital 
development and cyber capacity build -
ing efforts in different organizations, 
regions, and countries, it is clear that inte -
grating these aspects into development 
programs would lead to achieving better 
outcomes; streamlining processes, elim -
inating duplication of efforts, and maxi -
mizing resources; and building stronger 
resilience, safety, security, and trust into 
recipient countries’ digital transforma -
tion projects. Also worth noting is that 
“developing countries are increasingly 
becoming hosts to the infrastructure and 
actors behind malicious cyber activities. 
Bridging the digital divide [and incor -
porating cybersecurity and digital resil -
ience are] therefore important also with 
regard to responding to national secu -
rity and various types of cyber threats 
in donor countries” and that we must 
“strengthen the global security land -
scape by limiting the number of safe 
havens for cybercriminals.”745.1   Examples of Where Cyber 
Capacity Efforts Bridged to Digital 
Development or Where Digital 
Development Efforts Brought 
Increased Cybersecurity Maturity
During the interview process, some unique 
examples surfaced that could be repli -
cated by other institutions. For example, 
some donor organizations have begun 
to embed digital safeguards (or de-risk -
ing mechanisms ) into their digital devel -
opment and infrastructure projects. There 
are also instances where cyber security 
activities have been incorp orated into 
digital development initiatives (and vice 
versa) and helped to build real indigenous 
capacity. Additionally, there are commu -
nities of practice that have devised effec -
tive partnerships or cooperation mech -
anisms to build synergies and avoid 
duplication of efforts. Although anecdotal 
evidence is not a sufficiently strong foun -
dation to bridge the gaps highlighted in 
this report and to link best practices to 
effective project impacts or outcomes, it 
is still worth highlighting some of those 
successful examples: 
5.1.1   Value of Having Point-of-
Contact Networks
 ЈCouncil of Europe : The CoE has estab -
lished a 24/7 Network of contact points 
to combat cybercrime under the Buda -
pest Convention on Cybercrime (Art. 
35). Parties to the Convention can send 
and receive requests for assistance not 
only for computer-related crime, but 
for all matters in which electronic evi -
dence is involved – including receiving 
initial technical or legal advice to the 
requesting service, preserving essen -
tial data, or obtaining information on 
foreign forums about possible threats Integrating cybersecurity, digital 
resilience, and cyber capacity 
into digital development 
programs would lead to 
achieving better outcomes.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
44(e.g., France-Charlie Hebdo terrorist 
attacks, business email compromises, 
fraud, etc.). The channel can also trans -
mit requests for immediate assistance in 
cases when a person’s physical safety is 
in question (from kidnapping, threats, 
etc.) and can provide useful informa -
tion and alerts on cyber threats to criti -
cal infrastructures in other countries and 
indicators of compromise, if available.75
 ЈINTERPOL : The International Criminal 
Police Organization (INTERPOL) estab -
lished a secure global police commu -
nications network called I-24/7 that 
serves to connect member countries’ 
national law enforcement with other 
countries and with INTERPOL General 
Secretariat. Each member country 
hosts an INTERPOL National Central 
Bureau (NCB) that can search for the 
information needed from other NCBs 
to help investigate crime or criminals 
in their own country and to share crim -
inal data and intelligence to assist other 
countries through the I-24/7 network.76
 ЈOSCE Point-of-Contact Network : 
The Organization for Security and 
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has 
established a “Point-of-Contact Net -
work” to build partnerships and confi -
dence among peer communities. This 
project is specifically dedicated to pro -
moting the operationalization of the 
Confidence Building Measure (CBM) 
8  on Points of Contact (PoCs) by 
enhancing its functioning both as a crisis 
communication network and as a plat -
form for cooperation. This closed online 
platform/database, only accessible with 
a password, contains contact details of 
national PoCs – both technical (CERTs) 
and policy – and allows them to con -
nect directly. The aim of this directory is not to duplicate already existing 
technical communities (e.g., FIRST, EU 
CSIRT network, etc.) but to serve as 
a regional risk-reduction mechanism 
aimed at preventing conflicts stemming 
from the misuse of ICTs by states. The 
OSCE Secretariat keeps the database 
up-to-date and validates the contact 
information (through so-called “Com -
munication Checks”). Previously these 
people attended annual meetings of 
PoCs aimed at further building trust and 
confidence between experts, strength -
ening regional partnerships, exchanging 
best practices, promoting a common 
understanding of cyber/ICT threats, 
and discussing co-operative actions 
that can meaningfully address them 
– however, these in-person engage -
ments have been disrupted by COVID.  
 
OSCE is now sharing its experience on 
establishing and maintaining this direc -
tory of policy and technical PoCs with 
other regional organizations and the 
UN as an example of good practice on 
how to operationalize CBMs.77
 ЈEU CyberNet : The EU CyberNet plat -
form was launched in 2019 to bring 
together a group of vetted experts from 
the cybersecurity community across 
the EU to increase cyber resilience and 
capacities worldwide, provide techni -
cal assistance to partner countries in 
tackling the growing challenge of mali -
cious cyber activities, and strengthen 
the delivery, coordination, and coher -
ence of the EU’s external cyber capacity 
building projects.78 In addition to creat -
ing a pool of EU cybersecurity experts, 
this voluntary-based network serves 
as a forum for connecting the stake -
holder community in Europe, providing 
support to the European Commission’s 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
45services (i.e., expertise on external cyber 
actions), and building cybersecurity 
“train-the-trainers” curricula and train -
ing modules, as needed. 
 ЈUSAID Digital APEX:  USAID devel -
oped the Digital APEX resource of vet -
ted cybersecurity services/experts/com-
panies to strengthen the digital resilience 
of organizations across the range of 
sectors in which USAID invests, and to 
ensure successful international devel -
opment outcomes. Implementing part -
ners and beneficiary teams can tap 
into this list of pre-approved, U.S.- and 
regionally-located small businesses to 
receive rapid technical assistance if they 
experience significant cyber incidents, 
or to preemptively reduce vulnerabilities 
in digital systems to prevent or mitigate 
damages from malicious cyber activi -
ties. The program equips non-govern -
ment beneficiaries with tools and skills 
to improve digital hygiene, secure digi -
tal financial transactions, implement safe 
storage of private or protected data, 
improve the capacity to use advanced 
encryption, and field other diagnos -
tic and defensive tools to protect digital 
infrastructures. Digital APEX can also be 
used to support other cyber-related proj -
ects, including risk assessments, network 
penetration testing, software and hard -
ware procurement, cyber training, net -
work monitoring, and incident response.
 ЈCREST Service Selection Platform: 
CREST developed a Service Selection 
Platform of vetted vendors to offer free 
guidance for governments, regulators, 
and buyers on procurement of ICT and 
security services, with a list with contacts 
of recommended qualified companies 
and suppliers that can deliver high-qual -
ity technical security services.795.1.2 Partnership Effect
 ЈIDB - Uruguay : The IDB is funding the 
government of Uruguay through a spe -
cific multi-million dollar loan operation 
to strengthen its cybersecurity posture. 
The Uruguayan AGESIC (Agencia de 
Gobierno Electrónico y Sociedad de la 
Información) – the National Agency for 
e-Government and Information Society 
– is considered by the OAS and the IDB 
as a role model for the region for the way 
it has integrated cybersecurity and pro -
moted the use of ICTs to improve gov -
ernment management with a focus on 
citizens, democratizing public services, 
and mitigating regional inequalities. The 
IDB provided technical and financial 
assistance to AGESIC through seven dif -
ferent loan operations to implement the 
different digital agendas that support 
their cybersecurity policy. For exam -
ple, Uruguay’s Digital Development Pol -
icy integrated cybersecurity and risk 
mitigation measures into the country’s 
action plan. Uruguay currently leads the 
region in terms of e-government ser -
vices, information security, interoper -
ability, citizen services, personal data 
protection, access to information and 
electronic signatures, competitiveness, 
etc. This leadership has enabled the 
country to quickly scale positions glob -
ally, making a difference for an innova -
tive approach to open government poli -
cies and the application of ICTs focused 
on citizens. 
 ЈITU - Kenya : With financial and expert 
assistance from the ITU, Kenya estab -
lished and then improved the capabili -
ties of its National Computer Incident 
Response Team-Coordination Centre 
(National KE-CIRT/CC). This Centre con -
tinued to mature and expand its reactive 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
46and proactive capabilities, became a 
trusted, central coordination point of 
contact for cybersecurity in the country, 
and eventually led the national strategy 
development and policy updates for 
the country.80 It also became a regional 
example and extended its knowledge 
of technical capabilities into the East 
African Communications Organization 
(EACO) and continues to provide lead -
ership to extend capacity throughout 
the region (Tanzania, Uganda, etc.).81
 ЈUSAID – Ukraine:  The four-year USAID-
funded Cybersecurity for Critical Infra -
structure in Ukraine activity aims to 
improve the country’s cyber prepared -
ness and build critical infrastructure 
resiliency through three complemen -
tary objectives: 1) strengthening the 
cybersecurity enabling environment; 
2) developing Ukraine’s cybersecurity 
workforce; and 3) building a resilient 
cybersecurity industry. The project, led 
by Development Alternatives, Inc (DAI), 
has leveraged partnerships with the 
government and ministries to develop 
capacity on the ground; raise awareness 
of cyber threats; strengthen the legal, 
regulatory, and institutional frameworks 
for national cybersecurity oversight and 
align them with international standards 
and best practices; improve national 
cybersecurity sector governance and 
coordination; expand collaboration and 
communication among key governmen -
tal stakeholders; support and empower 
cybersecurity institutions; build techni -
cal capacity of critical infrastructure sec -
tors through demand-driven assistance; 
and incorporate specific security pro -
tections in the industrial control systems 
(ICS) of the energy sector and other vul -
nerable critical infrastructures.82  ЈEU – CoE – INTERPOL : The European 
Union (Instrument Contributing to 
Peace and Stability) and the Council 
of Europe – now also with INTERPOL 
– launched a joint project called the 
Global Action on Cybercrime Extended 
(GLACY+) to strengthen the capaci -
ties of countries to apply legislation on 
cybercrime and electronic evidence; 
enhance the abilities of police author -
ities to investigate cybercrime and of 
criminal justice authorities to prosecute 
and adjudicate cases of cybercrime; and 
engage in effective international coop -
eration in this area. The project supports 
fifteen priority and hub countries in the 
African, Asia-Pacific, Latin America, and 
the Caribbean regions (Benin, Burkina 
Faso, Cabo Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, 
Dominican Republic, Ghana, Mauritius, 
Morocco, Nigeria, Paraguay, Philippines, 
Senegal, Sri Lanka, and Tonga). These 
countries may serve as hubs to share 
their experience within their respective 
regions.83
 ЈDG NEAR – Estonia MFA – Ukraine: 
The EU Commission’s Directorate-Gen -
eral for Neighborhood and Enlarge -
ment Negotiations (DG NEAR)84 is part 
of the European eastern and southern 
neighborhood assistance actions dedi -
cated to supporting reform and demo -
cratic consolidation, taking forward EU’s 
neighboring and enlargement policies, 
and strengthening the prosperity, sta -
bility, and security around Europe. This 
program created a special unit to sup -
port Ukraine’s digital transformation and 
reforms after the revolution in 2014. This 
broad-reaching  Digital Transformation 
initiative, in partnership with the Euro -
pean External Action Service (EEAS) and 
the Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
47goes beyond digital development assis -
tance. This special team provides advice 
and guidance on legal, regulatory, and 
policy reforms in energy, environment, 
justice, and home affairs in Ukraine (in 
support of EU values, policies, and inter -
ests); supports the government’s efforts 
to expand availability and adoption of 
digital services (Ukraine was the first 
country in the world to adopt a digi -
tal passport and to offer a COVID vac -
cine digital certificate fully integrated 
with the EU system “Green Pass”), 
ensure interoperability of systems, and 
upgrade and strengthen critical infra -
structure (update software for the 
Soviet era); and provides capacity build -
ing for all government agencies respon -
sible for digitalization. Cyber security is 
an intrinsic component of all these digi -
tal projects, and all the financial support 
(overall budget of €25 million) and tech -
nical assistance provided is  considered 
“DAC-able.” They framed it as “reforms 
support” and “digital transformation,” 
but incorporated cyber security in the 
design of all their efforts.85
 ЈOAS – EU Cyber4Dev:  The OAS has 
partnered with the EU Cyber Resil -
ience for Development (Cyber4Dev) 
project to offer online training for inci -
dent responders (CSIRTs) in Ecua -
dor, Paraguay, Dominican Republic, 
and Costa Rica, and tabletop exercises 
(e.g., national-level cybersecurity exer -
cise “Cyber llamas” in the Dominican 
Republic).86 The online training courses 
intend to build local capacity, test matu -
rity, identify areas of vulnerability for 
improvement, reduce the impact of 
cyber attacks, increase cyber resilience, 
and tackle other cyber threats from 
managing disinformation to more tech -
nical issues.87 The OAS also works with the EU CyberNet  to offer a cadre of sub -
ject-matter experts and provide specific 
training on other requests for assistance 
from member states in the region. 
 ЈJICA – Indonesia:  As part of their CCB ini -
tiatives, JICA focuses on university part -
nerships as the natural place to develop 
indigenous capacity. In Indonesia, they 
are implementing a master-level pro -
gram on cybersecurity and developing 
the curriculum together with their local 
counterparts. (Sometimes their projects 
are developed from scratch with local 
university partners and other times they 
import their curricula and experts.)
 ЈWorld Bank:  The World Bank has begun 
to include cybersecurity in its financing 
operations. An early example was the 
project that financed the establish ment 
of the National CERT in Morocco. More 
recently, discreet country financing 
operations embedded cyber  security 
components in a project to connect 
Tonga. The project includes build ing a 
high-speed broadband capacity sub -
marine cable to provide better internet 
coverage and assisting the country in 
drafting a cybercrime law, which paved 
the way for Tonga to join the CoE Con -
vention on Cybercrime. Likewise, pro -
grammatic interventions, such as the 
Identity for Development (ID4D) initia -
tive, include cybersecurity in each of 
their 40 or so projects ensuring secu -
rity of national identification (ID) sys -
tems and data.88
 ЈIFC – Private Sector Firms : The Interna -
tional Finance Corporation (IFC), part 
of the World Bank, helps advance eco -
nomic development by investing in pri -
vate sector companies in low- and medi -
um-income countries across a range of 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
48sectors (e.g., energy, transport, and tele -
communications). They leverage the 
private sector to open up markets and 
mobilize other investments for compa -
nies in the lowest-income countries that 
are eligible for ODA funding/grants and 
in fragile and conflict nations (for every 
dollar the IFC invests, they bring $5 of 
private sector financing).89 The IFC has 
also incorporated de-risking mecha -
nisms through its financing. Their invest -
ment officers appraise risk according to 
each sector’s exposure. Their risk man -
agement framework helps assess risks 
(high-medium-low) for specific industry 
sectors. The sectors considered to have 
higher risk exposure (e.g., energy, logis -
tics) receive additional scrutiny, versus 
sectors considered low risk (e.g., finance, 
telecommunications) because of exist -
ing industry frameworks, best practices, 
regulations, or experience.
5.1.3 Using Organizations’ Convening 
Power: The Bridging Effect
 ЈUN DCO Resident Coordinators : The 
UN Development Coordination Office 
(DCO) provides  Resident Coordina -
tors (RCs) and UN country teams in each 
of the countries where there is a UN pro -
gram with regional-specific support, 
and acts as a key conduit for supporting 
UN’s activities for sustainable develop -
ment, informing policy, programs, and 
operations on the ground.90 The RCs, 
in turn, are responsible for coordinat -
ing local programs across all UN agen -
cies involved, which provides them with 
the most-centrally coordinated view of 
all the UN programs in a given coun -
try. They can also receive additional 
requests or signals from recipient gov -
ernments and guide those requests to 
the right agency that can provide the right kind of support. The RCs have a 
convening authority and influence in 
their country of operations, and could 
serve as the natural conveyor/aggrega -
tor among other donors, as well .
 ЈUNODC – El Salvador:  The UN Office 
on Drugs and Crime’s Global Program 
on Cybercrime has developed a natu -
ral bridging function between donors’ 
recipient countries, international organi -
zations, and local entities. For example, 
in 2004, they started a collaboration in 
El Salvador with the country’s Attorney 
General Office, Supreme Court of Jus -
tice, and El Salvador National Civil Police 
in order to develop and strengthen insti -
tutional capacity. They created a Cyber -
crime Unit within the National Civil Police 
and delivered joint workshops and tai -
lored training for law enforcement offi -
cials, judges, forensics experts, and local 
prosecutors from different units, as part 
of the project “Strengthening of the 
Capacities of El Salvador National Civil 
Police in the Effective Identification and 
Investigation of Cybercrime Cases in 
El Salvador.” UNODC also coordinated 
their efforts and invited other partner 
organizations, including the Interna -
tional Centre for Missing and Exploited 
Children (ICMEC) and INTERPOL, to 
work together on their specific areas of 
expertise (i.e., online child sexual abuse 
and exploitation, cyber operations, and 
connecting to the International Child 
Sexual Exploitation [ICSE] database). 
The initiative received financial support 
from the Bureau of International Nar -
cotics and Law Enforcement (INL) of 
the Embassy of the United States in El 
Salvador, and is still receiving financial 
support from other donors such as Can -
ada, the UK, and Norway.91
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
49community will need to create an em -
pirically convincing argument that an 
absence of better cybersecurity leads 
to demonstrably worse outcomes.  …  In 
the event that the need to integrate 
cybersecurity into development is em -
pirically convincing, the cybersecuri -
ty community more broadly has yet 
to develop truly useful measurements 
to evaluate cyber security and cyber-
security capa city building interventions. 
Lacking these metrics, it becomes dif -
ficult to craft meaningful, empirical -
ly driven arguments for what capacity 
development interventions produce the 
most positive outcomes. Better out -
come-oriented metrics are needed to 
identify and communicate these good 
practices, whether government poli -
cy interventions, corporate policies, or 
technolo gical interventions ."92
 ЈEncourage the OECD’s Development 
Assistance Committee (DAC) to add 
“digital resilience” to the eligibility cri -
teria for Official Development Assis -
tance (ODA)  as part of the peace and 
security activities to enable cybersecu -
rity-related assistance. 
 ЈEnsure the continuity and sustainabil -
ity of a project (e.g., continuity of the 
program, staff, equipment, etc.) by 
programming funds into the country’s 
national budget. Both the develop -
ment community and recipient coun -
tries still see ICTs as long-term capital 
assets and expenditures, rather than 
commodities that will need updat -
ing and replacing within a five to ten-
year period. ICTs that are still in use and 6 KEY RECOMMENDATIONS: INTEGRATING 
CYBERSECURITY AND DIGITAL RESILIENCE INTO 
THE BROADER DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
6.1 Call for Stakeholders Action to 
Bridge Digital Development and 
Cybersecurity
 ЈAdvocate for the development com -
munity and the cybersecurity commu -
nity to update their “playbook” to the 
digital era by connecting cyber security 
and digital resilience with the eco -
nomic aspirations, digitization strat -
egies, and development priorities of 
recipient countries. Digital capacity 
building must be more needs-driven 
and tailored to individual and national 
circumstances, and better coordinated 
globally. Tailored approaches and pro -
gramming based on a demand-driven 
signal and the political, economic, and 
social context of a recipient country are 
central to ensuring the long-term sus -
tainability and scalability of any capac -
ity building efforts. Providing sufficient 
funding should also remain an import -
ant objective. 
 ЈChange the cybersecurity narrative, in 
the context of international develop -
ment, and reframe it in terms of digital 
resilience, trust, sustainability, safety, 
and risk management. 
 ЈEncourage "more data-driven guid -
ance for cybersecurity good practices, 
cybersecurity community awareness of 
and participation in key dialogues in the 
development community around the 
use of metrics and identification of good 
practices in capacity development.
The donor community’s reliance on 
metrics to steer investment means that 
the cybersecurity capacity building 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
50no longer supported by hardware and 
software updates make the recipient 
country more vulnerable to digital risks. 
This vulnerability leaves a critical short -
fall in a program’s sustainability and its 
ability to achieve the desired resilient 
outcomes. A digital development proj -
ect’s total-cost-of-ownership and ICT 
refresh must, therefore, be included in 
project formulation and programmed 
into assistance packages.
 ЈEducate national leaders and poli -
cymakers in recipient countries to 
embrace the benefits of digital capac -
ities and encourage them to program 
funds into the country’s national bud -
get. This will help address the sustain -
ability issue and prevent development 
aid/low-interest loans from becoming 
an extra financial burden on the country 
that cannot be sustained after the end 
of a project (e.g., lack of funding for the 
local workforce, to develop indigenous 
capacity, pay to update/replace equip -
ment or software, etc.). 
 ЈFacilitate growing a cybersecurity 
skilled local labor force/talent pools 
and indigenous capacity (e.g., local 
training  on good cyber hygiene, aware-
ness of cyber threats, development of 
local cybersecurity expertise , imple -
mentation  of tailored digital solutions, 
etc.). This requires addressing many 
related challenges, including the afford -
ability of cyber certifications, the need 
to reform school and university curric -
ula, the need to identify and cultivate 
local talent, the problem of retaining 
people who have been trained (“brain 
drain”), and the problem of low govern -
ment salary scales that makes it more 
difficult to attract capable CISOs, CIOs, 
and other technical figures.  ЈPromote inclusivity in cybersecurity 
(women, youth, and minorities). Digital 
inclusion is the basis for a more thri-
ving digital ecosystem that can stimu -
late innovations for local development 
challenges, create local skilled jobs, 
and generate opportunities for busi -
ness partnerships. Inclusivity should 
be one of the overarching principles 
when designing school/university cur -
ricula, training programs for cyber -
security workforce development, or 
awareness campaigns about cyber -
security-related professions, with a 
particular focus on identifying parti-
cipants who may not already be in 
cyber security-related roles.
 ЈEngage in raising awareness of the 
donor community on the risks and ben -
efits of ICTs, especially when protected 
data is involved. Show the development 
community how digital transformation 
and digital technologies can become 
existential threats to some of their dig -
ital development projects and goals 
(e.g., tools for cybercrime, surveillance, 
disinformation, digital authoritarianism, 
human rights abuses, data exploitation, 
espionage, etc.) – ultimately making 
the recipient country more fragile (see 
USAID’s Cybersecurity Primer ). Under -
standing these threats will better guide 
the development community in sup -
porting countries’ digital pathways and 
in making the most of new technologies 
as enablers of sustainable and secure 
development. A few “champions” on 
board would make a quick win. 
 ЈSensitize the donor community about 
the need to embed cybersecurity, dig -
ital resilience, and CCB into their dig -
ital development projects and other 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
51lending operations at project design/
inception and throughout the entire 
program lifecycle (a sort of CCB for the 
donor community). 
a. Convene an ongoing global partner -
ship on cybersecurity and digital resil -
ience for the development community.
b. Consider some of the “bridging ven -
ues” listed below, which could provide 
different fora to educate donors across 
governments and international orga -
nizations about both the “dark side of 
digital innovations” as well as the ben -
efits of integrating cybersecurity, digi -
tal resilience, and cybersecurity capac -
ity building into digital development.
c. “Bring more expertise into cyberse -
curity donor institutions by exploring 
short-term solutions like fellowships 
and secondments and leveraging fund -
ing mechanisms to create long-term 
cybersecurity portfolios in develop -
ment donor institutions.”93
 ЈAlign digital development projects to 
the recipient country’s digital econ -
omy and national vision, ensuring that 
cybersecurity and digital resilience 
are included to produce successful 
outcomes. 
 ЈConsider capacity initiatives in the con -
text of the country’s technical maturity 
and political will and tailor them to the 
circumstances therein (demand-driven 
approach). 
 ЈBuild knowledge of local ecosys -
tems, culture, and digital risks to soci -
ety using local data, students, and 
institutions. Stimulate local/regional 
academic/policy research and data gathering in developing countries, 
which would further help shape local 
development projects based on local 
research/needs. Local data, trends, sta -
tistics, and field research that charac -
terize the threat within a country or 
region can provide compelling evi -
dence to drive economic and political 
arguments as to why cybersecurity is 
important and a necessary component 
of digital development : 
a. Allocate funding to local universi -
ties, students, and researchers to 
gather local evidence or conduct trend 
analysis in the country/region. Stimu -
late multidisciplinary academic proj -
ects, connecting technical sciences 
with economic, social, legal, and polit -
ical aspects – such multidisciplinary 
research and curriculum development 
would help effectively connect cyber -
security and digital resilience with dig -
ital development in the context of a 
given country;
b. Include the local private sector – “a 
crucial partner in building digital [and 
cybersecurity] ecosystems,” access -
ing local data, and providing a driver of 
economic and societal growth.94 
c. Build partners/client countries’ cyber -
security capacity to address shared 
threats through engagement with the 
private sector, local government, and 
civil society.
 Ј“Build [regional or country-specific] 
libraries of credible and politically use -
ful information to present to key deci -
sion makers, like deep statistical stud -
ies on the impact of cybersecurity on 
development and a library of case stud -
ies and examples of the positive and 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
52negative impacts of cybersecurity on 
key development outcomes.”95
 ЈDevelop baseline requirements for 
cyber capacity building for digital 
development projects run by major 
donor communities. Start with MDBs 
and cybersecurity of digital infrastruc -
ture (e.g., telecommunications, finance, 
energy) first; but then expand to other 
donors (countries, development agen -
cies, foundations) and a broader scope 
of digital policies (e.g., data protection, 
privacy, digital inclusion, etc.). The goal 
should be for each digital development 
support/project to have a digital pol -
icy and cybersecurity component (and 
capacity building for it) attached to the 
main project aim:
One particular example can be embed -
ding baseline requirements for security 
of digital products (e.g., software, cloud 
services, IoT, etc.) into development 
programs that support innovations 
in this field (e.g., “smart products”) or 
projects which end up producing some 
e-government or other online ser -
vices and applications (e.g., e-bank -
ing and e-money solutions, telehealth, 
etc.). Some useful resources that dis -
cuss such security baselines include 
the OECD recommendations on dig -
ital security of products, which offer 
practical recommendations for poli -
cymakers to leverage specific tools – 
from public procurement, certification, 
and multi-stakeholder partnerships, to 
labels and ex ante legal requirements 
– to increase transparency and infor -
mation sharing, promote co-operation 
(including at the international level), and 
ensure the duty of care of supply-side 
actors (e.g. through the principles of 
security-by-design, security-by-default, and responsible end-of-life).96 Another 
resource of good industry practices is 
the Geneva Dialogue on Responsible 
Behavior in Cyberspace, which provides 
common policy baseline requirements 
for companies to boost the secu -
rity of their digital products and over -
all supply chain and works to enhance 
their understanding of and contribu -
tion to global policy processes in order 
to achieve a trusted, secure, and stable 
cyberspace.97
 ЈUse development organizations as a 
conduit to raise cybersecurity aware -
ness and build capacity in low- and 
middle-income countries. While the 
development community may have not 
traditionally addressed the digital risks 
stemming from increased reliance on 
ICTs and the expansion of e-services, 
digital systems, and platforms, their 
established connections in the local 
community and better understanding 
of the local challenges faced by these 
countries offer particular insights and 
valuable relationships with the local 
“implementors.” This can be a great 
opportunity for practical collaboration 
between the development community, 
which brings on-the-ground expertise 
and networks,  and the cybersecurity 
capacity building community that pro -
vides extensive expertise but has little 
or no presence on the ground . “Draw -
ing on the development communities 
local presence and association with 
grassroots actors could be critical in 
enabling the delivery of better cyber -
security capacity building programs.”98
 ЈLeverage the UN Development Coordi -
nation Office’s (DCO) Resident Coordi -
nators (RCs) in a given country to gain 
a perspective on other local projects 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
53and opportunities to partner, and to 
better assess where to focus and how 
to best deploy program/money/assets 
in service of the recipient country/gov -
ernment. RCs can serve as a natural 
conveyor/aggregator for other donors/
implementors on the ground, and help 
donor organizations understand the 
activities already underway in recip -
ient countries and potentially high -
light underserved needs. They can also 
receive additional requests or signals 
from recipient governments and guide 
those requests to the right agency 
that can provide the right kind of sup -
port. Moreover, they can work with UN 
Headquarters entities to ensure over -
all coherence with the broader UN 
approach on digital and cyber issues, 
including through mechanisms such as 
the Roadmap Response Team, devel -
oped in response to the 2020 UN Sec -
retary-General’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation.
Other organizations such as the EU or 
MDBs’ local offices could also be lever -
aged in this regard.
 ЈConduct digital risk/maturity assess -
ments of the country or sector under 
consideration for foreign assistance, 
along with an assessment of other 
development or CCB projects by other 
donors in the same country or region 
before designing, funding, or imple -
menting new digital development and/
or CCB projects. Include a mapping of 
local experts and communities of exis -
tence that could/should be involved in 
the conceptualization and realization 
of/support to the projects. When these 
types of assessments are conducted 
by donors, consultants, or other inter -
national organizations, they should be 
made publicly available (perhaps with some jointly agreed redactions with the 
recipient government when covering 
sensitive topics) in order to increase 
transparency into lending operations or 
technical assistance programs and help 
avoid duplication of efforts and/or help 
find potential synergies.
For example, organzations can use the 
UNDP Digital Readiness Assess ment 
(DRA) tool as a baseline assessment to 
know what other digital develop ment 
projects (mapped to the SDGs) are 
already undergoing in a recipient country.
6.2 Call for Greater Cooperation and 
Coordination Among Donors 
and Implementors
 ЈEncourage both the cybersecurity com -
munity as well as the development com -
munity to invest in the development of 
“Digital Public Goods” or DPGs (uni -
versal tools and instruments) that can 
be shared and applied broadly. One 
such DPG is the development of prim -
ers (e.g., USAID Cybersecurity Primer) 
for missions and implementing part -
ners on how to incorporate cyberse -
curity and digital resilience safeguards 
into all phases of project design and 
implementation to ensure digital sus -
tainability and resiliency. Another tool 
is the development (or further support) 
of platforms  to share good practice 
guidance, assessment tools, and techni -
cal assistance (e.g., Cybil  Portal, USAID 
Digital APEX, CREST platform); and 
pool data sets; engage talent; promote 
more holistic approaches to capacity 
building; or serve as a “clearinghouse” 
to better direct support requests (e.g., 
GFCE), enhance support to national 
capacity building efforts, and amplify 
country-level support. All these efforts 
to facilitate the discovery, development, 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
54use of, and investment in DPGs can serve 
multiple communities and allow for 
funding to be focused toward the great -
est deficiencies, in addition to helping to 
accelerate the SDGs. Some examples of 
DPGs highlighted in this report included:
a. The GFCE’s Cybil  Portal is a global 
resource of existing CCB methodolo -
gies, frameworks, expert organizations, 
and projects, and a knowledge hub 
that brings together stakeholders from 
the cyber capacity building community 
to coordinate and share CCB research 
and initiatives. The GFCE also serves 
as a clearinghouse to match needs for 
cyber capacities with offers of support 
and to help connect donors, beneficia -
ries, and implementors.
b. USAID’s Digital APEX is a resource of 
vetted cybersecurity services/experts/
firms that USAID’s implementers, pro -
gram partners, and partner govern -
ments can tap into to receive rapid 
technical assistance if they experience 
significant cyber incidents or to pre -
emptively reduce vulnerabilities in digi -
tal systems. It can also undertake other 
cyber-related projects (e.g., security 
assessments, pen-testing, software and 
hardware procurement, cyber security 
training, network monitoring, inci -
dent response) to build accessible and 
affordable digital infrastructure and 
promote adoption of accepted interna -
tional standards.
c. CREST’s Service Selection Platform 
is a resource of vetted ICT and secu -
rity companies and trusted suppliers 
that can provide high-quality technical 
security services to governments, reg -
ulators, and other buyers. ЈDevelop greater coherence and 
coordination between stakeholders 
to avoid duplication of efforts and 
focus on approaches/solutions that 
scale. Develop dedicated platforms, 
pilot projects, and coordination 
mechanisms; and identify on-the-
ground/local partners to implement 
necessary actions and improve coor -
dination efforts with local authori -
ties (see role of UN RCs and other 
EU or MDBs’ local offices to promote 
greater coherence and coordination 
on the ground). 
 ЈAlleviate the practice of favoring 
“darling countries,” which receive 
multiple offers of foreign aid from 
different donors, while neglecting 
“orphan countries,” which are rarely 
the focus of foreign assistance by 
developed countries or donor orga -
nizations. Active donor coordina -
tion on this topic is necessary to 
ensure sustainable development for 
a broader set of countries. 
 ЈDevelop a third community (“commu -
nity of translators”) that can bridge the 
gaps to work across the digital develop -
ment community and the cybersecurity 
community. This speaks to the ability of 
not just building technical capacity, but 
also finding existing program cycles/
functions where donors and implemen -
tors can incorporate cybersecurity as 
part of their digital development port -
folios – if an infrastructure project is 
digital, there should be a cyber security 
component, which can be defined as 
“digital sustainability” to build in the 
necessary safeguards into the fabric of 
the institutional functions from a proj -
ect’s inception, just like other environ -
mental and human rights safeguards. 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
556.3 Explore Potential Venues for Bridging the International Development 
Community with the Cybersecurity Capacity Building Community 
Networking the networks may lead to cybersecurity becoming an integral activity 
within digital development projects and may help both communities achieve more 
resilient outcomes. Consider the following venues and forthcoming events to bring 
together the international development community with the cybersecurity capac -
ity building community (other bridging venues could be promoted through regional 
engagements and then replicated in other regions):
 –Forum of MDBs Presidents and 
Director Generals’ Meeting (facilitated 
by AIIB) – a key topic was digital 
infrastructure: October 2021;
 –GFCE-OAS LAC Donors and 
Implementers Forum: 9 November 2021;
 –GFCE Annual Meeting: 30 
November - 2 December 2021; 
 –Internet Governance Forum (IGF) Annual 
Meeting, hosted by Poland in Katowice, 
under the overarching theme “Internet 
United” – they will have a session on 
capacity building: 6-10 December 2021;
 –Democracy Summit (to be held in 
the USA): 9-10 December 2021; 
 –Dutch table on ICT development for trust 
and security as part of the UN Roadmap 
for Digital Cooperation: December 2021; 
 –Programme for Infrastructure 
Development in Africa (PIDA 
week) in Swakopmund, Namibia: 
10-14 December 2021; 
 –5th UN Conference on the Least 
Developed Countries (LDC5) in Doha, 
focused on building a new program for 
action for LDCs and realizing the SDGs 
as part of the UN decade of action for 
the 2030 agenda: January 2022; –World Summit of the Information 
Society (WSIS) 2022, co-organized 
by ITU, UNESCO, UNDP, and UNCTAD, 
is the largest annual gathering 
of the “ICT for development” 
community and will be focused on 
cooperation for accelerating progress 
on the SGDs: March-June 2022;
 –Indonesia Presidency of G20: 2022; 
 –OEWG (currently under 
Singaporean chairmanship);
 –African Internet Governance 
Forum: Summer 2022;
 –Smart Africa Summit (an annual forum 
bringing together regional and global 
leaders from government, business, 
and international organizations 
to collaborate on ways to shape, 
accelerate, and sustain Africa’s digital 
transformation): Summer 2022;
 –High-Level CCB Conference being 
organized by the GFCE Foundation, 
World Bank, and other key 
stakeholders: September 2022; 
 –Europol-INTERPOL Cybercrime 
Conference: 2022.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
56CONCLUSIONS
This research paper identified effec -
tive methods and practical initiatives to 
engage the broader development com -
munity and encourage them to embrace 
cybersecurity as a development issue. 
The intent of this paper is to catalyze fur -
ther discussions among GFCE and World 
Bank partners as well as other regional 
and international institutions working on 
digital development and CCB projects 
and to provide inputs into the formula -
tion of comprehensive digital develop -
ment strategies and projects that incor -
porate safety, digital resilience, cyber risk 
management, and other safeguards. 
Many reports have highlighted the con -
nections between digital technology and 
economic growth and emphasized the 
notion that digitization can accelerate the 
realization of every SDG. “But in order to 
fully reap the immense benefits of con -
nectivity and digitalization, the technol -
ogy [and ICT infrastructure] that under -
pin them must be secure,”99 safe, and 
resilient. Cybersecurity and digital resil -
ience should become a recognized issue 
of concern and an integral component 
of the development agenda – beginning 
with the design of any new development 
project. As well, cybersecurity and digi -
tal resilience should be considered an eli -
gible development assistance criterion 
for foreign aid and development support. 
“Cyber capacity building is not an end in 
itself. Rather, it is a cross-cutting concern 
across all SDGs.”100
At the same time, stakeholders in both the 
cybersecurity and the development com -
munity must realize that “digital develop -
ment is inextricably linked to geopolitics” 
and increasing geopolitical competition is leading to a decoupling and breakdown of 
technological platforms, norms, and stan -
dards.101 “As governments and technology 
companies align along geopolitical fault 
lines and competing national and regional 
data and digital ecosystem models 
emerge,” stakeholders in the development 
community are facing increased limita -
tions in their access, reach, and coopera -
tion capacity. Accordingly, development 
community stakeholders may decide to 
limit their digital development project 
scope to areas not perceived as contro -
versial or highly politicized. However, this 
limitation may also restrict the stakehold -
ers’ ability to build necessary safeguards 
(e.g., cybersecurity, digital resilience, data 
protection, data privacy, risk manage -
ment) into their development projects. 
Any new investments in digital devel -
opment projects and/or cyber capac -
ity building should, first and foremost, 
be aligned to the recipient country’s dig -
ital economic development agenda and 
cybersecurity priorities, and based upon 
an informed expectation of what the proj -
ects will achieve. The interviews high -
lighted some unique examples of suc -
cessful development projects that have 
started to embed cybersecurity and digi -
tal resilience and help build real capacity 
on the ground. However, anecdotal evi -
dence is not a sufficiently strong founda -
tion to bridge the gaps highlighted in this 
report and link best practices (or “menus 
of options”) to specific country needs 
and to real project impacts. 
For better evidence-based programming, 
and a compelling narrative for investment, 
the development and cybersecurity com -
munities need to update their “playbook” 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
57for the digital era; connect cybersecurity 
and digital resilience with the economic 
aspirations, digitization strategies, and 
development priorities of recipient coun -
tries; develop local institutional and indig -
enous capacity; and reframe their narra -
tive in the context of digital resilience, 
safety, trust, sustainability, and risk man -
agement rather than security. Moreover, 
digital development and CCB programs/
projects should be tailored to individual 
and national circumstances. Indeed, tai -
lored approaches based on a demand-
driven signal are central to ensuring the 
long-term sustainability and scalability of 
any capacity building efforts. 
In addition, improved integration among 
stakeholders is needed to facilitate learn -
ing across policy communities – span -
ning technical, law enforcement, for -
eign affairs, development, human rights, 
etc. – and to ensure project success. 
As described in Section 3 of this report describing key findings and observa -
tions, there is a strong interest in pro -
moting greater coherence and coordina -
tion in capacity building efforts among 
donor countries and organizations and 
scaling up solutions. We suggest this as 
the next priority for the GFCE and other 
benefactors (“champions”). These orga -
nizations should develop cooperation 
policies, co-investments, hand-off mech -
anisms, and business models tailored to 
specific country/regional needs. Also, a 
need exists for further research and data 
collection into the experience and per -
spectives of low- and middle-income 
countries as the recipients and direct 
beneficiaries of digital development and 
CCB projects, and programs to better 
understand how these countries become 
(trans)formed through their entangle -
ment with global digital connections, 
broader digital economy, international 
policies, standards, and regulations.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
58APPENDICES
the multi-stakeholder and international 
GFCE community (see additional infor -
mation below under the GFCE section). 
The AU-GFCE project has already estab -
lished an African Cyber Experts (ACE) 
Community consisting of small cohorts of 
selected national experts from participat -
ing AU member states, other AU affiliates, 
and GFCE Africa Multi-stakeholder group 
who sit together (virtually or in-person) 
and work on resource sharing and bet -
ter coordination of efforts across the Afri -
can continent. It is also tapping into the 
knowledge and expertise of GFCE com -
munity members to develop Knowledge 
Modules (KMs) associated with identi -
fied cyber capacity building priorities of 
AU member states and to better address 
their specific challenges.104
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
(AIIB):  The AIIB is a multilateral devel -
opment bank, located in Beijing China, 
focused on providing financial sup -
port to developing countries (mostly in 
East Asia) to build the “Infrastructure of 
Tomorrow” (i4t) and to foster sustainable 
economic development, wealth creation, 
and improved infrastructure connectivi -
ty.105 In 2020, the bank launched a Dig -
ital Infrastructure Sector Strategy, which 
covers both hard (transport and con -
nectivity, processing and storage) and 
soft (software and applications, termi -
nal and devices) infrastructure. The Strat -
egy interfaces with and supports other 
Bank strategies, and aims to guide AIIB’s ANNEX I  
ORGANIZATIONS INTERVIEWED AND RELATED 
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AND/OR CCB ACTIVITIES
African Union Commission (AUC):  The 
Commission of the African Union (AU), 
which is headquartered in Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia, acts as the executive/adminis -
trative branch or Secretariat of the AU. 
It consists of a number of Commission -
ers dealing with different areas of policy, 
including: peace and  security; political 
affairs; trade and industry; infrastructure 
and energy; social affairs; rural econ -
omy and agriculture; human resources, 
science and technology; and economic 
affairs.102 The AU has organized cyber -
security training in partnership with the 
U.S. State Department for more than 
450 local experts in over 50 AU mem -
ber states. The training focused on how 
to develop a national cybersecurity strat -
egy; a national CERT/CSIRT; and a mod -
ern legal framework to adequately com -
bat cybercrime. The AU is also partnering 
with the GFCE for a two-year collabora -
tive project, funded by the Gates Founda -
tion, aimed at developing cyber capacity 
building knowledge to enable AU member 
states to better understand cyber capac -
ities and support them in strengthening 
their cyber resilience. This collaborative 
project intends to help African countries 
prioritize and address their national cyber 
capacity needs and “foster coordination 
and increasing international collabora -
tion between (existing) cyber capacity 
building efforts in Africa”.103 The project 
is building on and utilizing existing cyber 
structures, plans, expertise, and capac -
ities within the AUC, as well as within 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
59activities as a catalyst for financing digi -
tal infrastructure growth in Asia, support -
ing AIIB Members efforts in bridging the 
digital divide, increasing economic com -
petitiveness, and improving infrastruc -
ture efficiency. While there is no systemic 
approach to cybersecurity or cyber resil -
ience as part of AIIB lending operations, 
they have identified cybersecurity as one 
of the main regulatory risks to investing in 
digital infrastructure, which is now being 
incorporated as a component of some 
of their projects.106 (**Note: AIIB does 
not have a role in policy changes in the 
countries of operation, but has built an 
in-house capacity to ensure that its dig -
ital infrastructure projects 1) comply with 
specific country regulations and laws, and 
2) are based on regulatory risks analysis 
that balance out data privacy risk with 
reputational risk.)
Australia Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade (DFAT):  The DFAT, headquar -
tered in Barton ACT, is the department of 
the Australian federal government respon -
sible for foreign policy and relations, 
international aid, consular services, and 
trade and investment.107 They work with 
international partners and other coun -
tries to tackle a variety of development 
challenges, including digital connectivity 
(e.g., laying of undersea cables connect -
ing Papua New Guinea and the Solomon 
Islands to Australia) and cyber and critical 
technology issues. DFAT has recognized 
“cyber affairs” and “critical technology” 
as foreign policy priorities, and estab -
lished the Ambassador for Cyber Affairs 
role (since expanded to include Critical 
Technology) that is responsible for coor -
dinating  Australia’s international cyber 
engagement.108 In 2016, DFAT established 
a AUD$4 million Cyber Cooperation Pro -
gram to improve cyber resilience  across the Indo-Pacific and to support Austra -
lia’s commitment to deliver on the UN 
SDGs and drive global economic growth 
and sustainable development.109 (**Note: 
the Program does not generally provide 
funding for equipment (software/hard -
ware), but supports recipient countries to 
develop institutional capacity, establish 
policy and regulatory frameworks, raise 
awareness of cybersecurity, and build a 
community of cybersecurity operators in 
the Indo-Pacific region). In 2017, the Pro -
gram was expanded with the launch of 
Australia’s International Cyber Engage -
ment Strategy, which also committed to 
developing Guidance Notes to incorpo -
rate cybersecurity de-risking measures – 
similar to environmental and social safe -
guards – into DFAT aid funding and to 
ensure the achievement of DFAT develop -
ment programs.110 In April 2021, Australia 
launched a broader International Cyber 
and Critical Technology Engagement 
Strategy. Australia’s eight-year, AUD$74 
million investment supports the country’s 
goal of strengthening national security; 
promoting economic growth; and ensur -
ing a safe, secure, and prosperous Austra -
lia, Indo-Pacific region, and world enabled 
by cyberspace and critical technology. The 
Strategy guides all of Australia’s practical 
international engagements across cyber 
and critical technology issues, including 
cyber capacity building and cyber resil -
ience, with a strong focus on the Indo-Pa -
cific region. The Strategy renamed the 
flagship Cyber Cooperation Program into 
the Cyber and Critical Tech Cooperation 
Program.111 Moreover, the Strategy com -
mitted an additional AUD$20.5 million 
to strengthen cyber resilience in South -
east Asia and AUD$17 million to support 
Pacific neighbors in strengthening their 
cyber capabilities and resilience efforts, 
including fighting cybercrime, improving 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
60online safety, and countering disinforma -
tion and misinformation.112 Other Austra -
lian-funded initiatives, like the AFP-led 
Cyber Safety Pasifika and Cyber Safety 
Asia programs, help assist regional law 
enforcement practitioners to develop fur -
ther cybercrime-relevant skill sets and pro -
vide broader community awareness and 
education regarding the risks of cyber -
crime. Other priority areas for Australia’s 
capacity building program include online 
safety and harms, regional connectivity, 
and internet governance. (**Note: major 
projects, like subsea cables, are funded 
from Australia’s development budget, not 
the capacity building program.)
CREST : CREST is a UK-based “interna -
tional not-for-profit accreditation and 
certification body that represents and 
supports the technical information secu -
rity market.”113 CREST awards interna -
tionally-recognized accreditations to 
service providers of vulnerability assess -
ments, penetration testing, cyber inci -
dent response, threat intelligence, Secu -
rity Operations Centre (SOC) services, 
etc., as well as  professional-level certifica -
tions and career pathways for individuals. 
There are more than 200 accredited mem -
ber companies across the world, and over 
3,500 individuals hold CREST qualifica -
tions in more than 50 countries. In collab -
oration with industry and governments, 
CREST has built a framework for measur -
ing the capability of cybersecurity com -
panies and their workforce. It also devel -
oped a Service Selection Platform that 
can help governments, regulators, and 
buyers identify suppliers capable of deliv -
ering high-quality technical security ser -
vices. In addition, it helps regulators build 
schemes that support assurance frame -
works allowing them greater levels of 
confidence in the operation of regulated entities (e.g., financial services, telecom -
munications, government, energy, avia -
tion). CREST practices an open and trans -
parent approach to the development of 
all frameworks for supporting the growth 
and development of the entire cyberse -
curity ecosystem, facilitating the sharing 
of common good practice guides/Digital 
Public Goods to speed assurance frame -
works implementation and support matu -
rity level improvement across the cyber -
security ecosystem of various countries.114 
For example, as part of a project funded 
by the Gates Foundation, CREST devel -
oped a Cybersecurity Maturity Model 
Assessment – a freely accessible, afford -
able, sustainable, and scalable framework 
to measure the maturity and financial 
inclusion of the cybersecurity ecosystem 
of a country across five dimensions: 1) 
National Cybersecurity Strategy & Capa -
bilities; 2) Cybersecurity Information 
Sharing; 3) Cybersecurity Service Provi -
sion; 4) Cybersecurity Professional Devel -
opment; and 5) Banking Sector Risk Pos -
ture. The resulting country assessments 
can be used to compare country sector 
organizations, identify good practice and 
areas of common concern, monitor the 
impact of investments, and define clear 
measurable objectives for improvement. 
DiploFoundation: Diplo is a Swiss-Mal -
tese non-profit organization, headquar -
tered in Malta with offices in Geneva, 
Washington D.C., and Belgrade. It spe -
cializes in “capacity development in the 
field of internet governance and digital 
policy,” and works to 1) increase the role 
of small and developing states in global 
diplomacy by developing digital tools for 
inclusive and impactful governance and 
policy-making and 2) providing online 
courses, workshops, and simulation exer -
cises for government officials  on internet 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
61governance, data, artificial intelligence, 
and other emerging tech issues.115 In par -
ticular, Diplo designs and implements 
capacity building programs and cyber -
security policy education, online train -
ings, workshops, webinars, events, and 
educational material for policymakers 
and diplomatic personnel.116 Diplo sees 
CCB education and traning as a process 
rather than a set of themes/modules. 
First, Diplo considers the technical envi -
ronment. From there, they discuss digi -
tal risks; instruments of crime, peace, and 
security; existing regional and national 
partnerships (CERTs, PPPs); international 
organizations (ITU, GFCE); soft skills; dig -
ital policy; cyber diplomacy; reporting; 
researching; data mining; and more. They 
have also contributed to the work of the 
UN Open Ended Working Group (OEWG) 
on developments in the field of informa -
tion and telecommunications in the con -
text of international security with specific 
recommendations on “Comprehensive 
Capacity Building.” Their contributions 
included advocating for a multi-stake -
holder, multidisciplinary, and holistic 
approach to CCB and CBMs and recog -
nizing capacity building as a comprehen -
sive, long-term, and sustainable process 
rather than simply training.117 This process 
should include developing organizational 
capacities of governments, civil society, 
business associations, and academia; nur -
turing established communities; embed -
ding CCB in budgetary planning, com -
mitment, and investments by states and 
regional organizations; and incorporating 
aspects of cybersecurity and digital liter -
acy into the curriculum of academic and 
professional training centers.118
European Investment Bank (EIB):  The 
EIB, headquartered in Luxembourg, is the 
lending arm of the European Union (EU). Owned by the EU member states, EIB is 
the largest multilateral financial institu -
tion/lender in the world. They fund proj -
ects that support the priorities and objec -
tives of the EU, including integration 
of the region, digitalization, and most 
recently, increasingly sustainable recov -
ery from the COVID-19 pandemic. They 
provide loans, guarantees, and techni -
cal assistance in the areas of sustainable 
development, infrastructure, innovation 
and skills (including cybersecurity), cli -
mate and environmental sustainability, 
SMEs, etc. All EIB-financed projects must 
comply with high technical, environmen -
tal, and social standards.119 The European 
Investment Advisory Hub (a joint advi -
sory initiative of the EIB Group and the 
European Commission) and the European 
Cyber Security Organisation (ECSO) have 
recently announced a feasibility study for 
the creation of a European Cybersecu -
rity Investment Platform (ECIP) aimed at 
attracting more investment in the Euro -
pean cybersecurity market.120
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD): The EBRD, which 
operates from headquarters in London and 
a network of Resident Offices, is owned by 
71 shareholder governments, the EU, and 
the EIB. It seeks to promote the transition 
to a sustainable market economy and the 
emergence of a strong private sector. The 
Bank operates in nearly 40 economies in 
Europe, Asia, and Africa that are commit -
ted to applying the principles of multi -
party democracy, pluralism, and market 
economics. Through investment, policy 
reform, and advisory projects, the EBRD 
works to make economies more com -
petitive, well-governed, green, inclusive, 
resilient, and integrated – six “transition 
qualities” that are also aligned with the 
UN Sustainable Development Goals. The 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
62EBRD  focuses on projects that bring eco -
nomic, social, or environmental benefits. 
The Bank works mainly with private cli -
ents, although it also finances public enti -
ties that deliver essential infrastructure 
and services.121 It has begun incorporating 
cybersecurity and digital resilience safe -
guards into its lending operations, con -
ducting digital risk assessments for sec -
tor-specific projects that involve digital 
technologies with closer scrutiny for proj -
ects that involve personally identifiable 
information. The Bank recently adopted 
its first Digital Approach to accelerating 
digital transition (2021-2025), which “sets 
out a comprehensive framework on how 
the Bank will use its three instruments – 
investment, policy engagement, and advi -
sory services – to support the digital tran -
sition in the economies where it invests… 
and aims to mainstream technology 
throughout the Bank’s activities.”122 The 
document expressly recognizes cyberse -
curity and the protection of data privacy 
as “essential parts of the digital transition” 
and states that the Bank will “develop a 
cross-cutting approach to cyber resil -
ience to protect itself, its clients, and the 
economies in which it operates.”123
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation:  The 
Gates Foundation is an American private 
non-profit foundation dedicated to fight -
ing poverty, disease, and inequity around 
the world. They have a program on digital 
financial inclusion that focuses on build -
ing trustworthy digital infrastructure for 
a fairer world and funding organizations 
around the globe that identify and develop 
tailored solutions to the needs of devel -
oping countries. The Gates Foundation 
recognizes that cybersecurity is funda -
mental to ensuring digital financial inclu -
sion and developing a more secure world, 
and they support efforts to create Digital  Public Goods, including tools to measure 
the cyber maturity of the financial sector 
in developing countries (CREST); threat 
models for the financial sector in low-in -
come countries (MITRE Engenuity); train -
ing courses and educational material to 
build local capacity of policymakers; net -
works of universities focused on improv -
ing cybersecurity of financial systems in 
Africa and other emerging economies, 
and scaling identity and payment digital 
public goods (CMU CyberLab-Africa)124; 
etc. Their focus is on Africa because they 
see it as a region where digitization can be 
introduced in disruptive, innovative, and 
new ways. The digital transformation can 
drive innovation (e.g., digital mobile wal -
lets to facilitate the movement of money) 
and create opportunities for economic 
growth. Together with the World Bank, 
the Gates Foundation is trying to better 
align the cybersecurity capacity building 
community with the larger development 
agenda (and development donors).
Global Forum on Cyber Expertise: The 
GFCE, headquartered in The Hague, 
Netherlands, is a non-profit, multi-stake -
holder foundation whose mission is “to 
strengthen cyber capacity and exper -
tise globally through international col -
laboration and cooperation.”125 Today, the 
GFCE serves as a consultative forum and 
global platform for governments, inter -
national organizations, and private com -
panies to identify and exchange best 
practices and expertise on CCB; coordi -
nate cyber capacity projects; maintain a 
cyber capacity database (the Cybil  Por-
tal) with tool, publications, and CCB proj -
ects;126 and act as a clearinghouse to 
match needs for cyber capacities with 
offers of support while connecting imple -
mentors with potential beneficiaries. The 
GFCE structures its work around five CCB 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
63themes, namely: 1) Cyber Security Pol -
icy and Strategy; 2) Cyber Incident Man -
agement and Critical Infrastructure Pro -
tection; 3) Cybercrime; 4) Cyber Security 
Culture and Skills; and 5) Cyber Security 
Standards.127 In 2020, the GFCE launched 
a two-year collaborative project with the 
African Union on “Enabling African coun -
tries to identify and address their cyber 
capacity needs.”128 This project  aims to 
enable African countries to better under -
stand cyber capacities and to support 
them in strengthening their cyber resil -
ience. In particular, the project intends to 
grow a trusted community of cyber lead -
ers from the different African countries; 
identify relevant cyber capacity gaps on 
a national and sub-regional level within 
African countries; enable African coun -
tries to prioritize, address, and communi -
cate their national cyber capacity needs; 
and foster coordination and increase 
international collaboration between 
(existing) cyber capacity building efforts 
in Africa. The project focuses on three  
key CCB themes: 1) Cyber Security Pol -
icy and Strategy  (i.e., Strategies , National 
Assessments , CBMs and Norms , Cyber 
Diplomacy ); 2) Cyber Incident Manage -
ment & Critical Information Protection  
(i.e., National Computer Security Incident 
Response ); and 3) Cyber Security Culture 
& Skills  (i.e., Cyber Security Awareness , 
Education and Training , Workforce Devel -
opment ). Publication of their final report 
is expected at the end of 2022.129
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB):  
The IDB, headquartered in Washington 
D.C., is the largest source of develop -
ment financing for the Latin America and 
the Caribbean (LAC) region. Among its 
large portfolio, the IDB provides funding 
to governments in the region to support 
their digital transformation strategies and cybersecurity initiatives.130 For exam -
ple, the IDB is funding a multi-million 
and multi-year project to support Chile’s 
national cybersecurity readiness and 
operational capacity building. The proj -
ect includes CCB activities to improve 
the country’s technological tools, infra -
structure, training programs, and cyber -
security policies; build resilience to digital 
threats; develop or implement additional 
strategies, processes, technologies, and 
personnel needed to keep Chile’s critical 
infrastructure, digital ecosystem, and gov -
ernment institutions secure; and establish 
Chile as a cybersecurity leader in South 
America. Additionally, the IDB provides 
technical and financial support through 
specific activities included in loan oper -
ations in Brazil, Honduras, Panamá, Para -
guay, Uruguay, and The Bahamas. The IDB 
also supports the cybersecurity agenda 
in key sectors, such as health, energy, 
finances, water, and transportation.
International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU):  The ITU, headquartered in Geneva, 
Switzerland, is the UN’s specialized 
agency responsible for all matters related 
to ICTs. The ITU Cybersecurity program 
offers member countries – particularly 
developing countries – “the opportunity 
and tools to increase cybersecurity capa -
bilities at the national level, in order to 
enhance security, build confidence and 
trust in the use of ICTs, and make the dig -
ital realm more safe and secure for every -
one.”  The work and mandate of the ITU 
Cybersecurity program builds on Objec -
tive 2 of the Buenos Aires Action Plan 
adopted at the 2017 World Telecommu -
nication Development Conference and 
related resolutions (Dubai, 2014; Ham -
mamet, 2016; etc.).  Under this program, 
there are several CCB initiatives that the 
ITU supports, which can be grouped 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
64under five CCB areas: 1) develop effec -
tive national cybersecurity strategies or 
frameworks; 2) develop national CSIRTs 
and conduct CyberDrills; 3) adopt appro -
priate cybersecurity legislation and har -
monize the legal and policy framework 
(i.e., Child Online Protection; Combatting 
Cybercrime Toolkit); 4) promote inclusiv -
ity (women and youth) in cybersecurity 
and workforce development; and 5) com -
bat SPAM.
Islamic Development Bank (IsDB): 
Headquartered in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 
the IsDB is a multilateral development 
finance institution focused on Islamic 
finance. They provide funding for sus -
tainable infrastructure projects in their 57 
member countries and Muslim commu -
nities worldwide. They foster innovative 
and sustainable solutions in line with the 
UN Sustainable Development Goals.131 In 
2019, they developed an ICT Policy that 
included cybersecurity as an enabler in 
the contexts of corporate governance 
and access to e-government services. 
Korea Development Bank (KDB): The 
state-owned KDB, headquartered in 
Seoul, South Korea, acts as the primary 
supporter of Korean public and corpo -
rate sector finances and manages major 
industrial projects to expedite industrial 
development of Korea.132 KDB has iden -
tified cybersecurity as a key risk factor 
in its infrastructure investment area but 
does not have clear guidelines for its proj -
ects. They are discussing what guidelines 
to incorporate into projects as well as a 
risk-rating to appraise project risk. 
MITRE Engenuity:  MITRE Engenuity – a 
subsidiary of The MITRE Corporation, a 
non-profit operator of Federally Funded 
R&D Centers for the U.S. government – is a Tech Foundation for Public Good. 
MITRE Engenuity brings MITRE’s deep 
tech expertise and intellectual property 
(across a variety of capabilities including 
cybersecurity standards, zero trust archi -
tectures, cyber threat and risk modeling, 
cyber defense tools, AI, quantum, 5G, etc.) 
to expand MITRE’s impact beyond fed -
eral borders to protect citizens and crit -
ical infrastructure, safeguard assets, pro -
mote democratic principles, and enable 
economic stability and growth.  MITRE 
Engenuity, through the support of the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, has 
developed a cyber threat-based risk 
model for digital financial mobile services 
(dFMS) in developing countries in Africa 
and India. This dynamic cyber risk model 
incorporates MITRE’s threat informed 
defense approach, attacker methods, 
and technology-specific vulnerabilities 
from MITRE and its cyber defense com -
munity sources including Adversary Tac -
tics Techniques and Common Knowledge 
(ATT&CK), Common Attack Pattern Enu -
meration and Classification (CAPEC), and 
the Cloud Security Alliance ’s Cloud Con -
trols Matrix. Using this threat model, sig -
nificant threat vectors that relate to 
mobile money applications within a par -
ticular technology/governance environ -
ment can be extracted and analyzed to 
produce a set of relative risks and asso -
ciated impacts. These analyses can be 
used to identify   existing and potential 
activities, including technical and non-
technical initiatives, to improve access 
while remediating risks. Findings can also 
inform potential investors about decision-
making options, including technical 
approaches as well as policy, governance, 
training, human resources, and other non-
technical approaches to investment that 
can have ecosystem-wide impacts. 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
65Norwegian Institute of International Affairs 
(NUPI): NUPI, headquartered in Oslo, Nor -
way, is the country’s leading center for 
“research and information on interna -
tional political and economic issues and 
on areas of central relevance to Norwegian 
foreign policy.” Their Centre for Digitali -
zation and Cybersecurity Studies is ded -
icated to bridging the gap between the 
technical community and the policy 
world with research focusing primarily 
on the political dimension of cybersecu -
rity and its role in international relations, 
global governance of cyberspace, capac -
ity building, development, and the secu -
rity vs. freedom dilemma. They partner 
with an extensive number of international 
and national institutions and organiza -
tions in the cybersecurity community to 
produce academic studies, expert analy -
sis, and strategic policy recommendations 
on a variety of cybersecurity-related top -
ics – from digital threats to critical sec -
tors to cyber capacity building efforts in 
developing countries, to the use of dig -
ital means to subvert democratic pro -
cesses, to digital value chains, and more. 
NUPI also organizes several seminars and 
events aimed at enhancing public aware -
ness and knowledge of the various chal -
lenges associated with cybersecurity in 
Norway and internationally.133
Organization of American States (OAS):  
The OAS, headquartered in Washing -
ton D.C., is a multilateral regional organi -
zation that comprises 35 countries from 
the Americas. The OAS, through the 
Inter-American Committee against Ter -
rorism (CICTE) and the Cyber Security 
Program, sponsors and organizes mul -
tiple cybersecurity projects in the LAC 
region with a wide range of national and 
regional entities from the public and private sectors. In particular, the OAS’ 
Cyber Security Program is focused on 
building and strengthening cybersecurity 
capacity in its member states across three  
CCB areas: 1) Policy development (devel -
opment and implementation of national 
or regional cybersecurity strategies and/
or legal frameworks); 2) Capacity devel -
opment (development of CSIRTs, pro -
tection of critical infrastructures, improv -
ing ability to monitor and respond to 
cyber incidents, training and crisis man -
agement exercises, increasing capabili -
ties of central bodies tasked with coor -
dinating cybersecurity activities, among 
others.); and 3) Research and outreach 
(development of technical documents, 
toolkits, and research-based reports to 
guide policy makers, CSIRTs, infrastruc -
ture operators, private organizations, and 
civil society on current developments and 
cybersecurity problems and key chal -
lenges in the region, building user trust 
in online platforms and e-commerce ser -
vices).134 The OAS also addresses capacity 
building in the area of cybercrime through 
CICTE, with an emphasis on the devel -
opment of digital investigative capaci -
ties of law enforcement, implementation 
of appropriate legal tools, and promo -
tion of information exchanges between 
law enforcement and CSIRTs. In addition, 
the OAS has set up an Inter-American 
Cooperation Portal on Cybercrime and a 
Working Group on Cybercrime under the 
auspices of its Department of Legal Coop -
eration. The Portal and Working Group 
were two of the major outcomes of the 
process of Meetings of Ministers of Jus -
tice or Other Ministers or Attorneys Gen -
eral of the Americas (REMJA) aimed at 
strengthening hemispheric cooperation in 
the investigation and prosecution of these 
crimes.135 Among other things, this project 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
66has resulted in the creation of a direc -
tory of national points of contact, cyber -
crime questionnaires, and training to build 
capacity to fight cybercrime.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD):  The OECD, 
headquartered in Paris, France, is an 
international organization focused on 
“building better policies for better lives” 
and shaping policies that foster prosper -
ity, equality, opportunity, and well-being 
for all.136 They bring together representa -
tives from governments, businesses, and 
industry, as well as civil society to estab -
lish evidence-based international stan -
dards and find public policy solutions to 
a range of social, economic, and environ -
mental challenges, including digital secu -
rity. OECD work focuses on many policy 
areas, including Digital Economy, Sci -
ence and Technologies, and Consumer 
Policy & Product Safety. The Organisa -
tion undertakes a wide range of activi -
ties to better understand how ICTs con -
tribute to sustainable economic growth 
and social well-being, and their Digital 
Economy Papers series covers a broad 
range of ICT-related issues.137 The OECD 
has long been supporting cooperation on 
the management of digital security risk 
to economic and social prosperity, along -
side other organizations that focus on 
defense and international security, crim -
inal law enforcement, and technical stan -
dards. They provide a unique forum for 
stakeholders to develop digital security 
policies that build trust in the global digi -
tal environment while preserving internet 
openness, innovation, and digitally-driven 
growth. They also serve as a knowledge 
hub for data collection and analysis, 
exchange of experiences, best-practice 
sharing, and advice on public policies and 
international standard setting. OECD work is led by formal bodies gathering policy -
makers from the Organisation’s member -
ship as well as non-members and non-gov -
ernmental stakeholders’ communities. 
The first working party addressing digital 
security was created in the mid-1990s and 
OECD work in this area is currently led 
by the Working Party on Security in the 
Digital Economy (SDE), supported by the 
OECD Secretariat’s Directorate for Sci -
ence, Technology and Innovation (DSTI). 
The SDE develops analytical reports and 
drafts recommendations on topics such 
as national cyber security strategies, dig -
ital security of critical activities, products, 
and services, as well as the treatment of 
vulnerabilities. Adopted by consensus, 
these recommendations are non-bind -
ing international legal instruments (“soft 
law”). In addition, the OECD launched 
a Global Forum on Digital Security for 
Prosperity in 2018 to champion multilat -
eral and multi-stakeholder dialogue and 
facilitate the convergence of views for a 
trusted and resilient digital environment.
Organization for Security and Co-op -
eration in Europe (OSCE): The OSCE, 
headquartered in Vienna, Austria, is the 
world’s largest regional security orga -
nization. It comprises 57 participating 
states from Europe, Central Asia, and 
North America, and serves as a forum 
for political dialogue on a wide range of 
security issues and as a platform for joint 
action. The organization uses a compre -
hensive approach to security that encom -
passes the politico-military, economic, 
environmental, and human dimensions. 
OSCE helps bridge differences and build 
trust between states by cooperating on 
conflict prevention, crisis management, 
and post-conflict rehabilitation. Through 
their institutions, expert units, and exten -
sive network of field operations, they 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
67addresses issues that impact common 
security problems, including cyber/ICT 
security, cybercrime, arms control, ter -
rorism, good governance, energy secu -
rity, democratization, among others.138 
Specifically, OSCE has a mandate to sup -
port its participating states in enhancing 
their criminal justice response to cyber -
crime, while upholding human rights, fun -
damental freedoms, and the rule of law. 
OSCE defines capacity building broadly 
as building the capacity of the entire 
system, strengthening national institu -
tions, and engaging all possible stake -
holders with a holistic and comprehen -
sive approach to security. This approach 
encompasses initiatives related to fight -
ing cybercrime, including capacity build -
ing for law enforcement, fostering dia -
logue with the private sector and civil 
society, and serving as a venue for pro -
moting coordination and collaboration at 
the international level.139 Other cyberse -
curity-related efforts focus on develop -
ing and implementing confidence-build -
ing measures (CBMs) and on cyber 
diplomacy. The OSCE Permanent Coun -
cil adopted two sets of cyber/ICT secu -
rity CBMs for a total of 16 non-binding, 
voluntary measures. These measures are 
designed to “enhance interstate co-op -
eration, transparency, predictability, 
and stability, as well as to reduce the 
risks of misperception, escalation, and 
conflict that may stem from the use of 
ICTs.”140 OSCE’s work in this field contin -
ues to focus on the implementation of 
CBMs and on providing support for the 
countries that implement them, includ -
ing through the “Adopt a CMB” initiative  
and a dedicated cyber/ICT security and 
CBM course on their e-learning platform 
– available both in English and Russian.141UN Executive Office of the Secre -
tary-General (EOSG): The EOSG assists 
the Secretary-General with relations 
with members and organs of the United 
Nations and with specialized agencies 
and non-governmental organizations, 
in addition to assisting with policy and 
coordination of the Secretariat. Current 
UN Secretary-General, António Guterres, 
has prioritized ensuring that digital tech -
nology is used to “strengthen human 
rights, advance peace, and improve all 
lives, including the most vulnerable” as 
part of the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), and addressing the risks 
that digital technologies pose to “global 
peace, stability, and development.”142 
Achieving the SDGs has remained foun -
dational to every strategy and high-level 
report the UN has published in the last six 
years, including the “High-Level report on 
Digital Cooperation – The Age of Digital 
Interdependence” and the “Data Strat -
egy of the Secretary-General for Action 
by Everyone, Everywhere (2020-22).” 
The Data Strategy expressly stated that 
technology tools and processes can be 
an enabler of sustainable development, 
but also highlighted some of the key risks 
of digital technology when we fail users 
with solutions that do not meet their 
needs ; lose trust by mismanaging cyber -
security and privacy ; or lock ourselves 
in inflexible “one-size-fits-all” systems .143 
Many of these concepts were also reiter -
ated in the 2020 UN Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation , which  emphasized the need 
to strengthen digital capacity building 
(both human and institutional), including 
the development of digital skills, “effec -
tive use of advanced and emerging tech -
nologies,” ability to advance broadband 
access, adoption, and meaningful use, 
and “ensuring that individuals stay safe, 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
68protected and productive online” (see 
below for more on this important UN 
document).144
UN Office of the Secretary-General’s 
Envoy on Technology (OSET):  This Office  
was created in 2021 with a policy coordina -
tion mandate to promote digital cooper -
ation, including sustainable digital devel -
opment and capacity building efforts writ 
large, work closely with all UN entities to 
ensure synergy and non-duplication, par -
ticipate in interagency and UN system -
wide processes, and collaborate with 
ongoing multilateral and international 
processes and forums, in particular the 
Internet Governance Forum (IGF). OSET, 
working with key UN entities and other 
stakeholders, coordinates the implemen -
tation of the 2020 UN Roadmap for Dig -
ital Cooperation and the range of actions 
envisaged therein to ensure overall coher -
ence, with full respect for the mandates 
of different UN entities. This Office also 
facilitates dialogue on the recommenda -
tions of the Roadmap to accelerate global 
digital cooperation, seizing on the oppor -
tunities – while mitigating the risks – pre -
sented by technology to ensure collective 
progress towards achieving the SDGs by 
2030. Finally, it serves as an advocate and 
focal point for digital cooperation so that 
member states, the private sector, civil 
society, academic and technical commu -
nities, and other stakeholders have a first 
port of call for the broader UN system.145 
The Roadmap clearly recognizes that “the 
need for digital capacity-building is sub -
stantial” and that 
...achieving real and sustained progress in 
the various dimensions of digitalization 
requires skills development and effective 
training, in particular in developing coun -
tries. This is necessary to unlock the ben -efits of technology, including the more ef -
fective use of emerging technologies and 
ensuring that individuals stay safe, protect -
ed, and productive online. For example, it 
is estimated that there will be 230 million 
‘digital jobs’ in sub-Saharan Africa by 2030 
that could generate nearly $120 billion in 
revenue, but this would require some 650 
million training opportunities by 2030. 146
The document also acknowledges that 
...one of the primary challenges to date is 
that a large part of digital capacity-build -
ing has been supply-driven as opposed to 
needs-based. Insufficient investment also 
remains a significant limiting factor. Giv -
en variances within and among countries 
and regions, there is no one-size-fits-all 
approach, and better evidence is there -
fore needed of which capacity-building 
approaches are most effective, considering 
political, economic, and social contexts.  To 
overcome these challenges, two aspects 
are central: greater coherence and coor -
dination in capacity-building efforts; and 
a concerted effort at scaling up solutions. 
Holistic, inclusive approaches that bring to -
gether existing initiatives, United Nations 
entities, regional and subregional bodies, 
and other relevant organizations that pro -
mote digital capacity-building are neces -
sary to improve support for Governments 
and other stakeholders. 147 
The Roadmap emphasizes the need to 
foster digital capacity building (both 
human and institutional) across four CCB 
areas: 1) digital literacy and skills training, 
2) “effective use of advanced and emerg -
ing technologies,” 3) ability to advance 
broadband access, adoption, and mean -
ingful use, and 4) “ensuring that individ -
uals stay safe, protected and produc -
tive online.” It also launched a new Joint 
Facility for Global Digital Capacity, led 
by the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) and the UN Development 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
69Programme (UNDP), to serve as a sin -
gle structure facilitating joint resourc -
ing, roles, and responsibilities tasked with 
mapping existing digital capacity build -
ing initiatives to assess gaps and provide 
strategic, operational, and programmatic 
support in executing digital strategies, 
capacity development initiatives, or other 
high-priority operational areas for part -
ners.148 Efforts to implement the Roadmap 
are underway, along with the establish -
ment of a Roadmap Response Team – an 
interagency effort among the above-men -
tioned entities and DCO to better support 
the Resident Coordinators and the UN’s 
in-country presence on these issues.
The UN Shared Cyber Hub brings together 
a large group of UN cyber focal points 
across the system (over 20 UN bodies), 
including those that deal with capacity 
building and policy, to make sure they 
speak with one voice on cybersecurity 
and share lessons learned.149 
The UN Development Coordination Office 
(DCO) serves as the secretariat for the 
UN Sustainable Development Group (UN 
SDG), which comprises 34 agencies, 
funds, and programs working on devel -
opment at the regional and global lev -
els. The Office acts as a key conduit for 
supporting UN’s activities for sustainable 
development, which inform policy, pro -
gram, and operations on the ground.150
UN Development Programme (UNDP):  
the UNDP is the UN’s global sustain -
able development organization, head -
quartered in Geneva, Switzerland, work -
ing across 170 countries. The agency has 
launched a broad Digital Transformation 
initiative – an organization-wide effort – to 
harness the power of new technology to improve the lives of those furthest behind. 
The UNDP is proactively investing in the 
key area of digital capacity building and 
its wide field presence and topic exper -
tise aim to help match key local contexts 
to relevant digital solutions. They have 
developed a Whole-of-Society Digital 
Transformation framework as an overarch -
ing reference model to  identify, structure, 
and prioritize national digital transforma -
tion efforts and agendas, and to s erve as 
a basis for discussion for possible UNDP 
engagement (or to complement ongo -
ing digital work) in countries that request 
UNDP support. They also developed a 
Digital Readiness Assessment (DRA) tool 
to identify digital strengths and weak -
nesses, and to map out the shape, pace, 
and types of transitions and what can be 
done to accelerate them, while ensuring 
an inclusive, whole-of-society approach 
to digital development.151 Other projects 
in the Digital Transformation program 
include a Digital ID project, a Misinforma -
tion project, and an AI Readiness project. 
UN Institute for Disarmament Research 
(UNIDIR):  UNIDIR is a voluntary funded, 
autonomous institute within the UN, head -
quartered in Geneva, Switzerland, primar -
ily focused on disarmament and security 
issues with the aim of assisting the inter -
national community in their disarmament 
thinking, decisions, and efforts. UNIDIR 
offers training and materials for diplo -
mats focusing on cybersecurity norms, 
and hosts conference series and a Cyber 
Policy Portal.152
UN Office for Disarmament Affairs 
(UNODA):  Headquartered in New York, 
U.S., UNODA is a UN office dedicated to 
supporting multilateral deliberations on 
the security and use of information and 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
70communications technologies in the con -
text of international security. UNODA 
has provided substantive support on this 
topic to the work of the Group of Govern -
mental Experts (GGE) and to the Open-
Ended Working Group (OEWG). UNODA 
will continue to provide substantive sup -
port to a new OEWG that was established 
for the period of 2021-2025. Through the 
leadership of the High Representative 
for Disarmament Affairs, UNODA sup -
ports member states in fostering a cul -
ture of accountability and adherence to 
emerging norms, rules, and principles on 
responsible behavior in cyberspace with 
a view to ensuring safety and security of 
the digital domain.
UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC):  
UNODC, a UN office headquartered in 
Geneva, Switzerland, is dedicated to 
strengthening member states’ capac -
ities to confront threats from transna -
tional crime, terrorism, corruption, and 
drug trafficking; to build effective crim -
inal justice systems and transnational 
approaches to the world drug prob -
lem; and to promote peace and sustain -
able well-being as deterrents to these 
crimes. They were given the mandate to 
address cybercrime issues in 2009. The 
UNODC Global Program on Cybercrime 
assists developing countries in their 
efforts to prevent and combat cyber-re -
lated crimes through law enforcement 
capacity building and technical assis -
tance.153 Their activities can be grouped 
around three  CCB areas: 1) Increase effi -
ciency and effectiveness of investigation, 
prosecution, and adjudication of cyber -
crime (e.g., online child sexual exploita -
tion and abuse); 2) Promote long-
term whole-of-government response 
to cybercrime (national coordination and effective legal frameworks); and 3) 
Strengthen national and international 
communication between government, 
law enforcement, and the private sector). 
World Bank: The World Bank, headquar -
tered in Washington D.C., is an interna -
tional financial institution that provides 
financing and technical assistance to low- 
and middle-income countries for the pur -
pose of pursuing projects to fight poverty 
through sustainable solutions. The World 
Bank’s expertise is organized across 
Global Practices (GPs) serving clients in 7 
regions. There are 14 key technical areas 
of development expertise and Cross-Cut -
ting Solution Areas addressing global 
challenges including gender, jobs, and 
fragility. The World Bank has been work -
ing to help over 100 developing countries 
and countries in transition to embrace the 
importance of scientific and technological 
innovation for meeting many sustainable 
development challenges and for acceler -
ating human progress. Today, the major -
ity of World Bank’s projects have ICTs as 
a fundamental component, and every GP 
is introducing digital technologies in its 
portfolio and beginning to incorporate 
a cybersecurity sub-component as part 
of their loan operations for digital econ -
omy projects. The World Bank has also 
been involved in the Global Cybersecurity 
Capacity Program  since 2016, which aims 
to enhance the cybersecurity capacities 
of developing countries through technical 
assistance and capacity building activi -
ties. The Bank’s Digital Development (DD) 
GP offers technical assistance across five 
CCB areas (“menu of options”), namely: 
1) Technical and legal support (includ -
ing policy dialogues, strategy develop -
ment, review of regulatory/legislative 
frameworks, stakeholder engagement, 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
71benchmarking); 2) Diagnostics and 
policy/strategy assessments (such as 
national cyber security assessments, rec -
ommendations on CERTs, cybersecurity 
advice to government, best practices to 
mitigate cyber risk to the financial sec -
tor); 3) Institutional and governance 
framework (developing national cyberse -
curity authority, governance plans, oper -
ational and administrative standards, 
cyber essentials and cybersecurity regu -
lation for SMEs); 4) Technical support and 
technical capacity (e.g., establishing or 
strengthening national CERT/SOC, pro -
curement of hardware/software/appli -
cations, threat intelligence gathering, 
assurance, monitoring, audit, CERT capa -
bilities [prevention, mitigation, response], 
drills, simulation, sandboxing, training for 
national [civilian] CERTs, support for crit -
ical infrastructure agencies and for agen -
cies handling biometric data); and 5) Dig -
ital skills development and cybersecurity 
capacity training and education (provid -
ing access to skilled security profession -
als; training for judges, police, prosecu -
tors, parliamentarians, legislators, senior 
national leaders, teachers; technical train -
ing for IT people throughout government; 
public awareness campaign for parents, 
students, children, SMEs, government 
staff [non-IT], entrepreneurs, and the 
public at large). Under a grant from the 
Korea-World Bank Partnership Facility, 
the World Bank, along with other develop -
ment partners, has also developed a spe -
cific toolkit dedicated to building capac -
ity to combat cybercrime. In August 2021, 
it launched a Cybersecurity Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund to help better define, under -
stand, articulate, structure, and system -
atically roll-out the cybersecurity devel -
opment agenda. The emerging work 
program intends to offer comprehensive cybersecurity capacity development, 
including the definition of result expec -
tations, country assessments, technical 
assistance, capacity building and training, 
underpinned with necessary investments 
in infrastructure and technology.154
International Finance Corporation (IFC) : 
The IFC, part of the World Bank Group, 
advances economic development by 
encouraging the growth of the private 
sector in developing countries. The IFC 
works on creating new markets, mobiliz -
ing other investors, and sharing exper -
tise to create jobs, improve the lives of 
people, and raise living standards, espe -
cially for the most vulnerable. Their work 
supports the WBG’s twin goals of end -
ing extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity.155 The IFC has incorporated 
de-risking processes in its digital invest -
ment strategy and developed a risk man -
agement framework for specific industry 
sectors to help assess risk (high-me -
dium-low). The sectors considered to 
have higher exposure to cyber risks (e.g., 
energy, logistics) receive additional scru -
tiny, versus sectors considered low risk 
(e.g., finance, telecom) because of exist -
ing industry frameworks, best practices, 
regulations, and experience.
Estonia Ministry of Foreign Affairs:  Esto -
nia, despite its small size, has developed 
significant cyber expertise and regularly 
invests in CCB projects, especially with 
Eastern partners (Ukraine, Georgia). Their 
largest digital development and cyberse -
curity project in Ukraine – in support of the 
€25 million EU Digital Transformation pro -
gram in Ukraine, funded by the EU Direc -
torate-General for Neighbourhood and 
Enlargement Negotiations (DG NEAR) – 
focuses on supporting enhancement of 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
72its government’s digital infrastructure and 
digital services; investing in updating leg -
acy, Soviet-era infrastructure; improving 
system interoperability; building capacity 
of government agencies responsible for 
digitalization; providing advice on reforms 
and policy for energy, environment, jus -
tice, and home affairs (political influence); 
aligning with international standards; and 
strengthening citizens’ trust in ICTs. The 
program includes a strong, foundational 
cybersecurity component and multiple 
CCB activities (e.g., cyber hygiene aware -
ness and training, advice on national strat -
egy and policy, and protection of critical 
infrastructure, among others). 
Israel’s Agency for International Develop -
ment Cooperation in the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MASHAV) & Israel National Cyber 
Directorate (INCD):  MASHAV, located in 
Jerusalem, Israel, is responsible for the 
design, coordination, and implementa -
tion of Israel’s worldwide development 
and cooperation programs in develop -
ing countries, with the goal of contribut -
ing to the fight against poverty and global 
efforts to achieve sustainable develop -
ment. MASHAV activities are based on 
capacity building, technical assistance, 
and the transferring of Israeli know-how, 
innovation, technologies, and expertise. In 
particular, they focus on sectors in which 
Israel has accumulated expertise and a 
comparative advantage, like cybersecu -
rity, and provide cyber capacity building 
in regions of the world that are of strate -
gic interest to Israel (i.e., the wider Mid -
dle East, Latin America, and Central/
South Asia).156 The Israel National Cyber 
Directorate (INCD) – the country’s locus 
of cyber expertise – delivers the cyber -
security capacity building programs for 
those countries where Israel provides development and CCB assistance. These 
efforts are aligned with the broader Inter -
national Cyber Strategy and priorities of 
Israel, including developing long-term 
partnerships and cyber defense coopera -
tion with key countries; improving capac -
ity and confidence building measures and 
fostering better reach between markets 
to support the economy on both sides; 
and improving security at home – “when 
the tide rises, all boats rise.”157 Their CCB 
activities abroad are focused on secur -
ing, rather than developing, digital and 
critical infrastructure; helping countries 
create national CERTs/SOCs (to monitor 
threats, share threat information, respond 
to cyber incidents); and developing core 
expertise and capacity, regardless of the 
maturity of the country’s digital infrastruc -
ture or legal infrastructure. Both organiza -
tions are working in close cooperation to 
achieve Israel’s development goals. 
JICA:  The Japan International Cooper -
ation Agency (JICA), headquartered in 
Tokyo, Japan, is a governmental agency 
that delivers the bulk of Official Develop -
ment Assistance for the government of 
Japan. It is tasked with assisting economic 
and social growth in developing coun -
tries and promoting sustainable growth 
and international cooperation, with a 
strong focus on ensuring peace, sustain -
able well-being, equality, environmen -
tal protection, and social development. 
JICA dispatches experts and overseas 
volunteers to developing countries, and 
in return welcomes government officials 
and specialists as training participants 
and overseas students. People-to-people 
connections established through human 
resource development are considered 
foundational to building trust between 
developing countries and Japan.158 While 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
73the majority of JICA’s development assis -
tance projects are dedicated to infrastruc -
ture development, sustainable agricul -
ture, and activities to increase and women 
and youth training and empowerment, 
JICA has also launched CCB initiatives to 
develop joint cybersecurity curricula at 
the university level. JICA focuses on uni -
versity partnerships as the natural place 
to develop indigenous capacity. In Indo -
nesia, for example, they are implementing 
a master-level program on cybersecurity 
and developing the curriculum together 
with their local counterparts.
UK FCDO : The UK Foreign, Common -
wealth & Development Office (FCDO), 
headquartered in London, UK, is a min -
isterial department dedicated to further -
ing UK interests in the world, safeguard -
ing UK security, defending UK values, 
reducing poverty, and tackling global 
challenges alongside their international 
partners.159 The Cyber Policy Department, 
part of the National Security Directorate, 
is dedicated to addressing cybersecu -
rity threats, building resilience to cyber -
security attacks, and promoting trusted 
and secure technology across the world. 
This department works closely with other 
lead UK government agencies such as the 
National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), 
Government Communications Headquar -
ters (GCHQ), Home Office, Ministry of 
Defence (MoD), and the Department for 
Digital, Culture, Media & Sport (DCMS) 
to improve cyber capabilities; educate 
different communities; increase digi -
tal literacy; provide technical assistance; 
and promote a free, open, peaceful, and 
secure cyberspace around the world. 
The FCDO recognizes that every devel -
opment project and every single digi -
tal investment requires cyber, data, and technical security and is embedding dig -
ital/cyber de-risking mechanisms in both 
its cybersecurity and its digital develop -
ment assistance programs. Their Digital 
Access Programme (DAP), a partnership 
between FDCO and DCMS with a total 
budget of £82.5 million, “aims to cata -
lyze more inclusive, affordable, safe, and 
secure digital access for excluded and 
underserved communities” in five mid -
dle-income countries (i.e., Kenya, Nige -
ria, South Africa, Brazil, and Indonesia) 
and use digital inclusion as a basis for a 
more thriving digital ecosystem that can 
“stimulate innovations for local develop -
ment challenges, create local skilled jobs, 
and generate opportunities for business 
partnerships.”160 The DAP was initiated 
in 2016-2017 after the publication of the 
World Bank’s World Development Report 
(WDR) on Digital Dividends, which 
explicitly acknowledged the importance 
of cybersecurity as a concern for inter -
national development. The five program 
countries were chosen in 2018 after con -
ducting detailed, in-country diagnostics 
to assess the current state of the coun -
try under three main areas (i.e., digital 
access and inclusion; capacity of govern -
ment, society, and the economy to man -
age digital risks; and status of the local 
digital economy). The countries chosen 
already had a baseline digitization and 
capacities (e.g., connectivity, infrastruc -
ture, government agencies, some regu -
latory frameworks in place). The digital 
access diagnostic assessments, and the 
accompanying business cases, served to 
guide the FCDO in tailoring their DAP pro -
gram to the specific needs of the recipi -
ent countries and to diversify the deliv -
ery models across three pillars (in-house 
delivery, outsourced delivery, or a mix 
of the two) – which, in turn, helped the 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
74program maintain flexibility, sustainability, 
and adaptability to current circumstances 
(e.g., increased use of telemedicine and 
remote learning during COVID-19 crisis). 
The DAP program, expected to conclude 
by 2023, emphasizes the importance of 
managing digital risk; growing the local 
digital economy (including by embed -
ding local tech experts in UK embassies to 
work on these projects); and supporting 
local-start-ups, technology accelerators, 
and digital solutions that can be applied 
locally – an example of “tech for good.” 
The program also focuses on learning 
about sustainable models and enablers 
for digital inclusion, which will be shared 
with key stakeholders and other partner 
countries, thereby amplifying the impact 
of the program. (**Note: the FCDO does 
not provide funding for equipment [soft -
ware/hardware] but supports key stake -
holders in recipient countries to develop 
institutional capacity, understand how to 
do things by following available models or 
frameworks, and strengthen the capacity 
of local community networks).161
USAID : The U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID), headquartered in 
Washington D.C., leads the U.S. govern -
ment’s international development and 
humanitarian efforts. USAID works in over 
100 countries and carries out U.S foreign 
policy by promoting human progress and 
economic and social development in the 
developing world.162 In April 2021, USAID 
released its first-ever Digital Strategy, 
which identified cybersecurity as a new 
focus area for the Agency’s technical pro -
gramming and outlined its vision and com -
mitment to improving their development 
and humanitarian assistance outcomes 
through the use of digital technology in 
support of open, inclusive, and secure digital ecosystems. The Digital Strategy is 
part of USAID’s holistic approach to help 
achieve the UN SDGs. It offers a road -
map for staff, partners, and future pro -
gramming, and “charts how USAID will 
change the way it does business – includ -
ing embracing digital technologies by 
default in certain instances – in a man -
ner that reflects best practice and is evi -
dence-based.”163 USAID has also released 
a Digital Ecosystem Framework designed 
to provide an overview and shared under -
standing of the elements that influence a 
country’s digital ecosystem across three 
overlapping pillars (i.e., Digital Infrastruc -
ture and Adoption; Digital Society, Rights, 
and Governance; and Digital Economy) 
and four cross-cutting topics (i.e., Inclu -
sion, Cybersecurity, Emerging Technolo -
gies, and Geopolitical Positioning).164 The 
Digital Strategy informs the work of the 
newly established Cybersecurity Team 
under the USAID Bureau for Develop -
ment, Democracy and Innovation, which is 
helping the Agency define strategies and 
systems to build awareness and capacity 
to respond to current and future cyber -
security risks related to international 
development. This team has developed 
a “Cybersecurity Primer” for missions 
and for implementing partners to better 
understand why cybersecurity and digi -
tal resilience safeguards should become 
a first-order strategic and operational pri -
ority across all phases of a project (i.e., 
design, objectives, and implementation) 
and be incorporated throughout USAID’s 
Programming Cycle. This tool introduces 
the concept of cybersecurity as a devel -
opment challenge and as a core thread 
that should run through all aspects of 
digital development programs in order 
to ensure digital sustainability and resil -
iency. The Primer is intended to increase 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
75awareness and provide a basic under -
standing of cybersecurity, cyber threats 
trends by sector, and cyber resilience 
as they relate to development program -
ming for USAID staff, which can serve as 
a resource to help streamline cybersecu -
rity into the broader development com -
munity.165 In 2019, USAID also launched 
a $19.5 million Digital APEX program as 
part of their efforts to bridge the devel -
opment and cybersecurity communities. 
It offers a pool of pre-approved, U.S.-
based cybersecurity experts and compa -
nies that can provide implementing part -
ners and partner governments with rapid 
technical assistance in the event of a sig -
nificant cyber incident or help in reduc -
ing vulnerabilities in their digital systems. 
Beneficiaries can tap into this resource for 
other cyber-related projects, as well (e.g., 
security assessments, pen-testing, soft -
ware and hardware procurement, cyber -
security training, network monitoring, 
incident response). This program helps 
expand USAID’s capacities to support its 
partners and beneficiaries, build accessi -
ble and affordable digital infrastructure, 
and promote the adoption of accepted 
international standards. In 2020, USAID 
funded another cyber-related initiative – 
the “Greater Internet Freedom” project – 
that considers these issues from a democ -
racy perspective and aims to enhance 
digital security for civil society and media 
organizations, engage citizens in internet 
governance debates, and advance human 
rights online. The global Internet Free -
dom Consortium that runs this initiative, 
organized by Internews, supports region -
ally-based organizations (including grant -
ees, implementors, and other civil soci -
ety organizations on the ground) that are 
leaders in digital rights and digital secu -
rity. They promote efforts to strengthen digital hygiene, data protection and data 
privacy, and cyber awareness of civil soci -
ety groups, and combat digital authori -
tarianism, disinformation, election inter -
ference, techno-solutionism, polarization, 
and human rights violations.166
U.S. State Department:  The United States 
considers “cyber threats as the most sig -
nificant security challenge facing the 
country, greater even than terrorism. 
To mitigate the risks, the U.S. promotes 
cybersecurity – the broad collection of 
tools, policies, best practices, and actions 
that can be used to protect organizations’ 
and users’ assets in cyberspace and bet -
ter ensure that the intended availability, 
integrity, and confidentiality of online data 
and services are unaffected by malicious 
threats.” The U.S. State Department also 
recognizes that working with partners to 
improve network defenses and cooper -
ation with other countries to respond to 
cyber incidents is crucial. The Department 
engages with many countries on cyberse -
curity directly through embassy contacts 
and senior leadership cyber consulta -
tions, and bilaterally through such efforts 
as Memoranda of Understanding for 
CSIRT information exchanges, research 
and development, coordinated awareness 
efforts, and collective action on combat -
ing botnets. The State Department also 
sponsors cybersecurity and cybercrime 
capacity building workshops across mul -
tiple regions. Responsibility for the State 
Department’s cyber capacity build -
ing work is spread across the regional 
and functional bureaus of the depart -
ment using a range of foreign assistance 
authorities. The work to implement its 
cyber capacity building activities is coor -
dinated across U.S. government agencies 
and with like-minded foreign government 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
76partners, regional and global multi-stake -
holder and multilateral organizations, and 
federally funded research and develop -
ment centers. The State Department’s 
efforts are generally focused on 1) rein -
forcing the international framework for 
responsible state behavior in cyberspace, 
and 2) encouraging the adoption of a set 
of internationally-recognized “best prac -
tices” – although both strands are consid -
ered mutually reinforcing. The “best prac -
tices” articulated in the 2007 Framework 
for National Cybersecurity Efforts  have 
been the model for U.S. State Department 
national and international cyber security 
engagements and cyber capacity build -
ing efforts. U.S. assistance to nations in 
need of development, as outlined in the 
Framework, encompass five CCB areas, 
namely: 1) Develop national strategies to 
enhance cybersecurity and reduce the 
risks and effects of cyber disruptions; 
2) Increase government-industry collab -
oration (public-private partnerships) to 
manage cyber risk and share knowledge; 
3) Fight cybercrime by updating criminal 
laws, procedures, and policies; 4) Develop 
incident management capability that can 
coordinate cybersecurity watch, warn -
ing, response, and recovery efforts (fre -
quently housed in a national CSIRT); and 
5) Build a culture of cybersecurity, increas -
ing awareness of citizenry and industry of 
their critical role in protecting cyber sys -
tems (following UN General Assembly 
Resolutions 57/239 and 58/199).167 In addi -
tion, in 2018, the State Department and 
USAID launched the Digital Connectivity 
and Cybersecurity Partnership (DCCP) – 
a multi-year, whole-of-government initia -
tive to provide a credible alternative to 
top-down, authoritarian approaches to 
internet connectivity and ICT develop -
ment, and to enable countries to realize the economic benefits of the digital econ -
omy. Through the DCCP, the U.S. govern -
ment is currently working with 17 coun -
tries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America to 
address shared threats through engage -
ment with the private sector, government, 
and civil society.168 DCCP aims to: expand 
and increase secure internet access in 
targeted emerging markets by support -
ing the development of secure communi -
cations infrastructure and enabling mar -
ket entry (or expanded market access) 
for U.S. or like-minded tech compa -
nies;  increase the adoption of transpar -
ent regulatory policies and positions that 
encourage open, interoperable, reliable, 
and secure digital infrastructure; promote 
exports of U.S. ICT goods and services 
and increase U.S. company market share 
in targeted markets; and increase adop -
tion of cybersecurity best practices in tar -
geted countries.
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
77ANNEX II  
DEVELOPMENT AND CCB-RELATED  
FRAMEWORKS AND REPORTS CONSULTED
• United Nations’ strategies and reports:
• “UN Charter” (1945);
• “High-Level report on Digital Cooperation – The Age of Digital 
Interdependence” (2019);
• “Data Strategy of the Secretary-General for Action by Everyone, Everywhere 
(2020-22)”;
• “Roadmap for Digital Cooperation” (2020); 
• “Final Substantive Report of the Open-Ended Working Group on Developments 
in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of 
International Security” (2021); 
• “UNDP pilots the Digital Readiness Assessment in Kosovo” (2021).
• “A History of the Development Assistance Committee and the Development 
Co-operation Directorate in Dates, Names and Figures” (OECD, 1996)
• “Capacity Building on Cybercrime” (Council of Europe, 2013); 
• “Cyber Security Capacity Building in Developing Countries: Challenges and 
Opportunities” (Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI), 2015);
• “Cyber Readiness Index 2.0” (Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 2015); 
• “Delhi Communiqué on a GFCE Global Agenda for Cyber Capacity Building” 
(GFCE, 2017);
• “Operational Guidance for the EU’s International Cooperation on Cyber Capacity 
Building” (European Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS), 2018);
• “Securing Digital Dividends” (New America, April 2018);
• “The Cyber Frontier and Digital Pitfalls in the Global South” (NUPI, 2018);
• “Boe Declaration on Regional Security” (Pacific Island Forum, 2018);In addition to the interviews conducted and the supporting documentation provided by 
interviewees, the following strategies, methodologies, frameworks, and reports found 
on the GFCE Cybil Portal169 and on other open-source websites informed this report: 
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
78ANNEX II  
DEVELOPMENT AND CCB-RELATED  
FRAMEWORKS AND REPORTS CONSULTED
• “Global Cybersecurity Capacity Program. Lessons Learned and Recommendations 
Towards Strengthening the Program” (World Bank, 2019);
• “International Strategy to Better Protect the Financial System Against Cyber 
Threats” (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, November 2020);
• “Lessons Learned: Cyber Incident Management Capacity Building” (GFCE, 2020);
• “Transnational Governance of Cybersecurity: Policy Challenges and Global 
Inequalities in Cyber Capacity Building” (Cardiff University, 2020);
• “Unpacking the GGE’s Framework on Responsible State Behaviour: Capacity 
Building” ( Global Partners Digital (GPD)  & Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre 
(APNIC) , 2020);
• “Cybersecurity Capacity Building: Cross-National Benefits and International Divides” 
(Oxford GCSCC, 2020);
• “Reviewing Cybersecurity Capacity in a COVID-19 Environment” ( Cybersecurity 
Capacity Centre for Southern Africa [C3SA]  & Oceania Cyber Security Centre 
[OCSC] , 2020);
• “Australia International Cyber and Critical Technology Engagement Strategy” 
(Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, April 2021);
• “Israel International Cyber Strategy” (Israel National Cyber Directorate, July 2021); 
• “Digital Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable Development Goals in Developing 
Countries” (NUPI, 2021);
• “Managing a Digital Revolution: Cybersecurity Capacity Building in Myanmar” (NUPI, 
2021);
• “Cyber Capacity Building (CCB) Needs – Mapping Exercise and Gap Analysis for 
African Union (AU) Member States” (AU-GFCE  Collaboration Project, July 2021);
• “International Cyber Capacity Building: Global Trends and Scenarios” (EUISS, 
September 2021); 
• “Cybersecurity Primer” (USAID, October 2021);
• “EBRD’s Digital Approach to Accelerating Digital Transition” (EBRD, November 
2021). DEVELOPMENT AND CCB-RELATED 
FRAMEWORKS AND REPORTS CONSULTED
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
79ENDNOTES
1 World Bank, “World Development Report 2016: 
Digital Dividends,” p. 3, https:/ /www.worldbank.
org/en/publication/wdr2016 .
2 Remarks by Sandie Okoro, World Bank’s 
General Counsel, at the Council of Europe 
Octopus Conference 2019.
3 World Bank, “World Development Report 2021: 
Data for Better Lives,” pp. 190-194, https:/ /www.
worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2021 .
4 World Bank, “Combatting Cybercrime: 
Tools and Capacity Building for Emerging 
Economies,” www.combattingcybercrime.org .
5 World Bank, “Cybersecurity Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund,” https:/ /www.worldbank.org/en/
programs/cybersecurity-trust-fund .
6 Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, “Cybil 
Portal, ” https:/ /cybilportal.org/ .
7 GFCE, “ Delhi Communiqué on a GFCE Global 
Agenda for Cyber Capacity Building,” 24 
November 2017, https:/ /thegfce.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/DelhiCommunique.
pdf.
8 GFCE Members, https:/ /thegfce.org/member-
overview/ .
9 UN Secretary -General Ant ónio Guterres’ 
remarks to the virtual high-level meeting on the 
“Impact of Rapid Technological Change on the 
Achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals,” New York, 11 June 2020.
10 Helmut Führer, A History of the Development 
Assistance Committee and the Development 
Co-operation Directorate in Dates, Names and 
Figures (OECD, 1996), https:/ /www.oecd.org/
dac/1896816.pdf .
11 UN Charter, 1945.
12 ODA-eligible funding (i.e. grants and soft loans) 
provided by official government agencies 
flows to countries and territories on the DAC 
List of ODA Recipients and to multilateral 
development institutions. C oncession s to 
ODA- eligible countries and/or activity areas 
are administered with the main objective of 
promoting the economic development and 
welfare of recipient countries. See: OECD, 
“Official Development Assistance (ODA),” 
https:/ /www.oecd.org/dac/financing-
sustainable-development/development-
finance-standards/official-development-
assistance.htm  and “What is ODA?” https:/ /
www.oecd.org/development/stats/What-is-
ODA.pdf . 
13 World Bank, “The McNamara Years at the World 
Bank,” (1981), https:/ /documents1.worldbank.
org/curated/en/850631468336712540/
pdf/332440PUB0McNa101Official0Use0Only1.pdf .14 UN, “Conferences | Least Developed Countries,” 
https:/ /www.un.org/en/conferences/least-
developed-countries .
15 OECD, "DAC Statement on Basic Human 
Needs" (1977), https:/ /www.oecd.org/
dac/1896808.pdf . 
16 World Commission on Environment and 
Development, “Brundtland Report,” https:/ /
www.britannica.com/topic/Brundtland-Report . 
17 Robert Collett and Nayia Barmpaliou, 
“International Cyber Capacity Building: Global 
Trends and Scenarios,” EUISS, September 2021, 
https:/ /www.iss.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
EUISSFiles/CCB%20Report%20Final.pdf .
18 United Nations, “Sustainable Development 
Goals,” https:/ /sdgs.un.org .
19 World Bank, “World Development Report: 
Digital Dividends,” (2016): p. 3, https:/ /www.
worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016 .
20 DiploFoundation, “Sustainable 
Development,” https:/ /dig.watch/issues/
sustainable-development .
21 Carl Bildt, “Development’s Digital D ivide,” 
Project S yndicate , 2015, http:/ /www.project-
syndicate.org ?commentary/sustainable-
development-goals-digital-divide-by-carl-
bildt-2015-08 .
22 ITU, “ICTs for a Sustainable World,” https:/ /
www.itu.int/en/sustainable-world/Pages/
default.aspx  
23 EBRD, “Annual Review 2020,” (2021), https:/ /
www.ebrd.com/news/publications/annual-
report/annual-review-2020.html . 
24 Niels Schia and Johann Willers, “Digital 
Vulnerabilities and the Sustainable 
Development Goals in Developing Countries,” 
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs 
(NUPI), Oslo, Norway (2021), p. 2 .
25 Atlantic Council, “The Role of Development 
Finance and Trusted Connectivity in Achieving 
the Sustainable Development Goals,” 18 
October 2021, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.
org/event/the-role-of-development-finance-
and-trusted-connectivity-in-achieving-the-
sustainable-development-goals/ .
26 United Nations, “Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation,” June 2020, pp. 12-13, https:/ /
www.un.org/en/content/digital-cooperation-
roadmap/assets/pdf/Roadmap_for_Digital_
Cooperation_EN.pdf .
27 UN Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy 
on Technology, “Digital Capacity Building,” 
https:/ /www.un.org/techenvoy/content/digital-
capacity-building .
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
8028 Schia and Willers, “Digital Vulnerabilities 
and the Sustainable Development Goals in 
Developing Countries.”
29 Ibid.
30 Robert Morgus, “Securing Digital Dividends,” 
New America, April 2018, p.8, https:/ /www.
newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/
reports/securing-digital-dividends/ .
31 UN General Assembly, “Final Substantive 
Report of the Open-Ended Working Group 
(OEWG) on Developments in the Field of 
Information and Telecommunications in the 
Context of I nternational Security,” 10 March 
2021, https:/ /front.un-arm.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/Final-report-A-AC.290-2021-
CRP.2.pdf ; and Internet Society, “What Do 
You Mean When You Say ‘Open Internet’ ?” 3 
September 2014, https:/ /www.internetsociety.
org/blog/2014/09/what-do-you-mean-when-
you-say-open-internet/ .
32 UN Secretary General’s High-Level Panel 
on Digital Cooperation, “The Age of Digital 
Interdependence,” (2019), https:/ /www.un.org/
en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation-report-for%20web.
pdf.
33 Collett & Barmpaliou, “International Cyber 
Capacity Building: Global Trends and 
Scenarios,” EUISS.
34 Ibid.
35 Schia and Willers, “Digital Vulnerabilities 
and the Sustainable Development Goals in 
Developing Countries.”
36 Authors’ interview with African Union 
Commission representative.
37 Melissa Hathaway and Francesca Spidalieri, 
“The Cyber Readiness Index 2.0,” Potomac 
Institute for Policy Studies, https:/ /www.
potomacinstitute.org/academic-centers/cyber-
readiness-index .
38 Tim Mauer and Arthur Nelson, “International 
Strategy to Better Protect the Financial System 
Against Cyber Threats,” Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, November 2020, 
https:/ /carnegieendowment.org/2020/11/18/
priority-5-capacity-building-pub-83113 .
39 Collet & Barmpaliou, “International Cyber 
Capacity Building: Global Trends and 
Scenarios.”
40 Robert Collett, “Understanding cybersecurity 
capacity building and its relationship to norms 
and confidence building measures,” Journal of 
Cyber Policy, 2021.
41 Israel National Cyber Directorate, “Israel 
International Cyber Strategy,” July 2021; and 
authors’ interview with the Israel National Cyber 
Directorate.42 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018).
43 “UN Secretary-General’s press remarks on New 
Plan for Digital Cooperation,” https:/ /media.
un.org/en/asset/k1x/k1x3tnmwei .
44 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018) .
45 Pacific Island Forum, “Boe Declaration Action 
Plan,” https:/ /www.forumsec.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/10/BOE-document-Action-Plan.pdf .
46 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018).
47 Authors’ interview with OAS representative.
48 United Nations, “Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation,” June 2020.
49 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018).
50 ICT Works, “The Future of International 
Development Programmes in the Digital Age,” 
1 September 2021, https:/ /www.ictworks.
org/international-development-cooperation-
digital-age/ .
51 Authors’ interview with DiploFoundation.
52 “A report conducted by analysts from 
Dataprotect, a Morocco-based data security 
firm, indicates that 55% of African financial 
institutions outsource their cybersecurity 
needs,” https:/ /cybersecforum.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/08/ECJ-VOLUME-6-2020-
ISSUE-1.pdf .
53 UN Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.
54 Ibid.
55 UN DCO, “About,” https:/ /unsdg.un.org/about/
development-coordination-office .
56 Authors’ interview with OECD representative.
57 United Nations, “UN Secretary-General’s 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation,” https:/ /
www.un.org/en/content/digital-cooperation-
roadmap/ ; and UN Office of the Secretary-
General’s Envoy on Technology, “Digital 
Capacity Building,” https:/ /www.un.org/
techenvoy/content/digital-capacity-building .
58 “AU-GFCE Collaboration: Enabling African 
Countries to Identify and Address Their Cyber 
Capacity Needs,” GFCE Cybil Portal, https:/ /
cybilportal.org/projects/auc-gfce-collaboration-
enabling-african-countries-to-identify-and-
address-their-cyber-capacity-needs/ .
59 Authors’ interview with CREST, 25 August 2021.
60 CMU CyberLab-Africa, https:/ /www.cylab.cmu.
edu/research/africa/index.html  
61 DIAL, “Unlocking MNO data to enhance 
public services and humanitarian efforts,” 
February 2018, https:/ /digitalimpactalliance.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/DIAL_D4D-
Report_2018.pdf .
62 Digital Impact Alliance, “Who We Are,” https:/ /
digitalimpactalliance.org/home/who-we-are/ .
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
8163 DPGA, “Who We Are,” https:/ /
digitalpublicgoods.net/who-we-are/ .
64 DPGA, “What We Do,” https:/ /
digitalpublicgoods.net/what-we-do/ .
65 World Bank, “Combatting Cybercrime: 
Tools and Capacity Building for Emerging 
Economies,” www.combattingcybercrime.org .
66 “Cybil Portal,” https:/ /cybilportal.org .
67 USAID, “Cybersecurity Primer,” October 2021, 
https:/ /www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/10-26-21_EXTERNAL_CyberPrimer-
CLEARED-accessible.pdf .
68 UNDP, “UNDP pilots the Digital Readiness 
Assessment in Kosovo,” 24 March 2021, https:/ /
www.ks.undp.org/content/kosovo/en/home/
presscenter/articles/2021/03/24/undp-pilots-
the-digital-readiness-assessment-in-kosovo.
html.
69 Note: cybersecurity and data protection are 
mostly discussed as part of the Regulations 
pillar.
70 Authors’ interview with the UNDP.
71 DiploFoundation, “Sustainable Development,” 
https:/ /dig.watch/issues/sustainable-
development .
72 ITU, “Global Cybersecurity Index 2020,” https:/ /
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Pages/
global-cybersecurity-index.aspx .
73 Melissa Hathaway, “Managing National Cyber 
Risk,” Organization of American States, 
(2018), https:/ /www.oas.org/es/sms/cicte/
ENGcyberrisk.pdf .
74 Schia & Willers, “Digital Vulnerabilities and the 
Sustainable Development Goals in Developing 
Countries,” p. 2.
75 Council of Europe, “The Budapest 
Convention on Cybercrime: Benefits and 
Impact in Practice,” July 2020, https:/ /
rm.coe.int/t-cy-2020-16-bc-benefits-rep-
provisional/16809ef6ac .
76 INTERPOL, “National Central Bureau (NCBs),” 
https:/ /www.interpol.int/en/Who-we-are/
Member-countries/National-Central-Bureaus-
NCBs .
77 GFCE Cybil, “Strengthening the Work of 
the CBM 8 PoC Crisis Communication 
Network,” https:/ /cybilportal.org/projects/
strengthening-the-work-of-the-cbm-8-poc-
crisis-communication-network/  
78 EU CyberNet, https:/ /www.eucybernet.eu/
vision/ .
79 Authors’ interview with CREST.
80 ITU, “Kenya National CIRT Establishment,” 
GFCE Cybil, https:/ /cybilportal.org/projects/
kenya-national-cirt-establishment/ , and 
“Kenya National CIRT Enhancement,” https:/ /
cybilportal.org/projects/kenya-national-cirt-
enhancement/ .81 Authors’ interview with the ITU, 31 August 2021.
82 USAID, “Cybersecurity for Critical Infrastructure 
in Ukraine.” 
83 Council of Europe, “Global Action on 
Cybercrime Extended (GLACY+),” https:/ /www.
coe.int/en/web/cybercrime/glacyplus .
84 DG Neighbourhood and Enlargement 
Negotiations (DG NEAR), https:/ /ec.europa.
eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/directorate-
general_en  .
85 Authors’ interview with representative of DG 
NEAR – Ukraine special unit.
86 EU CyberNet, “EU CyberNet work in Dominican 
Republic, first national cybersecurity exercise 
“Cyber llamas,” https:/ /www.eucybernet.eu/
eu-cybernet-work-in-dominican-republic-first-
national-cyber-llamas-exercise/ .
87 Cyber4Dev, “Cyber4Dev experts deliver 
wide-ranging virtual training alongside 
partners in Ecuador and Paraguay,” https:/ /
cyber4dev.eu/2021/03/26/continuing-our-
support-to-south-american-partners/ , and 
“Cooperation in times of adversity creates 
opportunities for development,” https:/ /
cyber4dev.eu/2020/08/11/cooperation-in-
times-of-adversity-creates-opportunities-for-
development/ .
88 Authors’ interview with World Bank 
representatives.
89 Remarks by Susan Lund , Vice President  of 
Economics and Private Sector Development 
at the International Finance Corporation  (IFC), 
18 October 2021, https:/ /www.atlanticcouncil.
org/event/the-role-of-development-finance-
and-trusted-connectivity-in-achieving-the-
sustainable-development-goals/ .
90 UN DCO, https:/ /unsdg.un.org/about/
development-coordination-office .
91 UNODC, “UNODC Strengthens El Salvador’s 
Capabilities in the Fight against Cybercrime 
Committed against Children, Adolescents and 
People with Disabilities,” 28 March 2017, https:/ /
www.unodc.org/ropan/en/unodc-strengthens-
el-salvadors-capabilities-in-the-fight-against-
cybercrime-committed-against-children--
adolescents-and-people-with-disabilities.html .
92 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018), pp. 35-6, 51.
93 Ibid.
94 ICT Works, “The Future of International 
Development Programmes in the Digital Age,” 
1 September 2021, https:/ /www.ictworks.org/
international-development-cooperation-digital-
age/.
95 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018).
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
8296 OECD, “Enhancing the digital security of 
products,” https:/ /www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
science-and-technology/enhancing-the-digital-
security-of-products_cd9f9ebc-en .
97 Geneva Dialogue on Responsible Behavior in 
Cyberspace, https:/ /genevadialogue.ch .
98 “Securing Digital Dividends,” New America 
(2018) . 
99 Ibid.
100 Schia & Willers, “Digital Vulnerabilities and the 
Sustainable Development Goals in Developing 
Countries.”
101 ICT Works, “The Future of International 
Development Programmes in the Digital Age,” 
1 September 2021, https:/ /www.ictworks.org/
international-development-cooperation-digital-
age/  
102 African Union, “The Commission,” https:/ /au.int/
en/auc .
103 GFCE, “ AUC-GFCE Collaboration : Enabling 
African Countries to Identify and Address their 
Cyber Capacity Needs,” 8 March 2021, https:/ /
thegfce.org/auc-gfce-collaboration-enabling-
african-countries-to-identify-and-address-their-
cyber-capacity-needs/ .
104 GFCE, “AU-GFCE Collaboration Project: Cyber 
Capacity Building (CCB) Needs – Mapping 
Exercise and Gap Analysis for African Union 
(AU) Member States,” July 2021. 
105 AIIB, “Who We Are,” https:/ /www.aiib.org/en/
about-aiib/index.html .
106 AIIB, “Digital Infrastructure Sector Strategy,” 
June 2020, https:/ /www.aiib.org/en/policies-
strategies/operational-policies/digital-
infrastructure-strategy/index.html .
107 DFAT, https:/ /www.dfat.gov.au .
108 Authors’ interview with former DFAT 
representative.
109 Australia’s International Cyber and Critical 
Tech Engagement, “Cyber and Critical 
Tech Cooperation Program,” https:/ /www.
internationalcybertech.gov.au/cyber-tech-
cooperation-program .
110 DFAT, “Development risk management,” 
https:/ /www.dfat.gov.au/development/topics/
development-risk-management .
111 Australia Government, “International Cyber 
and Critical Technology Engagement Strategy,” 
April 2021, https:/ /www.internationalcybertech.
gov.au/our-work .
112 Ibid.
113 CREST, “Homepage,” https:/ /www.crest-
approved.org/ .
114 CREST, “About CREST,” https:/ /www.crest-
approved.org/about-crest/index.html . 
115 DiploFoundation, “About Diplo,” https:/ /www.
diplomacy.edu/aboutus/about-diplo/.116 Ibid; and “Cybersecurity,” https:/ /www.
diplomacy.edu/cybersecurity .
117 DiploFoundation, “Comments on the Initial ‘Pre-
draft’ of the Report of the Open-Ended Working 
Group (OEWG),” April 2020, https:/ /front.
un-arm.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/diplo-
foundation-contribution-oewg-first-pre-draft-
report.pdf .
118 Ibid.
119 EIB, “Who We Are,” https:/ /www.eib.org/en/
about/index.htm ; and “Priorities,” https:/ /www.
eib.org/en/about/priorities/index.htm .
120 EIB, “European Investment Advisory Hub 
and European Cyber Security Organisation 
Announce First Step Towards a New 
pan-European Cybersecurity Investment 
Instrument,” https:/ /www.eib.org/en/press/
all/2021-331-european-investment-advisory-
hub-and-european-cyber-security-organisation-
announce-first-step-towards-a-new-pan-
european-cybersecurity-investment-instrument .
121 EBRD, “Who We Are,” www.ebrd.com/who-we-
are/.
122 EBRD, “EBRD Adopts First Digital Approach, 
10 November 2021," https:/ /www.ebrd.com/
news/2021/ebrd-adopts-first-digital-approach.
html.
123 EBRD, “The EBRD’s approach to accelerating 
the digital transition, 2021-25,” p. 17.
124 CyLab-Africa, https:/ /www.cylab.cmu.edu/
research/africa/index.html . 
125 Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, “About the 
GFCE,” https:/ /thegfce.org/about-the-gfce/ .
126 Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, “Cybil 
Portal, ” https:/ /cybilportal.org/ .
127 GFCE, “ Delhi Communiqué on a GFCE Global 
Agenda for Cyber Capacity Building,” 24 
November 2017, https:/ /thegfce.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/DelhiCommunique.
pdf.
128 “AU-GFCE Collaboration: Enabling African 
countries to identify and address their cyber 
capacity needs,” GFCE Cybil Portal, https:/ /
cybilportal.org/projects/auc-gfce-collaboration-
enabling-african-countries-to-identify-and-
address-their-cyber-capacity-needs/ .
129 The project is funded by the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation. 
130 IDB, “Gobernarte Blog,” https:/ /blogs.iadb.org/
administracion-publica/en/ .
131 IDB, “Who we are,” https:/ /www.isdb.org/who-
we-are .
132 KDB, “About KDB Bank,” https:/ /www.kdbbank.
eu/ /kdb-bank-seoul .
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
83133 NUPI, “Centre for Digitalization and Cyber 
Security Studies,” https:/ /www.nupi.no/en/Our-
research/Research-centres/NUPI-s-Centre-for-
Digitalization-and-Cyber-Security-Studies .
134 OAS, “Cyber Security,” https:/ /www.oas.org/en/
topics/cyber_security.asp .
135 OAS, “Inter-American Cooperation Portal on 
Cybercrime,” http:/ /www.oas.org/en/sla/dlc/
cyber-en/homePortal.asp .
136 OECD, “About,” https:/ /www.oecd.org/about/ . 
137 OECD, “OECD Digital Economy Papers,” https:/ /
www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/
oecd-digital-economy-papers_20716826?_
ga=2.67327122.2099822214.1630675930-
1561748895.1630675112 ; OECD, “Digital 
Security,” https:/ /www.oecd.org/digital/
ieconomy /digital-security/ .
138 OSCE, “Who We Are,” https:/ /www.osce.org/
who-we-are .
139 OSCE, “Capacity-building Initiatives Related 
to Cybercrime in Focus at OSCE Technical 
Briefing,” 8 September 2021, https:/ /www.osce.
org/secretariat/497434 .
140 OSCE, “OSCE Activities Regarding 
Implementation of Cyber/ICT Security 
Confidence-building Measures,” https:/ /front.
un-arm.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/1-
osce-nonpaper-for-oewg-and-gge.pdf  
141 OSCE, “CBM e-learning,” https:/ /elearning.
osce.org/courses/course-v1:OSCE+TNTD-
CYBERCBM_v1+2020_11/about .
142 Statement by Ant ónio Guterres, UN Secretary-
General , https:/ /www.un.org/techenvoy/
content/roadmap-digital-cooperation .
143 United Nations, “Data Strategy of the 
Secretary-General for Action by Everyone, 
Everywhere,” p.33, https:/ /www.un.org/en/
content/datastrategy/images/pdf/UN_SG_
Data-Strategy.pdf  .
144 United Nations, “Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation.”
145 UN Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on 
Technology, https:/ /www.un.org/techenvoy/
content/about  
146 United Nations, “Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation,” pp. 12-13.
147 Ibid.
148 United Nations, “Joint Facility for Global Digital 
Capacity,” May 2021, https:/ /digital-capacity.
org/joint-facility/ ; and “Strengthening digital 
capacity building,” https:/ /www.un.org/
techenvoy/sites/www.un.org.techenvoy/files/
general/Capacity_Building_Summary_PDF.pdf .
149 Authors’ interview with representatives of the 
Executive Office of the UN Secretary-General 
(EOSG).150 UN Development Coordination Office, 
https:/ /unsdg.un.org/about/development-
coordination-office . 
151 UNDP, “UNDP Pilots the Digital Readiness 
Assessment in Kosovo,” 24 March 2021, https:/ /
www.ks.undp.org/content/kosovo/en/home/
presscenter/articles/2021/03/24/undp-pilots-
the-digital-readiness-assessment-in-kosovo.
html.
152 UN Institute for Disarmament Research, 
“UNIDIR Cyber Policy Portal,” https:/ /
cyberpolicyportal.org/en/ .
153 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 
“Global Programme on Cybercrime,” www.
unodc.org/unodc/en/cybercrime/global-
programme-cybercrime.html .
154 World Bank, “Cybersecurity Multi-Donor 
Trust Fund,” https:/ /www.worldbank.org/en/
programs/cybersecurity-trust-fund .
155 IFC, “About IFC,” https:/ /www.ifc.org/wps/
wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_
corporate_site/about+ifc_new .
156 MASHAV, “About MASHAV,” https:/ /mfa.gov.il/
MFA/mashav/AboutMASHAV/Pages/Guiding_
Principles.aspx . 
157 Israel National Cyber Directorate, “Israel 
International Cyber Strategy,” July 2021, p. 9.
158 “JICA at a Glance,” https:/ /www.jica.go.jp/
english/about/at_a_glance/index.html .
159 FDCO, “What the Foreign, Commonwealth 
& Development Office Does,” https:/ /www.
gov.uk/government/organisations/foreign-
commonwealth-development-office .
160 FCDO, “Digital Access Programme,” https:/ /
devtracker.fcdo.gov.uk/projects/GB-1-204963/
summary .
161 Authors’ interview with FCDO representatives. 
162 USAID, “Who We Are,” https:/ /www.usaid.gov/
who-we-are .
163 USAID, “USAID Digital Strategy,” https:/ /www.
usaid.gov/usaid-digital-strategy .
164 USAID, “USAID Digital Ecosystem Framework,” 
https:/ /www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/Digital_Strategy_Digital_
Ecosystem_Final.pdf . 
165 USAID, “Cybersecurity Primer,” October 
2021, https:/ /www.usaid.gov/sites/default/
files/documents/10-26-21_EXTERNAL_
CyberPrimer-CLEARED-accessible.pdf .
166 Internews, “Global Consortium Launches Three-
Year Effort to Strengthen Internet Freedom 
in 50 Countries,” 10 September 2020, https:/ /
internews.org/global-consortium-launches-
three-year-effort-strengthen- internet -freedom-
50-countries/ .
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda
84167 U.S. State Department Office for the 
Coordinator for Cyber Issues, “Cybersecurity,” 
August 2015.
168 U.S. State Department, “Digital Connectivity 
and Cybersecurity Partnership,” https:/ /
www.state.gov/digital-connectivity-and-
cybersecurity-partnership/ .
169 Cybil Portal, “Publications,” https:/ /cybilportal.
org/publications/?_sf_ppp=148 .
 
Integrating Cyber Capacity into the Digital Development Agenda 
85