Policy Research Working Paper 9615
Development Economics
World Development Report 2021 Team
April 2021 Mapping Data Governance Legal 
Frameworks Around the World
Findings from the Global Data Regulation Diagnostic
Rong ChenBackground PaperWorld Development Report 202 1
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedProduced by the Research Support TeamAbstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.Policy Research Working Paper 9615
A robust data governance regulatory environment, encom -
passing both safeguards that protect the rights of market 
players and enablers that facilitate use/reuse of data, provide 
an important foundation for trust in the data economy. 
This paper presents the methodology and findings from 
a Global Data Regulation Diagnostic. The Global Data 
Regulation diagnostic is a detailed assessment of laws and 
regulations on data governance, covering both safeguards 
and enablers for data governance across 80 countries rang -
ing from low to high income groups. Diagnostic results 
show that countries have put in greater effort in adopting 
enabling regulations than regulatory safeguards. However, the development of both enablers and safeguards remains 
at an intermediate stage: only 41 percent of good prac -
tices for safeguards and 47 percent for enablers have been 
adopted across countries. The diagnostic identifies gaps in 
the regulatory framework across several important dimen -
sions including safeguards for personal and nonpersonal 
data, cross-border data flows and cybersecurity, as well as 
enablers for public and private intent data, as well as e-com -
merce. While higher income countries are typically more 
advanced than their lower income counterparts, significant 
gaps nonetheless remain in the regulatory framework for 
data across all income groups. 
This paper is a product of the World Bank’s World Development Report 2021 Team, Development Economics. It is part of 
a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy 
discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://www.worldbank.org/
prwp. The author may be contacted at rchen5@worldbank.org.   Mapping Data Governance Legal Frameworks Around the World: 
Findings from the Global Data Regulation Diagnostic1 
R
ong Chen 
Key words: data protection, laws , regulatory framework 
JEL codes: K19, K24, L86, O38  
1 The paper is a  background paper for the World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives. The author  would 
like to thank the following colleagues from the World Bank Group for their review and valuable feedback  on the 
paper : Mark Williams ( Practice Manager, Digital Development Global Practice ) and Silvia Muzi (Program 
Coordinator, Development Economics Vice Presidency). The author is also grateful to participants to the World 
Development Report 2021 Seminar Series ( Seminar 2 : Data policies, laws and regulations ) for their comments and 
suggestions.  2 1.Introductio n
D
igital data is growing at exponential rates. Individuals are leaving digital footprints through their daily 
activities . Businesses accumulate data about customer behaviors and preferences , using them  to improve 
efficiency and to facilitate exchanges. Governments are also taking initiatives on data accumulation  by 
creating, for example, smart cities and incorporat ing data analytics into their policy making. If used well, 
data can foster inclusive economic growth and improve the delivery of public services. Concerns regarding 
data protection and security are  mounting , however, as data breaches and potential violations of individual 
rights  increase . 
Governments have been adopting various approaches to improve data protection and security. For instance, 
the Europe an Union has adopted the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR ), which emphasizes the 
rights of data subjects who might be either identified or identifiable . The United States and the Asia -Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC)  opt for  a laissez- faire, or market -centric, approach by relying on voluntary 
private sector standards. But data sets that could  serve as a reference point to assess the robustness a 
country’s regulatory environment on data governance are limited .  
This Global Data Regulation Diagnostic ( or “d iagnostic ” hereafter)  aims to develop objective and 
standardized indicators to measure the regulatory environment for the data economy across countries. The 
structure of the indicators follow s a “trust” framework proposed in the  World Development Report 2021 : 
Data for Better Lives (WDR21) . The framework identifies the legal and normative “ safeguard s” and 
“enabler s” needed to engender trust and facilitate the development of a data- driven economy, using a 
conceptual framework developed specifically for the WDR21.  
The indicators aim to  serve as a diagnostic  tool so countries can assess their adoption of regulatory elements 
that comprise a “trust” framework for the data economy. Diagnostic results could also be used to form a 
baseline to track relevant regulatory reforms over time. Understanding gaps in regulatory good practice is 
a necessary first step for governments when identifying and prioritizing reforms. This is especially 
important for emerging economies that  need to catch up on reap ing the benefits of  the data economy while 
avoiding the risks associated with it. Meanwhile, it is important to emphasize th at there is no one-size-fits-
all approach  to data governance. Alt hough t he diagnostic  helps governments understand where they are 
with regard to the adoption of good practices in building a  robust legal framework to promote the data 
economy, the design of such a sound regulatory environment needs to be responsive to local circumstances. 
Extensive consultation with citizens and market players, efficient enforcing authorities , and flexible 
mechanisms to ensure that the legislation is adapted to new technologies or business models are all 
indispensable to making sure that  the regulatory environment is robust and effective.  
This paper has six sections.  The next section , section 2 , provides a literature review  and explains the 
theoretical background of the study, while  section 3 describes the methodology and section 4 presents key 
findings from the diagnostic. The penultimate s ection (section 5) shares case studies on data governance  
and regulatory reforms during the COVID- 19 pandemic. The final section , section 6, discusses policy 
implications  and provides conclusions.  
2.Literature Review
In t he evolving global data economy, t rust has come under the spotlight . As the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development  (OECD) observes, the data -rich and hyperconnected digital environment 
calls for trust to exploit the potential of the digital economy to support economic and social prosperity 
(OECD 2016) . An influx of  brand-new data-based products or services, as well as the vi rtual-interaction 
environment, imposes challenges for traditional ways to  develop trust (O’Neill 2012) . There is a lack of  3 prior k nowledge about the newly emerged and constantly changing data -based products or services. The 
authentici ty and reliability of entities behind the products are also difficult to assess or verif y. How to bui ld 
trust in data -based technologies, service providers, and other indi viduals and groups online  becomes 
important to promote data econ omic  activities.  
Data regulations could play an essential role in  shaping trust in the data economy. On the one hand, by 
legally recognizing data -related products (e.g ., e-signature s) and setting rules or standards for  data use/reuse, 
regulations provide certainty. Standards can help facilitate data use/reuse, just as accounting rules improve 
efficiency in conv entional business transactions. On the other hand, regulations that lay out rights and 
responsibilities of market players provide them  “a recourse to institutionalized forms of redress in the case 
of trust breaches.”  Some empirical evidences also show the impact of laws on engendering trust. For 
instance,  presence of government regulation in a platform rule helps reduce the likelihood of non-
compliance behavior s among sellers (Koo, 2019) .  AlGhamdi, Drew,  and Al ‐Ghaith  (2011 ) argue that laws 
and regulations  in internet  transaction s affect consumers’ attitude s toward technolog ies. Cyber-law is 
among the f actors that affect the adoption of e -commerce by residents in Saudi Arabia ( Alqahtani , Al-Badi, 
and M ayhew 2012). Similarly, González , Hasker,  and Sickles (2009) find that eBay consumers are less 
likely to make a transaction if they do not get protection from the government .  
 
The impact  of data regulations  on shaping trust in the data economy can  be traced back to the theory of new 
institutional economics. Institutions provide the structure for exchange  that determines transaction costs 
(North 1990) . As North argue s, transaction costs involve information gathering and measurement, policing 
and enforcing the agreement, as well as an uncertainty discount to compensate transacting parties for imperfect measurement and  the enforcement process.  
First, the cost of measuring the valuable attributes of what is being exchanged involves devoting resources 
to search and gather information about legal and physical attributes of the goods/services. For instance, data 
regulations that define characteristi cs of certain valid data products or services, such as a digital ID or 
electronic signature, saves assessing  or evaluation time for market participants . Data regulations that clearly 
define the responsibilities of data processors or controllers lower  trans action costs by vetting service 
providers on behalf of customers. Due to the complexity of data econom y activities, such a vetting function 
can be more economically performed by a centralized regulator through adopting rules or standards than 
by individual  customers.  
Second, when a transaction happens, efficient institutions can help police and enforce the agreement. 
Legislat ures regulate rights and obligations of parties involved in a transaction and exercise  the coercive 
power of the state to make those parties abide with the requirements. Data regulations that grant rights to 
data subjects, such as the right to access or erase  their individual data, protect individuals from data 
controllers or processors . Such protection might increase their willin gness to participate in data economic 
activities  without worrying about exploitation. Moreover, an  effective  and independent data protection 
agency  that supervise s the application of data protection legislation  and handle s complaints lodged against 
legal violations could further boost market stakeholders’ confidence in data protection.  
Third, institutions may exert influence on the transaction cost by affecting  the uncertainty of transaction  
parties  (North 1990, 1986) . It is worth noting that in a business transaction, the collection of information is 
unlikely to be exhaustive , while  the information shared by the parties to a  transaction are a symmetric . One 
party can deliberately hide or forge information. Regulatory enforcement can also be inefficient. An 
enabling institutional environment can serve as a foundation and safety net to engender trust for market 
participants. With regard  to burgeoning  data econom y activities, a regulatory environment  that has  4 cybersecurity requirements for  data processors or controllers and provisions safeguarding the rights of data 
subjects may engender certainty and trust to promote data -based transactions.  
Given the essential role of data regulation in promoting trust in the data economy, this  diagnostic  builds on 
a trust framework proposed in the WDR21 , which advocate s for the adoption  of both safeguards  and 
enablers  to achieve  an efficient environment for data governanc e (World Bank 2021) . The trust framework 
embeds rule of law and good governance principles , including c ertainty, transparency  and accountability , 
nondiscrimination, fairness, inclusiveness, and openness. Rule of l aw that emphasizes  certainty, rules, and 
predictability as well as procedur al due process supports the creation of trust in the data economy ( Crawford 
and Schultz  2014;  Tamanaha  2004; Waldron 2008) .    
This diagnostic  builds on earlier efforts to document the  regulatory environment for digital econom y 
activities  across countries. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development  (UNCTAD)  
developed a database tracking t he existence of legislation related to e -transactions, consumer protection, 
data protection/privacy,  and cybercrime in 194 countries. DLA Piper, a global law firm , also launc hed a 
data protection law tracker that covers 116 jurisdictions  (DLA Pipe r 2020) . Ferracane , Lee -Makiyama , and 
van der Marel  (2018) have developed a digital trade restrictiveness index to map and measure policy 
restrictions  to digital trade  in 64 countries. Greenleaf (2019) conducted a stocktaking of data privacy laws 
in 132 countries. However, most of the existing data collection efforts focus only on collecting information 
about the adoption of certain types of legislation , such as the existence of e-commerce or data protection 
laws, without providing a more granular level of information about the contents of the legislation . What 
makes this diagnostic  unique is that it goes beyond documenting the presence or absence of legislation. It 
assesses  whether the laws contain specific good  practice provision s or regulatory at tribute s, thereby 
conveying something about the quality of the regulatory environment. In doing so, it builds on the 
conceptual framework described above.  
 
3. Methodology  
Within the trust fr amework, the term safeguards  stand s for norms and legal frameworks that aim to protect  
the rights of individuals and entities participating in the data economy by addressing misuse of data, or data 
breaches. Cybersecurity requirements imposed on data proce ssors or controllers are typical safeguards.  The 
term enablers refer s to norms and laws that facilitate the use and reuse of data, such as data portability 
mechanisms, open data legislation , and so on. Although safeguards and enablers  include both formal legal 
frameworks as well as social norms, the diagnostic  assesses only formal regulatory environments.  While 
the diagnostic goes beyond identifying the presence or absence of legislation, by examining different 
attributes of the regulatory framework , it is not possible to assess the implementation or e nforcement  of the 
regul atory frameworks.   
Moreover, according to the WDR 21, a legal framework with enablers and safeguards to build trust in the 
data economy needs to be multidimensional , covering different types of data, actors , and transactions. 
Personal data—data directly pro vided by an individual that involved  personally identifiable information —
as well as nonpersonal  data have different levels of sensitivity, thus requiring tailored safeguards. 
According to international law, individuals have fundamental rights regarding their personal data, such as 
the right to object to the data usage, file complaints , and seek redress. Safeguarding nonpersonal  data instead  
requires protection of intellectual property rights. Depending on the “domain”  of the data —whether data 
are generated and/or controlled by the public or private sector —enablers would also vary. Government can 
directly adopt regulatory or policy reforms to mandate access or use of public data, while in the case of private data , the government’s role is more limited to crea ting incentives and removing barriers to facilitate  5 voluntary data sharing involving private sector actors. For instance, granting data portability rights to  
individuals allows  them  to legally  obtain and reuse their personal data across services, provides legal 
grounds for data sharing among different service providers , and prevents  existing players  from wall ing off 
data. Finally , although many enablers and safeguards apply to both domestic and cross -border data flows, 
particular regulatory provisions for  cross -border data transactions are needed to ensure adequate protection 
in receiving jurisdictions and the  accountability of parties involved in transactions.  
The diagnostic  is based on a detailed assessment of domes tic laws, regulations, and administrative 
requirements  in 80 countries ( see annex  1 for the list of countries covered) . Countries are selected to ensure 
a balance d coverage across income groups, regions and different levels of digital technology developmen t. 
Standard questionnaires are used to collect the data and are completed mainly by lawyers specializing in 
data governance and information and communication technology (ICT). The team has sent the 
questionnaire to more than 2,000 professionals in 80 count ries and received about 300 responses. Data were 
further verified through detailed desk research of legal texts and rounds of follow -up inquires with 
respondents. After this, data collection results and preliminary findings were shared with regional 
operat ional colleagues at the Digital Development Global Practice of the World Bank Group for final 
validation based on their direct knowledge of the countries concerned.  
The questionnaire comprises 37 questions designed to determine if a country has adopted good regulatory 
practice on data governance. The  responses are then  scored and assigned  a normative interpretation. Related 
questions fall into seven clusters so that when the scores are averaged , each cluster  provide s an overall  
sense of how it perform s in its corresponding regulatory and legal dimensions . These seven dimensions are :  
1. E-commerce/e- transaction  
2. Enablers for public intent  data  
3. Enablers for private intent  data 
4. Safeguards for personal data  
5. Safeguards for nonpersonal  data 
6. Cybersecurity and cybercrime  
7. Cross -border data transfers  
The detailed  calculation process is as follow: at the question level,  a score of 1 was assigned to the presence  
of good regulatory practices , and 0 otherwise. For example, a score of 1 is assigned if  there is a law or 
regulation that explicitly governs  e-commerce/e -transactions. For multiple choice questions, a score of 1 is 
divided by the number of options. For instance, a score of 1/6 is assigned to each of the six cybersecurity 
requirements for data processors/controllers. For each of the dimension s i, the score for country j is 
calculated as follows:  
Xij= 100∗�𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖−𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑖𝑖
𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑖𝑖−𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 𝑖𝑖� 
where GP is the number of the adopted regulatory good practices in country j under dimension i , and GPmin  
and GPmax  are the minimum and maximum number s of regulatory practices measured under dimension i.2 
The obtained scores are normalized be tween 0 and 100, with 100 (0) representing the best (worst) score for 
the robustness  of the regulatory framework. The unweighted averag e of a country’s scores on all questions 
pertaining to a specific dimension yields the score for that dimension  (For more  on the questions for each 
dimension, see annex 2) .  
 
2 The minimum number of regulatory practices measured under dimension i is always 0.   6 Further, the unweighted averag e of all dimensions pertain ing to a particular pillar yields the score for that 
pillar, whether enablers or safeguards. The average scores for d imensions  1–3 provide a n overall sense of 
how e nablers are performing , while dimensions 4–7  do the same  for safeguards. No attempt is made , 
however, to average the scores obtained for enablers and safeguards  into an overall country score. This 
avoid s the creation of  country rankings, as the purpose of the exercise is not to rank countries but rather to 
help them  identify gaps in their respective regulatory frameworks.  
Under the safeguards pillar , data governance  regulatory environments for personal data and non-person al 
data are assessed differently. The personal data dimension collects information on the regulatory practices 
adopted to protect data that convey information specific to a known (or knowable) individual. Personal data 
protection  that takes a  human rights approach is considered good practice —emphasizing the rights of data 
subjects, including the right  to challenge the accuracy of  data and obtain corrections . An independent data 
protection authority also plays an important role in enforcing compliance of those requirements . With  
nonpersonal  data, a balance must be struck between data sharing and protecting intellectual property rights . 
Cybersecurity and cybercrime are additional  dimension s covered under the s afeguard s pillar . The cost of 
malicious cyberactivity in the US economy was  estimated in 2016 at  $57 billion to  $109 billion (Council 
of Economic Advisers 2018). F or the sustainable development of t he data economy , there needs a regulatory 
framework that criminalizes illegal cyber -activit ies, specifies cybersecurity measures and requires the 
establishment of organizations such as national  Computer Security Incident Response Teams ( CSIRT) . 
Finally , the s afeguard s pillar , includes cross -border data flows , the  global volume of which  increased 
twentyfold  between  2007 and 2017, with a further threefold  increase expected in the 2017–22 period  (Cisco 
2018). How cross- border data flows are regulated may shape a country’s competitiveness and opportunities  
in international trade. For instance,  data localization conditions  may deter some  firms from opening offices 
in some countr ies. 
The enablers pillar begins with an examination of the regulatory environment for e -commerce /e-
transactions. A ccording to the UNCTAD  (2020 ), the global value of e -commerce sales was estimated at 
$25.6 trillion in 2018, accounting for  about 30  percent  of global GDP . Comprehensive e -commerce 
regulations support inclusive e-commerce by suppressing digital inequities  (UNCTAD 2019) . They also 
could increase  trust in the use of data to facilitate e -transactions . In addition, public intent data dimension 
measures regulatory provisions related to  data collected for public purposes . An enabling regulatory 
environment that promotes the use and reuse of public intent data not only allows  governments to achieve 
better development outcomes  through evidence -based policy but also to create opportunities for private 
sector growth and innovation, as well as contrib ute to the development of the society  as a whole through 
improved transparency and accountability . Private intent data dimension covers provisions  regulating data 
collected with the original intent of pursuing commercial purposes.  The recent booming  of dat a-driven 
businesses ha s shown the potential of private intent data in supporting innovation , efficiency, and inclusion .  
 
4. Findings  
4.1 The global picture  
Diagnostic results show the different regulatory environment s that countries have adopted, enabl ing data 
use for market players on the one hand while safeguard ing the rights of data subjects on the other  (map 1). 
According to their scores on the  safeguards and  enabler  pillars , countries fall into four groups : advanced, 
moderate, evolving, and basic.  A score of 75–100 confers an advanced level  for enabling/ safeguarding and 
is coded green; a score of 50 –75 confers  a moderate level , coded yellow ; a score of 25 –50 indicate s an 
evolving regulatory level , coded orange ; while  a score below 25 is considered basic  and coded red.   7  
 
 
Map 1. Overall country scores on the enabler s and safeguard s pillars  
 
Map 1.a Country scores on safeguard s pillar  
 
Map 1.b  Country scores on enablers pillar  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  The highest performers are denoted with  dark green , the lowest with  red. 
 
 8 With regard  to safeguards , only Estonia falls under the advanced category , while more than 60 percent of 
countries sampled have only reached a n evolving or basic level of regulatory framework to safeguard rights 
of participants involved in data economic activities  (table 1). Following the GDPR , Estonia has adopted 
comprehensive regulatory provisions to safeguard rights of data subjects, such as requiring that the 
collection and use of personal data be proportionate, relevant, adequate , and limited to what is necessary in 
relation to the purpose f or which it is processed, in addition to which personal data shall not be kept longer 
than is necessary. Nigeria, Moldova, and Benin have  the highest scores in  the safeguards pillar  among the 
lower -middle -income group. All three countries have passed  perso nal data protection legislation and 
adopted a cybersecurity strategy, entailing infrastructure and institutions to identify, investigate, and 
address cybersecurity threats. Togo and Uganda are the only low -income countries showing a moderate 
level of  regul atory framework  for data safeguards. Both countries  created a regulatory framework on 
personal data protection in recent years ( in Togo, the law is LOI N° 2019- 014 of October  29, 2019;  in 
Uganda it is the  Data Protection and Privacy Act 2019).  
Table 1. Safeguard s pillar by country income  (number  of countries by categ ory) 
 Advanced (75 –100) Moderate (50 –75) Evolving (25 –50) Basic (0 –25) 
High income  1 8 3 2 
Upper middle income  0 6 8 7 
Lower middle income  0 13 7 10 
Low income  0 2 6 7 
 1 29 24 26 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
Turning to enablers , only four countries were shown to possess  advanced legal framework s, while more 
than half the countries sample d pos sessed  regulatory environment s at evolving or basic level s (table 2). Of 
the countries surveyed, t he United Kingdom, Estonia , Mexico , and the Republic of  Korea are among the 
best performers under this pillar , adopting an array  of regulatory best practices regarding e-commerce and  
public and private data. For example, Estonia’s “ X-tee” data exchange platform is a good practice example 
on system interoperability among government entities. Mexico grants data portability rights  to individuals , 
enabling the smooth legal transfer  of personal data as individuals  switch between services  or product 
provider s. In Kore a, individuals can authenticate themselves with an online digital ID system to gain access  
to governmental services ; meanw hile private sector service providers can digitally verify or authenticate 
the identity of a person against data stored in the ID system . It is worth noting that Burkina Faso is the best-
performing  low-income country under the e nabler pillar . It has adopted  an open data policy;  meanwhile , 
another of its laws ( N ° 051- 2015 / CNT of August 30, 2015)  grants individuals the right to request access 
to government records or data , while  still another law ( 045-2009/AN ) facilitates  e-transactions , for instance , 
by granting legal equivalence to  paper -based and electronic communications.  
Figure 1 provides  more detail  on disparities  across income groups and regions. While  high-income countries 
tend to perform well  on average , there are notable disparities in  their regulatory development . For instance, 
in Mauritius, the regulatory environment for enablers  is far from complete. Private sector service providers 
are unable  to digitally verify or authenticate the identi ty of a person against data stored in the ID system. 
The country has  no government data classification policy , nor are individuals entitled to data portability  9 rights. Low -income countries present  low, closely clustered scores for enablers and safeguards  alike. 
Overall, performance is more widely distributed for  safeguards  than enablers, across income groups.  
 
Table 2. Enabler s pillar (number  of countries  per income group  by category )  
 Advanced (75 –100) Moderate (50 –75) Evolving (25 –
50) Basic (0 –25) 
High income  3 7 4 0 
Upper middle income  1 11 8 1 
Lower middle income  0 12 16 2 
Low income  0 1 9 5 
Total  4 31 37 8 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
 
There is a notable  overlap across geographic regions  regarding  the performance of enablers , whereas 
safeguards  development is more advanced in North America  and in Europe and Cent ral Asia.  Disparities 
in performance across countries within regions  is considerable. For example, within  Latin America  and the 
Caribbean , Mexico has established an advanced regulatory environment  for enablers , while Haiti remains  
at a basic level. Colombia ’s law (no. 1581 of 2012 ) protects  personal data  rights of data subjects, while in 
Bolivia the legal framework does little to safeguard data subjects.   
Figure 1. Safeguards  and enablers : Performance variations within income groups and regions  
  
 
 10   
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  The line on the upper whisker stands for the upper adjacent value, while  the line on the lower whisker stands for the lower 
adjacent value. The upper adjacent value (UAV)  is the largest observation that is less than or equal to the upper inner fence 
(UIF), which is the third quartile plus 1.5*IQR (interquartile range). The lower adjacent value (LAV) is the smallest observation 
that is greater than or equal to the lower inner fence (LIF), which is the first quartile minus 1.5*IQR. The line within the box refers to the median; the upper hinge of the box refers to the 75th percentile, and the lower hinge of the box refers to the 25th 
percentil e. Outside values are excluded  from the figure . Canada is the only North American country covered in the sample. EAP 
= East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North Africa; NA = North America; SA = South Asia; SSA = Sub -Saharan Africa.
  
 
4.2 Safeguards versus Enablers  
Overall, the adoption rate of good regulatory practices pertaining to enablers  is higher  than that of 
safeguards across countries. Countries in the diagnostic sample adopt 47 percent  of regulatory good 
practices measured for enablers, with the adoption rate ranging from 30  percent  in low -income countries to 
62 percent in high- income countrie s (table 3) . In comparison, 41 percent  of good regulatory practices 
measured for safeguards  are adopted . The lower rate is mainly due to the relatively worse performance of 
the high- and upper -middle -income countries on safeguard s. The difference between enablers and 
safeguards becomes less obvious at lower levels of country income group. Lower -middle and low- income 
country performance on both pillars  is consistent.   
Table 3. Scores for  enablers and safeguards (by country  income grou p)  
Average of safeguard score   Average of enabler score   
High income  54 High income  62  
Upper middle income  40 Upper middle income  52  
Lower middle income  40 Lower middle income  44  
Low income  33 Low income  30  
Grand total  41 Grand total  47  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
A scatterplot showing enabler and safeguard  scores also confirms that enabler regulatory practices are more 
prevalent than those for safeguard s (figure 2): consistently across country income groups, some 60 percent 
of countries exhibit higher scores for enablers  than safeguards. Estonia is alone in having an advanced 
 11 regulatory environment for  both enablers and safeguards. Indonesia , Thailand , and Tanzania have 
frameworks with  moderate environments for  enablers , coupled with minimal adoption of safeguards . 
Although it is true that these countries have  overarching e -commerce laws and implemented regulations 
supporting the utilization  of public intent  data, such as open data laws, they non etheless lack regulatory 
safeguards for personal and nonpersonal  data.3 Conversely, Mauritius  has adopted more regulatory good 
practices on s afeguards  than on e nablers . It lacks legislation  that supports the use/reuse of public and private 
intent  data, but the country’s  2017 Data Protection Act established  comprehensive safeguards for  personal 
data in addition to cybersecurity requirements.  It’s also worth highlighting that the  correlation coefficient 
between enablers and safeguards  is 0.38, demonstrating a moderate degree of positive correlation. In other 
words, countries that adopt a robust  regulatory environment on data enabl ing are more likely to have strong  
regulatory environment s for data safeguard s, and vice versa.  
Figure 2. Countr y scores on enablers and safeguards:  A scatterplot  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
Regional performance shows  slightly different patterns (figure 3 ), with most  regions performing better on 
enablers than on safeguards;  Europe , Central America, and Sub- Saharan Africa  are exceptions. On enablers,  
good regulatory practices remain  at the “evolving ” stage in Sub- Saharan Africa. For instance, the digital 
ID system that allows  individuals to authenticate themselves online to access governmental services (e.g., 
e-tax filing  and online benefits application) does not exist in most of the Sub- Saharan African countries in 
the sample . Few have adopted an open licensing regime (such a s a Creative Common s license by Attribution) 
to facilitate the use/reuse of public intent data . Europe and Central Asia is the other region where the 
regulatory environment for safeguards is more robust than it is for enablers. In the diagnostic  sample , all 
 
3 At the time of data collection, Thailand’s Personal Data Protection Act ha d not been enforced yet.  
 12 the countries in Europe  and Central Asia have  data protection law s explicitly governing the use, collection, 
and processing of personal data. Estonia, Moldova , and the United Kingdom have also imposed a full range 
of cybersecurity requirements on data pr ocessors  and controllers. But when it comes to the regulatory 
environment for enablers,  the region is still lagging. For instance, the Kyrgyz Republic is still in the process 
of drafting an e -commerce law.  
 
Figure  3. Scores on enablers and safeguards  across regions  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
4.3 Comparison across dimensions under  the enabler and safeguard pillars  
In addition to the uneven development of regulato ry environments  for enablers and safeguards , country  
performance on the underlying dimensions also varies significantly  (table 4). On average, countries in the 
higher -income group tend to perform better across all dimensions. However, no country income group 
demonstrates an advanced regulatory framework across all dimensions, indicating room for significant 
improvement . All income group s achieve their highest scores on the dimension of e -commerce, with more 
than 70 percent  of the regulatory good practices adopted on average. Public intent  data and c ybersecurity 
and cybercrime are two other dimensions where most countries are performing relatively wel l, except for 
those in the low-income c ategory. All income groups show a basic or evolving level of development for the  
regulatory framework  related to  cross -border data flows and private intent  data. On average , only 17 percent  
of regulatory best practice s are adopted under  the private intent  data dimension, ranging from 3  percent  in 
low-income countries to 30  percent  in high- income countries.  
The average correlation coefficient among  countr y scores across  all seven dimensions is 0.27; the  
coefficients between two  dimensions range from - 0.22 (between regulations for sharing public intent  data 
and protecting nonpersonal  data) to 0.82 (between regulations for protecting personal data and allowing 
cross -border data flows) (table 5). The extent  to which such bilateral correlation coefficients are statistically 
significant , and indeed rather large in some cases, suggest  that governments may tend to simultaneously 
address certain  clusters of issues in the regulatory framework. For instance, countr ies with regulatory 
frameworks that allow cross- border data flows are highly likely to allow access to private intent  data, 
provide protection for personal data, and have strong cybersecurity regulations in place. Or again, countries 0102030405060708090100
North
AmericaEurope &
Central AsiaLatin
America &
CaribbeanSub-Saharan
AfricaEast Asia &
PacificMiddle East
& North
AfricaSouth Asia
Enabler score Safeguard score 13 with strong e -commerce legislation are much  more likely to promote sharing of both public and private 
intent  data. Of some concern is the finding that governments with a well-established regulatory framework 
to facilitate e -commerce/transactions, appear not to be adopting adequate safeguards to protect personal 
data. Take Indonesia as an example, where Law No. 11 of 2008 on Electronic Information and Transactions 
(and amendments to the law)  establish es an enabling environment for e -commerce and e -transactions by 
granting the equivalence of paper -based and electronic communications, recognizing e -signatures , and 
adopting  the technological neutrality principle. But  there is no general law protecting data, despite scattered , 
sector -specific regulations.  
 
Table 4. Regulatory good practices , by country  income across dimensions  (in percentage s)   
Safeguards  Enablers  
Country income  
level  Personal 
data Non-personal  
data Cybersecurity 
and 
Cybercrime Cross 
border data 
flows E-commerce 
/transactions  Public 
intent data  Private 
intent data  
High income  59 43 73 42 86 69 30 
Upper middle income  46 29 57 30 74 62 20 
Lower middle 
income 43 38 55 24 72 44 15 
Low income  31 47 39 13 59 28 3 
Total 44 38 56 27 73 50 17 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
The high correlation between personal data and cross -border data flows merits  furth er scrutiny. Countries 
with sufficient  regulatory safeguards on personal data may not only engender trust for domestic market but 
also enhance its competitiveness in international digital trade, thus  further incentivizing governments in 
adopting regulatory practices to facilitate cross- border data transactions. The correlation between 
nonpersona l data protection and other dimensions is  at a rather low level, even falling into negative  territory , 
suggesting lack of attention  to this issue .   
Table 5. E nablers and safeguards : Correlation s among  regulatory scores across  dimensions  
 E-commerce/  
transactions  Public 
intent data 
enablers  Private 
intent data 
enablers  Personal 
data 
protection  Non-
personal 
data 
protection  Cybersecurity 
and 
cybercrime  Cross -
border data 
flows/ 
transactions  
E-commerce/transactions  1       
Public intent  data 0.2979* 1      
Private intent data  0.3496*  0.3998 * 1     
Personal data  0.0875  0.1736  0.4589 * 1    
Nonpersonal data  -0.1046  -0.2214 * -0.0853  0.1249  1   
Cybersecurity and 
cybercrime  0.2924 * 
0.4031 * 0.6232 * 0.5423 * -0.1744  1  
Cross -border data 
transactions/flows  0.1329  
0.2458 * 0.5573 * 0.8216 * 0.0348  0.6087*  1 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  * indicates that correlation coefficients are significant at the 5  percent  level or better .  14  
4.3.4 Safeguards : Personal data  
The first dimension under safeguards covers personal data —regulatory practices that seek  to protect 
personally identifiable data. Given the sensitivity of personal data, which may include an individual’s health 
or financial information, the level of regulatory protection could have an impact on individuals’ trust in 
data products or services, thus affecting their  willingness to participate in data econom y activities.  
The personal data dimension measures 12  different features of the data protection law of a given 
jurisdiction.4 It first examines whether an overarching data protection law has been enacted, then it surveys 
the implementation of data subject rights such as redress;  objection to the use of pers onal data and limitation 
of sharing with third parties ; data minimization , purpose limitation, and storage limitation requirements. 
Furthermore, this dimension looks at whether limitations exist on the possibility that decisions about 
individuals are taken only on the basis of automated processes, which might lead to social discrimination (Article 29 , Working Party 2018). Finally, this dimension provides information on whether data subject 
rights are ef fectively protected on the technical side through the implementation of measures based on the 
privacy -by-design and privacy- by-default principles in the surveyed jurisdictions (UK Information 
Commissioner ’s Office 2020b), as well as by the monitoring activ ity of a data protection authority.  
Overall, 58 percent  of the countries surveyed enacted an overarching data protection law , such as Nigeria’s 
Data Protection Regulation 2019  or Ukraine’s Law on the Protection of Personal Data of 2010. D ata 
protection laws are found in 40 percent  of low -income countries, 53 percent  of lower -middle -income 
countries, 62 percent  of upper -middle -income countries , and close to 80 percent  of high- income countries 
(figure 4). All these laws include exceptions to the limitations on data collection and processing by 
governments, but a necessity and proportionality test for such exceptions appears  in 18  percent  of the 
countries measured. Such limitation can be found in C ôte d’Ivoire’s data protection law, whereby the 
processing of pe rsonal data carried out on behalf of the state, or a public or private legal entity managing a 
public service authorized by decree, is subject to the reasoned opinion of the Data Protection Body.
5  
Interestingly, the performance  of income groups  on a few specific provisions of  personal data protection 
legislation is quite consistent. Provisions on purpose limitation , individual’s right to challenge accuracy of 
personal data, and seek redress are found in 79% of high income countries, 62% of upper middle -income 
countries, 53% of lower middle -income countries and 40% of low -income countries.  This indicates that 
when countries adopt personal data protection legislation, the above mentioned regulatory good practices 
are usually embedded in the regulatory framework,  implying a convergence on regulatory practices in 
personal data protection across countries. However, there emerges a potential gap between the enactment 
of regulatory frameworks  and their implementation.  Though personal data protection legis lation is 
relatively prevalent at 58  percent , supervisory authorities for data protection are found in 47 percent  of the 
countries surveyed and only 33 percent  in low -income countries.  
 
 
 
 
4 While scores are averaged on the basis of the full set of countries surveyed, the DBI methodology assigns a score for the 
specific safeguards adopted only if a country adopted an overarching data protection law.  
5 See Loi 2013- 450 relative à la protection  des données à caractère personnel , art. 13. Accessible at: 
https://www.artci.ci/images/stories/pdf/lois/loi_2013_450.pdf .  15 Figure 4. Countries with  good regulatory practices safeguard ing pers onal data , by country income 
group  (in p ercentage s)  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
There is significant potential for implementing further improvement in two areas:  data protection by design 
(or by default)  principle  and automated decision -making . Data protection by design seeks to deliver the 
maximum degree of protection  by ensuring the  automatic protect ion of  personal data in any given 
information technology system or business practice, from the design stage right through the life  cycle  
(Cavoukian 2011; UK Information Commissioner ’s Office 2020b). On a global scale, this requirement is 
found in 18  percent  of the countries assessed —36  percent  of high -income countries, as in the case of 
Uruguay,6 14 percent  of upper -middle -income countries, and 23 percent  of lower -middle -income countries.  
Not one  low-income countries has adopted a similar provision. For instance, art. 12 of Uruguay’s Ley de 
Proteccion de Datos Personales n. 18331 requires data controllers to adopt technical measures such as 
privacidad desde el diseño  and privacidad por defecto to protect personal data .7 A similar requirement can 
 
6 See Ley de  Proteccion de Datos Personales n. 18331, art. 12. Accessible at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/18331-
2008/12 . 
7 See Ley de  Proteccion de Datos Personales n. 18331, art. 12. Accessible at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/18331-
2008/12 . 0%20%40%60%80%100%Data Protection Law enactedNo exception to limitations on
data collecting/processing by
governments
Necessity and proportionality
test for government exceptions
Existence of purpose limitation
requirement
Existence of data minimization
requirement
Existence of data storage
limitations
Existence of requirements to
incorporate Privacy by DesignRegulation of data sharing with
third partiesIndividual right to challenge
accuracy and rectify personal
dataRegulatory limitation on
algorithmic decision-makingIndividual right of redress to
object to use of their personal
dataData Protection Authority
createdHigh income Upper middle income Lower middle income Low income 16 be found in Section 41(3) of Kenya’s Data Protec tion Act No. 24 of 2019, which mandates the adoption of 
the data protection -by-default  principle .8 
Limiting  decision -making solely based on automated processing becomes important with the increasing 
practice of  profiling used in various data economic  activities. Profiling is the practice of using personal data, 
specifically data on individuals’ various personal  attributes , in order  to analyze and predict their behavioral 
preferences based on their  economic status, interests, health, or work performance. On top of this, the data 
controller may also make decisions about data subjects through automated means, without human oversight. 
While profiling and automated decision- making may boost  efficiency and cost saving s for data controllers , 
these practices may have serious negative impacts on data subjects, perpetuating bias and discrimination . 
Individuals may see their freedom to  purchas e products online diminished  due to an algorithm that has 
locked them into a specific category or, in the wors t cases, subjected them to  unjustified discrimination 
(Article 29 , Working Party 2018). A limitation to the  making of decisions about  individuals solely as a 
result of automated processing of personal data is found in about 30 % of the countries sampl ed, with 
minimal differences recorded across income groups.  
4.3.5 Safeguards: Nonpersonal data 
The level of safeguards for nonpersonal dat a is a nother  dimension assessed under the s afeguards  pillar . It 
mainly covers two issues: whether IPRs can be cited  to prevent the sharing of data and whether a country’s 
regulatory framework includes provisions on the confidentiality of third- party rights in nonpersonal  
government data, such as company registers o r business data underlying official statistics.  
Results show that 70 percent  of countries do not allow the use of IPRs  to prevent data sharing or have no 
specific provision for  the matter. Most low -income countries have  not established relevant legislatio n on 
IPRs  at all, not to mention the leverag ing of such rights to facilitate or prevent data sharing. With regard  to 
the confidentiality of third -party rights in nonpersonal  government data, it is not regulated in any low -
income country but is addressed by 14 percent  of high- income countries. For instance, Canada protects 
third -party rights in nonpersonal  government official statistics made available publicly, preventing the 
manipulation of databases to identify individuals, businesses , or organizations.9 Only 7 percent  of the 
sampled countries worldwide regulate  third -party confidentiality in nonpersonal  government data .  
4.3.6 Safeguards: Cybersecurity and c ybercrime  
In or der to be effective, safeguards for personal and nonpersonal  data should be linked with  legal and 
technical cybersecurity measures. Mandating the implementation of security measures in  technical 
infrastructure , as well as adopting provisions against cyberc rime—that is , the criminalization of unlawful 
or illegal access or use of infrastructure, systems, and data —are crucial to build a robust safety net for data 
econom y activities. Therefore, the cybersecurity and cybercrime dimension collect s information on four 
elements: security requirements for automated processing of personal data ; cybersecurity requirements for 
data processors/controllers ; existence of a national computer emergency response team (CERT) ; and 
existence of provisions that criminalize cybercrime.   
 
 
 
8 The law can be accessed at: 
http://kenyalaw.org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/Acts/2019/TheDataProtectionAct__No24of2019.pdf . 
9 The terms and conditions of Statistics Canada Open Licence can be accessed at the following link: 
https://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/reference/licence .  17 Figure 5. Countries with  good regulatory practices on cybersecurity and cybercrime, by  income 
group (in p ercentage s)  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  CSIRT = Computer Security Incidence Response Team.  
 
Diagnostic results show that data processors and controllers have to comply with security requirements for 
automated data processing in 29 percent  of high- income countries (figure 5). Kenya is the only country in 
the lower -middle -income group with a similar security requirement . In particular, Kenya requires data 
controllers and data processors to: encrypt personal data, implement measures f or pseudonymization, 
restore the availability of and access to personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or 
technical incident, verify that the safeguards are effectively implemented, and ensure that the safeguards are continually updated in response to new risks or deficiencies.
10 Furthermore, no low -income country has 
adopt ed the full range of cybersecurity requirements for data processors and controllers, whereas these can 
be found in 10 percent  of the lower -middle -income group, 14 percent  of the upper -middle -income group, 
and 36 percent  of high- income countries.  
Although they lack cybersecurity measures in their regulatory framework s, many countries (66  percent ) 
have national cybersecurity plans  and a national Computer Security Inc ident Response Team (CSIRT). 
Stark differences remain  across income groups—100 percent  of high- income countries have endorsed these 
cybersecurity strategies while only a third of low -income countries have done so. With regard  to provisions 
that criminalize  different forms of cyber activities, income groups  have more consistent  performance. 
Globally, 62  percent  of the countries assessed have comprehensive cybercrime provisions, along with 47 
percent  of the low -income countries. Rwanda’s Law on Governing Information and Communication 
Technologies 2016 (ICT Law) addresses unauthorized access to computer data, modification of data held 
in a computer system, interception of computer service s, access to a computer system with intent to commit 
an offen se, damaging or denying access to a computer system, and computer -related theft, fraud , and 
forgery.11  
 
10 See Section 41(4) of the Data Protection Act 2019. Accessible at: https://www.ict.go.ke/wp -
content/uploads/2019/11/TheDataProtectionAct__No24of2019.pdf . 
11 See art. 197 -203. Accessible at: https://govca.rw/eng/lawspdf/RWA_2016_LAW%20N0%2024-
2016_INFORMATION_AND_COMMUNICATION_TECHNOLOGY-OG_N0_26_OF_27_JUNE%20_2016.pdf . 0%20%40%60%80%100%Security requirement for
automated processing of
personal data
Cybersecurity
requirements for data
processors/controllers
CSIRTRegulating cybercrime
activitiesHigh income Upper middle Low middle Low income 18 4.3.7 Safeguards: Cross -border data flow s 
As digital trade becomes more important in international trade, an appropriate regulatory approach is 
required to support c ross-border data flows. On the one hand, data subjects’ rights and national security 
should be safeguarded during international data flows . On the other hand, smart regulation is needed to 
avoid negative impact s on a country’s competitiveness in international trade. The cross- border data flow 
dimension monitors the conditions under which personal data can be transferred abroad. In particular, it 
measures whether a country’s regulatory framework allows data transfer through both adequacy and 
accountability approaches, recording the specific conditions that permit data transfer .  
Countries regulate the transfer of local personal data to nondomestic third parties  by adopt ing various  
approaches . The “adequacy” approach was introduced  in the 1981 Council of Europe’s Convention 108. 
Countries that adopt this approach allow international data transfer to a set of jurisdictions that guarantee 
comparable data protection safeguards, generally following the decision of the data authority. Conversely, 
the OECD Guidelines  recommend a more flexible approach, leaving to an organization the responsibility 
to assess and determine which protections are to be put in place before proceeding with the international 
data transfer  (OECD 2013) . Regulatory frameworks inspired by this view adopt an “accountability” 
approach (Phillips 2018). Moreover, some countries have begun  to adopt a restrictive government -control 
approach on cross -border data flows by mandating data localization within the country. For in stance, 
Nigeria, Russia , and Vietnam require that personal data about their citizens must be stored and processed 
with country border s. In China, “critical information infrastructure operators” are required to store 
“important data” collected and generated  in their operations  within its territory. Alt hough some 
governments cite national security in support  of such data localization requirements, concerns about citizen 
surveillance and disrupt ed business operation s are increasing.  
Almost 50  percent  of the c ountries adopt an adequacy approach. Circumstances constituting an “adequate 
level of protection” for international transfer s of personal data include the purposes and time period for 
which data are intended to be processed, the existence of relevant domes tic law in the host country (such 
as data minimization and individual  rights ), the existence and effective functioning of one or more 
independent supervisory authorities in the third country to enforce compliance, and so on. Around one -third 
of high- income countries have specified a full range of circumstances constituting this “adequate level of 
protection, ” while few low -income countries have done so. Countries can also have mutual arrangements 
with foreign countries or multinational entities or schemes to require, permit,  or limit transfers of personal 
data between countries. Such  agreements include whitelist ing, mutual recognition, and treaties. Mutual 
recognition agreement and treaties are more prevalent, with about 30 percent of countries surveyed having such arrangements. For instance, the Philippines and Singapore agreed to de velop compatible mechanisms 
to facilitate trusted cross- border data flows, including mutual recognition of comparable protection afforded 
by their respective laws to safeguard citizens of both the Philippines and Singapore. 
More in detail, f igure  6 shows t hat 29 percent  of high -income countries use  both adequacy and 
accountability approaches to r egulate data transfer s, but the ratio is at only 3 percent  and 7 percent  among 
lower -middle - and low -income countries , respectively. These shares are even lower whe n it comes to data 
transfer arrangements with foreign countries, such as adequacy decisions/whitelists, binding corporate rules, mutual recognition, and international treaties. Only 7  percent  of high- income - and 5 percent  of upper -
middle -income countries h ave incorporated all these requirements to facilitate cross- border data transfer s. 
On average, the regulations of high- income countries generally include at least two  conditions in order to  19 allow adequacy -based data transfer, while upper -middle - and lower -middle -income countries generally 
take into account only one condition.12  
Figure 6. Countries by  income group adopting good regulatory practices on  cross -border data flows 
(percent ages)   
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
4.3.1 Enabler s: e-commerce/e -transactions  
Countr y performance on each of the key regulatory dimensions (summarized above ) can be further explored 
with reference to  the scores on the “ component ” question underlying each dimension. Such analysis makes 
it possible to pinpoint where the data governance framework may be deficient.  
Firstly, s upporting the development of  e-commerce calls for  a regulatory environmen t that is  adapted to 
fast-evolving technologies  to allow a full participation  in the opportunities brough t by e-commerce without  
increasing digital inequalities  (UNCTAD 2019) . The e -commerce dimension encompasses  the following 
elements: existence  of an overarching e -commerce law ; legal equivalence of paper -based and e -
communications ; legal recognition of e -signatures ; adoption  of principles of technological neutrality of e -
communications ; and implementation  of a digital ID system so users can  access e- government service s. 
Country performance var ies significantly on technological  neutrality in electronic communications and  a 
digital ID system for  accessing  e-government services (figure 7). The technological neutrality principle 
advocates a flexi ble regulatory framework . Appl ied in the arena of e -commerce/transactions, it ensure s 
openness  to technologies needed  for e-signatures and e -communications . Rules that are neutral regarding  
technology accommodate innovation and change without further legislative work. R egulations  should 
define the expected output without imposing requirements favor ing, or consolidat ing the position of , 
technological winners  (Maxwell and Bourreau 2014) . For i nstance, the  Ukrainian Law on Electronic Trust 
Services stipulates technological neutrality of e -services.13 The principle of technological neutrality has 
been implemented in the  regulation of 53 percent  and 57 percent  of low - and upper -middle -income 
 
12 The DBI project measures how many adequacy conditions can be found on average in each jurisdiction. This average score is 
calculated on the basis of the full set of countries ; the score is not restr icted to countries that regulate adequacy -based data 
transfer only.  
13 See art. 1 (42). The text of the law is accessible at: https://zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/2155- 19.  0%20%40%60%80%100%Conditions for cross-border
data transfer
Existence of data transfer
arrangements with foreign
countriesExistence of adequacy level
governing cross-border
data transferHigh income Upper middle income
Lower middle income Low income 20 countries , respectively, in contrast  to 71  percent  in high- income countries and 80 percent  in lower -middle -
income countries.  
Figure 7. Countries  adopting good regulatory practices on e -commerce/e -transaction s by income 
group  (in p ercent ages) 
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
Digital authentication allows users to be verified, uniquely and securely, through digital technologies or 
biometric s.14 Digital IDs allow users to effectively access sensitive applications, data, and e -services, which 
enhances equality and inclusion.15 A digital ID system to access e- government services is found in 30  
percent  of lower -middle -income countries and only 6  percent of countries in the low -income group ; the 
system is adopted by 93 percent  and 62 percent  of high - and upper -middle -income countries , respectively . 
Singapore’s SingPass  is a well-functioning digital ID system .16 Users can access SingPass on their 
smart phone s, logging in through biometric data , using their digital identity to sign e -documents or access 
more than 200 e -government services, such as tax or property information.17 Instruments like SingPass 
allow citizens to interact easily with government  services  and save on administrative costs and fees.18 
 
14 See World Bank, Identity for Development (ID4D), glossary , available at: https://id4d.worldbank.org/guide/glossary . 
15 See, generally, World Bank, Identity for Development  (ID4D ), available at: https://id4d.worldbank.org/global -dataset ; and 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs ), available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs . SDG 16.9 provides that, “By 
2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration.”  
16 The SingPass portal can be accessed at: https://www.singpass.gov.sg/ . 
17 For further information, see also: https://www.tech.gov.sg/products -and-services/singpass/ . 
18 For information about the benefits of SingPass , see also: https://www.smartnation.g ov.sg/docs/default -source/press -release-
materials/factsheet ---national -digital-identity.pdf?sfvrsn=ea1d279f_2.   0%20%40%60%80%100%Existence of e-
commerce law
Legal equivalence of
paper based and
electronic
communications
Legal recognition of
electronic signaturesTechnological
neutrality of electronic
communicationsDigital ID system to
access e-government
servicesHigh income Upper middle income
Lower middle income Low income 21 4.3.2 Enabler s: public intent  data 
 
“Public intent  data” refer  to data collected for public purposes, regardless of the collection instrument or 
the entity that manages the data. Traditionally, public intent  data are collected by censuses and  household  
surveys, although newer sources of such data have become available and more prominent in recent years, 
such as data collected through digital identification and facial recognition through public cameras. Issues 
measured under the dimension of public intent  data include: the existence of open data laws, the 
interoperability of government data exchange platforms, the existence of a data classification policy and its 
mandatory use for government data, the existence of access to information (ATI) legislation and relat ed 
exceptions, and, finally, the adoption by gover nments of an open licensing regime. 
Countr y performance on the abovementioned aspects vary significantly , except on ATI legislation  (figure 
8), which has been adopted by 70 percent  of the countries  surveyed, while about half the countries include 
exception s regulat ing ATI rights .19 ATI  legislation provid es citizens a legal instrument to obtain public 
sector disclosure. Access and circulation of information held by public actors is a cornerstone for freedom 
of information and expression. This is one of the SDGs as it increases accountability and transparency of 
government action.20 
Figure 8. Percent age of countries with  good regulatory practices to facilitate the use of public intent  
data ( by country income ) 
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
Compar ed with ATI legislation that  provides an ex  post channel for citizens to obtain information, open 
data laws establish an ex  ante responsibility for the disclosure of public data . Korea’s Act on the Promotion 
 
19 Countries score points if they regulate all the following exceptions to ATI rights : (1) sensitive  information on national security, 
defense, o r foreign policy grounds; (2) trade secrets or other commercial interests; (3) personal  data; (4) law enforcement; (5) 
privileged  information; and ( 6) public  investigations and audits.  
20 Goal 16.10.2, see: https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal16 . 0%20%40%60%80%100%Semantic interoperability mandated for
government entities
Existence of Open Data Law
Existence of data classification policy
Mandatory usage of data classfication on
government dataExistence of Access to Information (ATI)
LegislationExistence of exceptions to the ATI rightAdoption of open licensing regime by
governmentsHigh income Upper middle income Lower middle income Low income 22 of Provision and Use of Public Data21 is a good example of such legislation. Sixty  percent  of upper -middle -
income countries have adopted an open data law. However , open data law s are not as prevalent as ATI 
legislation , especially in low-income countries. Another issue that is partially linked to the publication of 
open data is the adoption of an open licensing regime, such as a Creative Commons License. This allows 
users to reuse  “public sector information for a purpose other t han the initial public task it was produced for ,” 
with few or no restrictions, including commercial purposes  (UK Information Commissioner ’s Office 2020a) . 
Therefore, a sharing- friendly licensing regime maximizes the benefits of making open data available, 
enhancing opportunities for economic growth (European Commission 2019) . Adoption rates for this 
regulatory practice vary across country- income groups: an open licensing regime has been adopted in all 
the high- income countries surveyed, while the adoption rate decreases to 57  percent  of upper -middle -
income countries, 37 percent  of lower -middle -income countries , and 7  percent  of countries in the low -
income group.   
To facilitate the use of public data, another regulatory good practice is a  mandatory requirement among 
government entities to use common technical standards to enable interoperability of systems, registries, and 
databases. Examples of suc h initiatives include establis h standards for open APIs for G2G/G2B/G2C 
services, implement the “ask on ce” principle, utilize standardized communications protocol for accessing 
metadata, and rely upon semantic catalogues for data and metadata.22 Saudi Arabia’s Yesser E -Government 
Program provides a good example of an interoperable data exchange platform, which allows citizens and 
companies to access e- government services on the Gov.sa portal  (World Bank 2020) . Similar platforms can 
be found in 43  percent  of high- income countries and 10  percent  of upper -middle and lower -middle -income 
countries, while this system is not found in any low -income country.  
It is worth noting that certain categories of government data may not be suitable for  publi cation  under open 
data policies —for instance , in the case of personal data or data entailing  national security concerns. Thus, 
public entities should evaluate potential issues of sensitivity in light of a data classification policy. This 
requires an ex  ante assessment of the risks associated with the publication and adoption of protective 
measures to ensure the safe publi cation of personal information on open data portals, while allowing 
accountability. Data should be categorized taking into account the different levels of sensitivity across the 
different stages of the data life cycle, enabling effective and safe data reus e (Digital Guardian 2018) . A data 
classification policy has been adopted by more than half of the countries across income groups, ranging 
from 26  percent  of countries in the low -income group to 78 percent  of high- income countries. The use of 
such classification is mandatory for government data in 13 percent  of low -income countries, 20  percent  of 
lower -middle -income countries, 42 percent  of upper -middle -income countries,  and 57  percent  of high -
income countries.  
4.3.3 Enabler s: private i ntent  data 
The private intent  data refers to  data collected with the original intent of pursuing commercial purposes.  
Private data can generate productivity gains and growth in both developed and developing countries, 
supporting innovation, efficiency, and inclusion (World Bank 2016) . Data on consumer behavior and 
preferences become the secret weapon to further propel business growth  (Argenton and Prüfer 2012) . 
MYbank, an online private commercial bank in China, uses big data to assess loan applications instead of hiring thousands of loan officers or lawyers for  offline , face-to-face due diligence  work . It provided loans 
 
21 The text of the law can be accessed at: 
https://www.law.go.kr/%EB%B2%95%EB%A0%B9/%EA%B3%B5%EA%B3%B5%EB%8D%B0%EC%9D%B4%ED%84%B
0%EC%9D%98%EC%A0%9C%EA%B3%B5%EB%B0%8F%EC%9D%B4%EC%9A%A9%ED%99%9C%EC%84%B1%E D
%99%94%EC%97%90%EA%B4%80%ED%95%9C%EB%B2%95%EB%A5%A0 . 
22 Countries score points if their data exchange platforms adopt all these features.   23 exceeding $600 billion to more than 22 million small and medium enterprises (SMEs) from 2014 to 2019. 
However, these positive outcomes may be counter balanced by the potentially negative impact of  data 
collection and exploitation on society. Extensive data collection for private intent  requires the 
implementation of adequate protection safeguards, which will be covered in t he safeguards  pillar .  
The private intent  data dimension analyzes the existence of data portability rights for individuals and its 
formatting requirements, the possibility for the private sector to digitally verify and authenticate users, and 
the possibility for standard- setting org anizations to mandate patent holders to provide voluntary licensing 
access to “standard essential” data or applications on FRAND (fair, reasonable,  and nondiscriminatory ) 
terms  (figure 9 ).  
Figure 9. Countries with  good regulatory practices to facilitate u se of  private intent  data , by country -
income group  (in p ercentages)   
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
 
Granting data portability rights is one of the good regulatory practices to facilitate the use of private intent  
data. According to the European regulators, data portability rights allow data subjects to obtain the personal 
data they provided to a company or organization in a structured machine- readable format and can be  
transmitted to another data controller by virtue of clear legal and technical standards. Therefore, data portability has the double effect of increasing users’ control  over their own data while  enhancing 
competition betwe en companies  (European Commission 2020) . Data portability for individuals and related  
formatting requirements have been adopted by only 10 percent  of the surveyed countries. This is the case 
of Benin, among others, which gives users the right to request a controller to transfer their personal data to 0%20%40%60%80%100%Existence of data
portability right for
individuals
Existence of data
portability
formatting
requirement
Private sector able
to digitally
verify/authenticate
IDExistence of
mandate for
voluntary licensing
of access to
essential data on
FRAND basisHigh income Upper middle income
Lower middle income Low income 24 another service or product provider in a structured readable format .23 More in detail, the right to portability 
has been adopted approximately by 14 percent  of high - and lower -middle -income countries, 9  percent  of 
upper -middle -income countries , and 6  percent  of countries in the low -income group. 
Another issue  investigated under  the private intent  data dimension is the voluntary licensing on FRAND 
terms, which enables  companies and patent  holders to share technology and data. On the one hand, holders 
of data -related intellectual property rights (IPRs) are encouraged to invest in products and markets, as they 
can control access to licensed products and receive returns on their investments. On the other hand, sectoral 
or international standard setting organizations may require patent rights to be applied on FRAND terms 
when these are considered standard essential patents.  The diagnostic  results show  that voluntary licensing 
to access essential data on FRAND terms is regulated in 14 percent  and 9  percent  of high-  and upper -
middle -income countries , respectively, while the matter is not regulated by any lower -middle - and low -
income country. 
As more and more economic transactions occur  online, the ability of  privat e sector actors to digitally verify 
the identity  of users again st the ID system becomes essential for efficien t digital transactions.  High -income 
countries are taking the lead on adopting suc h practices, with more than 79 percent  of them allowing so . 
For instance, Canada’s SecureKey Technology digitally identifie s users  through the online credentials used 
with private partners .24 A comparable solution is found in approximately half of the upper -middle -income 
countries. However, no low -income country allows private sector actors to digitally verify the identity of 
users against the ID system.  
4.4 E xistence of laws vs. robustness of laws  
The details  presented above on data regulation frameworks seek to  capture the existence of  foundational 
laws, the robustness  of these laws, and data governance  administration . These additional details  comprise  
the value  this diagnostic  provides compared with  efforts like UNCTAD’s  e-transaction database and DLA 
Piper ’s data protection law tracker . Besides collecting information on the existence of any e-commerce and 
data protection laws, ATI , or open data legislation, the diagnostic  also measures the robustness of such laws 
to assess whether they contain specific provision s or regulatory attribute s. Moreover, in order to capture 
information on the implementation of those regulatory frameworks, the diagnostic  also includes a few  
questions on administrative aspects of data governance, suc h as any digital ID system s for e -services, key 
institutions such as CSIRTs for cybersecurity and data protection authorities, common technical standards 
to ensure government system interoperability, mandatory data classification s used acros s government 
system s, and so on .  
The diagnostic  results show that al though many countries have established various data regulations, those 
regulatory frameworks are not extensive enough or sufficiently  aligned with  good regulatory practices to 
ensure that the legal framework can create an enabling environment for the data econom y (figure 10). Low-
income countries in particular  are weak on technical infrastructure or institutional settings that enable robust 
data governance, such as the  existence of digital ID system for e- services , mandatory use of common 
technical standards to ensure government system interoperability . In comparison, hi gh-income countries 
show a high score on the  administrative aspects of data governance  even though some legislation is not 
robust  enough  with a full range of regulatory good practice incorporated.  This reflects quite  a pragmatic 
approach in exploring the most appropriate regulatory framework for their countries .   
 
23 See art. 438 of the Digital Code Act, accessible at: https://sg g.gouv.bj/doc/loi -2017- 20/  
24 Additional information available at: https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/serv ices/e-services/cra-login-services/sign -
partners -help -faqs/using-a -sign -partner.html    25 Figure 10. Performance on different elements of the data governance framework , by country  
income  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  Administrative aspects include existence of digital ID system for e-services, mandatory use of common technical standards 
to ensure government system interoperability, mandatory use of data classification categories across government system s, adoption 
of open licensing regime, private sector ability to digitally verify/authenticate ID,  and existence of mandate for voluntary licensing 
of access to essential data on FRAND basis. Robustness  of regulatory framework is based on the average score o f all regulator 
attributes measured under the Global Data Regulation diagnostic  except for the administrative aspects questions, as well as the 
questions on the existence of e -commerce law, personal data protection law, ATI law, open data law or policy, an d cybercrime 
provisions.  
 
Figure 11.  Comparison between existence of key  legislation and its coverage of regulatory good 
practice  
 
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic.  
Note:  Robustness  means that the corresponding legal framework contains all the regulatory attributes (getting a full score on all 
relevant questions) assessed under the Global Data Regulation diag nostic .  
 
The contrast between the existence of laws and the robustness of those laws is particularly salient for data 
protection legislation (figure 11). Though more than 60 percent  of upper -middle -income countries have 
legal framework s on data protection, none of them has adopted all the regulatory good practices measured 020406080100
High income Upper middle
incomeLower middle
incomeLow incomeAverage scores
Existence of laws (e-commerce, personal data protection, ATI/open data,
cybercrime)
Robustness of regulatory framework
Administrative aspects
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Existence of e-
commerceRobustness of e-
commerce lawExistence of
personal data
protection lawRobustness of
personal data
protection lawCybercrime CybersecurityPercentage of countries
High income Upper middle income Lower middle income Low income 26 under the diagnostic ; this is  similarly true for  low-income countries. In the same vein, though more than 60 
percent of countries surveyed have adopted comprehensive  provisions to regulate cybercrime, there are 
widespread , glaring gaps in the regulatory framework for cybersecurity. Only a few high- income countries 
(such as the United Kingdom ) have adopted a full range of regu latory good practices on cybersecurity, 
including security requirements for the automated processing of personal data, cybersecurity requirements 
imposed on data processors/controllers, as well as the creation of cybersecurity strateg ies, infrastructure , 
and institutions to identify, investigate, and address cybersecurity  threats.  
4.5 Data regulation diagnostic  vs. other governance  assessments  
As argued above, the regulatory environment for  data governance shapes public trust in the data economy.  
The diagnostic  can also be used , in combination with other data sources, to examine the association between 
a countr y’s level  of regulatory development for  data governance and public perception s, using the Word 
Governance Indicators  (figure 12).  
Figure 1 2. Cor relations between the quality of data governance and wider governance 
characteristics  
 
a. Quality of data governance associated with wider regulatory quality  
  
b. Quality of data governance associated with voice and accountability  
  
Source:  Author’s calculation based on results from the diagnostic and World Governance Indicators.  
 27 Note:  Data on  “regulatory quality” and “ voice  and accountability ” are from the world governance indicators.  The r egulatory quality 
score reflects perceptions of the ability of the government to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit 
and promote private sector development.  This indicator has a correlation of 0.45 with the safeguard score and 0.60 with the enabler  
score.  The voice  and accountability score reflects perceptions of the extent to which a country’s  citizens are able to participate in 
selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media.  This indicator has a  
correlation coefficient  of 0.45 with the safeguard score and 0.50 with the enabler score.   
 
The first point to note is that the safeguard and enablers scores show quite a high correlation with the wider 
regulatory quality index from the World Governance Indicators  (figure 12a) . This  makes sense as countries 
with a relatively strong regulatory cultu re tend to do well on regulation across a wide range of sectors , 
including data . The regulatory quality indicator reflect s the public’s trust in the government ’s ability  to 
formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote priv ate sector 
development. Moreover, more regulatory good practices in  enablers are associated with greater  confidence 
in various government functions and entities, including public  services, t he civil service and its 
independence from political pressures, p olicy  formulation and implementation  and t he government ’s 
commitment to policies . This could be related in particular to the dimension of public intent  data under the 
enabler  pillar, which aims  to facilitate the use/reuse of public data to improve government efficiency.  
Furthermore , the author finds that  more robust regulatory frameworks  for data governance are associated 
with countries where citizens feeling more empowered in terms of both voice and accountability, as 
reflected in their perceived  ability to participate in selecting their government, along with their  freedom of 
expression, freedom of association, and a free media (figure 12b).  
Though no causal relations can be drawn from  these correlations, the high level of positive associations 
indicate that the regulatory framework for data does not exist  in isolation from a country’s wider governance 
framework and tends to do better in country contexts where citizen perceptions indicate rela tively high 
levels of trust in the regulatory environment. One additional caveat is that the World Governance Indicators 
measure public trust in governance environment in general, rather than direct measurements of public trust 
in data economy.  
 
 
5. COVID- 19-specific  provisions  
The ongoing COVID- 19 pandemic  makes a robust  data governance  environment more salient than ever , as 
many governments have been exploring data-driven options to halt the spread of the virus. For instance, 
“contact tracing” mechanism s hinge upon the collection and processing of personal data by public 
authorities —and private actors on their behalf such as app developers . Data protection and cybersecurity 
concerns regarding such initiatives are rapidly  rising. This calls for transparent a nd consistent rules and 
regulations on enabling data usage for public health purpose s while safeguarding individual rights . 
As the pandemic unfolded during the implementation of this diagnostic , the team examined the adoption of 
COVID -19 emergency regulations in the surveyed countries to assess whether emergency regulations led 
to the implementation of additional data protection safeguards or the suppression of the existing ones.  
Overall, 15 countries in the diagnostic  sample adopted emergency regulations that had data protection 
implications . Nine  of them had a preexisting data protection law ( including Armenia, Côte d’Ivoire, Israel, 
Korea, Madagascar, Mauritius, Morocco, Peru, and the United K ingdom ) and the remaining six did not 
(Brazil, China, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of  Iran, Jordan, and Papua New Guinea ).  
For countries that had a pre-existing  robust  regulatory framework for personal data protection, the 
legislation  usually contained provisions specifying  legal grounds or conditions enabl ing public authorities 
to collect personal data to preserve public safety and permitting  private actors to do so for the public interest.   28 In this sense, emergency regulation may not necessarily have been required for authorities to carry out their 
duties. This is the view of the Council  of Europe  (2020) . Protecting the rights of data subject s and preserving 
public health are goals easily reconciled in jurisdictions that are signatories to the Convention 108 and 
Convention 108+, as long as data are  collect ed in line with the principles of necessity, proportionality, 
temporariness, effective (par liamentary and judicial) scrutiny, predictability of emergency legislation, and 
loyal cooperation among state institutions such as data protection authorities .25 
As of June 1, 2020, 20 percent  of countries with  data protection laws adopted emergency regula tions to 
contain the spread of COVID- 19 through the collection of personal data. None of those emergency 
regulations suppressed existing rights  of data subject s on the pretext  of fighting the pandemic. Take 
Mauritius as an example. In May 2020, the government adopted emergency regulations that included an 
amendment to the Data Protection Act 2017, which modified Section 44(1) of the act. This section regulates 
the “necessary and proportionate” exceptions to the application of the act,26 which now include s the “issue 
of any license , permit or authorisation during the COVID -19 period. ” This amendment sought  to facilitate 
the issuance of documents like work permits during the pandemic, although a test of necessity for such 
exceptions r emains in place .27 Similarly, the Israeli government declared a temporary state of emergency  
with the Emergency Regulations (Authorization of the General Security Service to Assist the National 
Effort to Reduce the Spread of the Novel Coronavirus , 5780- 2020 ), and empowered the national security 
agency, also known as the Shabak, to conduct contact  tracing . This measure raised concerns, but the Israeli 
Supreme Court confirmed  its compliance  with the principle of data minimization , and the processing is 
restricted to what is necessary for the purpose of fighting the pandemic within the time  frame  of the state 
of emergency .28  
On the other hand, 1 8 percent  of countries with no data protection laws promulgated  emergency regulations 
that addressed individual  rights with regard  to the collection of personal data. Some of the emergency 
regulations embed certain good regulatory practices on personal data protection , but none provide the  full 
range of safeguards. For instance, Brazil’s Law no. 13,979, adopted in response to the pandemic , did not 
include specific data protection safeguards other than a generic provision that requires personal data sharing 
among public authorities be limited to the purpose of prevent ing the spread of COVID -19.29 Similarly, in 
Papua New Guinea’s National Pandemic Act 2020 , although authorities manag ing the pandemic emergency  
are required  to limit their actions to what is “necessary to achieve the purposes and objectives” of the a ct 
and to be “the least intrusive and invasive as possible ,” they wield  extensive powers in data collection and 
surveillance, such as the unspecified power to “require a person to provide information or answer questions”  
when needed .30 
 
25 With regard  to the European Union, the European Data Protection Board (2020) adopted a similar view with its  Guidelines 
04/2020 on the use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID -19 outbreak , stating that there is no 
tradeoff  between responding to the COVID-19 emergency and the protection of data subject rights.  
26 The act can be accessed at: https://dataprote ction.govmu.org/Documents/The%20Law/Act%20No.%2020%20-
%20The%20Data%20Protection%20Act%202017.pdf . 
27 See the Covid -19 (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2020, Section 13. Accessible at: 
https://www.mra.mu/download/COVID19Act.pdf  . 
28 The Emergency Regulations (Authorization of the General Security Service to Assist the National Effort to Reduce the Spread 
of the Novel Coronavirus), 5780 -2020 is accessible at: https://perma.cc/96V9 -HJSS  – For further information see also: 
https://www.pearlcohen.com/israeli -privacy -and-data-protection -in-the-context -of-the-coronavirus -pandemic/   
29 See Lei Nº 13.979, de  6 de Fevereiro de 2020, Art. 6. Accessible at: https://www.in.gov.br/en/web/dou/ -/lei- n-13.979 -de-6-de-
fevereiro -de-2020 -242078735 ; At the time of our data collection, the implementation of Brazil’s Federal Law No. 13,709/2018, 
that is the Brazilian General Data Protection Law (L GPD), had been postponed to 2021.  
30 National Pandemic Act 2020, Sections 9 and 35. Accessible at: 
https://covid19.info.gov.pg/files/June2020/18062020/National%20Pandemic%20Act%202020-%28Certified%29.pdf    29 6. Conclusion  
The r apid development of the  data economy , entailing as it does a boom  in various data-driven products, 
services, and business models, calls for adaptive policies and regulations . A robust  regulatory framework 
for data governance, ecompassing both safeguards to  protect rights of market players and enablers to 
facilitate use/reuse of data, is important to engender trust and encourage  participat ion in the data economy. 
However, a comprehensive global stocktaking of various good  data governance  regulatory practices  is 
missing . Governments , especially those in developing countries, lack a reference point to understand their 
distance from the  global frontier of  regulatory best practices, and  help  prioritize regulatory reforms.  
The Global Data Reg ulation diagnostic  is so far the most comprehensive assess ment of  laws and regulations 
on data governance . It covers  the regulatory practices for both safeguarding and enabl ing across  80 
countries. Under the safeguarding and enabl ing pillars , the diagnostic  produces quantitative measurement s 
of the regulatory environments for countr y data governance , across  the dimensions of safeguards for 
personal and nonpersonal  data, cross -border data flows , and cybersecurity , as well as enablers for public 
and private intent data,  and e -commerce transactions . Two aggregated indicators —covering enablers and 
safeguards —are constructed to summarize good practice policies for benchmark ing countr y performance .  
Diagnostic results show that countries have put in greater effort in adopting enabler s than safeguard s. 
However, the regulatory development of both safeguards and enablers remain s at an intermediate stage:  
just 41 percent  of good safeguard practices and 47 percent  of enabler good practices are adopted  across 
countries . High-income countries perform better than lower -income countries in general , but nonetheless 
present significant regulatory gaps . Except for Sub- Saharan African countries,  presently  lagging, other 
regions  have  relatively similar  performance on the e nabler pillar , with the East Asia and Pacific region 
taking a slight lead. Europe and Central Asia is  doing better than many other regions on its regulatory 
safeguards.  
Across all dimensions measured , no income group demonstrates advanced regulatory framework s. All 
country income groups achieve their highest scores on the e -commerce  dimensio n. Enabling access to 
public intent  data a s well as safeguarding  cybersecurity  are two dimensions where countries are performing 
relatively well, except for low -income countries.  On average , countries have adopted about half the 
recommended regulatory practices for enabling access to  public  intent  data.  Although more than 60 percent 
of the countries surveyed have adopted comprehensive regulatory provisions on cybercrime, significant 
regulatory gaps persist in the framework for cybersecurity.  Meanwhile, a ll income groups are at evolving 
or basic level s for enabling the use/reuse of  private intent data and facilitation of cross- border data flows.  
The recent COVID -19 pandemic has provided the impetus for  many countries either to adopt missing 
personal data protection legislation or to strengthen or clarify such legislation already in place.  
An important value  addition of  the diagnostic , compared  with other tools , is that it does not merely track 
the existence of legislation but captures the overall  robustness and completeness  and completeness of that 
regulation by recording the presence or absence of key provisions within the legislation . The diagnostic 
finds that countries are typically far more advanced with the passage of overarching legislation, than they 
are wit h the robu stness of that legislation, or with administrative measures to support its implementation.  
A better characterization of the enforcement of data governance frameworks, as well as a deeper understanding of their economic and social impact, remain topics for future research.  
 
  30  
Acknowledgement s 
This diagnostic  builds on the experience and resources of the Digital Business Indicator (DBI) project, a 
joint initiative started among the Indicators Group of t he Development Economics Vice Presidency 
(DEC IG), Macroec onomics, Trade , and Investment (MTI ), and D igital Development Global Practices. In 
2018, the DBI project collected information on the regulatory environment for  the digital economy, 
covering topics of broadband connectivity, digital payment, data privacy and security, as well as logistics, 
in 21 pilot countries. Information about  data privacy and security, regulatory practices regarding the rights 
of data subjects, cr oss-border data flow , and cybersecurity is collected. This study refines the methodology 
of the data privacy and security indicator (now named as “data governance” indicator ) of the DBI project 
to ensure its consistency with the new framework proposed in W DR21.  
The diagnostic  project team appreciates funding support from WDR21 and USAID. Vivien Foster provided 
guidance throughout the diagnostic . Rong Chen was the Project Lead m anaging the diagnostic. David 
Satola and Adele Barzelay helped design the questi onnaire used in  the diagnostic . Yasmin Zand and Olga 
Kuzmina helped to  disseminat e questionnaires. Aliaksandra Tyhrytskaya, Federico Cardenas Chacon, 
Lillyana Sophia Daza Jaller, New Doe Kaledzi, Nicolas Conserva, and Paris Gkartzonikasm contributed to 
data collection. Nicolas Conserva also provided research support for the paper. David Medine, Malarvizhi Veerappan, Martín Molinuevo, and Sara Nyman  provided valuable comments on the methodology of the 
diagnostic .  
   31 References  
AlGhamdi, Rayed, Steve Drew, and Waleed Al‐Ghaith. 2011. “Factors Influencing E -Commerce Adoption 
by Retailers in Saudi Arabia: A Qualitative Analysis.” The Electronic Journal of Information Systems 
in Developing Countries  47 (1): 1 –23. 
Alqahtani , Mohammed A., Ali H. Al ‐Badi  and Pam J. Mayhew . 2017.  “The Enablers and Disablers of E ‐
Commerce: Consumers’  Perspectives .” The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing 
Countries, 10.1002/j.1681- 4835.2012.tb00380.x, 54, 1, (1- 24). 
Argenton, Cé dric, and Jens Prüfer. 2012. “Search Engine Competition with Network Externalities.” Journal 
of Competition Law and Economics  8 (1): 73–105.  
Article 29 Working Party. 2018. “Guidelines on Automated Individual Decision- Making and Profiling for 
the Purposes  of Regulation 2016/679.”  Accessed December 15, 2020 . 
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/item -detail.cfm?item_id=612053 . 
Cavoukian, Ann. 2011 . “Privacy by Design: The 7 Foundational Principles. Implementation and Mapping 
of Fair Information Practices.”  https://www.ipc.on.ca/wp- content/uploads/r esources/pbd- implement-
7found- principles.pdf .  
Cisco. 2018. “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Trends, 2017 –2022.” Accessed December 15, 
2020. https://cloud.report/whitepapers/cisco -visual -networking- index- forecast -and-trends -2017-
2022/9017 . 
Council of Europe. 2020. Digital Solutions to Fight COVID -19: 2020 Data Protection Report . Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://www.coe.int/en/web/portal/full- news/ -
/asset_publisher/y5xQt7QdunzT/content/digital -solutions -to-fight -covid -19-shortcomings -
protecting- privacy- and-personal -data. 
Crawford, Kate and  Jason Schultz . 2014 “ Big Data and Due Process: Toward a Framework t o Redress 
Predictive Privacy Harms. Boston College Law Review . Vol  55, Rev. 93.  
http://lawdigitalcommons.bc.edu/bclr/vol55/iss1/4   
Digital Guardian. 2018. “What Is a Data Classification Policy?” Accessed December 15, 2020. 
https://digitalguardian.com/blog/what- data-classification -policy . 
DLA Piper. 2020. Data Protection Laws of the World: The Full Handbook . London, UK: DLA Piper . 
https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.com/ .  
European Commission. 2019. “Commission Makes It Even Easier for Citizens to Reuse  All Information It 
Publishes Online.” EU Science Hub , European Commission. Accessed December 15, 2020. 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/news/commission -makes- it-even -easier -citizens- reuse -all-information -it-
publishes -online . 
European Commission . 2020. “ Shaping Europe’s Digital F uture : A European Strategy for Data.”  Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/european -strategy-data. 
European Data Protection Board. 2020. “ Guidelines 04/2020 on the Use of Location Data and Contact 
Tracing Tools in the Context of the COVID -19 Outbreak.”  Accessed December 15, 2020.  
https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_guidelines_20200420_contact_tracing_covid_
with_annex_en.pdf . 
Ferracane, Martina Francesca, Hosuk Lee- Makiyama, and Erik van der Ma rel. 2018. Digital Trade 
Restrictiveness Index. Brussels, Belgium: European Center for International Political Economy 
(ECIPE).   32 Gonz ález, R aul, Kevin Hasker, and R obin Sickles. 2009. “ An Analysis of Strategic Behavior in eBay 
Auctions.”  Singapore  Economic Review  54 (2): 1–32.  
Greenleaf, Graham. 2019. “ Global Tables of Data Privacy Laws and Bills (6th Ed January 2019).”  
Supplement to 157 Privacy Laws & Business International Report (PLBIR) , 16 pgs . 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3380794 .  
Koo, Wesley Wu -Yi. 2019. “An Institutional Perspective on Platform Rules and Government Regulation.” 
Academy of Management Annual Meeting Proceedings . Vol. 2019, No. 1.  
Maxwell, Winston, and Marc Bourreau. 2014. “ Technology Neutrality in Internet, Telecoms and Data 
Protection Regulation.”  SSRN Scholarly Paper , Social Science Research Network , Rochester, NY. 
Accessed December 15, 2020. https://papers.ssrn.com/ abstract=2529680 .  
North, Douglass C. 1986. “The New Institutional Economics.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical 
Economics (JITE)/Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft  142 (1): 230 –37. 
North, Douglass C . 1990. Institutions, Institutional Ch ange and Economic Performance . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. Accessed December 15, 2020. 
https://www.c ambridge.org/core/books/institutions -institutional- change -and-economic -
performance/AAE1E27DF8996E24C5DD07EB79BBA7EE . 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development ). 2016. “Managing Digital Security 
and Privacy Risk.” Accessed December 15, 2020. https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/science -and-
technology/managing- digital- security -and-privacy- risk_5jlwt49ccklt -en.  
OECD ( Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development ). 2013. “ Guidelines governing the 
Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data” Accessed December 15, 2020. 
http://www.oecd.org/digital/ieconomy/privacy- guidelines.htm  
O’Neill, Brian. 2012. “Trust in the Information Society.” Computer Law & Security Review  28 (5): 551–
59. 
Phillips, Mark. 2018. “International Data -Sharing Norms: From the OECD to the General Data Pro tection 
Regulation (GDPR).” Human Genetics  137 (8): 575–82.  
Tamanaha B rian Z.  2004.  On the rule of law: history, politics, theory . Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge . 
UK Information Commissioner’s Office. 2020a. “Data Protection by Design and Default.” Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-data-protection/guide -to-the-
general -data-protection- regulation -gdpr/accountability -and-governance/data -protection- by-design -
and-default/ . 
UK Information Commissioner’s Office . 2020b. “ What Is Re- Use of Public Sector Information?” Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-rpsi/what -is-rpsi/. 
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and  Development ). 2019. “ UNCTAD Rapid eTrade 
Readiness Assessments of Least Developed Countries: Policy Impact and Way Forward .” Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://unctad.org/webflyer/unctad- rapid -etrade -readiness -assessments- least-
developed- countries -policy -impact- and-way. 
UNCTAD . 2020. “ Global E -Commerce Hits $25.6 Trillion—Latest UNCTAD Estimates .” Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://unctad.org/press -material/global- e-commerce -hits-256-trillion -latest -
unctad- estimates . 
United States Council of Economic Advisers. 2018. The Cost of Malicious Cyber Activity to the U.S. 
Economy . Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President of the United States. Accessed  33 December 15, 2020. https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/cea -report -cost-malicious -cyber -activity -u-
s-economy/ . 
Waldron, Jeremy . 2008. “The Concept and the Rule of Law .” Georgia Law Review . NYU School of Law, 
Public Law Research Paper No. 08- 50. 
World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends . Washington, DC: World Bank.  
World Bank. 2020. “In Saudi Arabia, Investments in Digital Infrastructure Are Paying Off.” Accessed 
December 15, 2020. https://blogs.worldbank.org/digital -development/saudi -arabia- investments -
digital -infrastructure -are-paying . 
World Bank. 2021. World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives . Washington, DC: World Bank.  
 
 
 
   34 Data Annex es  
Annex 1 . Country list   
High income  Upper middle 
income  Lower middle 
income  Low income  
Australia  Argentina  Angola  Afghanistan  
Canada  Armenia  Bangladesh  Burkina Faso  
Chile  Brazil  Benin  Congo, Dem. Rep.  
Estonia  China  Bolivia  Ethiopia  
Israel  Colombia  Cambodia  Gambia, The  
Korea, Rep.  Dominican Republic  Cameroon  Haiti  
Mauritius  Gabon  Côte d ’Ivoire  Liberia  
Oman  Georgia  Egypt, Arab Rep.  Madagascar  
Qatar  Indonesia  Ghana  Malawi  
Saudi Arabia  Iran, Islamic Rep.  Honduras  Mali  
Singapore  Iraq India  Rwanda  
United Arab Emirates  Jordan  Kenya  Sierra Leone  
United Kingdom  Kazakhstan  Kyrgyz Republic  Tajikistan  
Uruguay  Lebanon  Lao PDR  Togo  
  Malaysia  Moldova  Uganda  
  Mexico  Morocco    
  Peru Myanmar    
  Russian Federation  Nepal    
  South Africa  Nicaragua    
  Thailand  Nigeria    
  Turkey  Pakistan    
    Papua New Guinea    
    Philippines    
    Senegal    
    Sri Lanka    
 
Annex 2 . Data Notes  
The Global Data Regulation Diagnostic measure laws and regulations concerning key aspects of a data 
economy. It consists of two pillars —enablers and safeguards —covering seven dimensions as below:  
 
1. Enablers  
o E-commerce  
o Public intent  data  
o Private intent  data 
 
2. Safeguards  
o Personal data  
o Nonpersonal data   35 o Cybersecurity  
o Cross -border data  
 
Data are obtained from lawyers specialized in data protection regulations, electronic transactions, 
cybersecurity , and information and communication technology (ICT) , as well as f rom data protection 
supervisory authorities. Data collection include s questionnaires completed by specialized respondents and 
telephon e interviews with contributors. Data are also verified through analyses of laws and regulations, 
including a review of pub lic information sources on relevant topics . More detail s on each dimension, 
including the scoring methodology for each data point and specific terms, are set out below.  
 
1. Enablers  
 
Dimension name  Regulatory 
attribute  What is measured  How it is scored  
E-commerce  
 Legal basis  Is there a law or regulation that 
explicitly governs e -commerce/e-
transactions?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”   
Legal/functional 
equivalence  Does any law include provisions 
that grant legal (functional) 
equivalence between paper -based 
and electronic communications, 
contracts, signatures , and records?  
- Electronic communications/ 
messages  
- Electronic contracts  
- Electronic signatures  
- E-evidence  
 
 A score of .25 for each of the 
four options  
A score of 0  if “no”   
E-signature  What types of electronic signatures 
are legally recognized in your country?  
- All legal signatures  
- Only digital signatures (e.g. PKI)  
 A score of 1 if “All legal 
signatures”   
A score of .5 if “Only digital 
signatures (e.g. , PKI)”  
Technological 
neutrality  Does the law or regulations 
prescribe a specific form or condition for any of the following:  
- Electronic communications/ 
messages  
- Electronic contracts  
- Electronic signatures  
 A score of 0 if “yes”   
A score of 1 if “no”    36 Digital ID system for 
e-services  Is there a digital ID system that 
enables individuals to authenticate 
themselves online to access 
governmental services? (E.g., e -tax 
filing, online benefits application)  
 A score of 1 if “yes”    
A score of 0 if “no”   
Public intent  data Semantic 
interoperability  Are governmental/official entities 
mandated to use common technical 
standards (e.g. “FAIR”) that enable interoperability of systems, 
registries, databases?  
- Established standards for open 
APIs for G2G/G2B/G2C services 
- Mandated “ask once” principle  
- Standardized communications 
protocol for accessing metadata 
- Semantic catalogues for data and 
metadata  
 A score of .25 for each  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Public intent  data Open data  Is there an Open Data Act or open 
data policy applicable across the 
entire public sector?  
- Yes, an Open Data Act  
- Yes, an Open Data policy  
- No 
 A score of 1 if “yes, an Open 
Data Act”   
A score of .5 if “yes, an open 
data policy”   
A score of 0 if “no ”   
Public intent  data Data classification  Is there a government data 
classification policy/directive?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”    
Public intent  data Data classification  Is it mandatory to use common data 
classification categories across all government database applications or document management systems?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
Public intent  data ATI Has right to information/access to 
information (ATI) legislation been 
passed that grants individuals the 
right to request access to 
government records or data?  
  A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”  
Public intent  data ATI Does the law provide for 
limitations or exceptions to this right of requesting access to 
government records or data? Please 
check all that apply:  
- Sensitive information on national A score of 1/6 if any of the 
options other than "other";  
A score of 0 if "other"   37 security, defense, or foreign policy 
grounds  
- Trade secrets or other commercial 
interests  
- Personal data  
- Law enforcement  
- Privileged information  
- Public investigations and audits  
- Other (please explain):  
 
Public intent  data Sharing -friendly 
license  Has the government adopted an 
open licensing regime (such as a 
Creative Common license by 
attribution )? 
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
Private intent  data Data portability  Do individuals have the right to 
request that a controller transfe r 
their personal data to another 
service or product provider?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
Private intent  data Data portability  Do individuals have the right to 
obtain their data processed by a controller in a structured, 
commonly used , and machine-
readable format?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
Private intent  data Private sector 
verification/authent
ication through ID  Can private sector service providers 
digitally verify or authenticate the 
identity of a person against data 
stored in the ID system?  
  A score of 1 if “ yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
Private intent  data Voluntary licensing 
of IPRs  Can standard -setting or ganizations 
mandate patent/IPR holders to provide voluntary licensing access 
to “standard essential” data or applications on FRAND (fair, reasonable and non -discriminatory) 
terms?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”   
A score of 0 if “no”   
 
2. Safeguards  
 
Personal data  Legal basis for 
personal data 
protection  Is there a data protection/privacy 
law of general application 
explicitly governing the use, 
collection, and processing of A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0.5 if “no, there 
are only sector -specific 
personal data protection  38 governing personal data (including 
sensitive data) and PII (“personal ly 
identif iable information )? 
- Yes, there is a data protection law 
of general application governing 
personal data, PII , and sensitive 
data;   
- No, there are only sector -specific 
personal data protection and/or 
privacy laws;    
- No, there are privacy and/or data 
protection rights protected in the country’ s constitution  
- No, no laws exist but there have 
been significant court or administrative decisions that form the basis of or clarify privacy or 
data protection rights  
 and/or privacy laws”  
A score of 0.25 if “no, there 
are privacy and/or data 
protection rights protected 
in the country’s constitution”  
A score of 0.25 if “no, no 
laws exist but  there have 
been significant court or 
administrative decisions 
that form the basis of or 
clarify privacy or data 
protection rights”   
A score of 0 if “no” 
 
Personal data  Government 
exception to liability  Does the relevant law/regulation 
provide exceptions  to limitations on 
the collection or processing of data 
by government?  
 A score of 0 if “yes”  
A score of 1 if “no”  
Personal data  Necessity and 
proportionality  Are these exceptions subject to a 
“necessary and proportionate” test 
to determine whether the exception is legitimately applied?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Purpose limitation  Does any law or regulation require 
that the collection and use of personal data be made for a stated purpose (or similar standard)?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Data minimization  Does any law or regulation require 
that the collection and use of 
personal data be proportionate, 
relevant, adequate, and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purpose for which it is processed 
(or similar standard)?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Storage limi tations  Does any law or regulation require 
that personal data not be kept 
longer than is necessary for the A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”   39 purposes for which it is processed 
(or similar standard)?  
 
Personal data  Privacy by design  Does any policy, law , or regulation 
require data processors to 
incorporate technical and 
organizational privacy- by-design or 
privacy -by-default principles or use 
privacy -enhancing technologies 
(PETs) in the design and implementation of processing 
systems?  
 A score  of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Data sharing with 
third parties  Do any laws, regulations , or 
policies authorize, restrict or 
otherwise address sharing of personal data with third parties?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Right to challenge 
accuracy and rectify 
personal data  Do individuals have the right to 
challenge the accuracy of information and have it rectified, 
completed, amended , and/or 
deleted?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Automated decisions  Are there rights to limit the making 
of decisions about individuals 
solely as a result of automated 
processing of personal data (i.e., without any human intervention)?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A scor e of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Redress  Do individuals have a right to 
object to the use of personal data 
about them, file complaints , and 
seek redress?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Personal data  Enforcement 
mechanisms  Does the law/regulat ion provide for 
the creation of a data protection authority/office (DPA/DPO)?  
 A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
Nonpersonal data  IPRs to prevent data 
sharing  Can intellectual property rights be 
used to prevent the sharing of data?  
 A score of 0 if “yes”  
A score of 1 if "no ” 
Nonpersonal data  IPRs to prevent data 
sharing  Does the law include a provision 
regulating confidentiality or third -
party rights in non -personal A score of 1 if “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”   40 government data (e.g. company 
registers, business data underlying 
official statistics)?  
 
Cybersecurity  Data security  Do data processors/controllers have 
to comply with the following security requirements for the 
automated processing of personal 
data? Please check all that apply:  
- Encryption of personal data  
- Anonymization/ 
pseudonymization of personal data  - Integrity of data and systems that 
use or generate personal data  
- Ability to restore data and 
systems that use or generate 
personal data after a physical or 
techni cal incident  
- Ongoing tests, assessments,  and 
evaluation of security of systems 
that use or generate personal data 
 A score of .20 for each 
“yes”  
A score of 0 if “no ” 
Cybersecurity  Internal adoption of 
cybersecurity standards  Do data processors/controllers have 
to comply with the following cybersecurity requirements? Please 
check all that apply:  
- Adoption of an internal policy 
establishing procedures for preventing and detecting violations  
- Confidentiality of data and 
systems that us e or generate 
personal data  
- Appointment of a personal data 
processing office/manager  
- Performance of internal controls  
- Assessment of the harm that 
might be caused by a data breach  
- Awareness program among 
employees  
 A score of 1/6 for each  
“yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”  
 
Cybersecurity  CERT  Does any law, regulation , or policy 
provide for the creation of a cyber -
security strategy, infrastructure and 
institutions to identify, investigate, and address cyber -security threats?  
- A cyber -security plan to protect A score of .5 for each “yes”  
A score of 0 if “no”   41 key national infrastructure  
- A national CERT  
 
Cross -border data  Adequacy and 
mutual recognition 
agreements for 
personal data  Under what conditions can local 
personal data be transferred to non-
domestic third parties?  
- Adequacy approach  
- Accountability approach  A score of .5 if “adequacy 
approach”  
A score of .5 if 
“accountability approach”  
A score of 0 if local personal data cannot be transferred to nondomestic 
third parties  
 
Cross -border data  Adequacy and 
mutual recognition agreements for 
personal data  Does the  country have 
arrangements with foreign 
countries or multinational entities 
or schemes, including decisions of domestic and foreign bodies or agencies, to require, permit , or limit 
transfers of personal data between countries? Please check all that apply:  
- Adequacy decisions/ whitelists  
- Binding corporate rules  
- Mutual recognition arrangements  
- Required information sharing 
through the Advance Passenger Information System  
- Treaties  
- Self-certification/self -assessment 
under a specific agreement  
- Standard contractual clauses  
  A score of .25 for (i) 
adequacy , (ii) BCR , (iii) 
mutual recognition arrangements, and (iv) treaties; 0 otherwise    
Cross -border data  Adequacy and 
mutual recognition agreements on 
personal data  If the regime requires an 
“adequacy” or similar mechanism, 
what circumstances constitute an 
“adequate level of protection” 
when transferring personal data internationally? Please check all that apply:  
- The nature of the personal data  
- The country of origin of the 
information cont ained in the data  
- The country of destination 
- The purposes for which and 
period during which the data are intended to be processed  Except for “country of 
origin ” and “country of 
destination ”, a score of 1/7 
for each remaining option   42 - The domestic law in force in the 
host country (general and sectoral, 
including defense and access of 
public authorities to personal data)  
- The existence and effective 
functioning of one or more independent supervisory authorities 
in the third country to enforce 
compliance  
- Presence of effective rule of law 
and judicial redress for data 
subjects  
- The international treatie s the host 
country is a party to  
- Relevant codes of conduct or 
other rules enforceable in the host 
country (SCCs; BCRs)  
 
 
Annex 3 . Country scores on different dimensions, and on the enabler s and safeguard s pilla rs  
Country name  E-
commerce/tr
ansaction  Public 
intent 
data  Private intent 
data  Personal 
data  Non-
personal 
data  Cybersecurity  
and 
cybercrime  Cross border 
data transactions/
flows  Enabler s Safeguard s 
Afghanistan  0.00 28.57  0.00 4.17 50.00  54.17  0.00 9.52 27.08  
Angola  80.00  0.00 0.00 83.33  50.00  43.69  42.86  26.67  54.97  
Argentina  80.00  82.14  25.00  75.00  0.00 76.67  70.24  62.38  55.48  
Armenia  50.00  69.05  25.00  83.33  0.00 69.17  42.86  48.02  48.84  
Australia  95.00  92.86  25.00  75.00  50.00  91.67  72.62  70.95  72.32  
Bangladesh  60.00  78.57  25.00  4.17 0.00 46.43  0.00 54.52  12.65  
Benin  70.00  0.00 50.00  83.33  50.00  82.50  60.71  40.00  69.14  
Bolivia  35.00  40.48  25.00  4.17 50.00  32.14  0.00 33.49  21.58  
Brazil  100.00  95.24  0.00 4.17 0.00 50.00  0.00 65.08  13.54  
Burkina Faso  80.00  65.48  50.00  75.00  50.00  47.86  25.00  65.16  49.46  
Cambodia  80.00  0.00 0.00 4.17 50.00  30.36  0.00 26.67  21.13  
Cameroon  75.00  0.00 0.00 4.17 50.00  54.17  0.00 25.00  27.08  
Canada  100.00  89.29  25.00  75.00  50.00  85.00  50.00  71.43  65.00  
Chile  75.00  86.90  25.00  58.33  50.00  54.17  0.00 62.30  40.63  
China  100.00  69.05  50.00  4.17 50.00  95.00  46.43  73.02  48.90  
Colombia  80.00  52.38  75.00  75.00  100.00  67.50  50.00  69.13  73.13  
Congo, Dem. 
Rep. 60.00  0.00 0.00 2.08 50.00  0.00 0.00 20.00  13.02  
Côte d'Ivoire  80.00  42.86  25.00  83.33  50.00  64.17  35.71  49.29  58.30  
Dominican 
Republic  65.00  92.86  0.00 50.00  0.00 63.33  52.38  52.62  41.43   43 Egypt, Arab 
Rep. 45.00  32.14  0.00 4.17 0.00 59.76  0.00 25.71  15.98  
Estonia  100.00  100.00  75.00  91.67  50.00  100.00  77.38  91.67  79.76  
Ethiopia  55.00  28.57  0.00 4.17 50.00  37.50  0.00 27.86  22.92  
Gabon  80.00  0.00 0.00 75.00  50.00  34.52  29.76  26.67  47.32  
Gambia, The  60.00  0.00 0.00 4.17 50.00  24.29  0.00 20.00  19.61  
Georgia  45.00  44.05  25.00  66.67  0.00 67.50  46.43  38.02  45.15  
Ghana  100.00  64.29  25.00  91.67  50.00  76.67  25.00  63.10  60.83  
Haiti  50.00  0.00 0.00 0.00 50.00  0.00 0.00 16.67  12.50  
Honduras  80.00  23.81  0.00 4.17 50.00  25.00  0.00 34.60  19.79  
India  70.00  60.71  25.00  4.17 0.00 50.00  46.43  51.90  25.15  
Indonesia  100.00  92.86  25.00  4.17 0.00 44.29  0.00 72.62  12.11  
Iran, Islamic 
Rep. 80.00  70.24  0.00 4.17 0.00 50.00  0.00 50.08  13.54  
Iraq 50.00  0.00 0.00 2.08 50.00  12.50  0.00 16.67  16.15  
Israel  65.00  47.62  25.00  58.33  50.00  90.00  76.19  45.87  68.63  
Jordan  100.00  78.57  0.00 4.17 50.00  37.50  0.00 59.52  22.92  
Kazakhstan  45.00  71.43  0.00 58.33  50.00  56.19  29.76  38.81  48.57  
Kenya  80.00  35.71  50.00  91.67  0.00 95.83  30.95  55.24  54.61  
Korea, Rep.  95.00  100.00  50.00  75.00  50.00  53.21  37.50  81.67  53.93  
Kyrgyz 
Republic  45.00  42.86  0.00 66.67  50.00  51.43  47.62  29.29  53.93  
Lao PDR  80.00  0.00 0.00 4.17 50.00  58.33  0.00 26.67  28.13  
Lebanon  60.00  50.00  0.00 66.67  100.00  35.95  29.76  36.67  58.10  
Liberia  60.00  50.00  0.00 2.08 50.00  25.60  0.00 36.67  19.42  
Madagascar  80.00  0.00 0.00 66.67  50.00  38.33  37.50  26.67  48.13  
Malawi  60.00  28.57  0.00 4.17 50.00  54.76  0.00 29.52  27.23  
Malaysia  80.00  46.43  50.00  66.67  0.00 47.86  38.10  58.81  38.15  
Mali  80.00  0.00 0.00 83.33  50.00  34.17  30.95  26.67  49.61  
Mauritius  60.00  21.43  0.00 83.33  50.00  100.00  35.71  27.14  67.26  
Mexico  100.00  96.43  75.00  83.33  50.00  90.00  51.19  90.48  68.63  
Moldova  100.00  71.43  25.00  83.33  50.00  77.86  65.48  65.48  69.17  
Morocco  100.00  30.95  0.00 66.67  0.00 35.95  55.95  43.65  39.64  
Myanmar  75.00  28.57  0.00 4.17 50.00  33.93  0.00 34.52  22.02  
Nepal  45.00  64.29  0.00 41.67  50.00  50.00  0.00 36.43  35.42  
Nicaragua  35.00  54.76  0.00 75.00  50.00  38.33  35.71  29.92  49.76  
Nigeria  80.00  60.71  75.00  75.00  50.00  90.00  65.48  71.90  70.12  
Oman  100.00  39.29  0.00 4.17 50.00  42.86  0.00 46.43  24.26  
Pakistan  95.00  50.00  25.00  4.17 50.00  26.79  0.00 56.67  20.24  
Papua New 
Guinea  60.00  35.71  0.00 4.17 50.00  37.50  0.00 31.90  22.92  
Peru 50.00  92.86  25.00  75.00  0.00 60.83  39.29  55.95  43.78  
Philippines  70.00  71.43  50.00  83.33  0.00 95.00  50.00  63.81  57.08  
Qatar  100.00  35.71  25.00  50.00  50.00  71.67  25.00  53.57  49.17   44 Russian 
Federation  60.00  50.00  25.00  75.00  50.00  85.00  38.10  45.00  62.02  
Rwanda  100.00  33.33  0.00 4.17 0.00 62.50  0.00 44.44  16.67  
Saudi Arabia  80.00  50.00  25.00  4.17 0.00 52.86  0.00 51.67  14.26  
Senegal  70.00  0.00 0.00 83.33  50.00  46.67  42.86  23.33  55.71  
Sierra Leone  50.00  50.00  0.00 4.17 50.00  33.93  0.00 33.33  22.02  
Singapore  80.00  21.43  25.00  66.67  50.00  67.50  62.50  42.14  61.67  
South Africa  75.00  26.19  0.00 4.17 0.00 50.00  0.00 33.73  13.54  
Sri Lanka  80.00  92.86  0.00 0.00 100.00  37.50  0.00 57.62  34.38  
Tajikistan  25.00  42.86  0.00 66.67  50.00  33.93  42.86  22.62  48.36  
Tanzania  80.00  75.00  0.00 4.17 0.00 41.67  0.00 51.67  11.46  
Thailand  100.00  96.43  0.00 4.17 0.00 50.00  0.00 65.48  13.54  
Togo  50.00  57.14  0.00 75.00  50.00  55.00  46.43  35.71  56.61  
Tunisia  40.00  64.29  0.00 66.67  50.00  55.60  42.86  34.76  53.78  
Turkey  55.00  28.57  25.00  75.00  50.00  63.33  73.81  36.19  65.54  
Uganda  80.00  35.71  0.00 75.00  50.00  80.83  16.67  38.57  55.63  
Ukraine  100.00  85.71  25.00  83.33  50.00  68.10  46.43  70.24  61.96  
United Arab 
Emirates  80.00  89.29  0.00 4.17 50.00  50.00  0.00 56.43  26.04  
United 
Kingdom  100.00  100.00  100.00  91.67  0.00 100.00  82.14  100.00  68.45  
Uruguay  80.00  97.62  25.00  91.67  50.00  64.40  65.48  67.54  67.89  
Uzbekistan  70.00  65.48  0.00 66.67  50.00  46.67  38.10  45.16  50.36  
Vietnam  80.00  54.76  25.00  4.17 0.00 90.83  0.00 53.25  23.75  
 