 
 
 
 
 
       Issue  2/2021 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL  
SECURITY  
REVIEW  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BUDAPESTMILITARY NATIONAL SECURITY  
SERVICE  
 
 
 Scientific  Periodical  of the 
Military  National  Security  Service  
 
Responsible  Publisher:  
 
Lt. Gen.  János  Béres,  PhD Director  General   
Chairman  of the Scientific  Board  
  
Editorial  Board  
 
Chairman:  Lt. Gen.  János  Béres,  PhD 
Members:  Col. Tamás  Kenedli,  PhD, 
Secretary  of the Scientific  Board  
Col. Sándor  Magyar,  PhD 
Col. Károly  Kassai  PhD 
Col. Zoltán  Árpád  
Lt. Col. Csaba  Vida,  PhD 
Lt. Col. János  Fürjes  Norbert,  PhD 
 Col. Béla Puskás , PhD 
 Col. István  Talián  
Responsible  editor:  Col. István  Talián   
Make -up editor:  Beatrix  Szabó   
Language  editor:        Col. Mihály  Szabó  
 
 
Postal  Address:   
Katonai  Nemzetbiztonsági  Szolgálat  Tudományos  Tanácsa   
1021  Budapest,  Budakeszi  út 99 -101. 
1525  Budapest,  Pf. 74. 
 
E-mail:  natsecreview@gmail.com  
Webpage:  http://www.knbsz.gov.hu  
   
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
 
THEORY OF NATIONAL SECURITY  
 
ISTVÁN BANDI   
CHAPTERS ON THE ACTI VITIES OF THE EMIGRA TION 
DEPARTMENT OF THE RO MANIAN INTELLIGENCE FROM THE 
SIXTIES TO THE CHANG E OF REGIME   .....................  .………………... 5 
 
ALBERT TORMA  MD 
BIOLOGY OF AGRESSION  IN WOMEN  .....................  .………………... 44 
 
JÓZSEF HOLECZ   
THE ORIGINAL “HYBRID  WARFARE” – PART I   ... .………………... 59 
 
PÉTER NYESTE  PHD  
THE IMPACT OF THE PA NDEMIC ON CRIMINAL I NTELLIGENCE  
 ................................ ................................ ..............................  .………………... 76 
 
LAJOS SZABÓ   
CAN WE MEASURE THE L EVEL OF THE SECURITY  AND 
SAFETY?  ................................ ................................ ............  .………………... 92 
 
 
GEOPOLITICS  
 
BERK CAN KOZAN – ALI MIRZADADE   
AUKUS' ORIGINS AND MAIN PUR POSE: NUCLEAR  DETERRENCE 
FROM GEOPOLITICAL PE RSPECTIVES  ................................ ...............  99 
 
RITA BIHARI  
SECURITY ISSUES IN T HE WESTERN BALKANS  .............................  111 
 
GÁBOR BOLDIZSÁR   
SIGNIFICANCE OF CULT URAL/RELIGIOUS VALUE S IN PEACE 
OPERATIONS   ................................ ................................ . .………………... 128 
 
ANDRÁS NOVÁK   
IMPACT OF THE CORONAVIRUS EPID EMIC ON ILLEGAL 
MIGRATION TO EUROPE   ................................ ..........  .………………... 143 
 
 4 VIRÁG NOVÁK -VARRÓ   
A REGIONAL POWER IN ACTION – TURKEY’S RO LE IN 
AFGHANISTAN’S FUTURE   ................................ .........  .………………... 152 
 
ANNA PUSKÁS   
CULTURE MATTERS: EUR OPEAN INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS’ POLIC IES FOR CULTURAL PROPERTY 
PROTECTION IN CONFLI CT AND CRISIS SITUAT IONS .………... 165 
 
GRÉTA VANESSZA VÁRAD I  
THE ASPIRATIONS OF T HE HUNGARIAN DEFENCE  FORCES’ – 
MILITARY DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME IN 2020 ……………... 187 
 
OLIVER ANDONOV  
POLITICAL -CULTURAL ASPECTS OF INFLUENCE ON  THE 
ABOLITION OF THE MACEDONIAN NATION  ................................ ... 200 
 
 
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION SECURITY  
 
RUDOLF NAGY PHD – TAMÁS SOMOGYI  
THE FINANCIAL INFRAS TRUCTURE AS A CRITIC AL 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND I T'S SPECIALITIES   ................................ ... 213 
 
LAFEE ALSHAMAILEH – TIBOR KOVÁCS   
CYBERATTACK ON THE SMART POWER GRID   .............................  224 
 
 
EVENTS  
 
ZOLTÁN NYIKES PHD – TÜNDE ANNA KOVÁCS PHD  
ICCECIP 2021 INTERNA TIONAL SCIENTIFIC CO NFERENCE  ...... 237 
 
 
AUTHORS OF THIS ISSUE  ................................ ................................ .....239 
 
CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC ATIONS  ................................ ....................... 241 5 THEORY OF NATIONAL SECURITY  
ISTVÁN BANDI   
CHAPTERS ON THE ACTI VITIES OF THE EMIGRA TION 
DEPARTMENT OF THE RO MANIAN INTELLIGENCE FROM THE 
SIXTIES TO THE CHANG E OF REGIME   
 
 
Abstract  
 
During the last thirty years of the Romanian communist dictatorship, he 
continued his intelligence activities under the auspices of national communism. The 
Romanian citizens who fled to the Western states and the emigration organizations 
they set up were e xcellent at providing and covering agency activities. In addition to 
scientific and technical and commercial intelligence, the management and influence 
of Romanian emigration and, last but not least, the countervailing of the lobbying 
activities of Hungari an emigration and the elimination of Hungarian emigration 
centers in general have played an important role.  Without wishing to be exhaustive, 
the present study attempts to present the targeted activities of Romanian intelligence 
before 1989.  
 
Keywords : Socialist Romania, Foreign Intelligence Directorate, Iosif Constantin 
Drăgan, Gustav Pordea, romanian and hunagrian emigration, secret influence  
 
 
Alexandre de Marenches,1 former head of the French secret service, said: "The 
intelligence work is a sort of constant puzzle game that is multi -shaped and diverse, 
incessantly taken to pieces and put together again [...]. The information gathering 
consists in the fact that it is always and everywhere necessary to look for a mosaic 
that others in the center of the  same service try to gather to assemble the puzzle. The 
big difficulty stems from the fact that while you manage to cover the empty areas with 
new pieces, the game changes, it is on the move without a break.”2 
 
 
Organization and goals of Romanian intelligence  
 
A pattern similar to the research on the topic had to be followed in order to get 
somewhat of a picture of the activities of Romanian intelligence against Hungarian 
emigration. In this study, we try to give an insight into the exploration of locations in 
Italy and France, based on the archived organizational and operational documents of 
the Romanian Intelligence. These documents, however, limit the opportunities for 
research. During the processing, we kept temporal linearity in mind, but we al so 
focused on understanding the operational methods, tools and logic of the 
contemporary Romanian intelligence agencies.  
                                                      
1  Alexandre de Marenches (1921 -1995) Director -General of the French Counter -Intelligence 
and Foreign Documentation Service (SDECE) from 1970 to 1981.  
2  OCKRENT , Christine – DE MARENCHES , Alexandre: Consilier de taină al Puterii  (Secret 
Adviser to the Powers That Be); Humanitas, București, 1992. p. 114.  6 At the end of World War II, the Romanian services were organizations that 
liaised with the French, British, and Germans and were famili ar with the methods of 
elite intelligence schools. With the historical turn in the zone, the Romanian 
specialized services, like the national secret services in all other Soviet -occupied 
states, were reorganized by the Soviets along two lines. Along the mi litary line, 
reorganization of the National Ministry of Defense (MApN) started in 1947 reached 
the stage of the Soviet model by 1951. The then Second Intelligence Department was 
transformed into the Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff (Direction 
Informaţii the Marelui Stat Major), which became the military intelligence agency and 
becomes known as the Army Intelligence Directorate (DIA).  
 
The Directorate -General for Public Safety (DGSP - Directorate -General of 
Securităţii Poporului) established in 1948 under the Ministry of the Interior in 1967. 
It also followed the Soviet pattern to guide the State Security Council (CSS), just like 
the State Security Department (DSS) established in 1977. These structures 
coordinated the acquisition of political and  military information. For a short time in 
the early fifties, Securitate was a ministry independent of the Ministry of the Interior.  
 
In the area of intelligence, Department A existed within the Securitate in 1948, 
which was succeeded in 1954 by Foreign In telligence Directorate Ia (Direction Ia 
Informaţii Externe), and by the Foreign Intelligence Directorate (DGIE) in 1963, and 
in the late 1960s it operated as Directorate I of Foreign Intelligence (DIE I) and from 
1972, with an expanded remit but under the same name, Directorate of Foreign 
Intelligence (DIE). After Ion Mihai Pacepa escaped in 1978, the former Foreign 
Intelligence Directorate was renamed Foreign Intelligence Center (CIE) described 
before. For a short time, intelligence and counter -intelligenc e agencies, which had 
been operating as independent ministries for a short time, were formally placed under 
the Minister of the Interior from the late 1940s to 1989 and foreign intelligence was 
placed under the Council of Ministers for some time. Apart fro m all that, during the 
Ceausescu -period, i.e. from 1965 to 1989 all these agencies directly reported to 
Romania’s leader number one, to the commander -in-chief of the Romanian armed 
forces.3 
                                                      
3  For a more detailed overview of the organizational history of the secret services, see BANU, 
Florian – ȚĂRANU , Liviu: Securitatea 1948 -1989 . Monografie vol I. (The Securitate 1948 -
1989, Monograph, Vol. I.); Editura Cetatea de Scaun, Târgoviște, 2016; BANU, Florian – 
BARBULESCU , Theodor – DUICA , Camelia Ivan – ȚĂRANU , Liviu: Archives Securității. 
(Archives of the S ecuritate) Volume 1. Editura Pro -Historia, București, 2002.; NEAGOIE , 
Elis – PLEȘA , Liviu: Arhivele Securității  ( Archives of the Securitate). Volume 2. Editura 
Nemira, Bucharest, 2004; DOBRE , Florica – BANU, Florian – DUICĂ , Camelia – MOLDOVAN 
Silviu B. – ȚĂRANU  Liviu: Trupele de Securitate (1949 –1989).  (Securitate Troops [1949 -
1989]). Editura Nemira, Bucharest, 2004; TRONCOTĂ  Cristian: Duplicitarii. The history of 
the intelligence and security services of Romania 1965 -1989.  (The two -faced. The history 
of the security and secret services of the Romanian communist system). Editura Elion, 
Bucharest, 2003; OPREA , Marius: Banalitatea răului. O historie a Securităţii în documente 
(1949 -1989).  (The Banality of Evil.  The History of the Securitate in Sources [1948 -1949]). 
Polirom, București, 2002; SRI: Cartea Albă a Securităţii.  (White Paper of the Securitate) 1 -
6. bind. SRI, Bucharest, 1994 -97. TRONCOTĂ , Cristian: History of the state security services 
of Romania.  (History of the Rom anian State Security Services). Ion Cristoiu, Bucharest, 
1999; WILLIAMS , Kieran – DELETANT , Dennis: Security Intelligence Services In New 
Democracies: The Czech Republic, Slovakia and Romania.  Palgrave, London – New York, 7 The Soviets, officially stationed in Romania until 1964, "reformed " the 
Romanian services with the intent to make them attached to the Soviet state security 
services and to be able to hold them under control, respectively. With the beginning 
of the withdrawal of the Soviet military troops in 1958, the total subordination  of the 
Romanian state security agencies came to an end and the fight against Romanian 
émigré groups was given greater emphasis in the intelligence demand of the 
Romanian intelligence agency. The intelligence objectives set in the period of Soviet 
occupati on virtually remained the same, namely the gathering of political, military 
economic and social information, acquisition of scientific -technical information, the  
mapping of the emigration (including emigration of ethnic Hungarians as well), 
demoralization and not least the execution of illegal operations.4 
 
The activity against Hungarian emigration was justified by the Romanian 
intelligence service on the grounds that the Hungarian irredentists contradicts the 
history of Romanian origin in its historical co nception. Beyond this ideological 
framework, Romanian intelligence wanted at all times and in all historical periods to 
know what kind of activities Hungarians emigrants who fled from either Hungary or 
Romania pursue that may be construed as anti - Romanian  that could have harmed the 
interests of the prevailing Romanian political leadership.  
 
Shortly after the 1956 revolution, intelligence agents were sent to the capitalist 
countries with the mission of assisting Romanian intelligence operations in the West 
in the long run. Mihai Caraman, who, as head of the Romanian residency in Paris, 
shook NATO with his agents infiltrated in the 1960s,5 the first successful agent being 
deployed in the West was through Hungary in 1958. He recruited and deployed in 
Vienna a monk, one of the close coworkers of Bishop Áron Márton, first to work with 
Cardinal Franz König of Vienna, and then sent him to the United States via Canada 
for a long -term deployment.6 
                                                      
2001; PELIN, Mihai: Culisele spion ajului românesc, DIE 1955 –1980.  (Scenes of Romanian 
Intelligence, DIE 1955 –1980). Editura Evenimentul Românesc, București, 1997.  
4  In 1951, taking advantage of the World Youth Meeting in East Berlin, Romanian 
intelligence abducted Magos Constanța, politic al refugee, and Teodor Bucur, a professor at 
Humboldt University with the help of the Stasi. In 1958, Traian Puiu, one of the leaders of 
the legionary movement, was deceived into Vienna and transported to Budapest through 
Budapest, wrapped in a carpet. In 1958, Romanian intelligence carried out a punitive action 
against Oliviu Beldeanu. Beldeanu played a leading role in the 1955 attack on the Romanian 
embassy in Geneva.  
5  In the autumn of 1958, Mihai Caraman began his intelligence activities at Romania's 
commercial office in Paris. He led the Romanian rezidentura in Paris for 11 years, during 
which time he recruited a number of NATO officials. Its established network included Imre 
Nahit, Head of Financial Control, Robert van de Wiehle, Francis Roushille, Fr ench Foreign 
Officer Pierre Rocheron, Sylvie Dagiun, Nuclear Planning Team, and Colonel Charles de 
la Salle, Intelligence Officer at the French Ministry of Defense. Caraman's network 
collapsed in 1969, when his Deputy, Captain Ioan Iacobescu switched sides  to MI6 and 
exposed them. The network, which was built in a short time, provided documentation of 
the military technical development of several NATO member states, NATO's mobilization 
plans for a possible Soviet attack, and other top -secret material, a tot al of nearly 3,000 
documents. The recruitment of Charles Hernu, who later served as Minister of Defense in 
the Mitterrand government, can also be linked to Caraman.  
6  BANU, Florian: Mihai Caraman, and spion român în războiul rece. (Mihai Caraman, a 
Romanian spy in the Cold War). Editura Corint, Bucharest, 2019. pp. 95 -97. Caraman did 8 In peacetime after the Second World War, just like the world's secret services, 
the Romanian state security services also adopted the practice of spreading false 
information, i.e. the disinformation and methods and splitting social groups. Under 
the motto “divide et impera” they not only set social groups on the domestic pol itical 
stage against each other, but also communities forced into emigration. The year 1964 
marked a turning point in Romanian intelligence in dealing with the issue of 
emigration. Alexandru Drăghici7 Minister of Interior proclaimed the principle of total 
intelligence against emigration.8 The background to this turnaround was that, from 
1958, citizens who left Romania permanently were not always deprived of their 
nationality, and the diplomatic missions concerned registered those who had arrived 
in that cou ntry. They did this with the intention of starting a targeted organization 
based on the register and involving those involved in their events, as well as providing 
them with press materials on Romania. However, the proclaimed principle was not as 
successfu l as its planners had dreamed of, as emigrants living in the free world were 
organized according to their own needs and all their institutions could not be brought 
under the control of the communist dictatorship. It cannot be ignored in the zone that 
over the years, Romanian intelligence has managed to plant or recruit agents in a 
number of emigrant organizations.  
 
The Intelligence Service used members of the emigrant groups in extremely 
varied forms to achieve its goals. University students, professors, jo urnalists, 
entrepreneurs, army officers, engineers, writers and many other freelance intellectuals 
were induced to cooperate in some way or other with the Romanian state security 
services. Through archival research, which is not only based on memories and 
opinions of the officers or collaborators, we can gain a better insight into those sources 
than contemporary professionals and new and previously unknown operational details 
are revealed. This self -confidence based on the records can, however, be deceptive , 
because the archival sources do not include the daily routine of the career intelligence 
officers and the mission -oriented improvisations falling outside the domain of the 
pertinent regulations.  
 
Romanian emigration presented a constant challenge for the  specialized services 
of the Ceaușescu dictatorship, as intellectuals and economists in emigration had a 
serious potential for influence in the host states. The opinions of emigrant leaders of 
authority had a serious impact on the emigration communities of  other states as well. 
Therefore, the groups of emigrants referred to above became prime targets of 
discrediting and divisive operations at a time when increasingly frequent and 
                                                      
not name the person who the story was about and the agent died in a car accident shortly 
after arriving in the USA.  
7  Colonel -General Alexandru Drăghici (1913 -1993). A member of the illegal communist 
movement, he was convicted in 1936 in the Ana Pauker trial. The rivalry between 
Ceaușescu and Drăghici had already begun. After Romania switched si des in August 1944, 
he led the party organization in the Romanian capital. From 1952 he was Minister of the 
Interior, between 1953 and 1957 he was the head of the Ministry of State Security, and from 
1957 to 1965 he was again Minister of the Interior. Ceau șescu, who came to power in 1965, 
launched an investigation into past crimes (trials against the Patrascanu group and other 
communists). In 1968, he was deprived of his rank as commander -in-chief and relieved of 
all party and state positions. He retired as  a company director in 1972.  
8  NEMETZI , Cornel: Ultimul curier ilegal. Memoriile unui spion român.  (The last illegal 
courier. Memoirs of a Romanian spy). Editura Marist, Baia Mare, 2013. p. 484.  9 widespread solidarity movements started all over the world in support of those  who 
suffered under communist regimes. Human rights movements starting in the seventies 
were recorded in the Helsinki Final Act in 1975, thus the political and economic 
lobbying of Romanian dissident groups establishing themselves in various western 
states  posed a serious risk to Romania’s separate policy.9 Another important aspect is 
that the Securitate’s operatives working among the emigrant groups were aware how 
receptive international publicity towards the positions and opinions of national 
emigrant gro ups, and they were also aware how their leaders related to the policies of 
the People’s Republic of Romania.  
 
By opting out of the 1968 intervention in Czechoslovakia, Nicolae Ceaușescu, 
who pretended to be an independent politician, was in fact trying to have the 
importance of his own personality accepted, emphasizing that he was a key player on 
the international political stage. His good relations with China and Israel were 
intended to demonstrate this.10 Good relations with the Soviet Union remained until  
1989, and even the transfer of COCOM -listed materials and joint intelligence 
cooperation were continuous.11 Ceaușescu, relying on the goodwill of the West, 
consistently adhered to the policy of a "state independent of the Soviet Union". During 
this period,  Romanian intelligence was given the constant task of maintaining that 
image through active measures. One of the elements of this strategy was to influence 
Romanian emigration and to counterbalance the activities of Hungarian emigration. 
Western journalist s and high -impact emigration centers were sought to work together 
to strengthen the image of independence. Thus, Le Figaro's deputy director, Michel 
P. Hamelet, was used to write an article praising Ceaușescu and his system.12 So did 
Vesitorul, a paper of t he Romanian emigrants in France, the Dreptatea of the 
Romanian emigrants in the USA, and Stindartul, the paper of the Romanian 
community active in the FRG.13 These contained discrediting and misleading 
information mainly about thinkers forced to emigrate, s uch as Paul Goma, Monica 
Lovinescu, and Vlad Georgescu. About them, the Securitate suggested that they 
cooperated with the Romanian communist special services.  
 
In the operations of Romanian intelligence, it is not always clear whether they 
served the inte rests of contemporary Romania or the dictator, but the intrusion of 
intelligence serving the system into Romanian dissident communities was clearly 
done to refine the negative image of the dictatorship. This was one of the areas 
including the control and i nfluencing the historical research and publications related 
to the history of Romania. The contemporary Romanian intelligence carried out a 
number of operations against Hungarian emigrants as part of this mission.  
                                                      
9  ALDEA , Patricia González: Helsinki 1975. Începutul sfârși tului. Degradation regimens in 
Romania and singularity in the Bloc de Est (1975 –1990) . (Helsinki 1975. The Beginning 
of the End. The Decline and Uniqueness of the System in the Eastern Bloc [1975 –1990]). 
Editura Curtea Veche, Bucharest, 2008.  
10  WOLTON , Thierry: K .G .B. -ul in Franta  (The KGB in France). Humanitas, București, 1992. 
p. 238.  
11  FUNDERBURK , David B.: Un-American Ambassador to the Department of the Communist 
Republic of Romania 1981 –1985.  Editura Dacon, Constanţa, 1994. pp. 59 -75. Funderburk, 
the US ambassador to Bucharest, pulls the cover step by step away from Ceaușescu’s 
mythology of independence.  
12  WOLTON  op. cit. pp. 292 -293. 
13  Ibid., p. 297.  10 The Italian line  
 
The double life of Iosif  Constantin Drăgan  
 
On the Italian line, too, Romanian intelligence achieved great success thanks to 
Iosif Constantin Drăgan. Known as a successful businessman in Italy, Drăgan was an 
ardent secret agent of Securitate, who was involved in carrying out oper ations within 
the Romanian community in Italy in the 1960s and later continued to operate 
internationally. He was considered a successful Italian businessman on the one hand, 
and he wrote and disseminated international protocronist14 historical works, on th e 
other. The intelligence activities of the Janus -faced entrepreneur were European in 
scale. The archival resources kept in ACNSAS can expand the image of the person in 
question and Romanian intelligence so far. It is not necessary to present a detailed 
history of the development of protochronism from its appearance in 1941 appearance 
to the Edgar Papu, who historically supported the nationalism of the Ceaușescu 
period, as we learn about Constantin Drăgan's double life and the role of Romanian 
communist pow er and international emigration in history, new dimensions of agency 
existence unfold before us. However, due to the complexity of the issue, we cannot 
present here a detailed analysis of the rich public life, public policy, cultural, literary, 
religious a nd other aspects of Drăgan’s actions.  
 
Iosif Constantin Drăgan was born in Lugos on 1917 as a Hungarian citizen. His 
father had his own tannery, which he ran until his death in 1946. Iosif graduated from 
the Faculty of Law of the University of Bucharest an d then studied at the Academy of 
Commerce in Milan in 1939, where he also earned a PhD degree in economics.  
 
Early in his studies, he became involved in Italian business and did not even 
return to his homeland. As a successful businessman, he first became a shareholder 
and then a majority owner of the Dacia oil company. After 1948, it engaged in 
extremely dynamic and diversified economic and commercial activities, soon setting 
up a number of companies producing, processing and transporting solid and liquid 
hydrocarbons. Among others, Butane Gas in 1948,  
 
Petrol Chimica in 1951, and Fingas and Dragochimica in 1954. These companies 
had an extensive network of subsidiaries in Spain, Austria, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Morocco, Greece, Belgium and South A frica. He acquired a monopoly on 
the Italian liquefied natural gas market and have played a significant shareholder role 
in several of the states already mentioned. By the early 1960s, he already had more 
than $ 50 million in capital investment in these ma rkets. Thanks to the commercial 
success of major Italian and international organizations he received an invitation in 
                                                      
14  Protochronism, a school of thought in 20th century Romanian historiography, was rooted in 
the traditionalism of the two world wars, warned of the dangers of Western thought and 
subjugation, and resolutely opposed cosmopolitan ideas. After the Second World War, in 
the 1970s, Ceaușescu became a hallmark of the official historical ideology in Romania , 
according to which Romanian culture took precedence over all other cultures. His 
nationalism is based on the so -called Dacology and Thracology. The methodological 
representative of modern Romanian protochronism was Edgar Papu, who in his 1974 study 
syste matically presented the Romanian technical and scientific innovations that preceded 
Europeans. Protochronism is the historical school in Romania that survived the regime 
change and still exists today.  11 UCITS: until 1957, then became president of the Italian gas extracting Syndicate from 
1952 to 1958, President of the Chamber of Commerce i n Italy. The weight of his 
influence is well indicated by the fact that in 1957 he was present at the birth of the 
Treaty of Rome, which created the Common Market.  
 
Constantin Drăgan was first contacted by Romanian intelligence in 1958,1515 and 
this relationship developed along different interests, but it was still a success. After 
initial operational inspections, an extremely fruitful relationship developed between 
Drăgan and intelligence through a light conversation. The oil magnate earlie r flirting 
with the legionary movement was employed under the codename "Dunăreanu" since 
1958, then in the early ‘70s his codename was changed to "Olteanu". Depending on 
whether Drăgan was in Italy or France, he was contacted by a territorially competent 
and undercover intelligence officer. Thus, his activities in France were supported and 
assisted by three agents, and Securitate influenced and controlled him through them.16 
His direct contact was a resident of France.  
 
In return for supporting the relatives  of the influential businessman who 
remained in Transylvania, he cooperated with Romanian intelligence so that Romania 
could buy petroleum equipment from the Italian company Eni at a discounted price. 
During the bilateral talks he provided preliminary data  on the intentions of the Italian 
party so as to give the Romanian party an appropriate bargaining position. Drăgan 
later agreed to hand over the technical documentation for high -octane gasoline and 
rocket fuel, as well as Vatican briefings on the eastern opening, which he received 
from Cardinal Tisserant.17 Acquisition of the Borgward Arabella car manufacturing 
license, which would have been the basis for the first Romanian car production, was 
not successful despite Drăgan's best efforts and the two parties  could not agree. 
Already in the first half of the sixties, Drăgan gained serious recognition among  
 
Romanian party leaders, and in 1964 he sent gifts (paintings, watches) through 
couriers to the leaders of the RCP: Gheorghe Gheorghiu -Dej, party secretary  general, 
Ion Gheorghe Maurer and Prime Minister Nicolae Ceausescu.18 
 
Drăgan, over many years, built up a scientific network, in addition to economic 
and political relations in Europe, related to historical research, manufacturing and 
distribution. The mos t important organization of this network of 47 people was the 
Fundaţia Europeană Drăgan (Drăgan European Foundation), set up in 1964 in Palma 
de Mallorca. By the end of the 1970s, the foundation had branches in Rome, Munich, 
Paris, Palma de Mallorca, Montr eal, Boston and Athens.19 The network delivered its 
propaganda materials to 4000 addresses (private persons worldwide, universities, 
libraries, etc.).20Although the organization's statutes provided that it worked on 
establishing the common European conscious ness, in practice it dealt with cultural 
                                                      
15  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 99.  
16  ACNSAS Fond  SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 99.  
17  Cardinal Eugéne -Gabriel -Gervais -Laurent Tisserant (1884 -1972) was ordained a priest in 
1907, and in 1936 he was appointed Cardinal by Pope Pius XI. He represented France in 
the Vatican. Secretary of the Congregation for the Ea stern Churches from 1936 to 1959. 
Member of the Cardinal Presidency of the Second Vatican Council.  
18  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 12. pp. 3 -4. 
19  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. 80/1.  
20  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 15. p. 266.  12 activities (conferences, seminars, publications, exhibitions) between the eastern and 
western Latin countries (the so -called "Romanities" ). Historical works under his 
name were constantly published,21 in which he de als with the history of the Daco -
Romanian origin.22 A significant part of the publications enjoyed the support of the 
Romanian communist regime, so these works showed a significant resemblance in 
content and style to the official Romanian national -communist  conception of history. 
In addition to his monographic works, he published a permanent paper in Milan 
entitled Europa și neamul românesc (Europe and the Romanian Nation). Writings 
published in it dealt with the establishment of a “Great Europe” also includ ing states 
in the eastern part of the continent, claiming that these states have always been part of 
Europe, and have made their contribution to European civilization, and the idea of 
Romania being the most Latinized island in the easternmost part of Europ e was often 
voiced in them.  Drăgan, with a background in the legionary movement,23 never hid 
his views on Hungarians, including emigrant Hungarians. In general, he responded 
extremely impulsively when Hungarian emigration groups and organizations carried 
out educational and awareness -raising activities. It is not surprising that in 1965, in 
the journal Exile et Liberté24 in an article on the Hungarian Revolution, the mere 
mention of Trianon sent the Italian magnate of Romanian origin into a fit of rage. He 
informed the director of the journal in so many details on the historical "reality", who 
indicated that the publication of the article did not aim to discredit Romania, and all 
that only happened because of lack of knowledge of historical facts.25 
 
By 1967, Drăgan's relationship with the Romanian authorities had become so 
intimate that, at the initiative of the Securitate, negotiations had begun for his return. 
The Italian businessman refused to settle for less than meeting Ceaușescu. By the early 
1970’s, Drăgan moved away from the extreme right -wing exile groups, and in parallel 
with this, in 1971 he started a series of visits in Romania. The intelligence leadership, 
the Doicaru26 – Pacepa27 Couple decided to support Agent “Olteanu” in the long run. 
                                                      
21  Some of them: DRĂGAN , Iosif C onstantin: Europa și romanitatea. Hispanitatea și 
romanitatea . (Europe and Romance countries. Hispanics and Romance countries) 1966; În 
serviciul Europei.  (At the service of Europe). 1971; Românii din Istria.  (The Istrian 
Romanians) 1973; România – țara a două lumi.  (Romania – a country of two worlds) 1973. 
Autobiography: La mia Italia. Editor Franco Orlandi, Milan, 1990. Published in 
collaboration with ODOBLE , Ștefan: The Birth of Generalized Cybernetics on Romanian 
Soil. Nagard, Milan, 1995; History of Ro mânilor.  (History of the Romanians). Ed. Europa 
Nova, Bucharest, 1994.  
22  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. 80/2.  
23  The Legionnaire movement is the Romanian version of European fascism.  
24  Founded on 1 January 1955, the newspaper was published by the Associa tion for the 
Protection of Oppressed Peoples (UDPO). The director of the paper is the Russian -French 
François de Romainville, originally named Arsène Goulevitch.  
25  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 8. pp. 105 -106. 
26  Colonel -General Nicolae Doicaru (1922 -1990). From 1963 he was promoted to lieutenant 
general in 1966 by the head of the Directorate General of Foreign Intelligence and the 
Secretary General of the Ministry of the Interior. He remained head of intelligence for 18 
years.  
27  Lieutenant General Ion Mihai  Pacepa (1928 –2021). From 1959 he became Deputy Head of 
the Securitate German Territories (Germany, Austria - later expanded to Northern European 
States) department. Colonel from 1963, Major General from 1967. In 1972, he represented 
the interests of intel ligence as Secretary of State in the Consiliul Securității Statului (CSS) 
of the Ministry of the Interior, and was also Deputy Head of the Intelligence Directorate. In 13 Distinguished Romanian historians (academician Constantin C. Giurescu – "Iosif 
Mundescu") sent or invited to historical conferences organized through his 
Foundation and its research centers in Venice and Salzburg28 or historian Randa 
Alexandru) supported Dr ăgan 's aims in accordance with the requirements of the 
regime. In addition, agents in four states (Italy, France, Spain, Austria) were trained 
to provide support for the Italian magnate’s “counterintelligence” activities.29 
 
He worked hard to make economic  and social circles of the Hungarian emigrant 
centers in Italy impossible.30 His cooperation with Romanian intelligence in 
countering Hungarian emigration proved to be proactive. In 1967, his contact officer 
reports that "Constantin Drăgan pointed out that an increasing number of institutions 
in the West appear, which explicitly or implicitly propagate irredentism concerning 
Transylvania. He requests that, in order to defeat these institutions, no matter how, 
but provide him with materials on the atrocities committed during the Hungarian 
administration in Transylvania, which he would publish."31 In addition to the technical 
assistance he constantly urged his extensive network of researchers to find historical 
sources so that he could place them in his volumes and educational periodicals and 
publications and with more and more certain data prove the Romanian people's 
historical primacy in Transylvania. So in 1967 his contact officer reported that he held 
a little surprise in store for the Hungarians, as a Greek Catholic priest in the Vatican, 
Carol Capros was doing research for such resources in the archives of the Vatican. In 
this fight, his strategy is: “As is well known, the best defense is attack, and therefore 
Hungarians should be intimidated. If I and other s show that Romania has always 
existed up to the Tisza, then their desire to demand Romanian territories will go 
away.”32 In 1970, according to Romanian intelligence, the NGO working with the 
Council of Europe, in addition to the Basque, Breton and Catalan minorities, “began 
to deal with the affairs of Hungarians, and it is feared that the issue of recognizing 
Hungarians may be brought before the council. The organizations of Hungarians 
living in exile prepared to hold a conference on the issue of Transylvan ia in Montreal”. 
Drăgan left no stone unturned to obtain more information on the cautious Hungarians 
in London, and set about to discredit the Hungarian conference, i.e. he started to 
organize and publish thematic articles, conferences, which propagated th e official 
Romanian position on history history.33  
 
In 1976, Drăgan established the Centrul European de Studii Tracice (European 
Center for Thracian Studies) and in 1978 set up the Italian -Romanian Chamber of 
Commerce in Milan. The Drăgan Foundation also had branches in other states, such 
as a Romanian lect ure hall in Austria (Salzburg) and a research office in Spain. Both 
researched the history, culture and literature of Romania, and especially the Daco -
Romanian continuity theory. In Venice, he set up a research center called the Centrul 
                                                      
1974, as Lieutenant General, he was the immediate commander of Nicolae Pleșiță, 
Secretar y-General for the Interior and First Deputy Minister for the Interior, and also a 
candidate for the position of Chief of Intelligence. In July 1978, he traveled to the FRG, 
where he applied for and received political asylum from the United States.  
28  ACNSA S Fond SIE 00028 vol. 13.p. 80.  
29  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol.13. pp. 77 -80. 
30  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 16. pp. 187 -189. 
31  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 12. p. 21.  
32  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 12. p. 60.  
33  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 13. p. 99.  14 Internațional de St udii asupra Tracilor to study the Thracian heritage and its impact 
on the peoples. In addition to research and processing, the foundation also edited and 
distributed a press conference publication throughout Europe.3434 He also conducted 
serious thracologic  activity to make sure that the above -mentioned history of origins 
is embedded in international and Romanian social history awareness. With the volume 
Noi, tracii și istoria noastră multimilenară (We, Thracians and our thousands of years 
of history) and wi th the journal Noi, tracii (We, Thracians), he revived the 
thracological ideas between the two world wars. The Ceaușescu dictatorship gave him 
the opportunity to take part in Second Thracological conference held in Bucharest on 
4-6 September 1976 where he read a lecture. In the Noi, Tracii the periodical of the 
Thracology Historical Research Institute of Venice, he propagated thracology as a 
refutation of Eduard Rösler’s theory.35 Active support from the Romanian intelligence 
was behind the publication of certain works and publication s. “The second volume of 
the Noi, tracii series, Buletin circular tracologic (1974 –1976) (Thracological Circular) 
and Noi, tracii 23 and 24 Numbers dedicated to the Thracological Congress; thanks 
to our influencing operations,” reads a transcript of the Ro manian intelligence 
authorities dated 7 August 1976.36 Drăgan at this point had been registered under the 
codename "Olteanu" for years, he was both a collaborative network member and he 
was also under extreme surveillance, that is, he was an agent subject t o constant 
monitoring. As early as in the 1960’s, officers of the Romanian intelligence 
Rezidentura in Italy sent reports of great appreciation of him, highlighting his 
extraordinary intelligence potentials. The Ceaușescu dictatorship after 1965 also 
conni ved at the fact that that his parents' house in Lugoj would be the seat of the 
Uniunea de Tracologie, (Association of Thracology), it was in fact designated by the 
local authorities. Drăgan never renounced his Romanian citizenship, so he asked the 
authorit ies to have his own permanent address in Romania. His international contacts 
were remarkable, and this is what the Romanian secret services built on. Europe -wide 
known personalities were in close contact with him, such as French President Valéry 
Giscard d' Estaing,37 Giuseppe Pella with the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs,38 
Harold MacMillan, the British prime minister,39 Minister of Health Enoch Powell,40 
as well as a number of high -ranking church leaders of the Vatican.  
                                                      
34  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 80/3.  
35  Eduard Robert Rösler (1836 –1874), Austrian historian. According to his migration theory, 
the cradle of the Romanian people lay south of the Danube, which he then abandoned and 
migrated north.  
36  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol . 16. p. 216.  
37  Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (1926 -2020) is a French conservative politician.  
38  Giuseppe Pella (1902 -1981) is an Italian Christian Democrat politician. Prime Minister 
from 1953 to 1954. In the 1950s and 1960s, he was, among others, Minister o f Finance and 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. Between 1954 and 1956, after the death of Alcide de Gasperi, 
Pella also served as President of the European Parliament. From 1968 to 1972, he chaired 
the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Italian Senate, and for a short time was Minister of 
Finance in the government headed by Giulio Andreotti.  
39  Harold MacMillan (1894 -1986), British Conservative politician, head of government 
between 1957 and 1963.  
40  John Enoch Powell (1912 -1998) is an English conservative politic ian. From 1950 to 1974, 
he was a member of the British Parliament in conservative colors. Minister of Health from 
1960 to 1963. From 1974 he transferred to the ranks of the Ulster Unionist Party. Prior to 
his career as a politician, Powell was a researcher  in the field of ancient sciences and was 
an appointed Greek university professor in Australia at the age of 25. He served as an 15 In the 1970s, Drăgan continued his business in Romania even more 
spectacularly. At his suggestion and initiative, the Romanian -French Chamber of 
Commerce was set up in Paris in 1977.4141 Romanian intelligence was also aware that 
this was not only about Drăgan’s patriotic feelings, but also a bout his own personal 
interests. They knew that he had also used the opportunities created by Romanian 
foreign policy to gain a foothold in the market. For Drăgan, therefore, this opportunity 
served as a kind of safety valve during the period of economic d ivorce in Western 
countries.42 He regularly supported the foreign trade interests of the Romanian 
dictatorship, and during his visits to Romania he became acquainted with the leaders 
of intelligence (Nicolae Doicaru, Ion Mihai Pacepa), the party (Nicolae Ce aușescu, 
Ștefan Andrei) and also the leaders of the Ministry of Interior (Teodor Coman, Tudor 
Posteln). During these meetings, Drăgan informed them of his plans to develop 
Romania's foreign relations, including the establishment of the Dacomex joint foreig n 
trade company in Paris with the aim of promoting the communist state in the capitalist 
world and at the same time spreading the idea of thracology. At these high -level 
meetings, they also discussed the interests of Romanian state security in Drăgan's 
activities, the direction in which he should continue to maintain the community of 
interests. The tangible evidence of the alienation of the “exiled” millionaire is the 
historical volumes published in the West, in which he conveyed the official 
propaganda of the dictatorship and the “truths” of socialist Romanian historiography. 
For in the 1970s (after a relative ideological loosening), Romanian official 
historiography entered a period of new myth -making, the history of the Dacian 
genesis.43 
 
Drăgan not only pu blished thracologic works showing the ancient origins of 
Romanians other works in capitalist countries, but in the Romanian Socialist Republic 
as well. The support of the Writers’ Union is further evidence of the symbiotic 
relationship between the Romanian  millionaire established in Italy and the Ceaușescu 
dictatorship. In the 1970s, a number of Romanian publications competed to present 
Drăgan’s professional and literary work with bombastic accolades. September 1, 1973 
j on the Luceafărul literary journal, Mihai Gafiţa described him as "a representative 
of the European spirit, cooperation and understanding among the states" .44 On June 
24, 1974, even the Scînteia , the official daily newspaper of the dictatorship, published 
a voluminous article by Ion Brad , elevating Drăgan's literary and historical work to 
the same level as that of Ion Creangă and Nicolae Iorga.45 The praise series was 
continued by Dumitru Berciu, who noted in article placed in  the literary journal 
Prefaţă  on 27 January 1976, that the reader  will find the ideas in the book entitled  
Noi Tracii that  he has always craved for, that correspond to the historic reality of the 
Thracian world and contemporary Romanian historiography.46 The same Berciu 
                                                      
intelligence officer during World War II and was already a brigadier general at the age of 
30. 
41  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17 . p. 2.  
42  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 16. p. 241.  
43  GOERGESCU  Vlad: History and Politics.  Cazul comuniștilor români . 1944 –1977. (History 
and Politics. Cases of Romanian Communists. 1944 –1977.) Editura Humanitas, București, 
1991. pp. 6 -66. 
44  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 12.  
45  Ibid. 
46  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 16 -17. 16 considered that the Prin Europa (via Europe) publ ished by Drăgan in February 1977 
could be considered a reinterpretation of Romanian national history.47 
 
It may have been a great honor and recognition for the famous Romanian 
intellectuals to receive invitations from the Drăgan Foundation. A series of lect ures 
was given in Venice between 27 May and 2 June 1974, in which Marin Sorescu,48Ana 
Blandiana,49 Alexandru Căprariu,50 Edgar Papu,51 Eugen Jebeleanu52 were the 
Romanian guests. The announced goal of the event was to offer new opportunities for 
literary writer s who have already gained recognition in domestic circles for their 
international appearance. The Drăgan Foundation also provided accommodation, 
meals and publicity for the event. The travel expenses were covered by the Romanian 
Writers' Union.  
 
In late 19 77, Drăgan wrote an account of the fruitful collaboration that had 
existed for years between the Romanian Writers' Union and him. On the occasion of 
                                                      
47  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 17 -18. 
48  Romanian writer Marin Sorescu (1936 -1996). In 1960, he graduated with a degree in 
Modern Languages from Alexandru Ioan Cuza University in Iași. He was a member of the 
International Writers Program at the University of Iowa. In 1964 he began his career as a  
writer with a volume of parodies of Singur printre poeți (Alone among Poets). He published 
an additional 23 volumes until his death. In 1992 he became a member of the Romanian 
Academy.  
49  Ana Blandiana (1942 –) poet, writer, journalist. He holds a degree i n humanities from 
Babeş -Bolyai University in Cluj -Napoca. In 1959, his first poems appeared in the columns 
of the Tribuna.  Between 1968 and 1974, he worked for several literary magazines, including 
Viaţa Studenţească and Amfiteatru.  From 1975 he was a libr arian in Bucharest, from 1977 
to 1979 he was an editor at the Romanian Writers' Association. In December 1989, he was 
a member of the interim leadership of the National Rescue Front. He resigned from this title 
on 29 January 1990 and founded the Alianţa Ci vică (Civic Association), of which he was 
chairman until 2001. Fundaţia Academica Civică (Civic Association Foundation), 
Honorary President of the Romanian PEN Club. He has been a corresponding member of 
the Romanian Academy since 2016.  
50  Alexandru Căprar iu (1929 –1988), a Romanian philosopher. From 1957 to 1969 he worked 
for the Tribuna Literary Journal. In 1969, he became the publishing director of Dacia. For 
the last 12 years of his life, he worked again for the Tribunal . 
51  Edgar Papu (1908 –1993) is a R omanian essayist, literary critic and university professor. He 
obtained his degree in humanities in 1932, was a student at the University of Vienna from 
1930 and then studied at the Istituto Interuniversitario Italiano in Florence from 1932. From 
1936 to 1 944 he taught Latin, French, German, Italian and Romanian as a secondary school 
teacher in Iaşi. From 1945 he was professor of aesthetics at the University of Bucharest 
until he was removed from the university in 1951 because of his ecclesiastical worldvie w. 
After a short absence, he returned to university in 1953 and taught comparative linguistics. 
He was arrested in 1961 and sentenced to 8 years. He was released in 1964 and writes his 
works on protochronism far from his university world: Călătoriile Renaş terii (1967), Din 
clasicii noştri  (1977).  After his death, in 2006 he became a post mortem member of the 
Romanian Academy.  
52  Poet Eugen Jebeleanu (1911 –1991). He graduated as a lawyer from the University of 
Bucharest. In 1932 he became a member of the Rom anian Writers' Association and 
published in several literary and public journals: Adevărul, Dimineata, Cuvantul liber.  From 
1939 to 1945 he worked as a clerk in the Press Directorate. He has been a corresponding 
member of the Romanian Academy since 1955. H e received the Etna -Taormina Prize in 
Catania in 1971 and was awarded the Herder Prize in 1973.  17 the centenary of Romania's independence53 he published a book in Bucharest entitled  
Idealuri și destine (Ideals and Fates), which should have been published in Hungarian 
by Kriterion in accordance with the central instructions. However, Géza Domokos, 
the publisher's director, prevented this. Drăgan emphasized that publication of the 
book in Hungarian had become so necessary that "(...) to reduce the chauvinistic spirit 
controlled by the Catholic Church, the impenetrable Alba Iulia closed circuit, as well 
as the foreign and Hungarian (i.e. working inside Hungary) radio stations, that are 
widely listened to in Transylvania.”54 For him, it was even more offensive that 
Kriterion Publishing House led by Domokos published 100 thousand copies of a 
volume by András Sütő to make sure the book can reach Argentina, too – Dragan 
recounted, at the same time it gave him sati sfaction that the Hungarian Radio reported 
on his work in prime time.55 
 
His complex collaboration took place at the level of heads of intelligence and 
home affairs, and he used his position to arrange alien administration matters (return 
of citizenship, en try and exit visas, issue of passports, etc.) for his acquaintances. He 
was regularly received at the highest level. Nicolae Ceaușescu invited him twice, in 
August 1971 and June 1980.  Ministers of Interior Teodor Coman and George 
Homoștean met with him in  1978 and 1980. Discussions covered sensitive topics such 
as the relationship of power to various emigration groups and the Western 
dissemination strategy of information about the Socialist Republic of Romania.56 
 
Drăgan felt so confident in his position th at he challenged Gheorghiu Mihnea, 
President of the Academy of Social Sciences, about the fact that his (i.e. Drăgan’s) 
thracological creative and publishing efforts were not valued high enough: “Mr. 
President, this is how history is falsified before our e yes. On whose order did the 
Romanian publishers publish my four books, which caused great waves?”57 – stressed 
his own inevitability of the oil tycoon "trapped" in emigration. Nor did Drăgan spare 
Emil Manut, editor of the chronological dictionary of Litera tura Română (Romanian 
Literature). He complained that Manu did not include Drăgan's publications.58 
 
Through the Nagard (Dragan spelled backwards), that is his own publishing 
house, he propagated his own book in the West published in three languages under 
the title Falşii Martiri maghiar (False martyr Hungarians), including France ( Les faux 
                                                      
53  The Kingdom of Romania waged a war against the Ottoman Empire in 1877 -78 with the 
help of the Russian Empire. The Congress of Berlin in 1878 determined the s ituation of the 
countries of the Balkan region. In the Kingdom of Romania, Charles I (Karl von 
Hohenzollern -Sigmaringen) became king after May 10, 1881, from which time we can 
speak of a Romanian constitutional monarchy.  
54  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. 2 8. Exile et Liberté was a monthly newspaper of the 
international expatriate organization Defense des Peuple Opprimés. see: 
https://www.retronews.fr/search#allTerms=Exile%20et%20Libert%C3%A9&sort=score
&publishedBounds=from&indexedBounds=from&tfHistoPeriods% 5B0%5D=V%C3%A8
%20r%Cque%A9puberli % 5D = Mensuel & page = 7 & searchIn = article (downloaded 
24 November 2020)  
55  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 32.  
56  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 120 -121. 
57  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 134.  
58  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 135.  18 hongrois )59 and in English ( How to become a Hungarian60), in which he claimed that 
one million Romanians in Transylvania had been Hungarianized by the Hungarian 
authoritie s and their identity documents had been falsified.61 In 1978, he sent his 
volume How to become Hungarian to US President Jimmy Carter and sent a detailed 
historical briefing in the attached letter on the “real” historical facts of Transylvania.62 
The French publication Giscard d'Estaing also received the French -language 
publication, accompanied by a letter spiced with similar historical explanations.63 
Furthermore, Section 1, the economic and political intelligence section of Foreign 
Intelligence Center I, reo rganized in 1979, after the escape of Pacepa, (UM -0199 
military unit code), in cooperation with Section 4 in charge of countering the 
emigration, and other hostile activities (UM 0225), through two agents, influenced 
Drăgan to publish in his publications material exposing the hostile acts by dissident 
Paul Goma.64 
 
In the annual news demand referred to, Drăgan was tasked in an action plan of 
the section in charge of “countering emigration and hostile activities” to vet, one of 
the Romanian -born members of t he U.S. Foreign Service, Șerban Vallimarescu, to 
find out the Ronald Reagan -led administration’s vision for Romania. Drăgan was 
ready to argue in negotiations with American diplomacy that Romania had acted as 
an independent and sovereign state both under t he Warsaw Pact and in its relations 
with the Soviet Union. The purpose of his visit and talks in the United States was to 
convince the U.S. foreign leadership that the most favored nation status for Romania 
would continue to be maintained. Moreover, he has  been tasked to contact Nicholas 
Andrews65 and during the discussions, persuade the US side to support the continued 
maintenance of Romania's trade preferences. According to the news demand, in 
addition to command overseas, he was still employed on scientif ic, technical and 
economic lines with the aim of carrying out transactions that meet Romania's liquefied 
gas needs. He had to conduct political intelligence at the Council of Europe, the 
Common Market and the Vatican. In the field of international promotio n of Romanian 
cultural policy, in line with the ideas of the Ceaușescu regime, “Olteanu” was 
instructed to publish certain works in a foreign language at his own expense. Of 
course, the cost of distribution was also borne by him. Here it is, among other th ings, 
about Volume 2 of Noi , Tracii . He undertook to translate the work into English and 
German, and received distribution assistance from the authorities, allowing him to 
give lectures on the volume on news agencies, television and universities.66 
Intellig ence officers prepared “Olteanu” to support certain groups of Romanian 
colonies in support of the mainland’s national -communist policy line. His primary 
mandate was to influence personalities in charge of Romanian emigration, such as the 
philosopher Mircea  Eliade (USA), the philosopher Emil Cioran (France), the literary 
                                                      
59  TELKES , Simon: Les faux hongrois: la multuplication artificielle d’un peuple, Milan, 
Nagard, 1977.  
60  TELKES , Simon: How to Become a Hungarian: The Artificial Reproduction of a People, 
Rome: Edizioni Europa, 1977.  
61  ACNSAS Fo nd SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 28.  
62  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 84 -85. 
63  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 86 -87. 
64  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 147.  
65  Nicholas Andrews was Head of the US DOS State Secretariat, Directorate for the USSR 
and the European Socialist States.  
66  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. pp. 142 -143. 19 translator, writer Aurel Răuță (Spain). The goal was to gain their support for the 
"Romanian cause" announced by Nicolae Ceausescu, that is the national protochronist 
communism, namely for h is idea of ancient origins of the Romanian people and its 
priority over all other nations. Under the auspices of this, Drăgan was tasked with 
gathering young writers around the magazine Noi, tracii , who will be able to take over 
the paper from him, and wil l continue to ensure the constant and operative publication 
of materials favorable to the Romanian dictatorship.67 
 
As compensation for the agent’s tasks, the Romanian intelligence agency tried 
to comply with Drăgan’s requests, the never hindered or investi gated his trading 
activities and tried to arrange bureaucratic administration quickly and favorably for 
him. Visa applications submitted by him or his close acquaintances were generally 
processed quickly. For example, when he requested a passport to be iss ued for writers 
and historians so that they could work for his Foundation, he gained immediate 
support from the Romanian authorities. In addition, intelligence intervened to obtain 
a temporary visa or, if necessary, a permanent permit to leave Romania for his 
relatives and family members.68 
 
According to the professional rules of intelligence, the agent was regularly 
inspected, his activities evaluated and his direction of action improved as necessary, 
they were provided with the necessary information, the r esults achieved, the pace of 
missions were jointly discussed and new specific tasks were assigned to him. In order 
to maintain a proper conspiracy milieu, Drăgan also occasionally received counter -
intelligence training.  
 
Using the classic method of decepti on, the Romanian secret services instilled 
confabulated information into extremist, right -wing groups of Romanian emigration, 
which Drăgan then passed on through his own publishing and distribution system. The 
question arises whether Dragan was used as a t ool when he Vlad Georgescu la stalpi 
infamiei (Vlad Georgescu at the pillar of infamy) edited by the agencies. The article 
made reference to a paper of the Romanian far -right groups in West Germany, the 
Stindardul  and Drăgan’s network disseminated moral -based false information, 
prepared by the Securitate, in Italy, France, Spain and Canada.69 
 
Drăgan involved many intellectuals in his symbiotic relationship with the 
communist regime, writers, lawyers, historians who formed a real network of contacts 
through the foundation. Separate research would be needed to answer whether these 
people were better motivated by Drăgan’s money or friendship. The answer is by no 
means simple, but archival sources attest that his rich work as a writer relied on the 
wide network of social contacts and friends he built and maintained. A number of 
publications and conferences were prepared by intellectuals, experts living in exile 
(linguists, lawyers, historians) and local professionals working anonymously or under 
their own name to  have quasi professional articles or books published under Drăgan’s 
name. Thus, the number of literary and historical works of the businessman increased 
spectacularly in a short time. In 1983, Drăgan was convinced by historian Stefan 
Pascu to write a prefa ce to the second volume referred to and thereby canonize 
                                                      
67  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 143  
68  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 17. p. 143  
69  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 45.  20 Volume 2 of Noi Tracii , which was published in Bucharest by Editura Ştiinţifică şi 
Enciclopedică (Science and Encyclopedia Publishing).70 Later, the work was 
included, with minor modifications, in the volume Imperiul milenial (The Millennial 
Empire), which received permission from Suzana Gâdea and was also published by 
the Scientific and Encyclopedic Publishing House in Bucharest. Eugen Barb u, a 
recognized writer of the dictatorship and an adviser to Drăgan convinced the oil 
magnate to republish the history of Romanian literature from the beginning to the 
present day (Istoria Literaturii rom â avoid de la Original p â n ă î n prezent) by 
Geor ge Călinescu, Densușianu's Prehistoric Dacia (Dacia preistorică ) and all the 
works of Mihai Eminescu at his own expense.71 The professional polemic that broke 
out in 1983 between Ion Lăncrănjan and György Száraz72 quickly crossed the borders 
of the Iron Curt ain, and the secret propaganda war between the two states continued 
in the ranks of emigration. On the Romanian side, intelligence worked hard, in 
accordance with the interests of the dictatorship, to propagate their own historical 
reality through Drăgan's  institutional network. According to a 1983 intelligence 
report, the Hungarian diplomatic mission in Italy, together with members of the 
emigration, were working there to prevent and counter the spread of Romanian 
propaganda. The news that the Budapest new sletter is being distributed in Hungarian, 
Russian and English by Hungarians was considered significant. This was also 
important since the said publication in its Issue 1982/160. included the study of 
György Száraz, published in the 1982 issue of Reality.  Romanian intelligence learned 
that the Italian parliament, government, foreign ministry, press, news agencies and 
parties also received the publication. As a result of articles published in the Italian 
press, the Panorama,  L 'Espresso etc.73 
 
In 1984, the i ntelligence of the dictatorship expected Drăgan to deliver certain 
materials to the OSCE meeting in Madrid, as well as to financially support the 
publications of loyal groups of Romanian emigration, in his own publishing house, 
Nagard .74 To counter all these, the Intelligence arranged exist visas for the persons 
designated by him and gave their consent to the completion of Drăgan’s own house 
in Lugos. He also asked permission to drive his car freely despite the restrictions 
imposed in Romania (alternatin g use of cars with even or odd number plates).75 
 
There were also sometimes “misunderstandings” between the oil tycoon and 
Romanian intelligence. In 1982, Drăgan published a historical work in Italian with his 
own publisher that was not in line with the off icial theses of the “golden age” in 
                                                      
70  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 44.  
71  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 45 (hereinafter v.)  
72  In 1982, in the work of the Romanian writer, Ion Lăncrănjan, Thoughts on Transylvania , 
the author presented the history of Transylvania and the Hungarians in a distorted way. The 
repressive activitie s of the Hungarians arriving in Transylvania after the Romanians caused 
serious damage to the Romanian nation before Trianon. The author presented the 
phenomenon of revisionism, which became the official policy of Hungary after the Treaty 
of Trianon, and o f interference in the internal affairs of Romania. In October 1982, György 
Száraz responded to the volume communicating the historical view of the Romanian 
Communist Party in his essay About a Strange Book published  in the Hungarian monthly 
Reality . The de bate continued in the following years.  
73  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 36.  
74  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. 14 -14 .v.  
75  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. pp. 4 -6. 21 Romania. In one chapter of Dal paese di Dracula ( On the Land of Dracula ), the 
student organizations of the period between the two world wars coincide with the 
legionary movement. The chapter seemed to present legionism i n a neutral way, but 
overall with a positive tone. The author argued that there are similarities between the 
communist and legionary movements in both organization and ideology.76 According 
to the author, “The Scout movement […] was created to counterbalanc e the 
“Brotherhood of the Cross”77 and "legionary nests"78 influence on young people, who 
were practically a kind of “communist cells”.79 It also attracted the attention of the 
Romanian intelligence service that Drăgan, in the July 1985 157 / 158 issue of Europa 
şi Neamt românesc published a protest call of the  Asociația pentru protecția 
monumentelor și a șezărilor istorice în România (Association for the Protection of 
Romanian Monuments and Historical Settlements) under the title Romania's 
historical and cult ural heritage in danger . The response, of course, did not fail to take 
place, the work of art offered by Drăgan to the Greek Catholic Church in Lugos could 
only arrive in Lugos late.  
 
After a short "Cold War", co - operation between Drăgan and the Romanian 
intelligence continued even more intensively in 1986, with the commission and 
publication of the work Mistificarea istoriei Europei - adevăr și impostură 
(Mystification of European His tory - Truth and Deception ), which was written by an 
officer one of the specialist services. Drăgan published it at his own expense and was 
emphatically prepared for the discrediting of the Hungarians. The publication had to 
be sent directly to universitie s and libraries in major Western countries. In addition, it 
was sent to leaders and major politicians and historians, as well as to groups of 
Romanian emigrants loyal to the Romanian regime. “This operation was initiated by 
the Securitate on the instructio ns of the Propaganda Department of the Central 
Committee of the Romanian Communist Party.”80 In the same year, Drăgan met with 
influential Ceaușescu officials in the Romanian capital. The thracologist was received 
by Suzana Gâdea, President of the Socialist  Council for Culture and Education 
(Consiliul Culturii și Educației Socialiste), and then met with Ion Iliescu, Director of 
Technical Publishing. They discussed current and specific issues, including the Dacia 
milenar Imperia (Dacia millennial empire) and the Ţara lui Dracula (Dracula's 
country) publishing volumes. At the end of the negotiations, “Olteanu” was able to 
leave with satisfaction, as he had contracted that his volumes would go to press on 
schedule in the second half of 1986.81 Several times a yea r, the magnate spent several 
months in Romania, as he did in 1986, when the presentation of the volume Mileniul 
imperial al Daciei (Imperial Millennium of Dacia) was scheduled to take place in Iași, 
where academician Mircea Petrescu -Dîmboviț presented the publication.82 In 
December, a symposium entitled The 2500th Anniversary of the Establishment of the 
Centralized Dacian State was organized by the Military History Committee of the 
                                                      
76  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 99.  
77  Brotherhood of the Cross – Frățiile de Cruce,  the youth organization of the Romanian 
Legionary Movement, founded in 1923 by Corneliu Zelea Codreanu.  
78  Legionary nest (club legionar): the basic unit of the Romanian Legionary Movement, which 
had no committee. The nest had only one leader, one liaison,  and one treasurer. The liaison 
/ courier connected the nests to other nests and/or the county leader.  
79  DRĂGAN , Iosif Constantin: Dal paese di Dracula,  Nagard, Milan, 1982. p. 351.  
80  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 101.  
81  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. 103 -103. v.  
82  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. 127 -127. v.  22 Ministry of Defense, for which Drăgan was also invited. At the event, Gheorgh iu 
Mihnea,83 Ștefan Pascu, Dumitru Berciu,84 Eugen Barbu85 also praised Drăgan's 
publishing activities abroad.86 
 
Thanks to a grateful Drăgan, the 5th International Thracological Symposium was 
held in Spoleto, Italy in November 1987, under the auspices of the European Center 
for Thracian Studies established by him and the European Drăgan Foundation. The 
scientific event was attended by 40 guests from Ro mania, Bulgaria, Italy, Yugoslavia, 
Greece and Spain. The Romanian delegation consisted of eight historians and 
philosophers who received financial support from him.  
 
In contrast, his business with the Ceaușescu regime is less well known. The 
Securitate fi le laconically recorded the fact that the millionaire had acted in 
accordance with instructions received, reveal new opportunities for the development 
of export of Romanian products. Among other things, Marimex Foreign Trade 
Company won, with some influenc e, an order from Fram Shipping Ltd. in Bermuda 
to build 15 oil tankers worth approximately $ 90 million. Also thanks to the influential 
emigrant patriot, an agreement in principle was reached with Moroccan decision -
makers on the construction of a railway n etwork to be laid in Morocco. The stake was 
a 1,000 kilometer railway line between Marrakech and Aiouin worth $ 1 billion. These 
contracts were handled by Securitate’s foreign trading front company, ICE Dunărea.87 
In 1988, Drăgan held business negotiations in the United States with the aim of 
exporting 20,000 Dacia cars to the US market.88 
 
Although in 1971 Drăgan distanced himself from the Paris emigration group led 
by Ioan Rațiu, their relationship later improved and stabilized. For this relationship, 
since  the magnate quite often turned up in French circles in Paris and Brussels, the 
Securitate drew up an operational combination, according to which they would 
establish a seed in the Romanian exile, that is control center, which would operate in 
accordance w ith the policies of dictatorship. In 1988, the Romanian Intelligence 
directed an illustrious member of the Romanian emigrant group in New York, 
Professor Serban Andronescu to Drăgan to recommend that he overtake the leadership 
of the Romanian exile organiz ations in some of the main western states, such as Paris 
and the US and Spain, so as to gain control over these organizations. Drăgan elegantly 
                                                      
83  Gheorghiu Mihnea (1919 –2011) was a Romanian poet, writer and translator. From 1944 to 
1946 he was deputy editor -in-chief of the Communist Scânteia in Tineretului . He earned 
his degree in huma nities from the University of Bucharest and then earned his doctorate in 
1947. In 1996 he became a member of the Romanian Academy of Sciences.  
84  Dumitru Berciu (1907 -1998) was a Romanian archaeologist and historian. He was the 
director of the Institute of  Thracology in Bucharest. Honorary member of the Romanian 
Academy of Sciences.  
85  Eugen Barbu (1924 -1993) was a journalist, writer and Romanian senator. He graduated in 
1947 with a degree in humanities from the University of Bucharest. He worked as a 
commu nist journalist and also as a censor. In 1969 he was an alternate member of the 
Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party. In 1975, Eugen Barbu was elected 
Member of the National Assembly. From 1970 to 1989 he led the literary magazine 
Săptămîna  (The Week). After 1989, he was the founder of the România Mare (Greater 
Romania Party), a member of parliament from 1992 to 1996.  
86  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 141. 
87  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 134. 
88  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 225.  23 rejected the offer, as he trusted the international network of his own organizations and 
their strength more. Th e situation changed in 1989, and Drăgan invited Professor 
Serban Andronescu to join the Mișcarea românilor pentru unirea Europei (Romanian 
Movement for the Unification of Europe), which the magnate had founded 40 years 
earlier.89 
 
On July 7, 1989, Drăgan re ported to the authorities in Bucharest that, 
unfortunately, he had not been able to publish an article in the Italian press about the 
revisionist and anti -Romanian aspects of the events of June 16 in Budapest. He 
expressed his intention to dedicate one of his periodicals to present this event.90 
 
The very last meeting between Drăgan and the Romanian intelligence agency 
loyal to Ceausescu took place on 27 November 1989. This time, the magnate invited 
Gheorghe Dolgu, Romanian ambassador to a restaurant in the UN palace in Geneva. 
Both reaffirmed the need to continue working together to offset Hungary's 
discrediting activities, and to hold a conference in the Romanian Socialist Republic 
next year on the protection of Romanian cultural property and historical mon uments. 
Drăgan indicated to the ambassador that he intended to visit Bucharest in January 
1990 to agree on the details with the competent authorities.91 According to archival 
sources, Drăgan's thracological activity and his cooperation with the secret servi ces 
can be traced back to 22 December 1989. Following the change of regime, up to his 
death in 2008, we can only be informed about his social, historical dissemination and 
attitude – forming actions through the media. But an analysis of this era would alre ady 
go beyond the scope of the study.   
 
While cooperation between the specialized services and Iosif Constantin Drăgan 
was ongoing and it would be difficult to separate the interests of the dictatorship, 
cultural and economic policy of the tycoon’s passio nate thracological interests, his 
anti-Hungarian sentiments inspired by the legionary movement, in addition to his own 
economic interests, his person was surrounded by suspicions that stemmed from the 
nature of the Romanian intelligence institutions. Each time he returned home to Lugos 
or went anywhere in the country, he was closely followed by the counter -intelligence 
service, and they were aware of his every move with the help of operational 
technology and agent networks. As for his activities in West wer e monitored by the 
Rezidenturas of intelligence agencies in the western countries. through agent 
infiltration. Whether Drăgan was aware of the strengthening of historical 
protochronism in the motherland in the 1970s or the theoretical background of this 
system of ideas would require deeper research. It seems clear, however, that he 
perceived the receptiveness of the Romanian state leadership and the intellectuals in 
its orbit for the conceptual construct of the origins designed by him. His person was 
also i mportant, because by propagating thracology internationally, he contributed to 
the international acceptance of the ideology of the Romanian power elite, and to 
operations against the Hungarian emigrant groups.  His role in Romanian emigration 
went far beyo nd Italy. The institutional network created by him often provided 
                                                      
89  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. pp. 269-270. 
90  ACNSAS Fond SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 331. At that time, the re -burial of Imre Nagy and his 
fellow martyrs took place in Budapest.  
91  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 00028 vol. 18. p. 367.  24 assistance to Romanian emigrants active in other countries and cover for the 
Romanian intelligence agencies for the conduct of various operations.  
 
 
The French line  
 
Gustav Pordea, the reluctant spy  
 
Controlling Romanian emigration became a particular priority task for 
Romanian intelligence after a group of Romanian refugees occupied the Romanian 
embassy in Bern in February 1955. Thereafter they vetted all intellectuals, who 
showed some potential as intelligence agents. Accordingly, the Romanian Intelligence 
as early as in the fifties repeatedly analyzed the biography of a teacher named Gustav 
Pordea and his operational situation, but his more intensive processing was started 
only in the late fifties.  
 
Gustav Pordea, whose father was a Liberal Party Senator, was born in 1916 in 
Cluj-Napoca. He studied in his hometown, then started to work as a lawyer there 
where his family owned three real estates, furthermore a hotel in Dej and another re al 
estate in Bucharest. With his mother was related to Iuliu Maniu.92 With the communist 
regime change in 1945, the family suffered serious financial losses.93 The young 
Gustav Pordea arrived in the Netherlands in 1947 on a diplomatic mission. However, 
with the persecution of King Michael in December 1947, Romanian diplomacy was 
also “cleaned up,” so in 1948 the young Pordea, serving in the Netherlands, decided 
to choose emigration. He maintained continuous correspondence with his parents, 
which fact was thor oughly used by the Romanian counter -intelligence mapping his 
new residence, place of employment, citizenship, his contacts in the emigration 
circles. Thus, the Romanian intelligence agency also knew that in 1955 at his father -
in-law, Max Auschnitt94 lived i n Biarritz, and read lectures at the diplomatic institute. 
Pordea probably did not renounce his return home, was not deprived of his citizenship, 
and had a Romanian passport. In 1966, through the embassy in Paris, he formally 
applied for permission to retu rn home. In 1968 he sent one of his children to Bucharest 
to attend a secondary school there. In 1969 he made another application to the 
competent authorities for his return home,95 which also allowed the Pordea family to 
repatriate on condition that they t ake up a teaching position at the University of 
Bucharest and offered them an apartment in an apartment block. Pordea’s wife, 
however, considered the offer to be below their social status, because they requested 
a separate villa with period furniture in it , plus a charwoman, so their repatriation was 
cancelled. In 1971, Gustav Pordea submitted another request to the Romanian 
                                                      
92  Iuliu Maniu (1973 -1953) was a  Romanian lawyer, politician and prime minister in 
Transylvania.  
93  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 12. 
94  Max Carol Auschnitt (1888 -1957), industrial tycoon. He was the richest man in Romania 
between the two world wars. Favorite of the Romanian royal family until 1939. His 
property, when he emigrated to America after the war, was nationalized in Romania.  
95  The intention to return home, and in particular the conditions, was previously notified to 
the Paris residence (under the pseudonym "Predeal", where the f irst two letters indicate that 
it was Paris) through an agent. In the code language, in the text sent to the center, the agent 
was designated as inventor, the first letter of the word, “i,” referring to the agent being an 
informant.  25 embassy in Paris. Under the previous conditions, in exchange for his return, he also 
demanded a serious sum of money to make up for al l that the Romanian state had 
confiscated from him and his family after 1945.96 He threatened to bring the matter 
before an international court. He argued that if a well -known Romanian patriot 
returned to Romania, it would serve as an example for other emig rants to follow suit. 
In recognition of his scientific activity, he wanted to receive the support of the 
Romanian state as a good patriot – and last but not least due to his lack of money.  
 
In 1975, the Securitate learned of Pordea, who lived in Paris, tha t he was not 
settling home because he could inherit a large sum from his father -in-law through his 
wife. Rather, the reason was good only to find an opportunity to channel his patriotic 
feelings into a sphere of influence (meaning Romanian state institutio ns and their 
contacts) through which he could disseminate his scientific activity and obtain money. 
In 1980, Pordea complained to an undercover officer in the Paris rezidentura that the 
French political leadership, especially Raymond Octave, Prime Minister  Joseph 
Barre97 supported the Transylvanian Hungarian minority, and stands by Hungary and 
for Hungarians in the world. To counter this, he suggested that a series of thematic 
volumes such as The contribution of Romanians to universal culture and civilizatio n, 
and volunteered to translate the works of Romanian authors into several world 
languages, including books by Mircea Eliade.98 In addition, he thought the following 
year, 1981, would be a good opportunity to commemorate Octavian Goga (born 100 
years earlie r), by organizing programs against the Hungarians, and finally proposed 
to establish the House of Romanians in Paris.99 He broached the idea of propagating 
topics such as the raised as the bloodshed Romanians suffered in World War 1 and 
World War 2 in suppo rt of the Allies, with an emphasis on Latinity through the theory 
of Daco -Romanian continuity. He emphasized that he had Hungarian acquaintances 
at the Sorbonne University and warned the undercover officer that 12 more teachers 
from Hungary were coming to Paris. He also drew attention to the fact that he was 
familiar with the propaganda tools of the Hungarians, as well as with the institutions 
that serve them, such as the Groupe pour les Minoritaires; the Hungarian branch of 
the Transilvanian Institute of P hiladelphia, the Hungarian branch of the Danubian 
Research and Information Center, Florida.100 The undercover officer met Pordea 
several times at the latter's apartment, at a reception at the U.S. Embassy in Paris, and 
spoke with him three times on the phone . During the talks, Pordea asked for the 
support of the undercover officer to spread his scientific work in Romania. The officer 
gathered from the conversations that Pordea was willing to act in the interests of 
socialist Romania, i.e. he could do a good s ervice in dividing the Romanian 
                                                      
96  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 20 
97  Raymond Octave Joseph Barre (1924 -2007), French Prime Minister from 1976 to 1981. 
His wife was Éva Hegedüs, the daughter of Lóránt Hegedüs (1872 –1943), former Minister 
of Finance of Hungary.  
98  Mircea Eliade (1907 –1986) was  a religious historian, philosopher and writer of Romanian 
descent, living in Paris after 1945 and in the USA after 1956. After 1945 he also wrote in 
French and English.  
99  It is possible that he was thinking of an institution competing with the Hungarian Institute 
in Paris.  
100  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 33. For details on the listed Hungarian emigration research 
and representative organizations, see: HARASZTI , Endre: The Ethnic History of 
Transylvania, published by Danubian Press (approved by Danubian Rese arch and 
Information Center) Toronto, Sovereigne Press, 1971.  26 emigration and counteracting the activities of the Hungarian emigration.101 There 
were initially small signs of support. First, through an agent called “Stan, the agency 
sent Pordea a lexicon published in Romania”, with the in struction for the agent to gain 
Pordea’s trust and invite him to events of the Romania Society (a Romanian NGO 
similar to the World Federation of Hungarians) in Romania.102 Agent “Stan” was a 
doctor -radiologist from Târgu Mureş, who had been registered by th e Romanian 
counter -intelligence as a network asset since 1972.103 Agent "Stan" sent the prepared 
letter to Pordea, promising to send him further publications, and help him join or 
infiltrate Romanian scientific circles. Copies of these letters were sent to t he 
Romanian intelligence agency as well. Thus the two directorates assessed the 
possibility of channeling Pordea into the circles of the Italian magnate Drăgan. That 
is why they studied him thoroughly, which showed that by then he had a serious 
professiona l career,104 and as a teacher at the Sorbonne, and someone whose second 
wife is a French woman, he completely assimilated into French society. Starting from 
the seventies, he turned to the cultivation of Romanian history, especially the history 
of the countr ies neighboring Romania, and the theory of continuity, respectively. His 
sweeping activity against the Hungarian emigration elicited appreciation from a 
significant part of the Romanian expat community in Paris (with the exception of the 
National Peasant P arty grouping led by Ioan Raţiu), and he proclaimed that it was 
time that the Romanian emigration change their relationship with the Romanian state. 
He demanded more serious support for those emigrants who fought militantly against 
the Hungarians.105 Based o n the profile, there was a correlation between the news 
demand of the services and the ideas of one of the dominant figures of the far -right 
emigration group in Paris. The image of him was in line with the news demand of the 
services; Gustav Pordea was the n one of the dominant figures in the far -right 
emigration group in Paris.  
 
Based on the principle of the gradual approach, agent "Stan"’s professional 
training and travel to Paris first took place in 1972, when during the seven -month 
training he had time t o thoroughly get to know Pordea as well. The relationship 
developed so well that in addition to ongoing correspondence, Pordea invited Agent 
“Stan” on a one -month vacation in 1980.106 
 
Pacepa’s defection in 1978 escape did not affect the Romanian intelligence 
agency’s contact with Pordea although the in next two years it underwent the largest 
reorganization in its history. From 1 October 1978, the entire organization of the 
Romanian inte lligence service consisted of several units that were subdivided into 
independent departments and sections as follows: Section I – Europe: made up of five 
units, responsible for obtaining political, economic, technical -scientific and military 
intelligence from the major capitalist countries in Europe. Its military designation was 
                                                      
101  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 33.  
102  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 35.  
103  Identification of “Stan” based on pages 137 and 282 of ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588: In 
1983, G. Stanciu was 52 years old.  
104  In the 1950s, he was director of the Center International des Etude Latine (International 
Institute of Latin Studies) and, since the 1960s, a full professor at the Sorbonne University.  
105  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 41.  
106  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 42 .  27 UM 0199.107 This organizational unit continued to handle Pordea. Influencing the 
target person in Paris was consistently coordinated by the European Section with 
Section IV for emigr ation consisting of five units and two groups, which carried out 
intelligence and prevention activities among emigrants of Romanian and other 
nationalities. This organizational unit carried out espionage activities in the Romanian 
expat communities with th e aim of developing a position loyal to Romania among 
Romanians who had fled abroad. It established organizations and associations, issued 
press publications, initiated the establishment of the Romanian religious councils 
surrounding Romanian orthodox chur ches and carried out other activities, through 
which it tried to persuade the Romanian expat communities to represent the interests 
of the Romanian state abroad. It was also the specific mission of this section to get to 
know and thwart the activities of t he organizations, associations and circles of the 
Hungarian emigration against Romania. At the same time, it was also authorized to 
press the Saxons, Swabs, Jews and Greeks forced to emigrate from Romania to make 
gestures loyal to Romania, and also thwart,  if necessary, their hostile actions. The 
military designation of the department was UM 0225.108 
 
The influencing operation ran under the codename “Replica” and was intended 
to publish works in capitalist states that served the purposes of the dictatorship. So 
Pordea was also tasked to write a book that would counteract the irredentist activities 
of the Hungarian emigre groups. An incentive of USD 2,000 was earmarked for 
Pordea for costs writing, distribution (in the USA, Canada and Western Europe) and 
for tr anslation.109 In early March, 1983, the Paris rezidentura noted with satisfaction 
that Pordea, as a member of the board of the Society for the History of Diplomacy, 
had given a lecture entitled Notes on Romanian -Hungarian Relations at the French 
Academy. The  event was attended by representatives of several ancient families of 
the French aristocracy, as well as university professors, colleagues, researchers and 
prominent members of the Romanian emigration (families of the Dukes Kretzulescu 
and Moruz). The part icipants received a duplicate copy of the lecture material. The 
topic mentioned had already been printed in 3000 copies in book form. Romanian 
intelligence played a role in the distribution of the volume, translating it into English, 
German and Italian, an d preparing it for distribution in the USA, Canada, England, 
the FRG, Italy and other Western states as required. To cover the influencing 
activities, in all reviews, and during the presentation and distribution of the lecture, 
Pordea’s integral attachment  to French culture was emphasized.110 Romanian 
intelligence also agreed precisely with Pordea on the content elements of the work, 
the emphases, and the details of the Paris edition.111 The publication of the volume 
took place within the framework of operation  "Replica", and was a response to a mass 
demonstration by several thousand outside the Permanent UN Representation of the 
Romanian People's Republic in New York on 23 January 1983, which called attention 
to the anti -Hungarian policies of the Ceausescu regi me. 
 
                                                      
107  ŢĂRANU , Liviu: Evoluţia Direcţiei de Informaţii Externe şi defectorii dion spionajul 
românesc . (Development of the Foreign Intelligence Directorate and Defectors of the 
Romanian intelligence service). Caiete CNSAS, 2008, Vol. I, No. 1 pp. 135 -161. 
108  Ibid. 
109  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 50.  
110  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588 pp. 51 -52. 
111  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588 pp. 53 -61. 28 Due to the cooperation of the two intelligence sections (European and 
emigration), their two influential agents, Pordea in Paris and Drăgan working in Rome 
were linked. Pordea, who was on the same platform with Drăgan, quickly accepted 
his go -betweens ’ that is the undercover officers’ suggestion that he make translations 
for Drăgan, who was glad in his turn that a knowledgeable compatriot of his, also 
living in exile, would be the translator of his works. It was in this way that the book 
Les Roumains: peuple multimillénaire de L'Europe , translated by Pordea, was 
published at the Edizioni Europa in Rome. Pordea received the fee in the form of an 
advance fee and against a receipt, which he signed in his own hand.112 Afterwards he 
often arranged book present ations, and his lectures were also arranged and financed 
by Drăgan’s Foundation: to the amount of USD  1,000 dollars and F 4,000.113 
 
His relationship with Drăgan deepened, and the former's leading role was clear, 
as Pordea was given precise tasks in addition  to the money from the magnate. Among 
other things, he had to organize a Romanian Friendship Association, a committee or 
a movement in France under the auspices of the Drăgan Foundation. He also 
undertook to involve the Foundation, through his political li nks, in the French and 
emerging European foundations (Fondation pour l'Europe and the Organization pour 
l ' Unité de l'Europe114). He conducted negotiations for this purpose with Simone 
Veill115 and Olivier Stirn.116 He also met Otto von Habsburg on the matter.117 
 
Although the involvement of Drăgan into the said French foundations and 
organizations did not prove to be a success, Pordea’s recognition and reputation 
further widened and his political ambitions also surfaced. In addition to the issues of 
the foundatio ns, the 1984 European Parliament elections were also discussed. The 
Securitate’s intelligence center was aware as early as December 1983 that that Pordea 
left no stone unturned to gain candidacy for the 1984 elections to the European 
Parliament.118 
 
Pordea r epeatedly indicated that he would accompany Drăgan to Bucharest, 
where he would report on the activities of Hungarian emigration to the official 
agencies, and he would also like to suggest possible countermeasures. His handler 
explained to him that this wo uld not be the right decision, as Romanian emigres in 
                                                      
112  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 94.  
113  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 90.  
114  Foundation for Europe and Association for the Unity of Europe.  
115  Simone Veil (1927 -2017) lawyer, French politician. In 1970, Georges Pompidou appointed 
her Secretary General of the French Council of Judges. During Valéry Giscard D'Estaing’s 
presidency, she was Minister of Health in Jacques Chirac’s government. Betwee n 1979 and 
1982, she was the first female President of the European Parliament. From 1993 to 1995, 
she was Minister for Health, Social Affairs and Urban Affairs in the Cabinet of Édouard 
Balladur. She was a member of the French Constitutional Council from 1998 to 2007. In 
2008 she was elected a member of the French Academy.  
116  Olivier Stirn (1936 -) Secretary of State for Jacques Chirac, then five times Members of 
Parliament. In the 60s, politics started from the right, and by the early 80s, he moved to the 
left. 
117  Otto von Habsburg (1912 -2011) was a politician and public writer, the last heir to the 
Habsburg throne. In 1921 he was stripped of his throne. Member of the Pan -European 
Parliament since 1936, Vice -President from 1957 and President from 1973. From  1979 to 
1999, he sat in the CSU Group in the European Parliament.  
118  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 134.  29 Paris would immediately call him a collaborator, with a serious loss to the cause he 
undertook.119 However, they thought that deepening collaboration with Pordea 
(training, development of new operations),  even with him visiting his home country, 
was a feasible idea, therefore they drew up a plan for him to travel to Romania by air, 
using indirect flights, so he can enter Romania without an entry visa. If this form of 
meeting had not been considered appropr iate by the agent, then the Romanian 
intelligence would have proposed a meeting in Austria or Greece. The intelligence 
service notified Pordea of these alternate locations for the meeting via agents.120 The 
contact agent at this time also was agent “Stan”, t he doctor radiologist from Targu 
Mures. He also seemed to be a suitable liaison for intelligence, as he had already been 
twice in the circles of Romanian emigration to France. As a recognized physician, 
members of the Romanian emigration to Paris, includin g Pordea, with whom he was 
in constant correspondence, approached him with confidence, and even signaled the 
strengthening of the relationship that in 1982 Pordea had invited him on a cruise. The 
role of liaison under the pseudonym “Stan” was appreciated w hen Pordea decided to 
run for a seat in the European Parliament, occupying a seat reserved at the initiative 
of Otto von Habsburg for states behind the Iron Curtain since 1982, His idea was not 
entirely unfounded, as he gained the sympathy and support of S imone Veil and Olivier 
Stirn during his decades of emigration lobbying. In this combination operation, “Stan” 
was tasked with “acting as a mailbox” in Târgu Mureş, i.e. sending texts written by 
intelligence officers to Pordea on postcards or meeting the ta rget person as a traveling 
agent in the western states. This is exactly what he did when he sent a postcard to 
Pordea in November 1983, arranging with him the date and place of a December 
meeting in Vienna.121 The “academic lecture” was held on December 13 -14 at Hotel 
Bristol in Vienna. At the six -hour meeting on the afternoon of December 13, Agent 
“Stan” was still present in addition to the professional intelligence. They talked to 
Pordea mainly about his activities in France, his work in Estonia, and about  
counteracting the activities of Hungarian emigration. The next morning, only the 
handler officer and Pordea met, and specific operational details were agreed, agreeing 
that the next meeting would be held in Geneva, and Pordea would approach the scene 
by car, thus avoiding being recorded in the border security computer system. They 
also agreed to assess, until the next meeting, the possibility of setting up an 
international organization in the Transylvanian cause involving well known French 
personalities. T he details of the editing and publishing of a quarterly publication 
aimed at bringing French -Romanian relations closer together and presenting the 
irredentist activities of Hungarian emigration circles were also agreed upon. It was 
also agreed to create th e conditions for the publication in France of a volume made 
under his name on the homeland base, written by a Securitate agent. He was asked to 
have a work plan for the next meeting at which he was to report on conferences, 
lectures and publications due in  1984.  
 
Romanian intelligence made a good choice when fishing the financially 
distressed Pordea out of the Paris émigré community for itself, because the issue was 
also raised by the agent at a meeting in Vienna, asking for the support of the agency. 
                                                      
119  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 112. 112 v. The rezidentura sent a coded report to the center 
on, among other things, Pordea's activities.  
120  ACNSAS Fond SI E 0005588 p. 118 v  
121  The data were obtained by the Securitate of Mureş County from the Bucharest headquarters, 
UM 0199, i.e. the Economic and Political Intelligence Department.  30 Regar dless of his request, Romanian intelligence handed over a $ 1,000 reward and $ 
1,300 travel expenses to Pordea.122 
 
After the operational meeting in Vienna, Romanian political intelligence 
(Department I of the Center – UM 0199) assessed its relationship with  Pordea, stating 
that the attitude of the teacher, who had been working against Hungarian emigration 
for many years, was in line with operational interests, what is more, by supporting his 
activities, his operational situation can be further exploited. He built a significant 
network of French political contacts, which provided an opportunity for Romanian 
intelligence to assert its operational interests, specifically to counteract the activities 
of Hungarian emigration and the Romanian editorial office of Ra dio Free Europe. 
According to the assessment, there was no risk on the counter -intelligence line, but it 
was considered necessary to constantly monitor Pordea's person and surroundings. 
Based on the meeting in Vienna, the intelligence service made its rela tionship with 
Pordea more active.123 
 
After Simone Veil, former European Parliament President, conservative 
politicians Jacques Chirac, and Olivier Stirn, despite their promises, did not put 
Pordea on the European Parliament election list, as a final solutio n, he turned to the 
National Front, led by Jean -Marie Le Pen. This political formation launched him 
under the auspices of the fight against communism. Through his contact officer, 
Pordea indicated to the Romanian ambassador to Paris that if elected, their 
relationship would not change at all, he would continue to support Romanian 
interests.124 
 
On 16 June 1984, the in the fourth place on the list of the National Front Pordea 
was elected Member of the European Parliament. Shortly afterwards, in August in 
Palma  de Mallorca, he agreed with Drăgan on the direction and content of future 
cooperation. Pordea planned to publish his manuscript on Romanian -Hungarian 
historical relations with the funding of "Olteanu".125 Even his access to the European 
Parliament did not c hange his decision, and he even made further promises to Drăgan 
that he would like to keep the volume unchanged and persevered that he would remain 
committed to the national sentiment.126 
 
His contact with the operational unit in the embassy was not broken, in fact, 
resulting from his position new opportunities arose to counteract Hungarian interests. 
Concerned, he indicated that the EP would send a committee to Romania led by 
Ceausescu, and its investigation would pose a serious threat to the regime, and als o 
stressed that the Franco -Hungarian relations were soaring, an eloquent evidence of 
which he saw in the visit in Paris by János Kádár.127 Pordea's fears were not 
unfounded, for William Newton Dunn128 under the colors of the Conservative party 
                                                      
122  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 144 . 
123  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 pp. 144 -145. 
124  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 179.  
125  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 156.  
126  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 162.  
127  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 212.  
128  William Francis Newton Dunn (1941 –) Member of the European Parliament, British 
politician. From 1979 to 1994 he was a Lincolnshire representative as a Conservative. He 
joined the EP in 1999 and joined the Liberal Democrats in 2000.  31 family, tabled a  proposal in the EP to condemn Ceaușescu's ethnic policy. Pordea also 
submitted a draft (counter) proposal in which he denied that the Transylvanian 
minorities' rights would be violated, in fact, he stressed that the authorities in Budapest 
were backing th e actions that give rise to unrest between the two nations.129 
 
Romanian intelligence, acting according to the rules of covertness and due to the 
increased counter -espionage risk, minimized direct contact between Agent Pordea and 
professional intelligence. A ccording to the logic of the contact model established, his 
friends and acquaintances and professional circles regularly sent visitors to Pordea, 
some of them were recruited by the Romanian intelligence agents. Thus, the 
previously mentioned doctor from Tâ rgu Mureş and then a retired philosopher from 
Hunedoara County, who was run under the codename “Willy” by Securitate.130). 
“Willy” was used for correspondence, thus signaling to Pordea that the previously 
arranged third -country meeting in Geneva would be can celed. The election of Pordea 
as an MEP posed new challenges for Romanian intelligence. His alternative contact 
with Agent "Willy" was discussed in detail back in December 1983 at a meeting in 
Vienna. In order to legalize their relationship and operational  correspondence, the 
publication of the manuscripts  Dreptul istoric asupra Transilvaniei (Historical Right 
to Transylvania) and Conceptul unității europene (Concept of European Unity) 
seemed sufficient.  
 
According to the evaluation of the Paris rezidentura , the controversy surrounding 
the election of Pordea, which was sparked by various groups of Romanian emigration, 
was thoroughly exploited by both the French and American (and thus generally 
Western European) professional services. This was confirmed by th e fact that Ion 
Mihai Pacepa who obtained asylum in the USA repeatedly frontally attacked the 
Securitate and the Ceausescu dictatorship, respectively.  
 
While Pordea was only one of the intellectuals living in exile in Paris, it did not 
attract the attentio n of Western political and secret service actors, but after being 
elected an MEP, he not only brought to light Pacepa’s memories, but was also of 
intense interest to members of Romanian emigration to Paris. Pacepa reported in detail 
on his previous profess ional experience and also instilled information about Pordea 
through French papers. The L'Express in the summer of 1984 and Le Matin ,131 
unveiled Pordea’s relationship with the Securitate. In the February 2, 1985 issue of Le 
Matin , Agathe Logeart claimed tha t Pordea was an agent for Romanian professional 
services, and that Pacepa, a former second in command in Romanian intelligence, had 
recruited Pordea before he escaped. However, an analysis of the Romanian 
rezidentura in Paris revealed that Pacepa may have known at most about Pordea, but 
could not know the details of operations. The officer analyzing the fall of Pordea 
misinterpreted the operational radius of the activities of the Hungarian specialist 
services, combining and reconciling the interests of cont emporary Hungarian 
                                                      
129  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 235 . 
130  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 pp. 223 -223. An agent under the codename “Willy” received 
15,000 lei and $ 1,0 00 for a “visit” to Paris in 1984 to cover travel expenses and other 
expenses. In the 1980s, the monthly wages of a skilled worker were 2,500 lei. An agent 
with the codename “Willy” can be identified on page 296 of Fond SIE 0005588. Based on 
the data found  here, “Willy”’s real name is Isac Victor.  
131  The Le Matin published in its February 2, 1985 issue an interview by Agathe Logeart with 
Ion Mihai Pacepa under the title “Surprise No. 4 from Le Pen’s list”.  32 intelligence and Hungarian emigration to France, saying they have a common interest 
in Transylvania in protecting the rights of the Hungarian minority in Romania. What 
Pordea did, on the other hand, lawfully aroused the interest of that specialist service. 
However, this conclusion can be attributed to Securitate's systemic color blindness, 
thus attributing to Hungarian intelligence an activity that has not been proven. The 
analyst suggested that it should be avoided that U.S. or French sp ecialist services 
could pass on evidence to the Western press to support the daily relationship between 
Pordea and Securitate. Meanwhile, information from certain groups of Romanian 
emigrants in Paris appeared in the French and British press,132 that Pordea was an 
agent of the Securitate. Pordea denied the news published in the Le Matin, a daily 
close to the in French Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste) that the Securitate had an agent, 
and as the National Front and Le Pen person also was attacked,  sued the newspaper. 
Finally, the Le Matin lost the lawsuit in February 1985, on the basis of a court 
decision; there was no evidence of cooperation with the Securitate, so it cannot be 
said that Pordea was an agent.  
 
After that, contact with Gustav Pordea  could not take place on the territory of a 
NATO state, so the Romanian intelligence suggested that the contact should be 
maintained through correspondence with a family member, i.e. his sister, who lives in 
Spain. Pordea's support has always been resolved  through the Drăgan Foundation. 
Pordea was very pedantic, so she asked for and gave written proof of everything. 
However, the analyst took note with great satisfaction that during his active duty 
career Pordea did not receive "domestic matter" (orders) dir ectly through the embassy 
or the local operational group and had never visited the consular section, either.133 
 
In February 1985, the Paris Court of Justice, pursuant to a fresh denunciation 
was hearing Pordea’s espionage case. The Securitate analyst came t o the conclusion 
that inflating this case was timed to cover up the exposure of a French spy134 and used 
for domestic political purposes, thereby discrediting Jean Marie Le Pen a nd 
weakening the National Front  with respect to Newton Dunn's proposal. They 
                                                      
132  ZAMFIRESCU , Dinu: S i noi am condamnat commununul  din exulul parizian.  (We also 
condemned Romanian Communism from exile in Paris). Editura Paideia, București, 2008. 
Dinu Zamfirescu, who also worked for the BBC, belonged to a group organized around 
Radu Câmpeanu, a member of the historic Liberal Party. In  his book, he discussed the case 
of Gustav Pordea in a separate chapter. By 1985, the said emigration group had announced 
the cleansing of Romanian emigration from Securitate agents. However, this was more of 
a political gesture and was presumably capable of legalizing information from the French 
specialist services. Several agents and Romanian undercover officers were unveiled in the 
emigration press at that time. The officers switched in most cases, so their role was different 
from that of the agents they  ditched.  
133  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588 pp. 231 -234. 
134  On January 21, 1985, espionage involving at least twenty influential people (businessmen, 
officials) was uncovered in the vicinity of Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. Lieutenant 
Colonel Alain Bolley, Deputy Military Attaché of France, was immediately re patriated. In 
his statements, Rajiv Gandhi sought to downplay the importance of espionage and stressed 
that mostly industrial secrets were violated that did not undermine India’s military 
capabilities. The matter was smoothed, and the French -Indian relatio ns not suffered the 
consequences; 
https://www.larousse.fr/archives/journaux_annee/1986/174/1985_l_annee_des_espions  
(downloaded 24 November 2020)  33 approached Axel Michael Stahlschmidt,135 a Brussels official, who was asked about 
the implications of that submission. According to the information, Dunn's proposal 
proceeded properly through the EP bureaucracy, which ended with the chairman of 
the Subcommittee  on Human Rights, who had just drafted the 1984 human rights 
report. The only question was whether the document will be included enshrined in the 
annual report. Stahlschmidt's suggestions for intelligence through Aurel Duma136 
were placed on the table of the  Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and the liaison 
of the secret services.137 The proposal was an important element for the Romanian 
political leadership for President Mitterrand to visit Bucharest, but the Pordea and 
many other cases turned France from  a friend foe.138 The Romanian Intelligence 
highly developed broad and targeted counter -measures to counter the situation. 
Among other things, letters were sent on behalf of former political prisoners to their 
fellows in French emigration, stressing that the  Securitate’s second man, Pacepa, is 
helping to uncover the activities of Romanian authorities. It was part of the Romanian 
Intelligence deceptive operation of the article, which was placed in a Parisian 
newspaper, the Revue du Liban , in which the Le Matin  newspaper liability was raised 
in connection with the Pordea -case, and also blamed the French Socialists responsible 
for the deterioration of the relationship between the two countries. Romanian 
intelligence gradually took advantage of the information tha t the Hungarian embassy 
had given the Socialist Party 8 million francs at the beginning of the presidential 
election. A separate plan was drawn up to provide the information, properly packaged, 
to the opposition in the election campaign beginning in March 1985. The intention 
                                                      
135  Axel Michael Stahlschmidt has been an official in the European Parliament since 1964. In 
1985, he was Head of Unit in the Directorate -General for Committees and Delegations. 
From 1987, in addition to German, he also acquired Luxembourg citizenship.  
136  Aurel Dima (1919 -1993) Ambassador to Beijing 1966 -1972. From 1972 to 1979 he was 
head of the RAC Central Commit tee. From 1979 to 1989 he was Secretary of State in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  
137  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 236.  
138  Politically and economically, Romania has traditionally relied on France. He first helped in 
the unification of the two Romanian prin cipalities in 1859, then in the peace around Paris, 
and finally in the 1960s and 1970s by raising his trade relations with Romania to a high 
level (Dacia, helicopter manufacturing, etc.) and visiting French presidents (Giscard d ' 
Estaing). Ceaușescu's vis it to Mitterrand should have been like a mouthful of Tanase in 
1982 ended in victory for the French counterintelligence (DST), with Romanian 
intelligence officer Matei Pavel Haiducu switching to them, and the operation ended 
unsuccessfully. There were even  more sensitive topics that Mitterrand was aware of. 
Recruitment of French Minister of Defense Charles Hernu in the 1960s or in Bucharest was 
the fatal truck accident of Bernard -Marie du Cheyron de Beaumont d'Abzac, the head of 
the DST's eastern areas, jus t leaving the airport. https//www.lexpress.fr 
/actualite/politique/l -express -du-3-novembre -1969 -espionnage -l-engrenage -
roumain_2099179.html (downloaded 24 November 2020). Given all this, it is no wonder 
that the French leadership prevented Western leaders from visiting Romania in the 1980s. 
Among others, the King of Spain, the Belgian Foreign Minister, etc. (for details see 
https://jurnalul.ro/special -jurnalul/Ștefan -andrei -icirc-n-anii-80-franza -a-fost-cel-mai-
mare -dusman -al-lui-Ceaușescu -115049.html  (down loaded 24 November 2020 ) bread, but 
by the early 1980s, Romanian secret service operations had an impact. Caraman's 
operations against NATO, which led the Paris residency in the 1960s, had a serious impact 
on the French position in NATO, as the French lost  50% of their positions after Caraman's 
downfall. The assassination attempt on Paul Goma and Virgil  34 was to publish articles in the international press through agents, emphasizing 
Romania's World War II liberation activities and Hungary's fascist satellite role.139 
 
Apparently, neither the Romanian political leadership nor the secret ser vice 
wanted to take into account the French political realities. Political and intelligence 
responses to the situation continued to be given according to the enemy image of self -
determination. The cover of Romanian intelligence was the foreign trade compan y 
Dacomex, established in Paris on Drăgan's initiative. As the co -director of the 
company in 1976 it was delegated from Romania under the codename of "Raul" to act 
as liaison to the intelligence officers of the rezidentura in Paris. Pordea's scientific 
publications were also funded through Agent “Raul”. "Raul" was called home from 
time to time for reporting and training. Their talks with Pordea were dropped either in 
Dacomex offices or in restaurants in the French capital, depending on what Pordea’s 
operati onal situation allowed. Pordea was aware that not only the French political 
forces were behind the proceedings against him, and that the statements condemning 
the communist camp in his public appearances were merely empty twists, he testified 
to ‘Raul’: “… I will continue to do what I have to do, and nobody should be bothered 
if I deal indirectly, for the sake of credibility, with Eastern regimes. I never referred 
to the domestic regime.”140 During the press lawsuit, fearing his phone was bugged, 
he visited Raul without advance notice by phone, he delivered the EP -materials and 
gave a sitrep.  
 
Agent “Willy” was also regularly sent out to do scientific work with Pordea and 
forwarded Pordea’s w ishes and requests to the center.141 This was how Pordea sent a 
message to the center saying he was concerned, seeing intense and effective action by 
the Hungarian irredentist emigration, and suggested that these be counteracted. He 
indicated that he would d o his utmost to keep the Hungarian case under control in the 
EP. He also suggested that an institute for European affairs be set up, which, in liaison 
with the European Parliament, would provide him with an appropriate opportunity to 
liaise actively.142 The intelligence, political, and emigration departments developed 
common combinations to assess Pordea's situation. In order to launch future 
intelligence operations, two members of the Association of International Law and 
International Relations (Asociația de  Drept Internațional și Relații Internaționale),143 
                                                      
139  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 pp. 251 -255. 
140  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 263.  
141  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 262.  
142  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588 pp. 269 -270. 
143  The Association for International Law and International Relations (ADIRI) was established 
in 1965 and is based in Bucharest. It has two publications: Revista Română de Drept 
Internaţional and Revue roumaine d'etudes internationales.  The dominant figure  was 
Adrian Năstase, a former Social Democratic prime minister.  35 Adrian Năstase144 and Valentin Lipatti145 were proposed to be sent to provide cover 
stories for the operation asserting Romanian interests in the “retro” European 
Parliament, and for future operations. Furtherm ore, to build personal and institutional 
relationships, establishing a research group on “Unity of Europe”, which would 
involve agents "Marinescu", "Maxim", "Silviu," and "Willy. The focus of this activity 
has been on the Pan -European Movement, the Europea n Parliament, the Council of 
Europe and the European Solidarity Corps, of course in line with the operational 
position of MEP Pordea.146 
 
Although the same court in Paris condemned the Le Matin  again on 22 February 
1985, in the Pordea libel lawsuit, however,  the case was far from coming to a 
standstill. In its December 29, 1985 issue, The Sunday Times in London reported in 
great detail on the meeting between Gustav Pordea and Romanian intelligence in 
Vienna on December 13 -14, 1983.147 The editorial office of th e Sunday Times seemed 
to be better informed, as details of the Vienna meeting were reported that only those 
who attended the meeting could know. About a year before the 1984 European 
elections, after his 36 -year stay in Paris, Pordea applied for and obtain ed French 
citizenship. He traveled to Vienna in December 1983 and stayed in room 378 of the 
five-star Hotel Bristol; the same day, Costel Mitran, a senior member of the Romanian 
intelligence organization, also arrived in Vienna from Bucharest.148 Both of the m 
stayed in the Austrian capital December 13 -14, 1983, and met in the Hotel Bristol. 
Here, Mitran commissioned Pordea to enter the European Parliament on the list of a 
French political party. According to the article, Pordea replied that there is only one 
way to do this: buy yourself a seat as a candidate. Mitran said that 500 000 dollars 
were available for this purpose.149 This further warming of vote buying had a 
devastating effect on Romanian Intelligence Unit 4, as the details proved that someone 
was leak ing along this line. Two days after the article appeared the inspection 
                                                      
144  Adrian Năstase (1950 –) lawyer, sociologist. In 1978, he received his doctorate in 
international law. From 1973 to 1990 he was a research fellow at the Legal Research 
Institute of the Romani an Academy, vice -president of ADIRI from 1977, member of the 
French International Law Society from 1984, and research director of the International 
Institute of Human Rights in Strasbourg. He is first the National Rescue Front (FSN), then 
the Romanian Soci al Democracy Party (PDSR), the Social Democratic Party (PSD) leader 
in international relations, and the deputy leader of the party, which has been transformed 
several times. From 2000 to 2008, he was head of the PSD. From 1990 to 1992 he was 
Minister of Fo reign Affairs, from 2001 to 2004 he was Prime Minister.  
145  Valentin Lipatti (1923 –1999) graduated from the University of Bucharest and then taught 
at the Department of Latin. He is an expert in the history of French literature. From 1964 
to 1984 he worked for the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and from 1965 to 1971 
he represented Romania at UNESCO. From 1972 to 1977, he was the head of the Romanian 
delegation to the Helsinki and Geneva Security Conferences.  
146  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588 pp. 269 -270. 
147  SWAIN , Jon: Euro -MP is a communist agent; Sunday Times,  29 December, 1985. http: 
//jonswain.org/articles/articles/articles/communistmep.html  (downloaded 13 March 2021)  
148  Costel Mitran retired in 2000 as an officer of the SIE, which was re -established in 1990, 
after completing a successful career in Vienna. On his retirement, President  Emil 
Constantinescu awarded him the rank of Brigadier General. As a retired general, he 
continued his activity by touring in the country, delivering lectures on intelligence, and he 
did this as third chairman of the Retired and Reserve Officers Associatio n of Professional 
Intelligence (ACMRRSIE).  
149  SWAIN  op.cit.  36 department conducted a summary analysis, and contrary to what was published in the 
Sunday Times , the topic of access to the European Parliament was raised by Pordea 
himself by stating he had a secure place on Simone Veil’s list. The motion was made 
in the presence of Agent “Stan”. According to the report it was Pordea who he 
claimed: "One single condition must be met to make sure he gets onto the list, namely 
if they give him 500 000 do llars of the Romanian services."150 The summary analysis 
emphasizes that reports on the meeting that took place in December 1983 did not 
indicate that the proposal of financial support for Pordea would be submitted to or 
approved by the Romanian intelligence  service. During the coordination between 
Mitran and Pordea neither a promise was made of a future large sum of money in the 
form of support, nor Le Pen’s name was mentioned. By contrast, at a meeting in 
Vienna, Pordea, in the presence of the Romanian amba ssador, repeatedly professed 
belief in the need to respond to the irredentist attacks. The summary analysis revealed 
signs of betrayal in Pordea coming to the meeting with his son, saying he was very 
afraid of the meeting. In exchange for a receipt, the Ro manian party gave Pordea $ 
2,300 in travel expenses and paid for his accommodation. According to the evaluation 
officer, Pordea’s admission to giving half a million USD to Le Pen was to be expected, 
because this might have been the objective of the planner s of the combination. This is 
also foreshadowed, the Westerners trumped up Pacepa again: make further revealing 
confessions, as well as Swiss financial companies will be compromised by alleging 
they handles sums of money coming from Romania.151 
 
Gustav Porde a’s case would have been just another chapter in the Franco -
Romanian spy stories had the man in question not submitted to the European 
Parliament draft resolution No. 2 -545/84 on behalf of European Right, in response to 
Dunn’s draft resolution. And he did it in the conviction that “the demands of the 
minorities are unfounded, given the fact that as minorities they were granted a 
situation which is liberal, what is more, exceptional in nature.”  He believed that he 
had "a duty to condemn the demanding and una uthorized behavior of Hungarians in 
Romania as a probable source of terrorist acts." In his submission, he asked the 
relevant committee to make public the results of its investigation and to call on the 
Government of the Hungarian People's Republic to stop  all support for the illegitimate 
activities of the Hungarian minority in Romania.152 The petition was not voted on by 
Parliament, but Romanian intelligence decided in September 1987 to suspend its 
cooperation with Agent Pordea on the basis of a number of in dications and 
evidence,153 who, despite what had happened, held his seat in the European 
Parliament, where he represented France under the colors of the National Front until 
24 July 1989.  
 
 
North and South American outlook  
 
In addition to the Italian and Fre nch lines discussed so far, anti -Hungarian 
emigration activities were carried out with similar intensity through the Saxon and 
Swabian, Jewish and Romanian emigration groups in Canada, the United States and 
                                                      
150  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 282.  
151  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 282 -282v.  
152  The Pordea case. Literary Newspaper,  1986/1. p. 4.  
153  ACNSAS Fond SIE 0005588 p. 336.  37 South America. We can only report these influenti al operations in a panoramic way, 
mainly due to the unexplored sources.  
 
To counteract the South and the North American Hungarian emigrant activities, 
the institutions of the emigrant/forced emigrant Saxon minority were used. The 
agency influence of promi nent and at the same time influential personalities of the 
Saxon/Swabian emigration community was aimed at conveying a favorable image of 
the Romanian dictatorship in the United States and Canada due to their German 
descent. According to the schedule of th e Romanian intelligence operation, various 
American Saxon emigration organizations, including the Alianța Sașilor 
Transilvăneni (Transylvanian Saxon Association), were forced to expose the activities 
of the Hungarian irredentists.154 The fight against Hungar ian emigration was also a 
constant task in the direction of German emigration organizations.155 In response to 
this operational request, pre -written texts were sent from the Romanian Intelligence 
Center and published in Ecouri Românești, (Romanian Echoes).156 Although the 
rezidentura built up in in Canada was insignificant in terms of manpower and quality, 
the center's instruction to take action against Hungarian emigration had to be carried 
out. Thus, among the Germans who left Romania, they had to find colla borators and 
persuade them to attack Hungarian emigration according to Bucharest's ideas, proving 
that the Germans and Romanians formed a unity against the Hungarian irredentism. 
The efficiency of agents operating in Saxon and Swabian exile organizations m ust 
have been minimal because the officers themselves reported that they had potent 
opportunities rise and would work more efficiently in the future.157 
 
Romanian intelligence also paid attention to the activities of Hungarian 
emigration organizations on the  South American continent. Thus, it also rolled up the 
                                                      
154  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 31125 p. 2. 
155  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 31125 pp. 13 -14. 
156  ACNSAS fond SIE 31125 p. 13. The Ecouri romanesti,  Toronto Romanian appearing 
between 1974 and 1984 emigration newspaper.  
157  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 31125 p. 26.  38 relations and activities of the leader of the Transylvanian World Federation. They 
were aware that in Transylvania Károly Király,158 Edgár Balogh,159  
 
Ákos Egyed160 and other prominent intellectuals are not  only visited on behalf of the 
world organization, but also carry out intensive supportive and organizing work to 
build a network of contacts around these persons for their protection in order to protect 
them. The relationship between the Transylvanian Wor ld Federation and the 
Hungarian Human Rights Foundation (HHRF), led by László Hámos, was also 
                                                      
158  Károly Király (1930 –) economist, Hungarian po litician from Romania. Between 1950  and 1965  he 
was an active member of the Romanian Communist Party , then the first secretary of the CYO 
Committee of the Hungarian Autonomous Province , hence the first secretary of the Gheorgheni 
District Party Committee. From 1966  to 1968 he was a member of the Central Committee of the 
RAC. From 1968 to 1972 , he was the first secretary of the Covasna County Party Committee  and 
an alternate member of the Political Executive Committee of the RCP. He became vice – president 
in 1968 to the Council of Hungarian Nationality Workers to be  established on November 15. In 
1972, he resigned in protest of official Romanian policy. He was “exiled” by the authorities, 
appointed the general manager of the Karánsebes Timber Production and Wood Processing Plant, 
inhabited by Romanians, in Caraș -Severin County, and later sent back to  Târgu Mureş. In 1978  , he 
protested in a letter against the Romanian state measures against the Hungarians in Transylvania. 
He was exiled  to Caransebes  again. By sending his letters abroad, he informed the international 
public about Ceaușescu's  legal crackdowns. After the 1989 revolution, he was elected vice -
president of the Council  of the Romanian  National Salvation Front . He attended the Democratic 
Union of Hungarians in Romania  in forming, but was not a member of the DUHR, 1992-1993  in 
the alliance of three's  organization was president. In 1990. He played a significant role in the events 
of 17 -19 March in Târgu Mureş  as Vice -President of the National Salvation Front. Specifically, it 
put pressure on the then leaders of the Mureş County Police and  Army to intervene and stop the 
atrocities, otherwise it would take them to court -martial. Late May in 1990, he became a member 
of the Rom anian Senate (the other house of the bicameral Romanian parliament next to the House 
of Representatives). He did not fulfill his mandate and resigned on 12 December 1991.  
159  Edgár Balogh (1906 –1996) was a Hungarian journalist, editor -in-chief and university professor in 
Romania . As a native of the Highlands, he began his journalistic work at the Magyar Hírlap in 
Prague in 1926. He was the organizer of the left -wing Sarló (Sickle) movement of Hungarian y outh 
in Czechoslovakia. He joined the Communist  movement in 1931, which is why he was expelled 
from Czechoslovakia in 1935 by the C zechoslovak authorities. He settled in Brasov and became an 
internal collaborator of O ur Time  and an article writer for the Brasov Newspapers . He is the initiator 
of the 1937 meeting in Vásárhely. After the second decision in Vienna, he was the e ditor of Kelet 
Népe in  Cluj-Napoca (1941) and an employee of the Hungarian Nation in  Budapest , and from 
1942 in the Kis Újság in  Budapest. After the Soviet invasion, in 1944 . On the  initiative of Cluj -
Napoca, the daily Naples  was published on October 18,  1948, of which he was the editor -in-chief 
until 1948. He was the vice-president of the Hungarian People's Association  (MNSZ)  (until 1946) 
and, as the head of the cultural department, took part in the organization of the new cultural 
institutions of the Hungarians in Romania. From 1948 he was a university professor and then rector 
of Bolyai University . In the autumn of 1949, along with several other leaders of the MNSZ, he was 
imprisoned for violating socialist rule of law, and was only rehabilitated in 1956. From 1957 to 
1971 he was the deputy editor -in-chief of OurTime , and the editor -in-chief of the Hungarian literary 
lexicon in Romania , which appeared from 1981.  
160  Ákos Egyed (1929 –) is a Hungarian historian from Transylvania. He completed his secondary 
schools in Sepsiszentgyörgy , and from 1948 he became a student at Bolyai University . From 1951 
to 1953 he was an intern there, after which he became a researcher at the Institute of History in Cluj -
Napoca. Between 1990 and 1994 he lectured at the Lajos Kossuth University in  Debrecen, and 
between 1995 and 1997 as a visiting lecturer at Eötvös Loránd University . He has been an external 
member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences  since 1990.  39 mapped. Thus, they were also aware that István Zolcsák161 and László Hámos162 there 
is no consensus on several issues.163 They also knew that László Hámos and Bulcsú 
Veress164 tried to persuade Zolcsák to give up his hasty, thoughtless and noisy 
activities affecting the Transylvanian intellectuals. Let the HHRF be more involved 
in these matters, as they have more experience and are more organized than the World 
Federation,  and prefer to support them financially. Romanian intelligence built on the 
tense disagreement between Zolcsák, Hámos and Veress and began discrediting and 
neutralizing operations.  
 
In 1980, Romanian intelligence firmly thought that István Zolcsák was acting on 
the initiative and with the support of the Budapest professional services. According to 
the Romanian opposition in exile, Budapest initiated all this to awaken the "dying 
Magyar awareness", to win over the second generation of the exiles, and the  central 
role in the management of emigration. Through thoroughly exploring and controlling 
his activities in the interests of the Hungarians of Transylvania,165 Zolcsák’s (“Pedro 
was his target person codename) future activities could be prevented – the Rom anian 
state security services set the objective.  
 
The fear of the Romanian services that the Hungarian secret service was behind 
Zolcsák is not completely unfounded, but it cannot be said that the Hungarian 
intelligence in the early eighties had a definite  blow to Hungarian emigration and 
wanted to wage war against the Ceaușescu dictatorship. Even if he was not directly 
contacted by the Hungarian secret services, he was indirectly used as a reference point, 
i.e. the services were curious about who was behin d the money in emigration, which 
group wanted what, which émigré organization intended to submit to American 
decision -makers. The Hungarian professional service was extremely cautious, as it 
                                                      
161  István Zolcsák (1921 -2006) founded the Transylvanian World Federation in São Paulo in 1974, of 
which he became president. He asked Wass Albert, who lived in Florida, to co -chair, so that North 
American Hungarians / Szeklers were also represented in the assoc iation.  
162  In 1976, the Committee for Human Rights in Romania was established under the leadership of 
László Hámos, which later took over the protection of the interests of Hungarians in the Highlands, 
which is why it changed its name in 1983 and continued  its lobbying activities as the Hungarian 
Human Rights Foundation in American political circles.  
163  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 044009 pp. 4 -5. 
164  Bulcsú Veress (1941 -2012) Hungarian -American lawyer, political scientist. From 1981 to 1991, he 
was a Fellow of the  U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs and an expert on defense and 
national security. After the 1956 revolution, as a high school student, he was a member of an anti -
communist student organization. He was arrested in 1958 and sentenced to 8 months in p rison. He 
holds a law degree from Eötvös Loránd University. He studied comparative and postgraduate 
studies in international law at ELTE at the University of Strasbourg. After completing his studies, 
he emigrated to the United States in 1971. In the same y ear he was admitted to Columbia University 
in New York, where in 1976 (as a third degree) he obtained a doctorate in political science and 
international relations. From 1981 to 1991, he was a Fellow of the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Foreign Affairs and an ex pert on defense and national security. Representing the New York -based 
Romanian Human Rights Commission (CHRR) (later the Hungarian Human Rights Foundation – 
HHRF), he lobbied for the Hungarian minority in Romania in the United States Congress in 
Washingto n. 
165  ACNSAS Foundation SIE 044009 p. 14. 40 did not want to establish direct agency relations with such expos ed persons as István 
Zolcsák, who was also "processed" by the Romanians.166 
 
The wealthy Zolcsák was the founder and maintainer of several organizations 
(Movimento Pro Transylvania, Transylvanian World Federation), that had 
representatives in Argentina, Canada and Austria. His organizing power and lobbying 
may have disrupted Romani an state security, as can be inferred from the fact that 
Zolcsák was threatened with execution by the Romanian consul in Brazil. A report on 
this threat dated March 22, 1982, landed on the table of Iulian Vlad, the last 
commander of the Securitate. The thr eat was confirmed by András Fodor, who 
belonged to the inner circles of Zolcsák. The interesting thing about the case is that in 
1946 Fodor left Hungary with an emigrant passport as a representative of Tungsram. 
He became a columnist for the Brasil Herald and worked for the Hungarian services 
as a social contact. In the same intelligence summary analysis referred to above, a 
detailed description is given to the fact that Zolcsák was constantly protected by a 
personal bodyguard in the factory owned by him. A n armed guard unit was established 
to provide personal protection for him, access to the referred institution was multi -
tiered, and we also learn from the analysis that the residential are he lived in, Sao 
Paulo's most exclusive district, was under permane nt police protection.167 
 
 
Closing remarks  
 
The Romanian secret services used far -right press products against the émigré 
centers and communities to carry out their disinformation operations. Influence was 
usually achieved through émigré foundations and associations. This was not too 
difficult to achieve, as some of the emigrants who left Romania after 1945 were 
members of the Legionary movement, or at least sympathized with it. This part of the 
Romanian emigration also maintained good relations with the far-right organizations 
of the Western world. Like Codreanu’s Iron Guard, Ceaușescu’s national communism 
was anti -minority. At this point, the far right of emigration and the enemy image of 
Romanian communism became one, making it easier to understand why the Romanian 
secret services were able to effectively network and influence these circles. This 
mechanism was recognized by Thierry Wolte as early as in 1986; he presented the 
KGB activities analogy drawn between the Securitate and the Soviet big brother 
intelligence, and came to the conclusion that there was a difference in scale and size 
only between the two state security organizations, not in the nature and direction of 
their operations.168 Augustin Gustav Pordea and Iosif Constantin Drăgan were 
involved in Romanian intelligence against the minority protection activities of 
Hungarian emigration in the Western world. Through presenting the cases we were 
able to demonstrate what Thierry Wolte, based on his experiences in France, wrote, 
namely that "it seems that one single person plays a part in these matters, Iosif 
Constantin Dragan", since far right wing Romanian émigré papers conveyed 
discrediting propaganda according to the taste of Bucharest against Paul Goma, Virgil 
Tanas and Monica Lovinescu forced int o exile. Wolton’s thoughts put to paper in 
                                                      
166  OSZK, 1956 Institute and Oral History Archive: “I was a double agent and I am proud of it”. 
Csaba Laszlo Seres Damenija's interview. 
www.rev.hu/ords//f?p7=600:2:31325026560896::NO:2:P2_PAGE_ID: 420569 . 
167  ACNSAS  Foundation SIE 044009 pp. 24 -25. 
168  WOLTON  op. cit., p. 294.  41 1986 that Gustav Pordea’s case, who made it to the EP from Jean -Marie Le Pen’s list, 
is much more complex than Dragan’s ”and is linked to the magnate by a thousand 
threads.169 
 
Hopefully, the processed cases will pr ovide an insight into the political and 
economic operations of Romanian intelligence, and more specifically on the modus 
operandi of Hungarian emigration. It is important to mention that the cases uncovered 
give only a partial picture of the activities of Romanian intelligence at the time, so we 
could not undertake to assess the full volume and depth of the operations. This will 
require further detailed research.  
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 ACNSAS Foundation SIE 00028  
 ACNSAS Foundation SIE 0005588  
 ACNSAS Foundation SIE 044009  
 ACNSAS Foundation SIE 31125  
 ALDEA , Patricia González: Helsinki 1975. Începutul sfârșitului. Degradation 
regimens in Romania and singularity in the Bloc de Est (1975 –1990) . (Helsinki 
1975. The Beginning of the End. The Decline  and Uniqueness of the System in 
the Eastern Bloc [1975 –1990]). Editura Curtea Veche, Bucharest, 2008.  
 BANU, Florian – BARBULESCU , Theodor – DUICA , Camelia Ivan – ȚĂRANU , 
Liviu: Archives Securității. (Archives of the Securitate) Volume 1. Editura Pro -
Histor ia, București, 2002;  
 BANU, Florian – ȚĂRANU , Liviu: Securitatea 1948 -1989 . Monografie vol I. (The 
Securitate 1948 -1989, Monograph, Vol. I.); Editura Cetatea de Scaun, 
Târgoviște, 2016;  
 BANU, Florian: Mihai Caraman, and spion român în războiul rece. (Mihai 
Caraman, a Romanian spy in the Cold War). Editura Corint, Bucharest, 2019. 
pp. 95 -97. Caraman did not name the person who the story was about and the 
agent died in a car accident shortly aft er arriving in the USA.  
 DRĂGAN , Iosif Constantin: Dal paese di Dracula,  Nagard, Milan, 1982. p. 351.  
 FUNDERBURK , David B.: Un-American Ambassador to the Department of the 
Communist Republic of Romania 1981 –1985.  Editura Dacon, Constanţa, 1994. 
pp. 59 -75. F underburk, the US ambassador to Bucharest, pulls the cover step by 
step away from Ceaușescu’s mythology of independence.  
                                                      
169  WOLTON  op. cit., pp. 295 -299. 42  GOERGESCU  Vlad: History and Politics.  Cazul comuniștilor români . 1944 –1977. 
(History and Politics. Cases of Romanian Communists. 1944 –1977.) Editura 
Humanitas, București, 1991. pp. 6 -66. 
 HARASZTI , Endre: The Ethnic History of Transylvania, published by Danubian 
Press (approved by Danubian Research and Information Center) Toronto, 
Sovereigne Press, 1971.  
 https://www.larousse.fr/archives/journaux_annee/1986/174/1985_l_annee_des
_espions  (downloaded 24 November 2020)  
 NEAGOIE , Elis – PLEȘA , Liviu: Arhivele Securității  (Archives of the Securitate). 
Volume 2. Editura Nemira, Bucharest, 2004; DOBRE , Florica – BANU, Florian – 
DUICĂ , Camelia – MOLDOVAN Silviu B. – ȚĂRANU  Liviu: Trupele de Securitate 
(1949 –1989).  (Securitate Troops [1949 -1989]). Editura Nemira, Bucharest, 
2004;  
 NEMETZI , Cornel: Ultimul curier ilegal. Memoriile unui spion român.  (The last 
illegal cou rier. Memoirs of a Romanian spy). Editura Marist, Baia Mare, 2013. 
p. 484.  
 OCKRENT , Christine – DE MARENCHES , Alexandre: Consilier de taină al Puterii  
(Secret Adviser to the Powers That Be); Humanitas, București, 1992. p. 114.  
 ODOBLEJA , Ștefan: The Birth of  Generalized Cybernetics on Romanian Soil. 
Nagard, Milan, 1995; History of Românilor.  (History of the Romanians). Europa 
Nova, Bucharest, 1994.  
 OPREA , Marius: Banalitatea răului. O historie a Securităţii în documente (1949 -
1989).  (The Banality of Evil.  The History of the Securitate in Sources [1948 -
1949]). Polirom, București, 2002; SRI: Cartea Albă a Securităţii.  (White Paper 
of the Securitate) 1 -6. bind. SRI, Bucharest, 1994 -97.  
 PELIN, Mihai: Culisele spionajului românesc, DIE 1955 –1980.  (Scenes of 
Rom anian Intelligence, DIE 1955 –1980). Editura Evenimentul Românesc, 
București, 1997.  
 SWAIN , Jon: Euro -MP is a communist agent; Sunday Times,  29 December, 1985. 
http: //jonswain.org/articles/articles/articles/communistmep.html  (downloaded 
13 March 2021)  
 ŢĂRANU , Liviu: Evoluţia Direcţiei de Informaţii Externe şi defectorii dion 
spionajul românesc . (Development of th e Foreign Intelligence Directorate and 
Defectors of the Romanian intelligence service). Caiete CNSAS, 2008, Vol. I, 
No. 1 pp. 135 -161. 
 TELKES , Simon: How to Become a Hungarian: The Artificial Reproduction of a 
People, Rome: Edizioni Europa, 1977.  
 TELKES , Simon: Les faux hongrois: la multuplication artificielle d’un peuple, 
Milan, Nagard, 1977.  
 The data were obtained by the Securitate of Mureş County from the Bucharest 
headquarters, UM 0199, i.e. the Economic and Political Intelligence Department.  43  TRONCOTĂ  Cristian: Duplicitarii. The history of the intelligence and security 
services of Romania 1965 -1989.  (The two -faced. The history of the security and 
secret services of the Romanian communist system). Editura Elion, Bucharest, 
2003;  
 TRONCOTĂ , Cristian: History of the state security services of Romania.  (History 
of the Romanian State Security Services). Ion Cristoiu, Bucharest, 1999;  
 WILLIAMS , Kieran – DELETANT , Dennis: Security Intelligence Services In New 
Democracies: The Czech Republic, Slovakia and R omania.  Palgrave, London – 
New York, 2001;  
 WOLTON , Thierry: K .G .B. -ul in Franta  (The KGB in France). Humanitas, 
București, 1992. p. 238.  
 ZAMFIRESCU , Dinu: S i noi am condamnat commununul din exulul parizian.  (We 
also condemned Romanian Communism from exi le in Paris). Editura Paideia, 
București, 2008.  
 
 
 
 
 44 ALBERT TORMA  MD 
BIOLOGY OF AGRESSION  IN WOMEN   
 
 
Abstract  
 
It is a well -known fact that the proportion of women in crime is lower than that 
of men, but this seems to be changing. On the one hand, the number of crimes 
perpetrated by women is on the rise, on the other hand, violence as a characteristic is 
increasing ly apparent in the behavior of female perpetrators. As research on women 
in crime has heretofore received less attention in literature, and forms of violence have 
been showing signs of change, more intensive research into the perpetration of violent 
crime by women and focusing on features particular to women is necessary. Gender 
distinction is related to both biological and social differences in the behavioral level 
of aggression. Exploring gender specifics fills a long -standing gap in the research of 
the n eurobiological background of aggression in the neurological, hormonal, and 
genetic fields.  
 
Keywords : aggression in women, criminality, neurobiology  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
The background to violence is evolutionary. Competitive behavior within 
species evolved as a matter of course due to the lack of unlimited availability of 
resources, forcing conspecifics to join forces and cooperate, since competition 
generated aggression,  whose energy requirements and dangers (e.g. injuries, inability 
to fight) could significantly reduce the chances of survival. Given that the 
evolutionary interest in ensuring survival overrides individual flourishing, over time 
social norms have channeled  aggressive behavior, the primary method of which is the 
establishment of pecking order. There is no chaos among conspecifics on this issue, 
but rather a set of principles that determine the feeding, mate selection and other 
options of group members. Thus,  an internal system of aggression regulation has 
evolved from species to species and from population to population, which in the case 
of man has acquired a social and even cultural medium. As part of this process, the 
manifestation of aggression in the hum an species is essentially regulated by culture, 
and violence can therefore be said to be, in general terms, a manifestation of 
aggression that is not socially acceptable. Today, the role of the media – especially 
social media – is over -represented in this issue and is a key determinant of the social 
perception of a given act of violence.  
 
Aggression is a complex human behavior whose comprehensive, uniform 
definition is beyond the scope of this study. There is a tendency to associate physical 
aggression and abuse with verbal abuse in our everyday lives, apart from war zones, 
conflict zones and certain forms of terrorism, exclusion, shaming and humiliation, the 
consequences of which are often more significant than the physical injuries, which 
heal sooner or la ter, while psychological injuries can stay with us for life.  
 45 In the course of a child's development, primary aggressive behavior (temper, 
anger) is initially manifested, which later matures and becomes "humanized", so that 
by the end of adolescence it be comes indirect aggression, characterized by 
sophisticated techniques, which may develop over the years, in accordance with or in 
deviant ways, in line with social norms. Primary anger (most often associated with 
physical acts of violence) is therefore not the same as resentment (which may also be 
expressed through verbal channels). The former is present in animals and children; 
the latter is human -specific. Indirect aggression can also be a form of social 
manipulation aimed at inflicting psychological/socia l damage to the other person, e.g. 
by spreading malicious gossip. It is not irrelevant whether the manifestation of 
aggression is reactive, i.e. in response to a stimulus, or proactive, i.e. ultimately 
"without cause", and merely a means of expressing domi nance.  
 
In the animal kingdom, the aggressive behavior of a conspecific can be triggered 
by the weaker opponent adopting a surrender posture, which can also stop the process 
of attack. At the social level, empathy and affection are on the opposite side of  
violence, distinguished from social intelligence by an emotional component, since the 
latter can operate without emotion or attachment (e.g. a sociopath may use his social 
skills to inflict harm on others without feeling mercy).  
 
Despite the generally ac cepted view that schoolboys are more likely to use 
physical forms of aggression and schoolgirls are more likely to use verbal and indirect 
aggression, it is surprising that in our country nearly 25% of schoolgirls were involved 
in fights in a given period (HBSC – WHO Health Behavior in School -aged Children, 
2011).1 
 
The study of female perpetrators of violence has been based largely on social 
science and criminological analysis, primarily on the role of women in society and the 
family. The experience of rec ent years and decades, based on forensic case studies 
and international trends, shows that the role of female perpetrators in violent crime 
has undergone a marked change, not only in terms of proportions, but also in terms of 
violence, with a greater empha sis on the female perpetrator. The biomedical and 
neurobiological study of women's aggression is a less studied and new trend, which 
seeks to understand the specific characteristics of women in this field, independently 
of the social sciences and on a phys iological basis.  
 
Women are more likely than men to engage in so -called indirect aggressive acts 
(e.g. spreading false rumors, gossip, exclusion from a social group or community, 
making someone suspect someone without justification, criticizing the appear ance or 
personality of others).2 The finding is even more valid for adult women.3 
 
                                                      
1  BUDA, Mariann: Rude boys - gentle girls?... Bullying behavior of school girls; In: 
NÉMETH , Nóra Veronika (ed.): Educators and trainees: Snapshots of teacher e ducation and 
teachers in the 21st century; Szeged, Hungary, Belvedere Meridionale, 2014, pp. 133 -154 
2  ARCHER , John et al.: An integrated review of indirect, relational and social aggression. 
Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 2005, Issue No. 9, pp. 212 -230 
3  ÖSTERMAN , Karin et al.: Cross -cultural evidence of female indirect aggression. 
Aggressive Behavior, 1998, Issue No. 24, pp. 1 -8 46 Most cultures reward "militant" behavior in men, but punish women for such 
behavior. Social norms of behavior prohibit physical aggression by women.4 
 
In experimental conditions, in which responses to behavior, electric shock, pain, 
loud noise, exclusion, rejection are tested, unprovoked women show lower physical 
and verbal aggression than men, while aggression to physical provocation or unjust 
attack is equally divided  between men and women.5 
 
In terms of alcohol -related aggression, studies show that acute and chronic 
alcohol consumption increases aggression in both sexes, in part through abnormal 
frontal lobe function.6 An interesting finding is that low -dose, moderate alcohol 
consumption increased aggression in women, whereas increasing the amount did not 
increase aggression.7 This may be due to the deliberative effect of alcohol, whereby 
women's inhibitions are release d by low alcohol and they are therefore "braver" in 
overt aggression, whereas when drunk their concentration and motor skills are 
impaired. Another study in this area found that alcohol -related aggression in women 
increased only for explicit provocation, b ut not for minor, harmless bullying.8 
 
 With regard to aggression in partner relationships, studies show that women are 
more likely than men to use some kind of instrument, weapon, throw objects and bite 
their victims.9,10 This may be due to the fact that w omen's smaller muscle mass may 
favor "fighting" at a distance and make it more difficult, but not impossible, for violent 
behavior to manifest itself. According to a study published by the WHO in 2013, 
which analyzed 1121 cases involving 65 countries and c overed the period 1982 -2011, 
the proportion of women killed in intimate partner violence was 38%, while the same 
rate for male victims was 6%. Other studies have found equal rates of partner 
involvement in forms of physical abuse such as punching, slapping  and knife attacks.11 
Studies from the field of justice have found that more serious forms of violence are 
equally likely to be used by women and men.12 However, women's involvement in 
double perpetration, where both partners are accused of violence against each other, 
is due to the fact that women defend themselves in the context of violence and 
                                                      
4  EAGLY , Alice H. et al.: Gender stereotypes, occupational roles, and beliefs about part -time 
employees; Psychol. Women Q. 1986 , Issue No.10, pp. 252 -262 
5  BETTENCOURT , B. Ann et al.: Gender differences in aggression as a function of 
provocation: a meta -analysis. Psychol. Bull; 1996, Issue No. 119, pp. 422 -447 
6  HEINZ, Adrienne J. et al.: Cognitive and neurobiological mechanisms  of alcohol -related 
aggression; Nat. Rev. Neurosci, 2011, Issue No. 12, pp. 400 -413 
7  ROHSENOW , Damaris J. et al.: Effects of alcohol and expectancies on verbal aggression in 
men and women; J. Abnorm. Psychol. 1984, Issue No. 93, pp. 418 -432 
8  CRANE , Cor y A. et al.: Provocation and target gender as moderators of the relationship 
between acute alcohol use and female perpetrated aggression; Aggress. Violent Behav. 
2018. Issue No. 40, pp. 36 -43 
9  ARCHER , John: Sex differences in physically aggressive acts b etween heterosexual 
partners: a meta -analytic review; Aggressive Violent Behavior, 2002, Issue No. 7, pp. 
313-351 
10  MELTON , Heather C. – BELKNAP , Joanne: He hits, she hits: assessing gender differences 
and similarities in officially reported intimate part ner violence; Crim. Justice Behav. 
2003, Issue No. 30, pp. 328 -348 
11  Ibid. 
12  BUSCH , Amy L. et al.: Comparing women and men arrested for domestic violence: a 
preliminary report; J. Fam. Violence Issue No. 19, 2004, pp. 49 -57 47 therefore also participate in the aggressive act as perpetrators.13 Studies have shown 
that the motivation for female aggressive partner violence is anger, control of  the 
partner, attention -seeking or revenge.14 
 
In terms of sexual aggression, which includes forced sexual acts or oral sexual 
intercourse, forced kissing, use of sexual objects, forced genital display, studies show 
a female rate of only 2.2%.15 It should be  noted that some of the violent sexual acts 
committed by women remain undetected because studies show that the victim fears 
that society will blame her for the incident, that there may be retaliation or that the 
official report will not be taken seriously.16, 
 
The not negligible and not insignificant nature of women's criminal behavior 
was already highlighted by the UN's Fourth United Nations Congress in 1970 and the 
Fifth UN Congress in Geneva in 1975. It was felt that female crime was on the 
increase world wide, that it was undergoing a marked change, that female offenders 
were becoming more independent and aggressive, and that this was due to the 
emancipatory lifestyle and the trend towards emancipation which was characteristic 
of the period and which was o n the increase.17 In the decade or so before the Congress, 
the number of female offenders in the United States and France nearly doubled, but 
the trend is even more marked in countries with traditionally low female crime rates, 
such as Australia and Japan. In Brazil, the number of crimes committed by women 
increased by 90% in absolute terms over the period, and in India the number of women 
prisoners increased by a similar amount. In 1973, in New York alone, there were 23 
separate gangs of women gangsters, th e majority of whom were juveniles. Not only 
crimes of a violent nature, but also so -called intellectual crimes such as fraud and 
embezzlement, have shown an upward trend in female crime: in the United States, the 
increase in these areas was 136% in the abo ve period, according to the relevant FBI 
figures.18  
 
The upward trend in female crime has continued after this period. In the nearly 
one and a half decade following the above -mentioned Congress, the female crime rate 
in Germany rose from 17.5% to 22.5%. In  the United States, the proportion of women 
arrested rose by almost 80% in this period, while the participation of men in this 
category increased by only 40%.19 Internationally, the rate of violent female offenders 
continues to rise. In the 10 -year period p rior to 2008/2009, the proportion of female 
offenders in Australia and Western countries showed a steep increase. While the 
                                                      
13  Ibid. 
14  BAIR-MERRITT , Megan H. et al.: Why do women use intimate partner violence? A 
systematic review of women’s motivations; Trauma Violence Abuse, 2010, Issue No. 11, 
pp. 178 -189 
15  CORTONI , Franca et al.: The proportion of sexual offenders who are female is higher than 
thought: a meta -analysis. Crim. Justice Behav. 2017, Issue No. 44, pp. 145 -162 
16  STEMPLE , Lara et al.: Sexual victimization perpetrated by women: federal data reveal 
surprising prevalence; Aggress. Violent Behav. 2017, Issue No. 34, pp. 302 –311 
17  RASKÓ , Gabr iella: Female Crime; 1978, pp. 10 -23 and 234 -235 
18  Ibid. 
19  FEHÉR , Lenke: Female Crime; In: GÖNCZÖL – KORINEK – Lévai (Eds.): Criminology, 
crime, crime control; Budapest, Corvina, 1999  48 number of male offenders increased by 29% over this period, the proportion of female 
offenders increased by 35%.20 
 
Relevant data on domestic conditions can be examined from 1931 onwards, 
showing that the proportion of women in crime ranged from 10 to 15 % and remained 
similar until recently,21 although it should be noted that the statistical evidence 
depends significantly on the type of  offending behavior under consideration. It is also 
not a minor circumstance that the proportion of female offenders shows a significant 
spike in certain periods, showing that as socio -economic circumstances change, 
women 'take advantage' of the opportunit y to commit crime. An example of this is the 
First World War period, which clearly shows what happens when the vast majority of 
men fighting on the front line are replaced by women in certain areas of life – when 
the overall female crime rate in the countr y rose to 21%.22 Looking at the period after 
the regime change it can be stated that female criminality, after some stagnation has 
shown a trend of continuously increasing.23 
 
The literature also monitors the upward trend in female crime. In the 1999 
nationa l criminology textbook, the chapter on women's crime was only eight pages 
long; the 2006 textbook devoted eighteen pages to the subject, and ten years later the 
chapter on women's crime has grown to twenty -one pages. In the 2020 criminology 
textbook of the  National University of Public Service, twenty -five pages are devoted 
to the subject. This trend shows that domestic research on women's crime is becoming 
increasingly important in the academic world.24 
 
 
The origins of gender differences in aggression  
 
Gender differences in aggression first manifest themselves in early childhood (3 -
6 years).25 A number of risk factors can cause problems related to aggression (e.g. 
smoking during pregnancy, birth complications),26 but there is evidence of gender 
differences in maternal depression, with a strong correlation between maternal 
depression and aggressive behavior in boys around 2 years and girls around 6 years.27 
 
                                                      
20  LIDDEL , Margaret – MARTINOVIC , Marietta: Women’s Offending: Trends,  Issues and 
Theoretical Explanations. In: International Journal of Social Inquiry, 2013, Vol. 6, Issue 
No. 1, pp. 127 -142 
21  KÖVÉR , Ágnes: Female crime before and after the regime change; Home Affairs Review, 
1998, Issue No. 3, pp. 5 -8 
22  Ibid. 
23  Ibid. 
24  FAIL, Ágnes: Recent Hungarian criminological literature on female crime. In: Prison 
Review, 2017, No. 2, p. 7  
25  ARCHER , John: Sex differences in aggression in real -world settings: a meta -analytic 
review; Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2005, Issue No. 8, pp. 291 -322 
26  JIANGHONG , Liu: Early health risk factors for violence: conceptualization, evidence and 
implications; Aggressive Violent Behavior, 2011, Issue No. 16, pp. 63 -73 
27  BLATT -EISENGART , Ilana et al.: Sex differences in the longitudinal relations among family  
risk factors and childhood externalizing symptoms. Dev. Psychol. 2009, Issue No. 45, pp. 
491-502 49 Mothers' cannabis use during pregnancy increased aggressio n in their 1.5 -year-
old daughters.28 
 
The difference in aggressive behavior between adult women and men is partly 
due to biological and partly to social causes. Research into the biological causes is a 
recent trend in which the role of the hypothalamic -pituitary-sex hormone axis is a key 
issue. There are still many questions to be addressed in the study of the hormonal 
relationship. The relationship between high levels of the male sex hormone 
testosterone and aggression has long been known, but it seems that  high testosterone 
levels are not a cause but rather a consequence of aggressive behavior. Placing 
dominant male copperhead monkeys in a different group when their influence is 
reduced may induce a decrease in hormone levels. Similarly, in athletes, testos terone 
levels are higher in winners than losers following competition. However, for women, 
the hormonal link remains to be tested, as the small number of studies so far have not 
found a significant correlation between hormone levels and aggression. Gender 
differences are also associated with perceptions of the dangerousness of the situation. 
Women are more effective at inhibiting their emotions and behavior, especially when 
emotions of fear are also present.29 
 
From a cultural point of view, the process of s ocialization of women is primary, 
and the defining element of this process is the relationship; women define themselves 
in terms of their participation in relationships and in the group.30 In this light, the 
dominance of indirect aggression, i.e. the abilit y of women to hide their rage and anger 
behind kindness, femininity and charm, but not to engage in open confrontation for 
socio -cultural reasons, is understandable.  
 
Women see direct, even pathological, aggression as a problem of self -control, a 
fact which is also reflected in the traditional avoidance of direct aggressive behavior 
by women.31 It is also attributable to the socialization background that women are 
better able to control their aggression. "A little girl doesn't do that", the girl -child is  
taught to control her temper.  
 
Two factors play an important role in women's aggression at school, mainly 
indirectly. On the one hand, and with reference to the above, the importance for 
women of belonging to a group and their role in the community is par amount. They 
do not tend to oppose group opinion and do not risk exclusion from the group.  
 
Another factor is that boys are more preoccupied, for example, during school 
holidays, while schoolgirls are in small groups watching other schoolgirls and seeing 
                                                      
28  EL MARROUN , Hanan et al.: Intrauterine cannabis exposure leads to more aggressive 
behavior and attention problems in 18 -month old girls; Drug Alcohol Depen d, 2011, Issue 
No. 118, pp. 470 -474 
29  CAMPBELL , Anne et al.: Intent to harm or injure? Gender and the expression of anger; 
Aggressive Behavior, May/June, 2008, Vol. 34, Issue No. 3, pp. 282 -293 
30  UNDERWOOD , Marion K.: Social aggression among girls. Guilford Press, 2003, pp. 13 -35 
31  CAMPBELL , Anne et al.: Social Representation of Aggression as an Explanation of Gender 
Differences: A Preliminary Study; Aggressive Behavior, 4/1/1992. Vol.18, Issue No. 2, 
pp. 95 -108 50 what they are doing; they have an inner urge to make a change or to make something 
happen.32 
 
 
Socio -cultural perceptions of female aggression  
 
The general social perception is that men are the ideal perpetrators and women 
are the ideal victims.33 Women are generally believed to be non -threatening, non -
criminal, passive and non -aggressive because of their gender and social status. If she 
does commit a violent act, it is assumed that she has a disturbed mind or personality 
disorder, or is motivated by her stat us as a victim.34 In other words, it is assumed that 
if a woman commits a violent (criminal) act typical of men, it is because she has a 
mental illness or hormonal imbalance. Femininity as a condition is to be assessed as 
an extra -legal factor, similar to a ge or ethnicity. Accordingly, female status may lead 
to a more lenient treatment in criminal proceedings, and possibly to a lighter sentence 
(the so -called chivalry hypothesis).35 
 
In an experiment involving 232 psychology students, half of the students wer e 
given photographs of male and half of female offenders, all of whom pleaded not 
guilty to the charges against them, some of which were serious (e.g. manslaughter). 
The study showed that female offenders were significantly less likely to be found 
guilty t han male offenders. However, it was a curious finding that the students were 
particularly lenient towards female offenders with a more attractive appearance.36 
 
The prominence of femininity in this issue goes as far as to suggest that the 
incompatibility of  criminality with female nature calls into question whether women 
can be held responsible for committing the offence in the first place.37 
 
In another approach, it is not absolutely necessary to judge a female offender 
more leniently or leniently in relatio n to a particular criminal act, but if she 
transgresses the traditional female role, which is described in terms of feminine purity, 
femininity, obedience and submissiveness, she may be subject to a more severe 
punishment than her male counterparts, to who m these characteristics do not generally 
apply (the so -called 'Tutelage Hypothesis').38 In other words, aggressive behavior that 
is not in the nature of a woman is more severely punished because of its deviant nature, 
since it is not – in social terms – the norm for men. The difference between 'tutelage' 
and the 'chivalry' approach is therefore that the 'chivalry' attitude is reserved for 
                                                      
32  OWENS , Laurence et al.: „Guess wha t I just heard!”: Indirect aggression among teenage 
girls in Australia; Aggressive Behavior, 2000. Vol. 26, Issue No. 1, pp. 67 -83 
33  DUGGAN , Marian: Revisiting The 'Ideal Victim'; Bristol: Policy Press, 2018, p. 52  
34  WEARE , Siobhan: “The Mad”, “The Bad”,  “The Victim”: Gendered Constructions of 
Women Who Kill within the Criminal Justice System. Laws, 2013, Vol. 2, Issue No. 3, 
pp. 337 -361 
35  TURNER , Kevin B. et al.: The Effect of Gender on the Judicial Pretrial Decision of Bail 
Amount Set; Federal probatio n, 2006, Vol. 70, Issue No. 1, pp. 56 -62 
36  AHOLA , Angela S. et al.: Justice Needs a Blindfold: Effects of Gender and Attractiveness 
on Prison Sentences and Attributions of Personal Characteristics in a Judicial Process; 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law, Iss ue, 2009, No. 16, pp. 90 -100 
37  Ibid. 
38  Ibid. 51 'normal' women, who, being deviant or aggressive by nature, are in fact committing a 
double crime: on the one hand, they are breaking the law, which is punishable by 
criminal law, and on the other, they are defying social expectations of their gender – 
their femininity (the so -called Devilish Woman Hypothesis). The "normal" woman is 
passive, accepting and submissive, while the "devilish" woman is violent and 
aggressive, so that the latter behavior in itself violates social – not legal – norms.39 
 
To be d istinguished from the so -called Chivalry Hypothesis is the Battered 
Woman Syndrome,40 the essence of which is that any leniency or mitigation in 
criminal law is not based on the femininity of the perpetrator, but on the fact that the 
subsequent female perpe trator has previously been subjected to torture or suffered 
mental or physical injury that led to the commission of such an act.  
 
In a "chivalry" approach, the female perpetrator is emotionally unstable, weak 
and mentally fragile, which implies that she i s only partially responsible for the act 
committed. The assault as a background is an additional factor that establishes the 
basis for the violent behavior, which is far from the woman's default, as if it triggered 
and provoked it.  
 
Generally speaking, wo men are reported in the media as victims and not as 
perpetrators of criminal activity, and the role of women as victims is over -represented 
in the media. When female offenders are reported, individual factors such as selfish 
behavior and family circumstanc es are typically examined, highlighting the abnormal 
nature of women's offending.41 
 
Media coverage of female offenders can be summarized from one study as 
showing that offences against children (including the offender's own child) are more 
harshly perceive d in the media than other forms of behavior that can be committed by 
women. The reason for this is, with reference to the above, that the woman has not 
only violated criminal law, but has also violated societal expectations of femininity, 
and thus committe d a double crime (see Devilish Woman Syndrome, above). It can 
be argued, therefore, that society has a certain expectation of women, that there are 
some acts that are not only legally but also socially unacceptable, that are 'not 
appropriate' for women. A typical example is aggressive acts against children, given 
that motherhood and child -related activities are traditionally linked to women, and 
therefore the rare case of a woman committing violence against her current partner 
because of a relationship prob lem is less shocking than committing the same act 
against a child.  
 
 
According to the study, a similar situation occurs when a woman's act of violence 
against a child is considered in the light of the same type of crime committed by a 
man. For the above re asons, when caring and motherhood are far from the man's 
responsibility according to the general social perception, the man's aggression against 
                                                      
39  Ibid. 
40  CHESNEY -LIND, Meda: Media misogyny: Demonizing “violent” girls and women; In J. 
FERREL  – N. WEBSDALE  (Eds.): Making trouble: Cultural representations of crime, 
deviance, and control; 1999, pp. 115 -141 
41  Ibid. 52 the child, although not nice, is not subject to the same consideration as the woman's 
crime against the child.  
 
A particular manifestation of media perception is the case where a man and a 
woman commit their crime together, as co -conspirators. In such cases, the woman's 
perception – and the social criticism of the couple in general – is harsher and more 
severe than the description of them separately, as if the woman's aggravating 
circumstance were that she committed the crime not alone but in collaboration with a 
man (the so -called Bonnie & Clyde effect).42 
 
 
The neurobiological backgr ound of female aggression  
 
Neurobiological theories are based on the results of genetic, neurobiological and 
hormonal research.  
 
It is not disputed that offending behavior has genetic factors. These factors act 
in multiple and indirect ways, by influencin g the functioning of the nervous system 
and by inducing changes in the structure of the brain, which in turn lead to changes in 
psychological characteristics and thus to an increased risk of offending. It is important 
to note that genetic factors are not p redictive but probabilistic factors. The twin studies 
that have been carried out on the 'criminal gene' have ultimately demonstrated that the 
propensity to commit crime is heritable, and that the role of this heritability, together 
with the circumstances o f upbringing, determines the propensity to commit crime.  
 
Epigenetics is one of the most important fields of science today, but also one of 
the most difficult to grasp from a legal and ethical point of view, and one that focuses 
on the links between enviro nmental and genetic influences. By definition, it includes 
heritable changes in gene expression that are not associated with changes in DNA 
sequence.43 Epigenetic research aims to clarify the environmental influences on 
female aggression, in particular how childhood, adolescent and youthful influences 
generate the occurrence of aggressive acts in later life. This is significant because 
research shows that a proportion of female perpetrators of violent crime are victims 
of previous sexual or physical abuse.44 
 
The relationship between brain function and offending behavior has been the 
subject of thousands of publications in recent years. These studies suggest that there 
may be a link between criminal behavior and organic abnormalities in the nervous 
system, alt hough there is currently no conclusive evidence on this subject. In 
particular, this finding is supported by publications that show that brain injuries of a 
certain localization lead to certain types of offending behavior, that other types of 
injuries lead  to other types of offending behavior and that injuries that do not lead to 
any criminal attitudes may be suppressed. The relationship is not clear and, more 
importantly, cannot be simplified. The nervous system links behavior to information 
from the senso ry organs, which is analyzed by the supra -coordinate brain area, the 
                                                      
42  Ibid. 
43  EMBER , István – Kiss, István – Cseh, Károly: Public Health Medicine. Pécs, Hungary: 
University of Pécs, 2013, pp. 101 -109 
44  Ibid. 53 frontal lobe, and this process results in the manifestation of an actual muscular 
response, which can be both delinquent and non -delinquent.  
 
Brain imaging techniques, primarily function al MRI, form the basis of the 
investigation of the functioning of the nervous system, but other neurological methods 
of investigation, such as EEG scans, can also be informative. In the latter 
measurement, the so -called event -related potential (ERP) shows the correlation 
between the onset of anger or aggression and the electrical activity of the brain. In an 
explicit gender -focused study involving 25 men and 24 women, the results showed no 
difference between the sexes electrophysiologically.45  
 
One of the b rain structures most involved in aggression is the so -called 
amygdala. In this respect, a study measuring the size of the amygdala using functional 
MRI in women with so -called reactive aggressive personality disorder found no 
correlation between amygdala s ize and aggressive personality in women.46 In a two -
phase study, in which women with this personality disorder were divided into an anger 
phase and an aggression phase (the first phase was only for rude behavior and the 
second for explicit aggressive behavi or), the aggression phase showed a positive 
correlation with the amygdala.47  
 
The relationship between offending behavior and the hormonal system can be 
embodied in two processes that can be isolated from each other. The first is a state of 
prompt arousal induced by stress hormones (adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol), 
which has a neurological effect that makes cognitive (thinking) functions secondary 
to emotional expression; this typically includes highly aroused offending. The other, 
long-term and lon g-lasting process is the neurobehavioral depressant effects linked to 
testosterone and cortisol action. The relationship between testosterone and offending 
behavior is controversial, particularly with regard to the differential differences 
between men and women. Early childhood (~2 years) and adolescence are sensitive 
periods of neurodevelopment in which so -called toxic stress requires sustained 
adaptations of the organism. As a result of this process, the opposite of the 
homeostasis characterized by intern al equilibrium, the so -called allostasis, may 
develop, which expresses a "different state", an imbalance, and whose basis is to be 
found in the genetic -epigenetic effects of cortisol. The effects may also extend to the 
nervous system structure, resulting i n criminal behavior. Animal studies have 
suggested that there is a direct causal relationship between low cortisol levels and 
aggression.48 The initial stress hormone -overloading effect of prolonged stress is later 
reflected in deficits, which manifest themselves in a tendency to aggression. Published 
studies on the subject have causally linked reduced cortisol levels to delinquency, but 
not always. This may be due to the phenomenon that low cortisol levels are only 
accompanied by aggressive behavioral attitudes years later (~2 -5 years), so the time 
                                                      
45  Ibid. 
46  MANCKE , Falk et al.: Amygdala structure and aggressiveness in borderline personality 
disorder. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci., 2016, Issue No 268, pp. 417 -427 
47  HERPERTZ , Sabine C. et al.: Brain mechanisms underlying reactive aggression in  
borderline personality disorder –sex matters; Biol. Psychiatry 2017, Issue No. 4, pp. 257 -
266 
48  FARKAS , Johanna – HALLER , József – FOGARASI , Mihály – KOVÁTS , Daniella – MALÉT -
SZABÓ , Erika: Biological factors of crime; In: HALLER , József (Ed.): The crimina l's mind; 
Budapest, Ludovika University Publishing House, 2020, pp. 1 -66 54 lag may be a significant factor in explaining this process. Early, sustained increases 
in corti sol production, as well as slow decreases, may generate epigenetic changes 
that can lead to brain structural and functional disturbances. An important distinction, 
however, is that the deficit is correlated with premeditated violence, whereas the 
increased  level is correlated with violent crime. The question is what determines 
whether an individual will respond to stress with increased cortisol production or 
whether low levels will result. The discrepancy may be due to the fact that some 
people's genetic ma ke-up predisposes them to a breakdown of the hormonal system – 
a cortisol deficit – while others are more 'hardy' and produce high levels of the 
hormone. Another possibility is that toxic stress occurs at different ages and that this 
condition plays a role  in later behavioral change. It has been observed that stress in 
early childhood induces impulsive attitudes (increased cortisol levels) and violent, 
aggressive criminal behavior in adolescence (cortisol deficiency), but this hypothesis 
needs to be confirm ed.49 
 
In women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, where there is an overproduction 
of androgenic hormones, including testosterone, a marked increase in physical 
aggression was detected compared to healthy controls.50 
 
It is generally accepted that higher testosterone concentrations may be behind 
the increased aggression in men. Fewer studies are available on this in women. A 
study of 87 female prisoners showed a correlation between dominant, aggressive 
behavior in prison and testosterone levels.51 A similar  finding was found in a study of 
a female rugby team, where pre -match testosterone levels showed a positive 
correlation with aggression during the game.52 The results of a double -blind 
experiment with 12 female participants suggested that an increase in tes tosterone 
levels is associated with a decrease in sensitivity to abuse and an increase in 
responsiveness to reward in relation to aggression.53 To better understand the 
relationship between testosterone and aggression, the role of cortisol was also 
examined . Based on the so -called dual hormone hypothesis, the results show that low 
cortisol levels enhance the effects of testosterone on aggression, while high cortisol 
levels block this effect. 54 Other studies have not found a clear link with the so -called 
dual hormone hypothesis. A study of 326 adolescent girls and 134 boys, which 
examined the detectability of testosterone from hair samples, found a positive 
correlation between aggression manifestations and low cortisol levels,55 and also 
showed that hair sampli ng resulted in more stable individual differences than the 
                                                      
49  Ibid. 
50  HINES, Melissa: Sex -related variation in human behavior and the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci., 
2010, Issue No. 14, pp. 448 -456 
51  DABBS , James M. et al.: Age, testosterone, and  behavior among female prison inmates. 
Psychosom. Med. 1997, Issue No. 59, pp. 477 -480 
52  BATEUP , Helen S. et al.: Testosterone, cortisol, and women’s competition; Evol. Hum. 
Behav. 2002, Issue No. 23, pp. 181 –192 
53  VAN HONK, Jack et al.: Testosterone shi fts the balance between sensitivity for punishment 
and reward in healthy young women; Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2004, Issue No. 29, pp. 
937-943 
54  MEHTA , Pranjal H. et al.: The dual -hormone hypothesis: a brief review and future research 
agenda. Curr. Opin.  Behav. Sci., 2015, Issue No. 3, pp. 163 -168 
55  GROTZINGER , Andrew D. et al.: Hair and salivary testosterone, hair cortisol, and 
externalizing behaviors in adolescents; Psychol. Sci., 2018, Volume 29, Issue No. 5, pp. 
688-699 55 sampling and detection of testosterone and cortisol from saliva samples. The 
researchers agree that further studies on this topic are needed.  
 
In women, changes in the concentrations of two hormon es produced by the 
ovaries – estradiol and progesterone – show fluctuations parallel to the menstrual 
cycle. The levels of these hormones are elevated during the so -called follicular phase, 
around the middle of the period between the two menstrual periods.  Elevated levels 
of these hormones were found to correlate with lower levels of aggression and 
irritability in a study of 122 female participants.56 On the other hand, a study of 281 
women of reproductive potential, analyzing hormone levels within 24 hours of a 
suicide attempt in the participants, showed a correlation between low levels of 
progesterone and estradiol and increased intention to commit suicide.57 
 
Breastfeeding mothers typically have higher levels of oxytocin and, under 
laboratory conditions, th ere is a positive correlation between breastfeeding – elevated 
oxytocin – and manifestations of aggression,58 although the association is not entirely 
conclusive on the basis of other studies.59 
 
 
Summary  
 
The biology of female aggression encompasses a broad range of interrelated and 
interconnected disciplines (biology, genetics, endocrinology, neurology, 
criminology). The definition of aggression itself is not a simple task, and many 
approaches and theories  have emerged. The feminine nature of aggression is evident 
in some of its manifestations, for example, so -called indirect verbal aggression is 
generally more characteristic of women. The development of this female specificity 
begins in early childhood and  can be traced back to a number of biological and social 
factors. Socio -cultural judgements of female offending are generally more lenient than 
those of male offenders. Trends both internationally and domestically show that 
female offending is changing bot h numerically and in terms of its nature, with an 
increase in the number of female offenders and a shift towards male offending in terms 
of its nature and violence. Despite the partial results, the genetic, neurological and 
hormonal research on female aggr ession is not conclusive and conclusive, and further 
research is needed in this area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
56  ZIOMKIEWICZ , Anna et al.: H igher luteal progesterone is associated with low levels of 
premenstrual aggressive behavior and fatigue; Biol. Psychol. 2012, Issue No. 91, pp. 376 -
382 
57  BACA-GARCIA , Enrique et al.: Suicide attempts among women during low estradiol/low 
progesterone state s. J. Psychiatr. Res. 2010. Issue 44, pp. 209 -214 
58  HAHN-HOLBROOK , Jennifer et al.: Maternal defense: breast feeding increases aggression 
by reducing stress; Psychol. Sci. 2011, Issue No. 22, pp. 1288 -1295  
59  NE’EMAN , Rina et al.: Intranasal administration of oxytocin increases human aggressive 
behavior; Horm. Behav. 2016, Issue No. 80, pp. 125 -131 56 Bibliography:  
 
 AHOLA , Angela S. et al.: Justice Needs a Blindfold: Effects of Gender and 
Attractiveness on Prison Sentences and Attributions of Personal Characteri stics 
in a Judicial Process; Psychiatry, Psychology and Law, Issue, 2009, No. 16, pp. 
90-100 
 ARCHER , John et al.: An integrated review of indirect, relational and social 
aggression. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 2005, Issue No. 9, pp. 212 -230 
 ARCHER , John: Sex differences in aggression in real -world settings: a meta -
analytic review; Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2005, Issue No. 8, pp. 291 -322 
 ARCHER , John: Sex differences in physically aggressive acts between 
heterosexual partners: a meta -analytic review; Aggressive Violen t Behavior, 
2002, Issue No. 7, pp. 313 -351 
 BACA-GARCIA , Enrique et al.: Suicide attempts among women during low 
estradiol/low progesterone states. J. Psychiatr. Res. 2010. Issue 44, pp. 209 -214 
 BAIR-MERRITT , Megan H. et al.: Why do women use intimate partn er violence? 
A systematic review of women’s motivations; Trauma Violence Abuse, 2010, 
Issue No. 11, pp. 178 -189 
 BATEUP , Helen S. et al.: Testosterone, cortisol, and women’s competition; Evol. 
Hum. Behav. 2002, Issue No. 23, pp. 181 –192 
 BETTENCOURT , B. Ann et al.: Gender differences in aggression as a function of 
provocation: a meta -analysis. Psychol. Bull; 1996, Issue No. 119, pp. 422 -447 
 BLATT -EISENGART , Ilana et al.: Sex differences in the longitudinal relations 
among family risk factors and childhood ext ernalizing symptoms. Dev. Psychol. 
2009, Issue No. 45, pp. 491 -502 
 BUDA, Mariann: Rude boys - gentle girls?... Bullying behavior of school girls; 
In: NÉMETH , Nóra Veronika (ed.): Educators and trainees: Snapshots of teacher 
education and teachers in the 21 st century; Szeged, Hungary, Belvedere 
Meridionale, 2014, pp. 133 -154 
 BUSCH , Amy L. et al.: Comparing women and men arrested for domestic 
violence: a preliminary report; J. Fam. Violence Issue No. 19, 2004, pp. 49 -57 
 CAMPBELL , Anne et al.: Intent to harm or injure? Gender and the expression of 
anger; Aggressive Behavior, May/June, 2008, Vol. 34, Issue No. 3, pp. 282 -293 
 CAMPBELL , Anne et al.: Social Representation of Aggression as an Explanation 
of Gender Differences: A Preliminary Study; Aggressive Behavi or, 4/1/1992. 
Vol.18, Issue No. 2, pp. 95 -108 
 CHESNEY -LIND, Meda: Media misogyny: Demonizing “violent” girls and 
women; In J. FERREL  – N. WEBSDALE  (Eds.): Making trouble: Cultural 
representations of crime, deviance, and control; 1999, pp. 115 -141 
 CORTONI , Franca et al.: The proportion of sexual offenders who are female is 
higher than thought: a meta -analysis. Crim. Justice Behav. 2017, Issue No. 44, 
pp. 145 -162 57  CRANE , Cory A. et al.: Provocation and target gender as moderators of the 
relationship between ac ute alcohol use and female perpetrated aggression; 
Aggress. Violent Behav. 2018. Issue No. 40, pp. 36 -43 
 DABBS , James M. et al.: Age, testosterone, and behavior among female prison 
inmates. Psychosom. Med. 1997, Issue No. 59, pp. 477 -480 
 DUGGAN , Marian: Re visiting The 'Ideal Victim'; Bristol: Policy Press, 2018, p. 
52 
 EAGLY , Alice H. et al.: Gender stereotypes, occupational roles, and beliefs about 
part-time employees; Psychol. Women Q. 1986, Issue No.10, pp. 252 -262 
 EL MARROUN , Hanan et al.: Intrauterine c annabis exposure leads to more 
aggressive behavior and attention problems in 18 -month old girls; Drug Alcohol 
Depend, 2011, Issue No. 118, pp. 470 -474 
 EMBER , István – Kiss, István – Cseh, Károly: Public Health Medicine. Pécs, 
Hungary: University of Pécs, 2 013, pp. 101 -109 
 FAIL, Ágnes: Recent Hungarian criminological literature on female crime. In: 
Prison Review, 2017, No. 2, p. 7  
 FARKAS , Johanna – HALLER , József – FOGARASI , Mihály – KOVÁTS , Daniella – 
MALÉT -SZABÓ , Erika: Biological factors of crime; In: HALLER, József (Ed.): The 
criminal's mind; Budapest, Ludovika University Publishing House, 2020, pp. 1 -
66 
 FEHÉR , Lenke: Female Crime; In: GÖNCZÖL – KORINEK – Lévai (Eds.): 
Criminology, crime, crime control; Budapest, Corvina, 1999  
 GROTZINGER , Andrew D. et al.: Hair and salivary testosterone, hair cortisol, and 
externalizing behaviors in adolescents; Psychol. Sci., 2018, Volume 29, Issue 
No. 5, pp. 688 -699 
 HAHN-HOLBROOK , Jennifer et al.: Maternal defense: breast feeding increases 
aggression by reducing stres s; Psychol. Sci. 2011, Issue No. 22, pp. 1288 -1295  
 HEINZ, Adrienne J. et al.: Cognitive and neurobiological mechanisms of alcohol -
related aggression; Nat. Rev. Neurosci, 2011, Issue No. 12, pp. 400 -413 
 HERPERTZ , Sabine C. et al.: Brain mechanisms underlyin g reactive aggression 
in borderline personality disorder –sex matters; Biol. Psychiatry 2017, Issue No. 
4, pp. 257 -266 
 HINES, Melissa: Sex -related variation in human behavior and the brain. Trends 
Cogn. Sci., 2010, Issue No. 14, pp. 448 -456 
 JIANGHONG , Liu: Early health risk factors for violence: conceptualization, 
evidence and implications; Aggressive Violent Behavior, 2011, Issue No. 16, pp. 
63-73 
 KÖVÉR , Ágnes: Female crime before and after the regime change; Home Affairs 
Review, 1998, Issue No. 3, pp. 5 -8 58  LIDDEL , Margaret – MARTINOVIC , Marietta: Women’s Offending: Trends, Issues 
and Theoretical Explanations. In: International Journal of Social Inquiry, 2013, 
Vol. 6, Issue No. 1, pp. 127 -142 
 MANCKE , Falk et al.: Amygdala structure and aggressiveness in borde rline 
personality disorder. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci., 2016, Issue No 268, 
pp. 417 -427 
 MEHTA , Pranjal H. et al.: The dual -hormone hypothesis: a brief review and 
future research agenda. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci., 2015, Issue No. 3, pp. 163 -168 
 MELTON, Heather C. – BELKNAP , Joanne: He hits, she hits: assessing gender 
differences and similarities in officially reported intimate partner violence; Crim. 
Justice Behav. 2003, Issue No. 30, pp. 328 -348 
 NE’EMAN , Rina et al.: Intranasal administration of oxytocin increases human 
aggressive behavior; Horm. Behav. 2016, Issue No. 80, pp. 125 -131 
 ÖSTERMAN , Karin et al.: Cross -cultural evidence of female indirect aggression. 
Aggressive Behavior, 1998, Issue No. 24, pp. 1 -8 
 OWENS , Laurence et al.: „Guess what I  just heard!”: Indirect aggression among 
teenage girls in Australia; Aggressive Behavior, 2000. Vol. 26, Issue No. 1, pp. 
67-83 
 RASKÓ , Gabriella: Female Crime; 1978, pp. 10 -23 and 234 -235 
 ROHSENOW , Damaris J. et al.: Effects of alcohol and expectancies on verbal 
aggression in men and women; J. Abnorm. Psychol. 1984, Issue No. 93, pp. 418 -
432 
 STEMPLE , Lara et al.: Sexual victimization perpetrated by women: federal data 
reveal surprising prevalence; Aggress. Violent Behav. 2017, Issue No. 34, pp. 
302–311 
 TURN ER, Kevin B. et al.: The Effect of Gender on the Judicial Pretrial Decision 
of Bail Amount Set; Federal probation, 2006, Vol. 70, Issue No. 1, pp. 56 -62 
 UNDERWOOD , Marion K.: Social aggression among girls. Guilford Press, 2003, 
pp. 13 -35 
 VAN HONK, Jack et al.: Testosterone shifts the balance between sensitivity for 
punishment and reward in healthy young women; Psychoneuroendocrinology, 
2004, Issue No. 29, pp. 937 -943 
 WEARE , Siobhan: “The Mad”, “The Bad”, “The Victim”: Gendered 
Constructions of Women Who Kil l within the Criminal Justice System. Laws, 
2013, Vol. 2, Issue No. 3, pp. 337 -361 
 ZIOMKIEWICZ , Anna et al.: Higher luteal progesterone is associated with low 
levels of premenstrual aggressive behavior and fatigue; Biol. Psychol. 2012, 
Issue No. 91, pp. 37 6-382 
 
 
 59 JÓZSEF HOLECZ   
THE ORIGINAL “HYBRID  WARFARE” – PART I1 
 
 
Abstract  
At the end of the 20th century, a concept was created which before its creation 
had already developed a long time in its meaning, and then even more so. Hybrid 
warfare, as a terminology for many, was born in 2014 of result of the events in 
Ukraine, but was known to soldiers long before that. In the two -part study, we 
examine which processes induced its creation and to whom its origin creation is due.  
 
Keywords:  hybrid warfare, fourth generation warfare, unrestricted warfare, 
compound warfare  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
„A war which changed the world ultimately changed war itself.”  
Qiao Liang – Wang Xiangsui2 
 
In the second half of 2014, a series of security studies and military publications 
announced that the Russian Federation had occupied the Crimea using hybrid warfare 
and was constantly supporting the breakaway forces in eastern Ukraine in their 
struggle for secession. From 2015 to the present day, ‘hybri d warfare’ as a term, 
thanks to the international media, has received so much resonance, that despite the 
fact that Russian military science did not know and use this concept, still the Crimean 
annexation, the method used by the Russians is identified with  this terminology.3 
 
Nowadays, thanks to research efforts in the past seven years, there are several 
interpretations of hybrid warfare, what is more, sometimes one can find other terms 
with similar meaning. In the present study we do not seek to resolve th is 
terminological chaos and do not wish to compare terms in current usage. Likewise, 
we do not aim to act as arbiter as to which   which terminology most expresses the 
phenomenon, its underlying design, the methods used and the mechanisms of action 
trigger ed by it.  
 
Our research focuses only on the presentation of the origin, as we are convinced 
that the understanding of the processes of our present age is most often helped by 
                                                      
1  ,,The work was implemented in the framework of project No. TKP2020 -NKA -09, financed 
by the Thematic Excellence Program 2020 from the National Re search Development and 
Innovation Fund.”  
2  QIAO Liang – WANG Xiangsui: Unrestricted Warfare, 1999. p. 5. 
http://www.c4i.org/unrestricted.pdf  (downloaded 10 March 2017)  
3  HOLECZ , József: The Gerasimov Doctrine – In Another Enlightenment; Felderítő Szemle, 
2017/3 -4. pp. 5 -7. https://www.knbsz.gov. hu/hu/letoltes/fsz/2017 -3-4.pdf  (downloaded 04 
June 2021);  
FRIDMAN , Ofer: Russian 'Hybrid Warfare'. Resurgence and Politicization; C. Hurst & Co. 
Ltd., London, 2018, pp.127 -152. ISBN 9781849048811  60 getting to know the past and exploring past processes. We present our research re sults 
on the origins of hybrid warfare in two studies, which will make it possible to follow 
the continuous broadening of meaning, its causal relationships, and to identify the 
factors under which the currently known terminology has developed under its 
complex influence.  
 
Our interest in the topic is not an end in itself. The National Military Strategy 
(NMS) issued in 2021 makes it clear when it presents our volatile and unpredictable 
security environment, envisions the rapid spread of emerging crises, assu mes the 
combined threat of security sectors, and therefore states that the issue of national 
defense can only be examined in a complex way, addressing all its areas. The 
legislator also deals with our research topic, according to which “in the so -called 
hybrid warfare, state and non -state actors seek to assert their interests in achieving a 
specific strategic goal to the detriment of the opposing party by using military and 
non-military means for a specific strategic goal, and they may take steps to aggrava te 
the challenges and crises that Hungary faces.”4 
 
The NMS defines today’s challenges in a modern way, where the greatest threat 
lies in the expansion of the theatres of war, its forms and means and the typically 
dynamic change of the features thereof. States seek to reduce the possibility of military 
confrontation as much as possible and increasingly use sub -war conflicts to achieve 
their goals. In addition to the military, diplomatic means, the possibilities of 
manipulating the media, the information w arfare, the malicious exploitation of the 
opportunities inherent in social, political and economic instability, and the escalation 
of existing or emerging crises will come to the fore. Increasingly, proxy forces, 
various criminal and terrorist groups/organ izations, and civilian alliances disguised as 
various non -governmental organizations are used with state support and 
management.5 
 
However, our research on the above is not only justified by the National Military 
Strategy, or the National Security Strategy  published in 2020 as a comprehensive 
strategy. We started the comprehensive study of the topic as early as 2015, the results 
                                                      
4  National Military Strategy of Hungary, Government Resol ution 2021. (1393/2021. (VI. 
24.), pp. 5069 -5070. 
https://magyarkozlony.hu/dokumentumok/2a94d595e4bc33b3515c09b0f6f04c4ca3df69c6
/megképes (downloaded 03 July 2021)  
5  Ibid. pp. 5069 -5072;  
FORGÁCS , Balázs: Guerrillas, partisans, insurgents. History of the Theory of Irregular 
Warfare – The Challenges of Our Time; Zrínyi Publishing House, Budapest, 2020. pp. 217 -
222. ISBN 978 963 327 798 0;  
FORGÁCS , Balázs: New Wars, Old Theories; Commentary, 2021/1, pp. 77 -78. 
RESPERGER , István: Security Problems of the Futu re; Szakmai Szemle, 2021/2. pp. 5 -22. 
https://www.knbsz.gov.hu/hu/letoltes/szsz/2021_2_szam.pdf (downloaded 04 July 2021);  
EMBER , István: The proxy war of market participants; Military Science, 2021 electronic 
issue 
https://www.mhtt.eu/hadtudomany/2021/202 1e/EMBER%20Istvan_%20Piaci%20szerepl
ok%20proxy%20haboruja.pdf (downloaded 21 November 2021);  
CHIFU, Iulian: Hybrid warfare, lawfare, information warfare – The wars of the future; In: SIMONS , 
Greg – CHIFU, Iulian (eds.): The Changing Face of Warfare in the 21st Century; Routledge -
Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2019, pp. 35 -36. ISBN 978 -0-367-90134 -9 61 of which were summarized in 2017 in a master's thesis6. The date is also interesting 
because a year later, Ofer Fridman’s now famo us book7 was published, in which he 
drew similar conclusions about the formation and development of hybrid warfare.8 
The aim of this publication is to share with the readership our thoughts expressed in 
the 2017 publication, which have since been supplemented with numerous research 
findings related to hybrid warfare that have not been published in either the domestic 
or international academia.  
 
  
Changes in strategic and operational environment - initial theories  
  
In the world of science, terms an d their meanings are constantly changing. A few 
centuries ago, it took up to hundreds of years to change the content of a terminology. 
Today, thanks to dynamic technological change, this has been significantly shortened. 
The development history and termino logical development of hybrid warfare did not 
begin with the creation of the concept itself, and since it is the 'child' of today, 
similarly intense changes can be observed in the meaning. At the end of the 20th 
century and the beginning of the 21st centur y, researchers in military science, security 
studies, history and strategic studies became aware that dynamic changes in the world 
no longer merely result in the development of weapons systems and their mechanisms 
of action, but change war itself as well. In the legal, ethical and cultural sense, the 
process has already brought about great changes in the interpretation of war (armed 
conflict), in the way it was fought, in its constantly evolving possibilities and 
limitations as a political tool.9 
 
The rise of technological advancement through globalization for developing 
societies, the advancement of the computer, Big Data, artificial intelligence, and the 
possibilities of manipulating available information have all provided the space for 
novel uses of the e xtended effects of the devices. Similar to the interdisciplinary 
relationship of different disciplines, the elements of the national force are able to 
achieve a synergistic effect together, in synchronization with each other and based on 
the principle of m ultiplication of effects. The combined use of forces and means is not 
new in warfare. This has been the case in all historical eras, on the one hand in the 
world of battlefields (military sector)10, but also, of course, in terms of politics, using 
a wider r ange of instruments (diplomatic, economic, financial, religious -ethical - 
                                                      
6  HOLECZ , József: War Theory of Hybrid Warfare; Diploma Thesis, 2017. National 
University of Public Service, Faculty of Military Sciences and Military Traini ng 
7  FRIDMAN (2018)  op. cit.  
8  Ibid. pp. 11 -29. 
9  FORGÁCS  (2020) op. cit. p. 217.  
HOLECZ , József: The study of hybrid warfare from the perspective of strategic studies; 
Seregszemle, 2018/2. pp. 43 -46. 
https://honvedelem.hu/files/files/115177/seregszemle _2018_2.pdf (downloaded 04 June 
2021)  
10  It is in terms of service branches, special troops and cooperation of troop elements within 
those that we can talk about military operations of combined arms and joint nature, at the 
basis of which lies the subunit -unit-higher unit level cooperation to achieve military 
objectives. Regardless of the existence of these concepts, this was already evident in the 
world of ancient battlefields, when the commander tried to forge an advantage from the use 
of forces w ith different capabilities precisely from the goal -oriented cooperation of 
capabilities through maximizing impact.  62 cultural sector). What has changed by the end of the 20th century, is the arsenal of 
modern possibilities inherent in synchronization and measurability of the synergic 
effect of the u se of the means. We are able to elicit not only intended, positive and 
negative, effects on the opposing party, but thanks to the technology we are able to 
follow, evaluate and, if necessary, shape them with a relatively high accuracy in a 
'real-time' way.  And all this in terms of all means of asserting the will (interest), not 
just the military sector.  
 
According to Fridman, four main sources can be identified that influenced the 
theory of hybrid warfare: Chinese warfare without borders (others: unlimited 
warfare), Lind's fourth -generation warfare, Huber's complex warfare, and the 2005 
U.S. National Defense Strategy.11 In our 2017 thesis, we identified the same elements 
of developmental history that led to the creation of Hoffman’s first ‘hybrid warfare’12 
terminology of 2005/2007.13 At the same time, our opinion certainly differs from the 
findings of Fridman that only these would have played a role in the process. In our 
opinion, in the 21st century, a terminological development in all academic areas or 
discip lines takes place in an inter - or rather transdisciplinary way, i.e. they develop 
partly independently of each other, but sometimes interacting with each other, in most 
cases unpredictably influencing one another. We believe that representatives of 
differe nt disciplines examined strategic and operational environmental changes 
simultaneously, but from different perspectives, and identified their implications for 
security and warfare. The development process is more akin accordingly to a multiple 
DNA spiral, where the threads lean on each other, occasionally linked to each other 
denote a variety of research and theories, like a staircase, where the time factor and 
the development can be demonstrated, but does not illustrate the 
inter/transdisciplinarity of thi s day and age.  
 
As mentioned above, our research does not necessarily follow the Fridman line 
of thought, but rather focuses on the development of terminological meaning content. 
Accordingly, we partly present the theories also used by the famous English w riter, 
and partly beyond them we try to interpret the processes influencing terminology and 
meaning on a wider basis.  
 
Like Fridman, we must first and foremost deal with an Anglo - Saxon theory: 
the American generation theory of warfare, which perfectly sh ows how authorities of 
different directions are mixed around the study of a subject.  The publication in 1989 
of a study entitled “ The Changing Face of War: Into the Fourth Generation”  is not 
linked to William s Lind, as he, being a civilian, wrote the the ory jointly with four 
military officers (Keith Nightingale, John F. Schmitt, Joseph W. Sutton and Gary I. 
Wilson).  It is clear that both members of the army and the security studies publicist 
perceived the changes in warfare.14 In an article published by Lind on his own in 2004, 
                                                      
11  FRIDMAN (2018)  op. cit. p. 12.  
12  In our view, during the development of the concept, the first acceptable terminology was 
formulated by Frank G. Hoffman. The two dates are justified by the fact that in 2005 he 
carried on a discourse with James N. Mattis in a short publication on the features of hybrid 
warfare represented by the two of them, and in 2007 he formulated his thoughts in a more 
extensive study on his own.  
13  HOLECZ (2017)  op. cit. pp. 6 -17. 
14  LIND, William S. – NIGHTENGALE , Keith – SCHMITT , John F. – SUTTON , Joseph W. –
WILSON , Gary I.: The Changing Face of War: Into the Fourth Generation; Marine Corps 63 entitled “ Understanding Fourth Generation War”, he already further shaped his 
theory independently based on the directions and effects of the trends that occurred 
since 1989.  
 
Lind's theory, with regard to periodization, is subject to critique and attacks to 
this day, but what he wrote about the effects of environmental change on warfare is 
beyond debate and clearly relevant to our topic. It presents the most marked and 
radical change since the Peace of W estphalia (1648), according to which the state 
loses its monopoly on war.15 It identifies several reasons for this, which is partly the 
cause of this radical change, partly the consequence of technological revolutions and 
many economic, socio -political proc esses. Due to the opportunities provided by 
technology, in addition to/instead of military force, non -military entities, in many 
cases civilians, may be involved in the cause of the conflict, which induces a blurring 
of the line between classical war and p eace. This effect is enhanced by the fact that in 
addition to conventional warfare used in the majority of terminologies, new toolkits 
have also appeared that in most cases defy interpretation in terms of combat 
procedures.16 
 
Since the first World War, the  in-depth possibilities of operations have more and 
more spectacularly been ensured, which in World War 2 demonstrated the horrors of 
war for the population. At the same time, it is a definitely new phenomenon, that the 
aggressor did not necessarily have t o attack protected civilian and military targets, but 
much rather the critical infrastructure in today's parlance, through which the 
government’s public esteem can be shaken, and public support for a possible war can 
be reduced. The military levels are mix ed as strategic goals are achievable through 
tactical means, i.e. destruction of civilian and military infrastructure, that is, war is no 
longer a purely military issue, it is an issue for everyone in the given country.17 
 
To match the new theory, new activ ities were created were – on top of the 
existing toolkit. According to Lind, psychological operations may become a decisive 
strategic weapon in the future, primarily in the form of media and information 
influence. Both the media and computer viruses are ab le to influence the mood and 
morale of civil society and the military. According to Lind, these tools create the 
condition for us to think of the enemy not just as an army to be destroyed. It is much 
more optimal if the enemy country's collapses internally  collapse by having the 
termination of the general public support for the war available. In fourth -generation 
warfare, modern technologies offer us additional opportunities. Lind believes that a 
much smaller military force in the theater of war will be abl e to bring about a similar 
effect than a numerically much larger force up until then.18 
 
                                                      
Gazette, October 1989, pp. 22-26. 
https://www.academia.edu/7964013/The_Changing_Face_of_War_Into_the_Fourth_Gen
eration (downloaded 10 July 2021)  
CHIFU (2019) op. cit. p. 36.  
15  LIND, William S.: Understanding the Fourth Generation War; Military Review, September -
October 2004, p. 12.  https://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=482203  (downloaded 10 July 
2021)  
16  Ibid. pp. 22 -24. 
17  Ibid. pp.18 -19. 
18  Ibid. pp 36 -37. 64 In parallel with the fourth -generation theory, a theory in China also appeared, 
which, like Lind’s theory, departs from the observation that the Cold War following 
Worl d War 2, the restricting capabilities of the international organizations, 
globalization based on economy, military professionalism based on technology, the 
military hegemony of the United States of America, the weakening of the states’ 
opportunities to con trol and dominate over war all foreshadowed the need to 
reconsider earlier warfare principles and the interest -asserting opportunities shaped 
by the above processes.19 
 
The study published in 1999 was written by two senior officers of the Chinese 
air force,  Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui, under the title Unrestricted Warfare20 (the 
original title of the work: in simplified Chinese script: 超限战, or in traditional 
Chinese characters: 超限戰 )21. The authors noted that, by the end of the 20th century, 
human societies have become much more complex and heterogeneous, also much 
more inexplicable than ever before. At the same time their susceptibility to crises, 
crises, conflicts also increased.  
 
In their writing, they eerily identify strategic environmental changes similar to 
those of the creators of fourth -generation theory. After World War 2, the bipolar world 
order, and the constant risk of the possibility of nuclear war, resulted in the use of 
military means in the conflicts of the modern age being either limited or avoided 
where possible. In parallel with this process, there is a clear increase in the use of non -
military, political, economic and technological, means of resolving these conflicts. 
Recognizing that, as a result of these changes, war still remains war, but in addition 
to the physical coercive ability of the military, other means, armed and non -armed, 
military and non -military, and deadly and non -lethal, can ensure that the political e nd 
goal is achieved.22 
 
The new warfare appears as a ‘grand warfare method’ in the study, which is 
nominally linked to the phenomenon of war, but only in its purpose. This method or 
approach is already breaking with old forms of war, instead it combines mil itary and 
non-military means.23 It includes the opportunity to use many of the means of will 
assertion, such as diplomatic means (alliance building, diplomatic agreements), 
economic warfare (applying trade pressure, granting aid and imposing sanctions), 
financial instruments (stock market speculatio n, currency devaluation), the cyber 
warfare (hacking, virus attacks, actions against critical infrastructure), the information 
warfare (media manipulation, disinformation), interventions against networks 
(disrupting the operation of large national support systems) as well as exploiting the 
                                                      
19  NAN Li: Unrestricted Warfare and Chinese Military Strategy; pp. 1 -2. 
https://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp -content/uploads/2014/07/CO02022.pdf (downloaded 10 July 
2021)  
20  It should be noted that both the Hungarian and English translations of the title refer to the 
'unlimitedness' of warfare, while the use of the 'unrestricted' or 'u nregulated' signaling 
structure could be better understood, which would make it clearer that it is about a way of 
thinking and approach that goes beyond the national -international regulation of will 
assertion, which exploits and even utilizes its shortcomi ngs. 
21  Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unrestricted_Warfare  (downloaded 10 July 2021)  
22  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. p. 7.  
23  Ibid. p. 119.  65 opportunities provided by industrial and environmental disasters.  This can, in our 
understanding, be resource warfare, technology warfare, intelligence warfare, 
psychological warfare, space warfare, cultural or ideologic al warfare, virtual warfare, 
international legal warfare, or even ‘warfare’ using terrorist tools, guerrilla warfare, 
or gaining advantage through criminal acts.24 At the same time, Qiao and Wang did 
not rule out any use of old methods, either, i.e. convent ional warfare, the use of 
weapons of mass destruction (nuclear war, bio -chemical warfare) they considered 
these likewise suitable as a means to achieve the political end goal.25 
 
However, the power of the above possibilities is not in themselves, but in the ir 
almost infinite combination possibilities. “Any of the above types of methods of 
operation can be combined with another of the above methods of operation to form a 
completely new method of operation. […] Regardless of whether it is intentional or 
uninte ntional, the carrying out of combined methods of operation using…”26 they 
formulate. However, this combined application, the synchronization required for this, 
does not take place within the application limits of the different areas. The rules of 
operation of all instruments need to be pushed out, which is of course not an option 
without limits/boundaries, but in any case it requires a kind of thinking “outside the 
box” mindset. The synergistic effect of the resulting combined application will be 
much greate r than would normally be expected, as the suffering state faces novel 
threats and their complex effects in several areas, which do not take into account the 
framework provided by the rules.27 
 
At the same time, the authors also suggest that the novel toolki ts brought about 
by the changes of the modern age, due to technological developments, in addition to 
the possibility of gaining political/military advantage, also pose at least as much 
vulnerability. And the threat they feel is much more complex today than  it used to be, 
as the rapid changes in technical development, the new opportunities inherent in the 
instruments and the varied synergies resulting from their combination require a 
constant knowledge of the situation at the political strategic level.28 
 
Accordingly, Wang and Qiao consider the following to be the most important 
characteristics of modern will assertion:  
- 360-degree approach to the combined use of available and applicable means 
and toolkits;  
- synchronization to harmonize different activities;  
- identification of limited objectives ; 
- unrestricted application of measures to achieve limited objectives;  
- search for asymmetry,  in all possible military and non -military domains, in 
order to assert our will;  
- minimize the use of resources in a way that the objectives are reasonably set 
and then the necessary resources are used efficiently;  
                                                      
24  Ibid. p. 146.  
NAN Li (2017) op. cit. p. 3.  
25  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. p. 146.  
26  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. p. 146.  
27  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. pp. 181 -182. 
FRIDMAN  (2018) op. cit.  pp. 13 -17. 
CHIFU (2019)  2019. p. 38.  
28  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. pp. 115 -116. 66 - multidimensional coordination between all dimensions,  military and non -
military, in order to achieve a common goal;  
- to control the situation for the whole period , which ca n be ensured by 
continuous acquisition of information , correction of activities and control of 
the situation.29 
 
In the Chinese study, the characteristics of the ‘hybridized’ conflicts of our time 
are easily recognizable. The political, military or even dip lomatic toolbox, the 
economy in the culture of, or even religion inherent in, exerting influence, the growing 
role of psychology and the media, but also domains that were not yet a priority then, 
but which have now become priorities, such as cyber space an d space.30 
 
American military thinking has also come to realize that there are new 
opportunities in the combined use of military force of different legal statuses. The 
theory of the next author, compared to fourth -generation theory, or the thoughts of 
Chine se theorists, might seem to us to be a kind of setback, yet we do not think we 
should disregard its presentation. The reason for this is very simple: the theories of 
various thinkers have been largely determined not only by the situation and ambitions 
of their own country, but also by their own interests and vocations. Based on this, 
these theories are simultaneously affected by the author’s nationality that determines 
their world view, its approach and subjective evaluation criteria and by their 
profession , which is defined as soldier, social scientist, strategic analyst or defense 
politician which determines the criteria of examination. Based on this, the theory of 
Compound Wars is an unavoidable theory.  
 
The blending of the combatants, the appearance in t he theater of operations of 
actors of differing legal status, respectively, gave rise to the following theory. The 
publication in 2002 of Compound Wars: That Fatal Knot, edited by Thomas M. 
Huber31, which in two studies also dealt with the fact that warfare  modes can be mixed 
in some form due to the complexity of the combatants. Huber also points out that war 
had earlier been clearly defined, thanks to which its basic principles, the dividing line 
between war and peace could easily be formulated. The author presents future warfare 
as the use of regular and irregular forces for a common objective. However, the joint 
commander, who is able to see through the strategic and operational situation and to 
achieve the political objectives by properly and effectively using the two types of 
military potential, each radically different in terms of capabilities, plays a key role in 
mingling the combatants.32 
                                                      
29  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. pp. 206-215. 
FRIDMAN  (2018) op. cit.  pp. 17 -19. 
HOLECZ (2017)  op. cit. pp. 8 -9. 
30  QIAO – WANG (2017) op. cit. p. 192 ;  
31  Besides Huber, many contributed to the publication, but most important for us is the article 
entitled Compound Warfare: A Conceptual Framework , contributed by the editor. The 
origin of the theory is dated by many back to 1997, however, the Internet only co ntains a 
version of it (containing several studies) published in 2002 by the US Army Command and 
General Staff College. References here are made to the version of 2002, available on the 
Internet.  
32  HUBER , Thomas M.: Compound Warfare: That Fatal Knot; US A rmy Command and 
General Staff College Press, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 2002. 
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA481548.pdf  (downloaded 21 July 2012) pp. 1 -7;  67 By mentioning historical examples, he tries to shed light on the fact that in 
previous eras there were numerous inst ances of regular forces cooperating with 
irregular forces. In his opinion, it is beyond doubt that in this case they can exert much 
greater influence on the tide of war that those military leaders who do not recognize 
it, namely the fact that a strategy ut ilizing compound warfare gains the upper hand 
over a strategy that uses solely conventional forces.33 
 
In addition to the above theories, a number of monographs and studies were 
published in the 1990s on the political and military understanding of the rapid ly 
changing strategic and operational environment, on the conclusions that can be drawn 
from them with regard to understanding the changes in warfare. Without being 
exhaustive, this list includes a book by Martin van Creveld, published in 1991, The 
Transfo rmation of War , a book published in 1993, entitled War and Anti -War,  written 
jointly by Heidi Toffler and her husband, Alvin Toffler, famous for his Third Wave 
theory ( The Third Wave , 1980), mention must be made here of Charles C. Krulak's 
The Three -Block  War34 theory developed in 1999 and published on the pages of the 
Marines Magazine, under the title The Strategic Corporal: Leadership in the Three -
Block War . All of them examined, from different approaches, changes in both the 
strategic and operational environment and the conclusions that can be drawn from 
them.  
 
 
The birth of terminology  
 
The collocation ‘hybrid warfare’ has now become almost a ‘buzzword’ and most 
scientifically demanding analyses or studies deal to some extent with its origins. This 
study of origin is less likely to interpret the circumstances of the creation of a new 
                                                      
FRIDMAN  (2018) op. cit. pp. 24 -27. 
33  HUBER , Thomas M.: Napoleon in Spain and Naples: Fortified Co mpound Warfare; In: 
HUBER , Thomas M. (ed.): Compound Warfare: That Fatal Knot; University Press of the 
Pacific, 27 July 2004. p. 91. ISBN: 978 -1410215307  
FLEMING , Brian P.: The Hybrid Threat Concept: Contemporary War, Military Planning 
and the Advent of Un restricted Operational Art; United States Army Command and 
General Staff College, 2011. p. 13. 
http://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/p4013coll3/id/2752/rec/1  
(downloaded 30 March 2017)  
34  According to the Three -Block War theory, the U.S . military must cope with three radically 
different systems of tasks at the same time in an operational space. According to Krulak, 
modern military application is no longer a mere war activity. A military force must be 
deployed at a level of preparedness, which enables it to perform combat operations, 
stabilizing operations and also humanitarian tasks simultaneously, practically in the same 
operational area. There is a continuation of the theory that has become less commonplace, 
thanks to hybrid warfare, wh ich has been dubbed the Four -Block War. An article by James 
N. Mattis and Frank G. Hoffman in 2005, Future Warfare, The Rise of Hybrid Wars, added 
one block to the three that already existed: information operations. However, the theory of 
the Four -Block Wa r shifted the focus to another name: hybrid wars, precisely because of 
the authors' research direction and choice of title. In: KRULAK , Charles C.: The Strategic 
Corporal: Leadership in the Three -Block War; https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/  
a399413.pdf  (downloaded 10 July 2021);  
MATTIS , James N. – HOFFMAN , Frank G.: Future Warfare: The Rise of Hybrid Wars; 
http://milnewstbay.pbworks.com/f/MattisFourBlockWarUSNINov2005.pdf (downloaded 
02 October 2017)  68 name  in a broader sense (as we did in the previous section), but it is much more 
common to focus on the formation of the term itself. In the following, we will deal 
with the latter. Researchers on the subject are currently divided on the inventor of the 
term ‘ hybrid warfare’. Perhaps it is no longer a question that the creation of 
terminology has nothing to do with the Russian Federation or its activities in the 
Ukraine in 2014. In the creation of ‘hybrid warfare’ as a technical term, most mention 
either the na me of William J. Nemeth or Frank G. Hoffman. However, this is a 
mistake. The terminology itself already existed, and its appearance was precisely 
brought about by the changed operational environment, and, respectively, by the need 
for the US armed forces t o effectively apply the capabilities required to defeat the 
adversary identifiable at the operational -tactical level.  
 
During my research work between 2015 and 2017 I already came across a piece 
writing by Robert G. Walker who had talked about ‘hybrid warf are’ and ‘hybrid 
forces’ as early as 1998.35 In recent years, during our examination of the subject, 
another author came into view, James C. Dugan, the person who, like Walker, 
addressed hybrid warfare in 1998. They both define the concept of hybrid (milita ry) 
force and the purpose for which it is necessary to create a military force with such 
capabilities.  
 
Although the domestic and international literature I found does not mention the 
above two American military officers at all in connection with the devel opment of 
hybrid warfare, it is clear that they came to hybrid warfare along the same lines of 
thought as Huber to Compound Warfare. Consequently, we believe that we also need 
to address the ideas they represent in relation to the birth of the terminology.  
 
Robert G. Walker completed his dissertation entitled SPEC FI: The United 
States Marine Corps and Special Operations upon  his graduation from the Naval 
Postgraduate School in December 1998. The author assumed that the use of the U.S. 
Marine Corps had prov ided them with new operational experience in recent years. 
Based on the present study, the expected challenges of the security environment of 
the future, and the operational experience, it sought to support the need to modify the 
applicable warfare and the  correctness of the corresponding, then recent past, 
American military organizational restructuring.  
 
Walker's research is not an end in itself. It focused on the development of the 
American special operational capability that was already underway and to j ustify the 
related organizational restructuring, to demonstrate the characteristics of the 
applicable modern warfare.36 In examining the environmental characteristics that 
determine the warfare of the future, he also uses the findings of the theories presen ted 
earlier, according to which “in [..] conflicts are increasingly fought between states and 
non-state actors, as well as between technologically and militarily developed states 
against underdeveloped or emerging states. The future of warfare as described  by 
these authors, as well as many others, possesses a number of unconventional 
                                                      
35  HOLECZ (2017)  op. cit. pp. 11 -12. 
36  WALKER , Robert G.: SPEC FI: The United States Marine Corps and Special Operations; 
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, 1998. p. 7. 
https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/8989  (downloaded 11 June 2021)  69 characteristics, including the use of guerrilla tactics, terrorism, and perhaps 
information warfare or even weapons of mass destruction (WMD).”37 
 
Following this environmental f actor study, Walker concludes that such a 
complex threat cannot be effectively addressed by a conventional force. In his view, 
this challenge requires units of complex readiness, armed, non -traditional thinking, 
commanded differently from regular troops, i .e., “hybrid force”.38 In the study, the 
author also created the content elements of the hybrid combatant, according to which 
such a force can be interpreted as a cross between a special and a conventional force. 
He believes that in this way this form of wa rfare "… possesses characteristics of both 
the special and conventional realms, and requires an extreme amount of flexibility in 
order to transition operationally and tactically between the special and conventional 
arenas."39 
 
James C. Dugan, like Walker, deals with hybrid warfare in his December 1998 
dissertation entitled Elusive Armies and Invisible Hands: Combining the 
Conventional and Guerrilla Forces from 1776 to the Present.  He, too, sought to 
substantiate his hypothesis, based on the processing of historical experience, that in 
the operational environment of the late 20th century, one must adapt to an enemy 
using irregular warfare. Unlike Walker, Dugan, however, does not envisage hybrid 
forces as a section of conventional and special operations, but, like Hubert, as the 
combined use of regular and irregular forces, which is realized under a single 
command.40 
 
Dugan also seeks, primarily through the military eye, to create a better -
functioning, more adaptable, more flexible f orce that, unlike traditional military force, 
is much more versatile and more likely to achieve political and military goals. It 
identifies two key factors: organizational flexibility resulting from the combination 
and cooperation of forces, and command fl exibility at all levels resulting from 
decentralization. Both factors build leadership adaptation, which can be the 
foundation of success.41 
 
The force combinations of Dugan and Walker are not independent scientific 
ideas, by the way. As early as the first half of the 1990s, research was conducted into 
how American military supremacy could be effectively applied in a changing 
operational environment in the then unipolar world order. A good example of this 
finding is Michael M. Kershaw’s study in 1994, The In tegration of Special Operations 
and General Purpose Forces,  in which the author argues in a similar way as Walker 
or Dugan did. What the above two military officers are definitely pioneers in is ‘hybrid 
warfare’ as the first users of the term. Although the  concept they define is far from 
comparable to today's 'hybrid warfare', in terms of the theories presented before them, 
only environmental changes have given the concept a sense of relevance and 
                                                      
37  Ibid. p. 7.  
38  Ibid. pp. 2 -12. 
39  Ibid. pp. 4 -5. 
40  DUGAN , James C.: Elusive Armies and Invisible Hands: Combining Conventional and 
Guerrilla Forces from 1776 to the Presen t; Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, 
California. December 1998, pp. 2 -5. https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/8306  
(downloaded 07 March 2020)  
41  Ibid. pp. 100 -110. 70 development, but since 1998 it has been proven to exist, it has been researched and 
used by some.  
 
Knowing the above, we have to disagree with our fellow researchers who 
attribute the creation of the term ‘hybrid warfare’ to the work of William J. Nemeth. 
It is undisputed among us that Nemeth to a great extent refi ned the terminology 
presented so far, but since what he has articulated is still far from today's ‘hybrid 
warfare’, so overall we consider him to be just one of the stations in development 
history of terminology.  
 
William J. Nemeth wrote his study Future W ar and Chechnya: The Case for 
Hybrid Warfare in 2002, in which he believes that the mode of warfare used by the 
Chechens can be practically identified as hybrid warfare. In his view, although the 
assertion of the will applied can be equated with guerrilla warfare, i.e. an irregular 
form, he emphasizes that behind the seemingly disordered forces, strategically 
coordinated activities, a high degree of awareness, modern technology and 
networking make a qualitative difference. All this gave a new dimension to t he 
Chechen forces, who, taking full advantage of these elements, successfully fought 
against regular Russian troops in 1994 -96. Chechen forces are not measurable to the 
irregular warriors of earlier ages. In contrast, conventional weapons systems, terroris t 
methods, or even the ' capabilities ' of organized criminal groups have been used 
extremely flexibly. They do not exclude the possibility to learn and creatively apply 
adaptable elements of Western and Russian military doctrine, what's more they were 
able to consciously and in an organized manner combine one with the other.42 
 
According to Nemeth, hybrid warfare is the future form of warfare, which is 
rooted in the strength of the guerrilla approach, opposed to which the technically 
advanced and centrally commanded conventional forces are cumbersome.43 The 
author sets the social system as the basis of his whole theory, where he creates the 
concept of ‘hybrid society’. These social forms operate within a gray zone between 
the modern world and the pre -state st ate. In practice, these states/societies have 
returned to a traditional socio -political structure of the past, as a result of which their 
system of norms is radically different from the ethical approach of modern states. 
Hybrid societies are anarchist, for  whose members war and violence are accepted as 
the norm. At the same time, a hybrid society emphasizes their traditional roots, yet is 
open to the possibilities offered by modern technology.44 
 
The above basic orientation determines the relationship of such a society to 
hybrid warfare, but also the characteristics of the successful operations to be carried 
out against them! Traditional thinking is dominated by the struggle for life , as a result 
of which the use of other means and methods beyond guerrilla warfare, which are 
morally unacceptable to modern society, such as kidnapping, murder, hostage 
mutilation, genocide, or bomb or mine attacks. To this end, the blurring of the legal 
distinction bet ween combatant and non -combatant, which was fully accepted as an 
intentional principle, was also used.  From these characteristics Nemeth draws the 
                                                      
42  NEMETH , William J.: Future war and Chechnya: a case for hybrid warfare; Naval 
Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, 2002. pp. 28 -29. 
https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/5865 (downloaded 21 March 2 017)  
43  Ibid. pp. 73 -76. 
44  Ibid. pp. 68 -76. 71 conclusion that, for Western societies, a hybrid society can be practically perceived 
as a terrorist state.45 
 
In addition to the above findings, Nemeth summarizes the key military features 
of hybrid warfare and the non -traditional characteristics of the responses to them.46 
According to the author, the strengths of a hybrid force are not the same as those 
considered by Western societies to be military strengths, and therefore these different 
ways of thinking/values in operations give a decisive advantage to a hybrid force over 
a regular force. The hybrid strengths which mainly define these different mindset s are 
as follows:  
 Novel thoughts/ideas that may arise both in command and in the use of the 
means/methods. Hybrid forces are able to effectively adapt the advanced 
technology systems so that they are efficacious, or cause a surprise. They are 
able to use m odern and outdated equipment in a way different from the 
conventional, thereby bring about unexpected effects, demoralizing their 
enemies. They also take advantage of the regulation of Western societies: 
when a new military system is introduced, the rules for its use are 
incorporated into doctrine, which immediately determines the direction of 
training. As a result, the trained staff will no longer be able to use these tools 
in a new way (even in a prohibited way), i.e. it will be predictable and 
recognizab le. Nemeth stresses the importance of the use of modern media, 
as tools of command and control, disinformation or propaganda.  
 Use of personalities and charismatic leaders and bringing them to the 
forefront, which is a basic necessity of decentralized comma nd (nowadays 
we practically talk about it as the basic criterion of mission -oriented 
command – the Author ). 
 Society and the military , precisely because of their strong instincts of 
survival, are able to bear almost any loss, which gives the appearance of 
indestructibility.  
 The strong belief in the cause to ensure the supply of motivated new 
members for the hybrid force, but also one of the most important bases for 
guerrilla warfare, the support of society as well.  
 The decentralized approach ensures the flex ibility of the subunits 
performing the tasks, the rapid adaptation to the situations, and decouples the 
execution of the tasks from possible obstacles in the flow of information and 
the possible bureaucracy of the leadership.47 
 
 
 
                                                      
45  Ibid. pp. 72 -74. 
46  Nemeth summarizes 13 points of this system of political, social, and military relations of 
hybrid society and its hybrid warfare, its mechanisms of interaction, and makes 
recommendations to those who oppose them.  
47  Based on the whole of the study, the five bullet points were supplemented, since the 
summary only mentions them as entries. In: NEMETH  (2002) op. cit.  72 The author considers it important to mention another aspect, which, although it 
appears as a special condition in the region, it also had key consequences48, namely 
the knowledge of the Russian language and culture provided the perfect backdrop for 
them for the successful accompli shment of psychological and information operations. 
They were able to accomplish all this so efficiently that they not only strengthened 
their own social basis, but managed to weaken the morale of the Russian troops and, 
above all this, earned the politica l support and sympathy of Western societies.49 
 
 
Conclusion  
 
In our study, we showed how hybrid warfare was first formed in its meaning, 
and then how the name itself was found, in the late 1990s and early 2000s. However, 
the development process was unstoppa ble.  Hybrid warfare increasingly demanded 
room for itself in terminology, which is true even if “ The National Defense Strategy 
of the United States of America”  adopted in 2005 makes no mention of it at all.  In 
fact, the U.S. Strategy Paper does not yet ad dress the subject of our research, but at 
the same time already addresses the changed security (strategic and operational) 
environment, the emerging new types of threats whose understanding and 
identification of responses is a policy and, in part, military  task. The strategy divides 
the identified threats into four major groups.  
 
On the one hand, of course, traditional threats can still not be ruled out, which 
other states can realize through their regular forces. In addition, a range of non -
traditional thr eats is emerging, which can be identified with non -state actors (political, 
religious, ethnic or extremist groups), uprisings of irregular armed groups, guerrilla 
warfare and acts of terrorism. The third group are the threats associated with the 
disaster t hat the theft of weapons of mass destruction, illegal possession, storage, or 
malicious use thereof. Finally, threats of a destructive (destructive, subversive, 
disruptive) nature are mentioned in the document, which means the development and 
malicious use  of advanced technologies for the purpose of gaining control over key 
areas (biotechnology, cyber activities, lasers, etc.).50 
 
The strategy takes over the possible actors of the identified sources of threat from 
the theories discussed above: state and non -governmental organizations, organized 
crime groups and terrorist organizations as well. It also stresses that the trait present ed 
as a central element of the study is that these threats may occur separately, but the 
security environment is increasingly challenged by the simultaneous existence of 
these threats, different variation characteristic, which represents a growing challeng e 
for the responses with respect.51 
                                                      
48  This factor may seem marginal to the reader, but we still consider it imp ortant to highlight. 
Last but not least, also because Russia used this same way of thinking in the 2010s to build 
up its influence on the Ukrainian cultural and educational institutions and finally used it to 
perform the operation that ended in 2014 with t he annexation of the Crimea.  
49  NEMETH  (2002) op. cit. pp. 58 -59. 
50  The National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, pp. 2 -3. 
FRIDMAN  (2018) op. cit. pp. 27 -29. 
51  The National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, March 2005. pp. 2 -5. 
http://archive.defense.gov/news/Mar2005/d20050318nds1.pdf (downloaded 20 April 
2017)   73 Our study presented only the first phase of the evolutionary history of the 
original, American, ‘hybrid warfare’. We have recorded that the concept has existed 
since 1998, although a significant difference can be identified between the 
interpretations of the time and today. We demonstrated how the changes in the 
strategic and operational environment transformed the development of various 
theories, which, combined, led to their being recorded in 2005 in one of the k ey 
strategic documents of the United States of America. As a continuation of our 
research, in the next section we come to the hybrid warfare of today, with all its 
positive and in many cases contradictory features.  
 
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
  
 CHIFU, Iulian: Hybri d warfare, lawfare, information warfare – The wars of the 
future; In: SIMONS , Greg – CHIFU, Iulian (eds.): The Changing Face of Warfare 
in the 21st Century; Routledge - Taylor & Francis Group, New York, 2019, pp. 
35-47. ISBN 978 -0-367-90134 -9 
 DUGAN , James C.: Elusive Armies and Invisible Hands: Combining 
Conventional and Guerrilla Forces from 1776 to the Present; Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California. December 1998, https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/  
10945/8306 (downloaded 07 March 2020)  
 EMBER , Istvá n: The proxy war of market participants; Military Science, 2021 
electronic issue 
https://www.mhtt.eu/hadtudomany/2021/2021e/EMBER%20Istvan_%20Piaci
%20szereplok%20proxy%20haboruja.pdf (downloaded 21 November 2021)  
 FLEMING , Brian P.: The Hybrid Threat Concept: Contemporary War, Military 
Planning and the Advent of Unrestricted Operational Art; United States Army 
Command and General Staff College, 2011. 
http://cgsc.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/p4013coll3/id/27 52/r
ec/1 (downloaded 30 March 2017)  
 FORGÁCS , Balázs: Guerrillas, partisans, insurgents. History of the Theory of 
Irregular Warfare – The Challenges of Our Time; Zrínyi Publishing House, 
Budapest, 2020. ISBN 978 963 327 798 0.  
74  FORGÁCS , Balázs: New Wars, Old  Theories; Commentary, 2021/1, pp. 77 -85. 
 FRIDMAN , Ofer: Russian 'Hybrid Warfare'. Resurgence and Politicization; C. 
Hurst & Co. Ltd., London, 2018, ISBN 9781849048811.  
 HOLECZ , József: The Gerasimov Doctrine – In Another Enlightenment; Felderítő 
Szemle, 20 17/3-4. pp. 5 -27. https://www.knbsz.gov.hu/hu/letoltes/fsz/2017 -3-
4.pdf  (downloaded 04 June 2021)  
 HOLECZ , József: The study of hybrid warfare from the perspective of strategic 
studies; Seregszemle, 2018/2. pp. 43 -56. 
https://honvedelem.hu/files/files/11517 7/seregszemle_2018_2.pdf 
(downloaded 04 June 2021)  
 HOLECZ , József: War Theory of Hybrid Warfare; Diploma Thesis, 2017. 
National University of Public Service, Faculty of Military Sciences and Military 
Training.  
 HUBER , Thomas M.: Compound Warfare: That Fatal  Knot; US Army 
Command and General Staff College Press, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 2002. 
https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA481548.pdf  (downloaded 21 July 2012)  
 KRULAK , Charles C.: The Strategic Corporal: Leadership in the Three -Block 
War; https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a399413.pdf  (downloaded 10 July 
2021)  
 LIND, William S. – NIGHTENGALE , Keith – SCHMITT , John F. – SUTTON , 
Joseph W. –WILSON , Gary I.: The Changing Face of War: Into the Fourth 
Generation; Marine Corps Gazette, Octob er 1989, pp. 22 -26. 
https://www.academia.edu/7964013/The_Changing_Face_of_War_Into_the_F
ourth_Generation (downloaded 10 July 2021)  
 LIND, William S.: Understanding the Fourth Generation War; Military Review, 
September -October 2004, pp. 12 -16. 
https://www.hs dl.org/?abstract&did=482203  (downloaded 10 July 2021)  
 MATTIS , James N. – HOFFMAN , Frank G.: Future Warfare: The Rise of Hybrid 
Wars; 
http://milnewstbay.pbworks.com/f/MattisFourBlockWarUSNINov2005.pdf  
downloaded 02 October 2017)  
 NAN Li: Unrestricted Warfare  and Chinese Military Strategy; 
https://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp -content/uploads/2014/07/CO02022.pdf 
(downloaded 10 July 2021)  
 National Military Strategy of Hungary, Government Resolution 2021. 
(1393/2021. (VI. 24.), pp. 5069 -5084. 
https://magyarkozlony.hu/dokum entumok/2a94d595e4bc33b3515c09b0f6f04c
4ca3df69c6/megképes (downloaded 03 July 2021)  
 NEMETH , William J.: Future war and Chechnya: a case for hybrid warfare; 
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, 2002. 
https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/5865 (downloaded 21 March 2017)  75  QIAO Liang – WANG Xiangsui: Unrestricted Warfare, 1999. 
http://www.c4i.org/unrestricted.pdf  (downloaded 10 March 2017)  
 RÁCZ, András: Russia's Hybrid War in Ukraine – Breaking the Enemy's Ability 
to Resist. 2015; https://www.fiia.fi/wp -content/uploads/2017/01/fiiareport43.  
pdf (downloaded 13 May 2021)  
 RESPERGER , István: Security Problems of the Future; Szakmai Szemle, 2021/2. 
pp. 5 -22. https://www.knbsz.gov.hu/hu/letoltes/szsz/2021_2_szam.pdf 
(downloaded 04 July 2021)  
 The National Defense Strategy of the United States of America, March 2005. 
http://archive.defense.gov/news/Mar2005/d20050318nds1.pdf (downloaded 20 
April 2017)  
 WALKER , Robert G.: SPEC FI: The United States Marine Corps and Specia l 
Operations; Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California, 1998. 
https://calhoun.nps.edu/handle/10945/8989  (downloaded 11 June 2021)  
 Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unrestricted_Warfare  (downloaded 10 
July 2021)  
 
 76 PÉTER NYESTE  PHD  
THE IMPACT OF THE PA NDEMIC ON CRIMINAL I NTELLIGENCE1  
 
 
Abstract  
 
The global pandemic, COVID 19 and its mutations have a significant impact on 
the structure of crime and law enforcement, and it will have a serious impact in the 
near future, on the branch of the criminal service. In my research, I examine the impact 
of a pandemic on global and domestic cr ime and how resilient law enforcement has 
been to respond to these challenges. I examine and present the changes in the structure 
of crime as a result of the pandemic, relying on international law enforcement 
professional sources. I established the trends and data on domestic crime on the basis 
of interviews and the analysis of statistical data.  
 
In my research I have found that there have been changes in the qualitative and 
quantitative structure of crime due to the forced effects of the pandemic on societ y 
and I made suggestions for more effective law enforcement and intelligence activities.  
 
Keywords : criminal intelligence, impact of pandemic, crime  
 
 
 
The development and change of domestic criminal intelligence  
 
Based on the professional history development of the Hungarian criminal service 
branch, already at the end of the 1880s the aim of the detectives' criminal intelligence 
activities was to monitoring, preventing and detecting crime. In order to monitor 
crime, effectively prevent, interrupt a nd detect crime, confidential intelligence 
procedures were carried out, such as surveillance, informants, covert methods of 
information gathering and various traps.  
 
The confidentiality of criminal intelligence was justified by the nature of the 
assumed of fenses (eg. crime without victim, political nature, identity of interest 
between the parties, organized crime, etc.) or by obtaining information with 
confidence way, informants or by an effectiveness of investigation.  
 
Revolutionary events, periods of Worl d War, new types of political crimes, 
which could have posed a threat to the whole society, social order, ruling regime, 
necessitated the detection of political crimes, primarily of a communist nature, and 
the development of an organizational system suitab le for their prevention.  
 
These extraordinary (revolutionary, war) circumstances necessiated the complex 
development of organizational systems suitable for obtaining information on a 
confidential basis (eg. police, gendarmerie, customs guard, army) in Hung ary. Later, 
                                                      
1  The publication was implemented with the support of the National Research Development 
and Innovation Fund TKP2020 -NKA -09 project, in the financing of the Them atic 
Excellence P rogram 2020 application program  77 due to the prevention of parallel information and procedures of a state defense nature, 
an information center was established, but it ceased to function at the end of the 
Second World War.  
 
In the losing domestic political situation of the Seco nd World War, the social 
and political system of the country, based on centuries of civil traditions, gradually 
transformed. The new, dictatorial, Soviet -type, ideologically based social and political 
transformation changed the organization and goals of cr iminal intelligence.  
 
The covert methods and procedures that have been preparing the judicial activity 
so far have been named secret operational activities and the state defense and state 
security units serving the ideological and political system have bee n set up on the 
Soviet model.  
 
The secret operational activities did not have a preparatory role for the judiciary, 
and the prosecutor's office supervising the legality of the investigation could not have 
been aware of them. The use of confidential informa tion gathering tools that severely 
restrict fundamental human rights took place without external scrutiny.  
 
After the change of regime, following the so -called Danube -gate2 scandal, the 
Parliament enacted Act X of 1990 on the temporary regulation of the licensing of 
special intelligence equipment and methods to regulate the secret information 
gathering activities of secret services and law enforcement agencies.  
 
There was st ill no legal regulation on the use of internal authorized secret means 
and methods for law enforcement (and state security) purposes other than those 
subject to external licensing.  
 
More than a hundred years have passed since the establishment of the Hunga rian 
Detective Corps until the change of regime, and the nature and character of crime and 
criminal offenses have changed significantly, but the circumstances underpinning 
confidential information (eg victimlessness, organized crime) have not changed. 
Thes e circumstancies continue to justify to collect information and record data 
without the knowledge of the party concerned, using appropriate external control.  
 
After a long preparatory work, was born in 1994 The Act on the Police, which 
regulates the secret  gathering of information for “criminal purposes” in a separate 
chapter (VII.), Which became a new, legal -level name for the activities called earlier 
”covert confidental procedures” and later „secret operational tools and methods”. 
With this, the preventi on, detection and proof of crime has gained new, available, 
legally regulated opportunities, with little external control.  
 
The criminal intelligence system based on the internal, classified norms was 
similar of the procedures prior to the change of regime . The secret information 
gathering procedure was divided into two stages. The first phase was the control of 
                                                      
2  In December 1989, the State Security Service of the Ministry of the Interior conducted 
secret means and methods of investigation against opposition parties and organizations, 
despite the fact that under t he new constitution adopted on October 23, 1989, this was 
already illegal and even unconstitutional activity.  78 the primary information called secret control of information and the second phase was 
further verification of the information supporting the suspic ion called secret 
investigation.  
 
This continues to mean that the investigating authority independently, at its 
discretion, ordered and carried out a secret information gathering procedure at the aim 
of criminally relevant information check, at the aim of finding of suspicion and the 
existence of evidence without a substantive external audit.  
 
In 2018, the time has come to transform the domestic criminal intelligence 
system and legal bases in order to ensure the continuity of supervision, investigations, 
the loss of information and the strengthening of the law.  
 
The new Criminal Procedure Act, which entered into force on 1 July 2018, 
changed in system level the law enforcement model according to which the tasks of 
criminal intelligence remained in the Police  Act, the National Tax and Customs 
Administration Act and the Prosecution Act. The covert methods for criminal 
investigation purpose are set out in the Criminal Procedure Act.  
 
The established system of procedures ensures the possibility that proactive pri or 
detection can be applied within a short period of time before ordering an investigation, 
but already within the framework of criminal proceedings.3  
 
 
Current modern criminal intelligence4 
 
First, domestic modern criminal intelligence needs to be defined on the basis of 
relevant legislation and literature, and then we take an international perspective.  
 
In order to achieve the policing and law enforcement objectives (protection of 
public security, public order and state border, prevention and detec tion of criminal 
offenses) reflected in the Hungarian Basic Law the Hungarian modern criminal 
intelligence  activity can be characterised  as a  proactive information gathering and 
analysis activity for the  respect for family life, private residence and c orrespondence 
and its closely related information self -determination, the free flow of information and 
the protection of personal data5. 
 
Domestic criminal intelligence can basically have strategic, tactical or 
investigative support tasks.  
 
The starting point of strategic criminal intelligence6 is strategic criminal 
analysis, which provides criminal analysis methods and examines the extent, 
dynamics and structure of crime, as well as the long -term pattern and tendencies of 
the characteristics  and prevalence of certain crimes.  
                                                      
3  NYESTE , Péter – SZENDREI , Ferenc: A bűnügyi hírszerzés kézikönyve; Dialog Campus, 
2019.  
4  NYESTE  Péter: A bűnügyi hírszerzés; Magyar Rendészet  2012/4. pp. 25 -32. 
5  NYESTE , Péter – NAGY, Ivett: A bűnügyi hírszerzés az elméletben és a gyakorlatban; 
Rendőrségi Tanulmányok vol. 2021/1. pp. 1 -2. 
6  23/2018( VI.21.) ORFK Utasítás a Bűnügyi Elemzési Szabályzatról 2.§ n) pontja  79 The aim of strategic criminal intelligence is to satisfy current news needs 
formulated on the basis of continuous strategic analyzes and thus to establish strategic 
decision -making.  
 
The purpose of tactical intelligence  is to serve the immediate prevention, 
handling and solution of individual and specific criminal problems.  
 
This includes intelligence activities that can be carried out in order to maintain 
the criminal intelligence infrastructure (eg protection of informan t, covert 
investigator), but also protection of privileged persons and places based on risk 
analysis.  
 
The starting point for investigative criminal intelligence7 is investigative support 
analysis, which is the activity of examining data obtained through i ndividual criminal 
proceedings and from the use of secret information gathering and from special 
investigative methods, which can assist in detecting an unknown perpetrator, planning 
investigative actions, to recognize the connections between the objects t hat can be 
connected to them, to detect organized criminal groups and their activities, to define 
the tasks of law enforcement work against the groups.  
 
The task of criminal intelligence in support of an investigation is to provide 
information and result p roducts (possible means of proof) to support further 
investigations based on the data containing individual and specific criminal offenses 
or elements referring to them.  
 
In the European Union, instead of the concept of criminal intelligence, the term 
special investigative activities and special investigative tools can be found, and these 
indicate that the purpose of collecting confidential manner criminal information is to 
prepare and assist justice.  
 
At the same time, criminal intelligence as crime monito ring, mapping of 
organized criminal groups, crime prevention, and the facilitation of other law 
enforcement tasks under police and other laws, are used yet with appropriate control 
outside of criminal proceedings.  
 
In the European Union, by Special Investi gative Means (SIM) we mean those 
special tools and methods, with the help of which evidence or information and 
analyzed information can be obtained in a covered way, without the knowledge of the 
person concerned. Their deployment will involve a breach of t he right of private right, 
wich will have to be justyfied by those carrying out/ authorising the operation.8 
 
The concept of special investigative tools is similarly defined in the European 
Union Recommendation:9 “special investigation techniques” means te chniques 
                                                      
7  23/2018( VI.21.) ORFK Utasítás a Bűnügyi Elemzési Szabályzatról 2.§ k) pontja  
8  Council of Europe Office in Belgrade: Deployment of special investigative means. 
Belgrade, 2013. pp. 12 -13. 
9  Recommendation Rec (2005) 10 of the commitee of Ministers to mem ber states on „special 
investigation techniques” in relation to serious crimes including acts of terrorism; 
https://www.legislationline.org/download/id/1 732/file/46f9ab2c5ef4d150d845540a9b79.p
df (downloaded 22 September 2021)  80 applied by the competent authorities in the context of criminal investigations for the 
purpose of detecting and investigating serious crimes and suspects, aiming at 
gathering information in such a way as not to alert the target persons.  
 
According  to a report10 prepared by the European Commission's Directorate -
General for Migration and Home Affairs, the special investigative tools, technical, 
can be divided into two parts: one part is the so -called “Legal instruments” that belong 
to the area of just ice (e.g., witness protection), the other is “investigative tools” as 
well as in law enforcement operations.  
 
The report identified and examined eight special investigative tools:  
‒ Interception of communication: interception of post, wiretapping, bugging, 
telecommunication data, location acquisition, telecommunication devices, 
computer remote searching, mobile and radio frequency identification devices, 
computers and Internet data file control devices are used to detection of serious 
crimes and usually for a maximum period of 6 months.  
‒ Surveillance activity is not interpreted uniformly in the Member States. Some 
Member States distinguish between technical surveillance and non -technical 
surveillance (Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Luxembourg), other Membe r 
States distinguish between short -term and long -term surveillance and distinguish 
between surveillance with or without a judicial authorization.  
The broader concept of observation can be the collection and examination of 
samples in a covered way, the repl acement of goods in a covered way, the taking 
of videos, the taking of photographs in a covered way, hidden image recording, 
body -mounted hidden devices and tracing.  
‒ Covert investigations refer to the following investigative activities in Europe: 
infiltrat ion, pseudo or test purchase, participation in controlled deliveries11.  
It is carried out by a trained member of the authority or by a civil person, who 
conceals his identity by means of cover documents. There are three types of use 
of undercover investiga tors: the first is the general, systematic collection of 
information to detect specific crimes, the second is the execution of short -term 
pseudo purchase type operations, and the third is long -term infiltration in a 
criminal organization.  
‒ Controlled delive ry is the technique of allowing illicit or suspect consignments 
to pass out of, through or into the territory of one or more States, with the 
knowledge and under the supervision of their competent authorities, with a view 
to the investigation of an offence  and the identification of persons involved in 
the commission of the offence.  
‒ Employment of Informants, as defined by Europol12 
                                                      
10  DI NICOLA , Andrea – GOUNEV , Philip – LEVI, Michael – RUBIN , Jennifer: Study on paving 
the way for future policy initiatives in the field of fight against organised crime: the 
effec tiveness of specific criminal law measures targeting organised crime; Final report, 
February 2014, Brussel p.223.  
11  Ibid. p. 266.  
12  EUROPOL: Covert Human Intelligence Source Handling, European Union Manual on 
Common Criteria and Priciples, Europol, 2012.  (Law enforcement only) p. 8.  81 Informant is a person who, in return for a guarantee of confidentiality, provides 
information, inside knowledge or assistance to  the competent law enforcement 
agencies or intelligence services which facilitates the detection, investigation 
and detection of criminal offenses.  
Two large groups of informants have emerged in the EU, which are often used 
in parallel in one Member State (eg Hungary). One group includes the 
employment of informants by a dedicated special unit (eg National Investigative 
Unit of Rapid Respond Police) developed and supported by Europol, the other 
model is the traditional one, in which any law enforcement inve stigator himself 
selects, studies and recruit their informants. In the latter case, the control and 
supervision of informants and contacts is only periodic.  
‒ Joint investigation teams: a fixed -term group of judges, prosecutors, members 
of investigative bodi es set up for the purpose of a specific investigation by 
written agreement to investigate criminal offenses involving two or more 
Member States.  
‒ Witness protection includes the implementation of a witness protection program, 
which can be applied against pr otected "witnesses" who meet the requirements.  
‒ "Hot pursuit" allows a person who has been convicted of a crime in one Member 
State to be prosecuted across borders for the purpose of apprehension.  
 
According to the report, most often measures, that Member S tates are in place: 
interception of communications, followed by surveillance tools, followed by 
informants, followed by the use of a covert investigations, and controlled deliveries, 
witness protection, joint investigation teams and "hot pursuit".  
 
In term s of the usefulness of the measures, it is first and foremost a very useful 
special investigative tool the interception of communications, followed by 
surveillance tools and informants, controlled deliveries, witness protection, and the 
line is closed by “ hot pursuit” measures with case -by-case usefulness.13  
 
Special covert investigative activities may be used in the European Union if:  
‒ there is an available, public national legal mandate;  
‒ there is an appropriate authorization and control procedure;  
‒ its application is necessary and proportionate.14 
 
The principles of application15 are necessity, proportionality (with the gravity of 
the offense and the least possible restriction), and the last principle is the condition of 
application, "threshold", meaning t he connection with a criminal offense. However, 
this does not preclude using covered measures for the prevention and countering of a 
public security emergencies (eg protected personal protection, crime prevention).  
 
In the European Union, the need to devel op intelligence and analysis -based law 
enforcement has gradually spread in the various strategic programs and action 
programs, particularly in order to combat organized crime, terrorism and serious crime 
                                                      
13  DI NICOLA  – GOUNEV  – LEVI – RUBIN (2014) op. cit. pp. 221 -337.  
14  Council of Europe Office in Belgrade: Deployment of special investigative means. 
Belgrade, 2013. p. 13.  
15  DI NICOLA  – GOUNEV  – LEVI – RUBIN (2014) op. cit.  p. 243.  82 more effectively. The Hague Program, which is also b ased on information from 
strategic intelligence, drew attention to the need to apply a new strategic criminal 
intelligence methodology to changed crime. The so -called European Criminal 
Intelligence Model (ECIM) is based on the acquisition and analysis of o perational -
based quality information. The strategic goal is to reduce the legal, financial and 
human opprtunities of organized crime.  
 
Based on the information of the criminal intelligence agencies, the data of other 
public administration control and licen sing organizations, the analytical units are able 
to make a fairly accurate group and activity analysis of the structures identified as 
criminal organizations.  
 
The legal fixation and application of the criminal intelligence model is mainly in 
the Anglo -Saxon area, but the EUROPOL Manual on the Use of Covered Human 
Intelligence sources16 also discusses in detail the rules for the use of human resources in 
criminal intelligence as a recommendation to law enforcement.  
 
In addition to the English National Intelligence Model17, U.S. federal law also 
discusses in detail the principles of how criminal intelligence systems work. (Code of 
Federal Regulations, CFR Part 23 Criminal intelligence systems operating policies,).18 
Part 23 of the law describes in detail t he rules of operation of law enforcement 
intelligence systems, which includes the objectives, applicability, operating principles, 
operational guidelines, system control and audit activities.  
 
 
The impact of the pandemic on crime and criminal intelligence  
 
The performance of law enforcement agencies has been and continues to be 
significantly affected by various local, regional or global challenges and emergencies. 
The COVID 19 virus falls into the latter category and thus has had a global impact 
and later v ersions of the pandemic are still affecting law enforcement agencies.  
 
This global epidemic has been a challenge never seen before in modern societies.  
 
Governments had to try at the same time to maintain the standard of services in 
modern societies, such as security or the operation of the economy, and to ensure 
stopping the spreads of pandemic and that health care systems were maintained.  
 
Following the emergence of the pandemic in Europe, the primary tasks of law 
enforcement agencies were to apply quaran tine measures, to reduce social contacts, 
and to apply lockdowns, border closures and border controls. These measures have 
fundamentally affected the normal performance of law enforcement.  
 
                                                      
16  EUROPOL: Covert Human Intelligence Source Handling, European Union Manual on 
Common Criteria and Priciples, Europol, 2012. (Law enforcement only)  
17  ACPO: Guidance on the National Intelligence Modell; 
https://whereismydata.files.wordpress.com/2009/01/national -intelligence -model -
20051.pdf  (downloaded 09 September 2021)  
18  Criminal intelligence systems operating policies; CFR Part 23, 
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title -28/chapter -I/part -23 (downloaded 21 September 2021)  83 Ensuring the continuity of the work of health authorities and pres erving the 
safety of society by introducing and maintaining various restrictive and control 
measures was the primary task of law enforcement agencies.  
 
At the same time, after a brief halt, organized crime saw serious opportunities in 
the effects of the ep idemic on society. There have been significant changes in crime 
and crime trends that have been quiet affected by the closures.  
 
„More people are spending more time online throughout the day for work and 
leisure during the pandemic, which has greatly incre ased the attack vectors and 
surface to launch various types of cyber -attacks, fraud schemes and other activities 
targeting regular users. A lot of these goods are offered on online trade platforms, 
which have made it easier and cheaper for counterfeiters a nd other criminals to 
access a broad customer base. Creating virtual and obscuring real identities is easier 
online than in offline interactions, which greatly aids criminals using aliases and 
creating front companiees online.”19 
 
The majority of citizens w ere forced to stay in their homes and forms of crime 
that targeted people in their homes emerged or intensified. During the pandemic, the 
grew in fear, frustration, anxiety of citizens making them more vulnerable to crime 
and criminals responding flexibly to exploiting vulnerable people.  
 
Crime, organized crime, has invented a number of forms of fraud that exploit the 
above effects of a pandemic. Organized criminals against property gained access into 
the elderly, vulnerable people's homes with various tric ks, impersonation of 
representatives from public authoryties or medical stuff who providing saniterie 
products or perform a “Corona test” while stealing property from their homes.  
 
Also a popular method of organised criminal groups to deceive vulnerable 
elderly people is the so -called "grandson frauds" also increased significantly during 
the pandemic. Fraudsters use essentially the same method to commit crimes. Elderly 
victims are called by a member of the organization and pretended to be a relative 
during the conversation. The caller most often claims to have caused an accident and 
needs money immediately to make good the damage. The fake relative, to avoid direct 
encounters, he convinces the victims that he cannot go for the money but sends an 
acquaintance  for it.  
 
A courier is then directed to the home of the elderly, who takes over the money, 
jewelry. There were also examples of criminals asking for a bank account to transfer 
money or dictating bank card details and using them to cause property damage thr ough 
online transactions.  
 
Due to "home office" and "home study", the children and juveniles were often 
at home without parental supervision and this opprutnities has not been left unused by 
criminals. Increase in activities related to the distribution of child abuse material 
online and the conversations of potential offenders around the increased accessibility 
                                                      
19  Beyond the Pandemic – What will the criminal landscape look like after COVID -19? 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/beyond -pandemic -what -will-criminal -
landscape -look-after-covid -19 (downloaded 20 September 2021)  84 and vulnerability of children online due to isolation, less supervision. Online child 
sexual e xploitation includes all acts of a sexually exploitative nature carried out 
against a child that have, at some stage, a connection to the online environment. There 
has been a continuous increase in activities related to online child sexual abuse over 
recen t years.20  
 
The use of encrypted communication channels, tools, programs, and Darknet 
forums facilitates the commission of this type of crime. The perpetrators use file -
sharing networks and livestreaming platforms.  
 
In both 2019 and 2020, several Darknet m arketplaces were liquidated thanks to 
law enforcement cooperation. A coalition of law enforcement agencies across the 
world announced the results of a coordinated operation known as DisrupTor which 
targeted vendors and buyers of illicit goods on the dark w eb. This operation follows 
the takedown in May of 2019 of  Wall Street Market , the world’s then second largest 
illegal online market in the dark web.21 
 
Interpol provides global assistance to law enforcement agencies around the 
world by continuously updating  the International Child Sexual Exploitation database.  
Interpol’s Child Sexual Exploitation database holds more than 2.7 million images and 
videos and has helped identify 23,564 victims worldwide.22 
 
International Child Sexual Exploitation (ICSE) image and video database is an 
intelligence and investigative tool, which allows specialized investigators to share 
data on cases of child sexual abuse. Using image and video comparison software, 
investigators are instantly able to make connections between victims, abusers and 
places. The database avoids duplication of effort and saves precious time by letting 
investigators know whether a series of images has already been discovered or 
identified in another country, or whether it has similar features to other images.  
 
It also allows specialized investigators from more than 64 countries to exchange 
information and share data with their colleagues across the world. The priority of 
Crimes Against Children unit of Interpol is to identify and rescue young victims of 
sexual  abuse, block access to child sexual abuse material and prevent sex offenders 
from travelling abroad to abuse children or escape justice.  
 
Europol established in 2017 the Stop Child Abuse – Trace An Object initiative. 
This initiative invites the public to identify objects and places in the hope that it can 
lead to the identification of victims down the line. Since then, Europol has received 
                                                      
20  European Unio n Serious and Threat Assesment 2021; 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities -services/main -reports/european -union -serious -
and-organised -crime -threat -assessment  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  
21  International sting against dark web vendors leads to 179 arr ests; Press release, 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/international -sting -against -dark-web-
vendors -leads -to-179-arrests  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  
22  International Child Sexual Exploitation Database; Interpol, 
https://www.interpol.int/Crimes /Crimes -against -children/International -Child -Sexual -
Exploitation -database  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  85 26.000 tips which have already led to the identification of ten children and the 
prosecution of three offenders.23 
 
The rate of domestic violence and sexual abuse crimes among citizens forced 
into their homes due to the pandemic has also increased in the wor ld. 
 
According to official statistics of the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior24, the 
number of crimes "endangering a minor" was 779 in 2019, while in 2020 it was 
already 964, which means an increase of almost 24%. By September 2021, 651 such 
crimes had oc curred.  
 
The number of „sexual violence” offenses was 240 in 2019 and 327 in 2020, an 
increase of 36%. By September 2021, 172 such crimes had occurred.  
 
The number of „sexual coercion” crimes was 56 in 2019 and 95 in 2020, an 
increase of 17%. By September 2021, 42 such crimes had occurred. The number of 
„domestic violence” crimes was 392 in 2019 and 650 in 2020, an increase of nearly 
66%! By September 2021, 410 such crimes had occurred, which is already in excess 
of the 2019 base year!  
 
Looking at the base year 2019, it can be stated that in 2020, people who forced 
into their homes due to the pandemic, lockdowns, restrictions, other stressors, and 
psychological difficulties, caused to them a serious impact and there was a significant 
increase in deviant beha viors at home, violent, sexual violence within the family have 
increased significantly.  
 
The numbers for 2021 are more encouraging, but for some types of crime they 
already exceed the base year, despite the extremely high latency for these crimes.  
 
At the same time, due to the restriction of social interactions and lockdowns and 
increased law enforcement presence have led to a decline in street violence and 
property crimes, as well as human trafficking. As a result of supply disruptions, drug 
trafficking al so came to a halt in the beginning. However, it was later stabilized or 
other supply routes emerged (Dutch, Belgian ports).  
 
There has been an increase in the rate of social engineering attacks, mailware, 
phishing emails around the COVID 19, in which perpe trators mislead victims by 
referring to the coronavirus epidemic by selling fake cures or medicines against the 
coronavirus, or by other epidemic -related fakenews.  
 
It identifies significantly more misleading or deceptive publications than before, 
so the N ational Investigation Bureau of the Rapid Response and Special Police Force 
of Police of Hungary has set up a special investigation team to prevent such crimes 
from being followed. Fake news or misleading content is experimented with on a daily 
                                                      
23  Experts meet to identify victims of child sexual abuse; News Article, 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/experts -meet -to-identify -victims -of-
child -sexual -abuse  (downloaded 18 September 2021)  
24  Criminal Statistic System; Ministry  of Interior , https://bsr.bm.hu/ (downloaded 18 
September 2021)  
 86 basis, and the commission of the crime is established, and proceedings are initiated 
immediately.  
 
In the event of an emergency, new criminal code facts have also come into force, 
such as the crime of spreading false news suitable for disturbing the general public.  
 
There has been a significant increase in cyber attacks with various extortionist 
viruses (etc.Wanna Cry, Emotet, NotPetya). It can be observed that the attacks are 
much more sophisticated, personalized.  
 
In the course of committing a crime, they make contact with the victims and 
threaten them, which results in a very high latency for such crimes. Typically, they 
target smaller, less resilient targets with viruses. Users who are forced to go online 
due to a pandemic with little cyber security awareness can be attacked by installing 
various malware.  
 
It can be a Bootnet that is an attack on networks, a Rootkit that is gaining 
administrator privileges, it can be a worm that infects without control, or it may be a 
Trojan that is embedded in other software, Backdoor which is obtaining remote 
access, Extortion Virus, Spyware, or Adware that is unsolicited advertising or 
Scareware which is a fake antivirus program  
 
Today, not only individuals but also various organizations and health care 
institutions have bec ome the targets of various cyber attacks. During the pandemic, 
targeted attacks hit hospitals and health care systems.25 
 
 
Significantly increased and sophisticated a business e -mail compromise (BEC) 
The initial simple phishing and malicious attacks have be come more personalised and 
complex. Ransomware to target particularly affected sectors such as healthcare and 
education.  
 
The rate of investment fraud exploiting economic fears of the pandemic has also 
increased. There is an increase in the number of incid ents related to bank and loan 
fraud, money laundering and corruption. The real estate and construction sectors 
become more attractive for money laundering  
 
According to the official statistics of the Hungarian Ministry of the Interior, the 
number of money laundering crimes was 188 in 2019, while in 2020 it was already 
308, which means an increase of 61%. By September 2021, 168 such crimes had 
occurred.  
 
The number of „fraud crimes committed using the information system” was 
2,624 in 2019, compared to 3,400 in 2020, an increase of nearly 30%. By September 
2021, 1,438 such crimes had occurred.  
                                                      
25  PALICZ  Tamás – BENCSIK  Balázs – SZÓCSKA  Miklós: Kiberbiztonság a koronavírus idején 
– a COVID -19 nemzetbiztonsági aspektusai; Scientia et Securitas, 2021/1. p. 82. 
https://akjournals.com/view/journals/112/2/1/article -p78.xml  (downloaded 08 October 
2021)   87 The number of crimes against the information system or data was 587 in 2019, 
compared to 830 in 2020, an increase of more than 41%. By September 2021, 579 
such crimes ha d occurred.  
 
Statistics from cases in recent years show that some crimes have moved in online 
space independently of the pandemic, but forced home stays, lockdowns and increased 
use of online services during the pandemic have helped increase the number of crimes 
committed online.  
 
During the pandemic, organized crime also exploited the huge demand for 
medical devices and hygienie products and sold counterfeit or poor quality medical 
devices such as masks, rubber gloves or medicines, disinfectants, some of w hich were 
actually sold, others only as part of financial fraud. Law enforcement officers 
identified more than 2 000 links to products related to COVID -19. A Member State’s 
investigation focused on the transfer of €6.6 million from a company to another 
company in Singapore to purchase alcohol gels and FFP2 and FFP3 masks. The goods 
were never received. In another case reported by a Member State, a company 
attempted to purchase 3.85 million masks and lost €300 000. Similar supply scams of 
sought -after produc ts have been reported by other Member States.26 
Some business sector suffering negative economic pressures such as hospitality, 
catering, tourism are becoming more vulnerable to criminal infiltration.27 
 
In Italy organised crime networks penetrated the healt care system and able to 
divert investements originally aimed at providing financial rosources, equipment and 
influence procurement, commercial agreement within the healtcare system.28 
 
Organized crime, taking advantage of the weakening of closures and suppl y 
chains, is vigorously present in the counterfeit and substandard foodstuff and beverage 
illegal market. During the first months of 2020 there was a decrease in organized 
crime involvement in food crime. The illicit livestock and meat products remain a 
threat for public health and potentially add additional risks in the context of the 
COVID -19 pandemic, and infection can spread rapidly amongst the workers of meat 
processing plants or in specialized markets. The pandemic created critical shortages 
of basic necessities (e.g. maize, wheat, dairy products, rice, sugar, tomatoes, 
vegetables). In lack of genuine raw material, whose cost raised a lot, dishonest 
producers used low quality or unsuitable ingredients. Consequence has been an 
increase of illegal, count erfeit and potentially unsafe food on the market.29 
                                                      
26  Pandemic Profiteering: How criminals exploit COVID 19 crisis; Report, 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications -documents/pandemic -profiteering -how-
criminals -exploit -covid -19-crisis  (downloaded 16 September 2021)  
27  Enterprising criminals – Europe’s fight against global networks of financial  and economic 
crime; Report, https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications -documents/enterprising -
criminals -%E2%80%93 -europe%E2%80%99s -fight -against -global -networks -of-
financial -and-economic -crime  (downloaded 16 September 2021)  
28  Coronavirus: The impact on c rime and criminal networks; Global Initiative Against 
Organised Crime, https://globalinitiative.net/analysis/crime -contagion -impact -covid -
crime/  (downloaded 16 September 2021)  
29  Operation Opson IX. – Analysis Report; https://www.europol.europa.eu/publicat ions-
documents/operation -opson -ix-%E2%80%93 -analysis -report  (downloaded 27 September 
2021)  88 The counterfeit and substandard foodstuff and beverage illegal market poses 
serious challenges for food safety authorities, who need to obtain up -to-date 
information in the field of organized crime in orde r to detect and prevent the placing 
on the market of food that is harmful to human or animal health.  
 
Europol expects that the impact of the pandemic will unfold in three phases30:  
 the current and immediate short -term outlook;  
 a mid -term phase which will become apparent over the upcoming weeks and 
months;  
 a long -term perspective  
 
In the first phase the most notable immediate impact has been in the areas of 
cybercrime, the trade in counterfeit and substandard goods as well as different types 
of frauds and s chemes linked to organised property crime. There has been limited 
impact of the pandemic on the level of terrorist threats to the EU.  Another highly 
visible phenomenon has been the proliferation of scams promoting fake COVID -19 
test kits and treatments.31 
 
In the second phase (mid -term phase) cybercrime threats are likely to continue 
to be the dominant threats from serious and organised crime during the pandemic as 
continued lockdown and social distancing measures will only enhance the reliance on 
digital s ervices to continue to work and interact.  
 
Child sexual exploitation online will remain a significant threat as a result the 
lockdown and online education. The trade of counterfeit and substandard goods 
especially those related to healthcare such as pharma ceuticals and equipment remains 
very high, counterfeiters will continue to provide counterfeit and substandard versions 
of these goods.  
 
In the third phase (long -term perspective) communities, especially vulnerable 
groups, tend to become more accessible to  organised crime during times of crisis. 
Economic hardship makes communities more receptive to certain offers, such as 
cheaper counterfeit goods or recruitment to engage in criminal activity.  
 
Some of the most threatening organised criminal groups (mafia -type) are likely 
to take advantage of a crisis and persistent economic hardship by recruiting vulnerable 
young people, engaging in loan -sharking, extortion and racketeering, among other 
criminal activities. Organised groups are able to exploit the global fi nancial crisis with 
real estate investments, which allowe them to launder illicit profits.  
 
Cybercrime activity is unlikely to diminish and new cyber threats that have 
emerged during the COVID -19 pandemic will continue to target victims even after 
                                                      
30  Beyond the Pandemic – What will the criminal landscape look like after COVID -19? 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/beyond -pandemic -what -will-criminal -
landscape -look-after-covid -19 (downloaded 20 September 2021)  
31  European Union Serious and Threat Assesment 2021; 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities -services/main -reports/european -union -serious -
and-organised -crime -threat -assessment  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  89 the end of the current crisis. A global recession as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic 
is likely to have a significant long -term impact on migration.  
 
The long -term impact of the COVID -19 pandemic may be particularly 
significant in the area of economic and financi al crime. Criminals will likely intensify 
their use of shell companies and companies based in off -shore jurisdictions with weak 
anti-money laundering policies.  
 
Cashless payment options are likely to continue to become popular, which are 
key targets for c ybercriminals  
 
Europol's databases are updated by obligatory data uploads from Member States' 
authorities. Based on these, its ex -post and forward -looking analyzes are of paramount 
importance to the governments and law enforcement agencies of the European 
Member States.  
 
 
Conclusions  
 
Member States' criminal intelligence systems and procedures have been and 
continue to be affected by the pandemic. Mainly during the initial period of the 
pandemic, law enforcement agencies had to perform other tasks to reduce  the health 
risks of the pandemic or to carry out control tasks at the state border instead of their 
usual tasks.  
 
As a result, the investigations were delayed in time, and some procedural acts 
could only be carried out later. In several cases, the investigators were also infected 
with the coronavirus and after thus were able to perform their duties with a reduced 
number of staff. Of course, investigating and following up the legality of high -profile 
crimes was a priority even during this difficult p eriod.  
 
In addition to the aforementioned difficulties of investigations, the lockdowns 
and restrictions made difficult for the criminal staff of law enforcement agencies to 
handle covert informants. Certain covert measures were more difficult to enforce 
against criminals forced to stay longer in their homes. Effective action against new 
criminal trends requires closer cooperation between law enforcement agencies and 
national security services.  
 
Law enforcement has greater emphasis must also be placed on mo nitoring, 
detecting new criminal trends, and preventing crime. Close co -operation is needed 
between police counter -terrorism units, given the link between organized crime and 
terrorist organizations. The latter are strongly present on online platforms.  
 
The intensification of crime and organized crime online performance has 
entailed the importance of training investigators in cybercrime and strengthening the 
anti-cybercrime activities of organized crime units.  
 
 
 90 Responses to the current challenges of cyber crime include the operation of 
international cooperation channels 24/7, the development of virtual currency analyzes, 
the development of Big data, the use of Darknet operations, the use of covert 
investigators, covert informants, and ever closer cooperatio n with NGOs and 
continuous organization of awareness - raising campaigns (eg ENISA, Europol,  
National Investigation Bureau of the Rapid Response and Special Police Force of 
Police of Hungary ). 
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 23/2018 (VI.21) ORFK Utasítás a Bűnügyi Elemz ési Szabályzatról  
 ACPO: Guidance on the National Intelligence Modell; 
https://whereismydata.files.wordpress.com/2009/01/national -intelligence -
model -20051.pdf  (downloaded 09 September 2021)  
 Beyond the Pandemic – What will the criminal landscape look like after COVID -
19? https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/beyond -pandemic -what -
will-criminal -landscape -look-after-covid -19 (downloaded 20 September 2021)  
 Coronavirus: The impact on crime an d criminal networks; Global Initiative 
Against Organised Crime, https://globalinitiative.net/analysis/crime -contagion -
impact -covid -crime/  (downloaded 16 September 2021)  
 Council of Europe Office in Belgrade: Deployment of special investigative 
means; Belgra de, 2013.  
 Criminal intelligence systems operating policies; CFR Part 23, 
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title -28/chapter -I/part -23 (downloaded 21 
September 2021)  
 Criminal Statistic System; Ministry  of Interior , https://bsr.bm.hu/ (downloaded 
18 September 20 21) 
 DI NICOLA , Andrea – GOUNEV , Philip – LEVI, Michael – RUBIN , Jennifer: Study 
on paving the way for future policy initiatives in the field of fight against 
organised crime: the effectiveness of specific criminal law measures targeting 
organised crime; Final report, February 2014, Brussel  
 Enterprising criminals – Europe’s fight against global networks of financial and 
economic crime; Report, https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications -
documents/enterprising -criminals -%E2%80%93 -europe%E2%80%99s -fight -
again st-global -networks -of-financial -and-economic -crime  (downloaded 16 
September 2021)  
 European Union Serious and Threat Assesment 2021; 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/activities -services/main -reports/european -
union -serious -and-organised -crime -threat -assessment  (downloaded 17 
September 2021)  91  EUROPOL: Covert Human Intelligence Source Handling; European Union 
Manual on Common Criteria and Priciples, Europol, 2012. (Law enforcement 
only)  
 Experts meet to identify victims of child sexual abuse; News Article, 
https://w ww.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/experts -meet -to-identify -
victims -of-child -sexual -abuse  (downloaded 18 September 2021)  
 International Child Sexual Exploitation Database; Interpol, 
https://www.interpol.int/Crimes/Crimes -against -children/International -Child -
Sexual -Exploitation -database  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  
 International sting against dark web vendors leads to 179 arrests; Press release, 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/international -sting -against -
dark-web-vendors -leads -to-179-arrests  (downloaded 17 September 2021)  
 NYESTE  Péter: A bűnügyi hírszerzés; Magyar Rendészet 2012/4.  
 NYESTE , Péter – NAGY, Ivett: A bűnügyi hírszerzés az elméletben és a 
gyakorlatban; Rendőrségi Tanulmányok vol. 2021/1.  
 NYESTE , Péter – SZENDREI , Ferenc: A bűnügyi hír szerzés kézikönyve; Dialog 
Campus, 2019.  
 Operation Opson IX. – Analysis Report; 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications -documents/operation -opson -ix-
%E2%80%93 -analysis -report  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
 PALICZ  Tamás – BENCSIK  Balázs – SZÓCSKA  Miklós:  Kiberbiztonság a 
koronavírus idején – a COVID -19 nemzetbiztonsági aspektusai; Scientia et 
Securitas, 2021/1. https://akjournals.com/view/journals/112/2/1/article -p78.xml  
(downloaded 08 October 2021)  
 Pandemic Profiteering: How criminals exploit COVID 19 cr isis; Report, 
https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications -documents/pandemic -profiteering -
how-criminals -exploit -covid -19-crisis  (downloaded 16 September 2021)  
 Recommendation Rec (2005) 10 of the commitee of Ministers to member 
states on „special investigation techniques” in relation to serious crimes 
including acts of terrorism; 
https://www.legislationline.org/download/id/1732/file/46f9ab2c5ef4d150d8455
40a9b79.p df (downloaded 22 September 2021)  
 
 
 92 LAJOS SZABÓ   
CAN WE MEASURE THE L EVEL OF THE SECURITY  AND SAFETY?   
 
 
Abstract  
 
The definition of time and the determination of safety are the most debated 
concepts; thus, many disciplines try to define them. However, even the most 
unqualified man is able to perceive the time and the safety/security. The time – from 
an engineering viewpoint – is exactly such an important unit of measurement as the 
distance. What is the possible way to measur e the safety/security?  
 
Keywords:  safety, time, measuring, time measurement, distance measurement, 
safety measurement  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
More than ten years ago, I started a research with the aim to find a widely 
accepted scientifically determined definition  of security. The results of the research 
were published in 2012 in Hungarian and English as well . The definition is applied to 
a system, where predictable processes can be examined within the system and between 
the system and its environment.  
 
For a long time, I did not even think about the further development of this concept 
and the problem of predictability. My studies in the meantime have led to the solution; 
they have produced an arithmetical ratio, by which the degree of security and its 
effectiveness  can be expressed. To create this ratio, the time – as I will explain later – 
seems to be one of the most adequate parameters, compared to the others. In the 
following, the relationship between security and time will be examined.  
 
 
1. The definition from safe ty system view  
 
The authors mean something else by the concept of safety/security, when they 
examine this concept by taking into consideration different areas of science or within 
the given science a narrower special area.  93 Due to this fact, the concept of legal security1, public safety2, food safety3, 
industry safety4, the military safety5, the social safety6, transport safety7, ecological 
safety8, IT safety9, etc. can be significantly different from time to time. Only in the 
Cambridge Dictionary, I find 18  different interpretations of the term  Security.10 
 
Of course, since all concept creators concentrate on their own research subjects, 
the definition of certain subjects may be different.  
 
1.1 The concept of the safety syste m view definition  
 
Security consti tutes a system, a complex status of its one or more elements, 
examined in a certain timeframe and between determined limiting values, when 
security – taking into account the environment and the context of the system – can be 
considered as stable and predic table.  
 
1.2. Elements of the c oncept  
 
Status of one or more elements of the system;  is an examined status of one or 
more elements of the system that can be the base for drawing conclusions concerning 
the stability of the system. Later on, the critical elem ent(s) can be determined by 
examining the threat sources and risks. Its changes can generate events or unusual 
events.  
 
Referring to a given time frame; we can make conclusions from the beginning 
of the examination of the system until its first changing point. We have to evaluate 
from time to time the system’s stability level.  
 
Examined within certain limits volume; mutual effects of the system’s 
elements cause changes within the system’s stability. During the estimation phase, we 
take into consideration only those factors that we can influence. Factors below the 
limit can be neglected, they are irrelevant, and they d o not harm the existing system. 
                                                      
1  https://dictionary.thelaw.com/security/ (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
2  https://www.goodwin.edu/enews/what -is-public -safety -and-where-do-you-fit-in/ 
(downloaded 21 August 2021)  
3  https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/general_food_law_en  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
4  https://www.safeopedia.com/definition/1052/industrial -safety  (downloaded 21 August 
2021)  
5  https://worldjusticeproject.org/resource -hub/milita ry-and-public -safety  (downloaded 21 
August 2021)  
6  https://www.thefreedictionary.com/Social+safety+net  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
7  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318251449_Sa fety_in_transportation_a_ 
review_of_the_concept_its_context_safety_preservation_and_improvement_effectiveness  
(downloaded 21 August 2021)  
8  over 900.000 articles 
https://scholar.google.hu/scholar?as_vis=0&q=ecological+safety+definition&hl=hu&as_s
dt=0,5  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
9  https://information -technology.web.cern.ch/staff/safety/overview  (downloaded 21 August 
2021)  
10  https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/security  (downloaded 21 August 
2021)  94 Effects of the factors above limit volume (remainder risks) require the system’s 
reorganization and the execution of emergency plans.  
 
Relations of the system components;  In order to achieve security – first of all 
– it is n ecessary to ensure balanced and predictable circumstances, within the inner 
functioning of the system.  
 
Relation between the system and the environment; without examining inputs 
and outputs of the system, it is impossible to provide security. The completel y 
autonomous functioning of a system is possible only for a short period.  
 
Stable, predictable ; the system is stable until its elements and existing relations 
between them or outer effects do not disturb its mechanism. If the system is efficiently 
examined , its some disturbing factors (an event) and a factor that makes its function 
– even for a short period – impossible (or generates an unusual event) can be 
determined and prevented.  
 
The interpreted definition is useful in the everyday life and in scienti fically is 
important too. This latter, system -based concept of safety facilitates the interpretation 
of a concept and promotes its uniform interpretation. In this way, we can get a useful 
definition, in the everyday life.  
 
Based on the above reasoning, a c oncept can be equally applied to an atom, an 
active organism and a planet or even to the Milky Way, since all of them can be 
contemplated as a system and can be interpreted their safety in the context of their 
own components and environment. The above defi nition of security can be applied to 
any simple or complicated system; furthermore, to any subsystem.  
 
 
2. How do we apply the time parameter to measure security?  
 
Calculating the time is essential for the planning or execution of a military or 
police oper ation.  
 
Risk assessment and risk management use the time as well, as one of the 
important parameters. For example, the time of wear and tear, the time period 
available for intervention and many other time -dependent parameters have to be 
examined.  
 
There a re many areas where time -based risk assessment and risk management 
are applied. A significant part of disaster control measures – for instance – is time -
based, such as evacuation, area closure, etc.  
 
It is also utilized in health care, in order to determin e whether or not a patient 
can be saved or not. In case of a large number of injuries, time is a determining factor, 
whether some patients have to be treated immediately or others have to be prioritized.   
 
Various service providers such as energy, IT, transport and other providers also 
measure how fast they can restore or reestablish their service, in the event of failures.  
 95 The various economics concepts, such as rate of return, profit and loss, are all 
dependent on time as well. The examples enumerate d so far have demonstrated the 
assumption that time is a suitable parameter for determining the degree of security. . 
 
I find that risk assessment methodology can be developed, enabling time -based 
risk and security level classification for all safety -relate d activities. The exact values 
can be used to perform clear calculations.  
 
Several people have indicated that M.L.Garcia has already conducted these 
calculations; thus, there is no reason for me to thinking about this. Let us see what 
Garcia has reached du ring her researched and published!  
 
The book, „Design and Evaluation of Physical Protection Systems”11 shows us, 
how can calculate the effectivity of troops in case of an attack. The author – Mary 
Lynn Garcia – naturally uses their own interpretation to Security and Safety. 
“Security, on the other hand, refers to systems used to prevent or detect an attack by 
a malevolent human adversary”  and “For the purposes of this book, safety is meant 
to represent the opera tion of systems in abnormal environments, such as flood, fire, 
earthquake, electrical faults, or accidents.”12  
 
If this definition is accepted, there is a trouble. Roman law distinguishes four 
different types of criminal behavior. However, she associates o nly the  „dolus 
directus13” deliberate crime – with Security. The „dolus eventualis”, „luxuria” and 
„negligentia” do not belong here, but do not belong to Safety either. What have crimes 
done in these three states of consciousness? It is probably better to i gnore this issue 
of interpretation and examine the strengths and positive aspects of the book that are 
numerous.   
 
A very thorough and logical conclusions can be drawn from her method: how to 
protect a facility in the event of a deliberate attack. All of t hese are profound thoughts, 
including very useful formulas and calculations. She identifies one – only one – 
extraordinary event, and examines the protocol, with which this event could be 
prevented. She examines the effectiveness of protective measures by comparing the 
time periods of the attack.  
 
She measures only the effectiveness of the Physical Protection System (PPS), 
from the viewpoint of the attacked facility. The author has never written down that 
the efficiency indicator is expressing the security level of the facility.  
 
If Garcia would have expanded her investigation over all types of crime, and not 
only over the deliberate ones, she could have recognized that with the application of 
further mathematical operations, together with the average of the  effectivity values or 
a similar method, the security rate of the facility with respect to crimes could be 
expressed.  
                                                      
11  GARCIA , Mary Lynn: The Design and Evaluation of Physical Protection Systems Second 
Edition, CPP Sandia National Laboratories ISBN -13: 978 -0-7506 -8352 -4 
12  Ibid p. 2.  
13  https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780195369380.001.0001/acre f-
9780195369380 -e-571 (downloaded 21 August 2021)  96 This is shown in chapter 1.2. “Elements of the concept”. If we identify all those 
risks that we are able or we want to handle, and we prep are protocols that are suitable 
for effectively treating them, we can declare that safety has been achieved.  
 
Garcia's book shows a very good method to prepare good risk management 
protocols. The formulas she used for the calculation can be applied to many  other risks 
as well. The same calculations can be used for any criminal offenses if we are prepared 
to detect them and prevent their consequences.   
 
The same applies to addressing the risks arising from violation of the law and 
internal regulations.   
 
The calculations by Garcia that are capable of protecting against deliberate 
attacks are perfectly applicable in the case of industrial or natural disasters as well. 
And these calculations can be used not only for the protection of facilities! If we wish 
to protect an area or some sport, political or cultural events, we have to use the same 
calculations. The order of the procedure is based on the following principle in all 
cases. First, we select and determine all those risks we wish handle. Secondly, we 
prepa re protocols for the treatment of determined risks. Thirdly, we make calculations 
and detect the risks from the very beginning of the process, until its end (i.e. until the 
intervention).  
 
Of course, this is only a conceptual description of the calculation  process to 
ensure the effectiveness of our protocols, capable of handling all risks. The final 
solution can be found and elaborated by prepared professionals, with deep 
mathematical knowledge and engineering precision, similar to Garcia.  
 
 
3. Results: How can the level of a security system be measured?  
 
We can probably answer this question, based on the above analyzes.   
 
So, based – amongst others – on the formulas of Garcia, the safety, interpreted 
in Hungarian language, can also be pictured and explained through equations. In a 
similar manner, the effectivity of each system – in other words, its safety level – can 
be expressed with a given numerical value.  
 
While we are assessing the possible risk and we can concretely determine such 
a risk that requires an effective intervention, we have to elaborate appropriate 
protocols.  
 
These protocols describe how to handle the events or the specific, extraordinary 
events. They identify the affected elements within the facility protection system and 
those procedures and measures that have to be implemented.   
 
Protocols must be prepared in a way to ensure their effective and successful 
execution, in other words, to guarantee the safety in the protected facilities.  
 
 
 97 Only two timeframes need comparison:  
a.) the timeframe o f the unwanted event, from its initial starting point until all 
its effects are felt;  
b.) the timeframe of facility protection, from the first detection until the 
conclusion of an effective counter -action (intervention), essentially the 
timeframe of the protoc ol.   
 
These two time values can be subtracted from each other (a -b=c; if c is positive, 
the protection is not effective; if it is negative, efficiency has been achieved). If the 
two indicators are divided by each other (a/b=c; and c has a greater value than 1, the 
protection is not efficient, if it is less than 1, efficiency has been achieved), or we be 
analyze the efficiency through much more sophisticated mathematical operations.   
 
If the lifetime of the mechanical protection (T m) is added to the timeframe of 
detection (T d) and then the result is divided by the timeframe between the detection 
and the successful intervention (Ti), it can already be seen, whether the system 
designed is indeed secure or not. A relevant formula is presented here:  
𝑻𝒎+𝑻𝒅
𝑻𝒃<𝟏=𝐒𝐚𝐟𝐞   
 
Naturally, the formula can be further complicated, broken up into parts, as seen 
previously in the listed examples. The result of the formula is a numerical value, in 
which time is not a variable anymore, and this numerical value – as an efficiency -
value of the subsystem of facility protection – can also be considered as the safety 
value of the facility. The formula also satisfies the definition of safety, first published 
in 2012.14 A stable system is its status interpreted in the cont ext of its one or more 
designated elements, which system – analyzing its components within a specific 
period and between determined timeframes as well as in a given environment – can 
be viewed as stable and predictable.   
 
The management of an extraordinary  event is elaborated in a protocol, in every 
case, from the initiation of the manifesting risk – taking into account one or more 
highlighted elements of the system which are affected in the extraordinary event – 
until the conclusion of the expected timefra me (determined time), evaluating the 
predetermined degree of attack, damage or threatening circumstance (examined 
within the predetermined timeframe). If some calculations are performed – which is 
not always the case, it is almost exclusively conducted onl y for evacuations. If a 
protocol were to be elaborated for all the possible risks to be handled within a facility, 
then it can be determined whether or not the system is safe.   
 
 
Conclusions  
 
Based on the above arguments, we can confirm – with complete cer tainty – that 
there is a possibility of measuring safety with time parameters. However, we have to 
declare: this is only one of the existent possibilities! We have to continue our work on 
                                                      
14  SZABÓ  Lajos: Mi a biztonság? Pécsi Határőr Tudományos Közlemények XIII. 
Tanulmányok „A biztonság rendészettudományi dimenziói – változások és hatások” című 
tudományos konferenciáról. HU ISSN 1589 -1674 73 -84. pages.  98 the relevant theory; however, we know it quite well: “Even a travel of one thousand 
miles begins with a single step – Lao Ce”. Notwithstanding, this naturally does not 
rule out the possibility that someone else develops another definition for safety, and – 
based on the parameters within this definition – he carries out cal culations, and 
determines the degree of security/safety with the help of these parameters.   
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 GARCIA , Mary Lynn: The Design and Evaluation of Physical Protection 
Systems Second Edition, CPP Sandia National Laboratories ISBN -13: 978 -0-
7506 -8352 -4  
 https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/security  (downloaded 21 
August 2021)  
 https://dictionary.thelaw.com/security/  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/general_food_law_en  (downloaded 21 August 
2021)  
 https://information -technology.web.cern.ch/staff/safety/overview  (downloaded 
21 August 2021)  
 https://scholar.google.hu/scholar?as_vis=0&q=ecological+safety+definition&h
l=hu&as_sdt=0,5  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://worldjusticeproject.org/resource -hub/military -and-public -safety  
(downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://www.goodwin.edu/enews/what -is-public -safety -and-where -do-you-fit-
in/ (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://www.oxf ordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780195369380.001.000
1/acref -9780195369380 -e-571 (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318251449_Safety_in_transportation
_a_review_of_the_concept_its_context_safety_preservation_and_improvement
_effectiveness  (downloaded 21 August 2021)  
 https://www.safeopedia.com/definition/1052/industrial -safety  (downloaded 21 
August 2021)  
 https://www.thefreedicti onary.com/Social+safety+net  (downloaded 21 August 
2021)  
 SZABÓ  Lajos: Mi a biztonság? Pécsi Határőr Tudományos Közlemények XIII. 
Tanulmányok „A biztonság rendészettudományi dimenziói – változások és 
hatások” című tudományos konferenciáról. HU ISSN 1589 -1674  pp. 73 -84.  
 
 
 
 99 GEOPOLITICS  
BERK CAN KOZAN – ALI MIRZADADE   
AUKUS'  ORIGINS AND MAIN PUR POSE: NUCLEAR DETERR ENCE 
FROM GEOPOLITICAL PE RSPECTIVES   
 
 
Abstract  
 
A historic trilateral security pact in the Asia -Pacific has been announced by the 
United Kingdom, the United States and Australia, which is seen as a counter -offensive 
to China. For the first time, Australia will be able to build nuclear -powered 
submarines using US technology. The AUKUS agreement will also cover artific ial 
intelligence, cybersecurity and quantum technologies. In the South China Sea, the 
United States is attempting to expand its external balancing strategy by forging new 
alliances against China, which it sees as the greatest threat to its waning hegemony.  
A multi -centre structure is emerging in the international system, with Cold War 
conditions developing between the centres. AUKUS cooperation is likely to activate 
some critical fault lines in this environment. AUKUS stands for a lot more than the 
fact tha t Australia will build eight nuclear submarines using US technology.  
 
Keywords:  AUKUS, nuclear deterrence, USA, China, Australia, pacific region  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
After the signing of the AUKUS Pact on September 15, 2021, the Pacific and 
Indian Ocean basins  began to become a hypo -centre of 21st -century global geography. 
The formation of a coalition of giant countries, such as the United States, Britain and 
Australia is already being viewed as one of the events that will accelerate changes in 
the political an d economic landscape of the Pacific and Indian Ocean. The signing of 
the AUKUS pact is already a sign of the entry of states into a new configuration 
system and new geopolitical realities in global politics after a political stagnation 
caused by recent COV ID-19 events. As a consequence, this military alliance, which 
comprises the three geographical regions provided above, incorporates economic 
relations as well as a new geopolitical orientation.  
 
The signing of the AUKUS military pact did not only economica lly develop 
relations between the three co -operation nations but also drew huge global 
geopolitical criticism, including from the European continent. Beforehand it was 
signed, there was an agreement between Australia and France for $60 billion in 2016. 
This deal included Australia’s $60 billion purchase of boats from France and ships for 
the Navy. However, for France, the deal was enormously substantial not only in terms 
of selling $60 billion worth of military equipment but also for its economy, not to 
mention its political vision.  
 
Moreover, there was another agreement that would be organised by French 
companies to repair and recondition the equipment, which would bring more than $90 100 billion in economic resources to France. Therefore, the signing of the AU KUS treaty 
and Australia's refusal to give up the $66 billion Century Treaty has dealt a serious 
blow to France. As a result, the emergence of the AUKUS organisation strained 
relations not only with China but also with European countries. Consequently, thi s 
article will analyse the relationship between the AUKUS organisation and its 
supporters in various regions, along with economic, geopolitical and political issues 
and will provide an analysis not only by presenting a political and geopolitical outlook 
but also economic.  
 
 
A New Military Alliance in The Pacific: AUKUS  
 
There can no longer be any doubt that tensions between the U.S. and China in 
recent times' international relations are bearing the essence of the cold war, moving 
not only in terms of trade but in several directions.1 The struggle of potential rivals 
such as the United States and China to become a superpower is already forcing the 
international order to change anywhere in the world political geography. In a bipolar 
review of today's internati onal order, it can be noted that there is already economic 
and political conflict in many parts of the world's political geography.2 One of these 
geographies is the Indo -Pacific region. The Indo -Pacific region has always been one 
of the regions distinguish ed by its geopolitical complexity.  
 
There have been two factors that have influenced this political geography into a 
recent ideological confrontation and a place of conflict. First, it is a Chinese factor 
that seeks to increase its political and economic influence by pursuing new regional 
cooperation. Second, it is a U.S. factor that seeks to strengthen its economic position 
along with its military and political support. However, the AUKUS military alliance, 
which was unexpectedly revealed on September 15,  2021, by the United States, Great 
Britain and Australia, aimed at ensuring security, peace and stability in the Indo -
Pacific region. Great Britain and Australia were also to become two of the three states 
that could at least deploy their influence in the Indian -Pacific region, the other being 
the United States. Therefore, the alliance may be one of the most significant foreign 
policy steps in international politics in recent years.  
 
Although the reasons for each country's participation varies, the fundamen tal 
objective of the alliance is to establish a geopolitical defensive bloc with a high degree 
of deterrence. In point of fact, fundamentals of AUKUS give insights about the present 
global situation. When the issue is scrutinised in depth, it is feasible t o conclude that 
the United States' efforts to stalemate China will continue because “China’s growing 
                                                      
1  HUANG , Y.: The U.S. -China Trade War Has Become a Cold War; 2021. 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/09/16/u.s. -china -trade -war-has-become -cold-war-
pub-85352 (downloaded 19 September 2021)  
2  DEMPSEY , J.: The United States and China: The Return of a Bipolar World; 2012.  
https://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/49969 (downloaded 2 September 2021)  101 hard power is now eliciting a genuinely tough and structural political -military 
reaction” ,3 though “China was not mentioned anywhere in the announcement.”4  
 
 
New Geopolitical Realities, New blocks: the AUKUS' Trinity  
 
The fast withdrawal of the US from Afghanistan in order to develop a new grand 
strategy that would reinforce US leadership under Biden might be viewed as an effort 
to build a new Chinese -oriented alliance rather than a return of the US to international 
politics. Equally, the United States, which has long viewed China's growth as a threat 
to its global leadership, aims to offset China's economic, military and diplomatic 
predominance in the Asi a-Pacific region by balancing China. Mark Leonard points 
out the situation that “for the US, AUKUS comes hot on the heels of its chaotic 
withdrawal from Afghanistan and thus is being held up as evidence that the Biden 
administration is serious, competent a nd tough on foreign policy”.5 The AUKUS 
treaty presents a crucial chance for the United States to take a stance against China 
and it wishes to respond militarily to China as the dominant force in the area in the 
global power rivalry by reactivating the C old War -era nuclear deterrent policy.  
 
With this move, the United States has taken a step towards balancing, deterring 
and containing China in the Asia -Pacific region. Miller proposes to regard that 
“America now rationally categorises the Pacific region as more important than the 
Middle East.”6 China's One Belt, One Road project and ambitious geography have 
long posed threats to the U.S.’ global hegemonic role. Against this, the United States 
tried to implement a geopolitical strategy that would encompa ss the AUKUS pact. 
The strategy was to ensure the safety of the U.S. and its allies on sea routes from the 
Pacific and Indian Oceans to Africa, the Middle East and Europe.  
 
Likewise, it should be noted that Australia, Great Britain and the US announced 
the creation of a new partnership in the geopolitical framework for security on 
September 15. Under the security pact, Australia plans to build at least eight atomic 
submarines based on U.S. technologies, as well as equip its armed forces with U.S. 
wing miss iles. Stephan Walt goes further and clarifies that “three states are close 
allies of long standing but the headline item in the new arrangement is a joint effort 
to equip Australia with a fleet of advanced nuclear -powered submarines. U.S. 
President Joe Bid en, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison and British Prime 
Minister Boris Johnson also announced plans for more extensive cooperation on 
cyber -security, artificial intelligence and quantum computing” .7  
 
                                                      
3  NIBLETT , R. Dr. CMG: AUKUS reveals much about the new global strategic context;  
2021. https://www.chathamhouse.org/2021/09/aukus -reveals -much -about -new-global -
strategic -context (downloaded 20 September 2021)  
4  WALT, S. M.: The AUKUS Dominoes Are Just Starting to Fall; 2021. 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/18/aukus -australia -united -states -submarines -china -
really -means/ (downloaded 24 September  2021)  
5  LEONARD , M.: The false promise of AUKUS;  2021. https://ecfr.eu/article/the -false-
promise -of-aukus/ (downloaded 2 October 2021)  
6  MILLER , J.: From Afghanistan to AUKUS: The Painful Pivot to Asia; 2021.  
https://harvardpolitics.com/painful -pivot -to-asia/ (downloaded 9 October 2021)  
7  WALT op. cit.  102 To achieve these goals, Canberra has cancelled  a €50bn agreement with France 
saying it did not meet the country's national interests.8 The termination of a previous 
deal between Australia and France, which was for building about 12 conventional 
submarines, heightened tensions between France and the Un ited States, the United 
Kingdom and Australia. Céline Pajon analyses that “Paris had never been consulted, 
nor notified in advance, despite the historic importance of the deal and the huge 
implications that it bears for France’s interests, not least the br utal termination of the 
contract to provide 12 submarines to Canberra”.9 Moreover, France regarded it as a 
“stab in the back”.10 
 
In response, Paris accused the Australian government of deliberate deception 
and recalled its ambassadors to Canberra and Was hington for consultations, which is 
why, with the signing of this agreement, it is already clear that in this political 
geography, not only the United States and China but also the United Kingdom and 
Australia have begun to play a key role in the region. T herefore, it is feasible to argue 
that the alliance is one of the most significant expansions since Brexit for the United 
Kingdom. “AUKUS is also the first and (so far) only expression of a “Global 
Britain”, the newly empowered global player that was suppo sed to arise after 
Brexit.”11 
 
The United Kingdom, which regarded Russia as a greater danger than China, 
will sooner or later be posing equaliser policies to balance China, as defined by the 
notion of “Global Britain”, with multifaceted foreign policies. Furthermore, the 
“AUKUS alliance unites the core of the Anglosphere against Beijing” ,12 and allows 
the UK to return to the Indo -Pacific region while providing a new strategic initiative 
for the UK's repositioning in global affairs. At this moment, it is e xtremely likely that 
the United Kingdom is part of the process of strategic disintegration that is becoming 
more visible across the European continent. In other words, by placing itself inside 
the Anglo -Saxon geopolitical wing, the UK appears to have moved  beyond the 
conventional geopolitical centre on the Germany -France axis.  
 
In addition to all these, AUKUS is important to Australia for a variety of reasons. 
First and foremost, during recent years and through its economic might, China has 
grown its influe nce in Australia. The Chinese government increased its power through 
                                                      
8  WINTOUR  Patrick: As China threat rises, can Aukus alliance recover from rancorous birth? 
13 November 2021; https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/nov/23/as -china -threat -
rises-can-aukus -alliance -recover -from -rancorous -birth  (downloaded 25 November 2021 )   
9  PAJON , C.: AUKUS, the Indo -Pacific, and France’s Role: Fluctuat Nec Mergitur;  2021. 
https://www.ifri.org/en/publications/publications -ifri/aukus -indo-pacific -and-frances -role-
fluctuat -nec-mergitur (downloaded 22 September 2021)  
10  DE HOOP SCHEFFER , A. – QUENCEZ , M.: The new AUKUS Alliance is yet another 
transatlantic crisis for France; 17/09/2021. https://www.gmfus.org/news/new -aukus -
alliance -yet-another -transatlantic -crisis -france (downloaded 21 September 2021)  
11  LEONARD  op. cit.  
12  BECKLEY , M. – BRANDS , H.: The End of China’s Rise, Beijing Is Running Out of Time to 
Remake the World;  2021.  https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2021 -10-01/end -
chinas -rise (downloaded 2 October 2021)  103 investments in Australian companies and it has been a source of security concerns for 
the Australian government .13 
 
Moreover, some regulatory measures have been implemented in various se ctors 
to reduce China's influence. It was further claimed that China was responsible for the 
cyber -attacks in Australia in 2020 ;14 therefore, there was a significant decrease in 
Chinese investments in Australia. As a result, the trade volume between the t wo 
countries was severely affected and the Australian State of Victoria tear up the Belt 
and Road Initiative .15 All of these things have heightened the tension between Beijing 
and Canberra. Moreover, the agreements reached in June 2020, as well as increas ed 
bilateral military drills between India and Australia in the domains of Indo -Pacific 
maritime problems, defence, and cooperation, was already strained ties between China 
and Australia .16 
 
Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that the alliance is dir ectly connected to 
nuclear submarines for Australia. Moreover, “equipping Australia with long -range, 
extremely quiet nuclear -powered submarines will enable Canberra to play a more 
active role in the region, along with the other members of the Quadrilateral  Security 
Dialogue (the United States, India and Japan).”17 In addition to China's aggressive 
stance in the South China Sea, the trilateral security pact is unquestionably ground -
breaking in terms of Australian foreign policy. Likewise, China's aggressive actions 
in the South China Sea deserved to be answered. To do so, cooperation within the 
AUKUS framework was extremely important. In this respect, the signing of the 
AUKUS alliance, geopolitically, shows that by choosing Australia as a supporter, the 
U.S. is already making it a bastion of the struggle against Chin a in the Pacific Ocean.18  
 
The AUKUS agreement also interests Australia as much as other AUKUS 
members in its active role in the region, which has become a centre of global 
geography. In fact, the selection and strengthening of Australia under the AUKUS 
pact is also seen in geopolitical terms as being directly linked to Taiwan .19 As it is 
known, the Chinese Communist Party considers Taiwan as its land and does not hide 
this fact. As Taiwan's geopolitical area is also extremely important to the U.S., it i s a 
                                                      
13  BECHEV , D.: Is NATO in crisis? 2021.  
https://www.aljazeera.com/opinion s/2021/9/25/will -the-aukus -pact-undermine -nato 
(downloaded 28 September 2021)  
14  PACKHAM , C.: Australia sees China as main suspect in state -based cyberattacks, sources 
say; 2020.  https://www.reuters.com/article/us -australia -cyber -idUSKBN23P3T5 
(downloaded 18 September 2021)  
15  WESTCOTT , B.: Australian government tears up Victoria's Belt and Road agreement with 
China, angering Beijing; 2021  https://edition.cnn.com/2021/04/22/business/australia -
china -belt-and-road-initiative -intl-hnk/index.html (downloaded 18  September 2021)  
16  MIGLANI , S. – NEEDHAM , K.: Australia will join naval drills involving India, U.S., Japan; 
2020.  https://www.reuters.com/article/india -military -exercises -idUSKBN2741J1 
(downloaded 19 September 2021)  
17  WALT op. cit.  
18  MOSS, D.: Will Aus tralia's Nuclear Sub Gamble Pay Off? 2021.  
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021 -09-26/why -the-aukus -deal-is-a-major -
strategic -gamble -for-australia (downloaded 29 September 2021)  
19  KASSAM , N. – LIM, D.: Successful deterrence: Why AUKUS is good news for Taiwan; 
2021.  https://www.smh.com.au/world/asia/successful -deterrence -why-aukus -is-good -
news -for-taiwan -20210918 -p58su7.html (downloaded 22 September 2021)  104 label for the U.S. to protect it from China as much as it can. Additionally, the existence 
of allies that will balance China is extremely important to the U.S. For example, Japan, 
which has the potential to balance power for China alongside Australia, is also 
included in the U.S.’ goals in this strategy.20  
 
In fact, when it comes to political processes, it can be observed that not only 
Taiwan but the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei also have problems with China. 
These problems also lead those states to  enter into alliances with both the U.S. and 
each other against China. The U.S. is apparently trying to recruit new and reliable 
allies for new geopolitical competition with China. It also shows that a major factor 
in geopolitics is largely due to China's One Belt, One Road Initiative.21  
 
Australia has demonstrated that it would take a more active part in the Asia -
Pacific strategy with this step. Moreover, it is easy to anticipate that Australia's move, 
which has a mutual economic dependency on China, would  have significant economic 
consequences. However, owing to nuclear -powered submarines with incredible 
speed, range, stealth and endurance, Australia will acquire substantial deterrent 
options with AUKUS. Starting from this point, most importantly, the agre ement is 
that the United States and the United Kingdom are committed to supplying Australia 
with nuclear submarines; hence, with the completion of new -generation aircraft 
carriers by the United Kingdom and the United States, the goal of establishing an 
Anglo-Saxon navy to dominate the world's seas will be reached. Therefore, “If it 
comes to fruition, the AUKUS agreement will, in sum, lead to industrial cooperation, 
particularly in the military field, which is of course far from negligible.”22  
 
 
Where does  China stand in this geopolitical reality?  
 
Openly, China was highly uneasy about this move which would land them in 
difficulties not just politically but also militarily. Although the signing of the AUKUS 
agreement has been condemned by China and reported  by U.S. officials that there is 
no security deal for China geopolitically, recent relations between both the U.S. and 
China suggest it is the beginning of a new geopolitical conflict between China and the 
U.S. that would begin in the Indo -Pacific region.23  
 
It depicts the coming together of long -term inclination steps. The reason for this 
is that China, which was at odds with the US economically and politically, found itself 
on the armed side of the conflict for the first time. AUKUS, a military manoeuvre,  
                                                      
20  TANAKA , M.: 'Quad' and AUKUS put Biden's Indo -Pacific shift under microscope; 2021.  
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2021/09/26/asia -pacific/quad -aukus -biden -china/ 
(downloaded 30 September 2021)  
21  REISINEZHAD , A.: What AUKUS and Afghanistan Tell Us About the US Asia Strategy; 
2021. https://thediplomat.com/2021/09/what -aukus -and-afghanistan -tell-us-about -the-us-
asia-strategy/ (downloaded 23 September 2021)  
22  PEROT , E.: The Aukus agreement, what repercussions for the European Union?  2021. 
https://researchportal.vub.be/en/publications/the -aukus -agreement -what -repercussions -
for-the-european -union (downloaded 29 September 2021)  
23  GIRARD , B.: China’s AUKUS Response Highlights Beijing’s Bunker Mentality;  2021. 
https://thediplomat.com/2021/10/ch inas-aukus -response -highlights -beijings -bunker -
mentality/, (downloaded 2 October 2021)  105 was viewed as a military danger by China for the first time. In fact, it has long been 
observed that the United States has been constantly fighting ideologically, 
economically and politically to try to protect and retain its political hegemony over 
differ ent regions since the advent of liberal internationalism and its own global 
hegemony. However, China's rising economic initiatives and its growing hegemony 
in the Indo -Pacific region also prompted the United States to take action, specifically, 
against Chi na. 
 
One example is Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, which the United States did in 
2007 with countries such as Japan, India and Australia. However, China's relentless 
increase in regional influence power was already a geopolitically important step for 
the U.S. to sign such a security pact after NATO. This was because of the revisionist 
aims of China in certain areas. Stunningly, “among the 10 member states of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the reception to the news has been 
surprisingl y mild” .24  
 
In this situation, China may strengthen ties with nations in the area that are 
ideologically opposed to the West, not just in the Asia -Pacific region but also in the 
Middle East -Central Asia and the Gulf. In reality, Iran's admission to the S hanghai 
Cooperation Organisation is a development that may be associate alongside it. China's 
policies toward North Korea may be accelerated further. China has the potential to 
make North Korea a nuisance for the West as they said “it could trigger a nucle ar 
arms race, a concern North Korea has also voiced” .25 Perhaps the United States can 
pursue a more forceful approach in areas where it has political issues and has been 
evacuated and can establish an anti -Atlanticism wing and become a part of this 
diplom acy in some way.  
 
 
Fracture of AUKUS in the European Union  
 
“Germany, France and the Netherlands had each published their own Indo -
Pacific strategies but last week, the EU finally released its own strategy on the 
region.”26 However, the European Union, led – militarily heavy – by Germany and 
France, was driven out of the game by the United States with the signing of AUKUS. 
On the other hand, the fact that France began to raise its domination in world affairs 
and desired to a ct alone was not tolerated by the United States, which is the 
dominating force in the Asia -Pacific region. Philippe Le Corre comments that “The 
                                                      
24  SUPRIYANTO , R. A.: Why Southeast Asia Should Welcome  AUKUS; 2021 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/28/southeast -asia-asean -australia -aukus -china -united -
states/ (downl oaded 2 October 2021)  
25  ZHU, M.: Aukus alliance: what is it, what does it have to do with China, and why is 
France angry? 2021.  
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3151700/aukus -alliance -what -it-
what -does-it-have -do-china -and-why (downloaded  10 October 2021)  
26  VARMA , T.: After AUKUS: The uncertain future of American and European cooperation 
in the Indo -Pacific; 2021.  https://ecfr.eu/article/after -aukus -the-uncertain -future -of-
american -and-european -cooperation -in-the-indo-pacific/ (downloaded  26 September 
2021)  106 country’s presence in the Indo -Pacific pre -dates that of many major powers, including 
the United States” .27  
 
Given the global processes that are taking place, it can be observed that France 
is not heavily reliant on these processes, neither geopolitically nor politically. In 
addition, the signing of this agreement has led to a kind of geopolitical crisis not only 
in relations with China but also with Europe due to the problem with France.28  
 
There have been many negative examples of this in terms of institutional 
relations between the United States and France. As France's objection to the U.S. 
invasion of Iraq and the expulsion of the NATO headquarters from its country are still 
quite recent, these factors make France an ally that is not both geopolitically and 
politically reliable.  
 
From all these perspectives, it is understood that the U.S. -focused area is the 
Indo-Pacific region, both after Afghanistan and after the new U.S. geopolitical 
strategy. In this region too, the U.S. already prefers to act with its new and healthy 
allies rather than its former allies. This circumstance might lead to France 
reconsidering its role in Atlantic politics and transforming Europe into another global 
player by bringing other European countries, particularly Germany, into Eurocentric 
politics.  
 
In this situation, the European Union must improve its ability to act 
independently in order to be more successful and proactive in foreign affairs. This 
applies not just to economic independence but also to security and defence concerns. 
Nathalie Tocci co ncludes and claims that “the only reasonable conclusion for the EU 
to draw is to step up to its own responsibilities in its neighbourhood. Both Afghanistan 
and AUKUS have reignited the debate about European defence and strategic 
autonomy”.29 
 
Furthermore, t he European Union may pursue a structure that may freely make 
military decisions by enhancing its own strategic autonomy. “The EU could find a 
role of its own, as an independent strategic player at the same level as the US, China 
and Russia, with its own g rand strategy.”30  
  
Greater accountability is evident in the two old nations, France and Germany, 
which are well -versed in geopolitics. On the other hand, the European Union's desire 
for strategic autonomy in the sphere of defence will intensify. It is app arent that the 
AUKUS alliance is a significant effort aimed at creating a regional deterrence against 
China on an Indo -Pacific Ocean spectrum.  
 
                                                      
27  LE CORRE , P.: France’s Indo -Pacific “Third Way”; 2021. 
https://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/85525 (downloaded 7 October 2021)  
28  LEONARD  op. cit.  
29  TOCCI, N.: After the Honeymoon, How to Make the EU -US Relationship Work;  2021. 
https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/after -honeymoon -how-make -eu-us-relationship -
work (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
30  BISCOP , S.: AUKUS and the EU: A Snub for the Bloc?  2021. 
http://aei.pitt.edu/103610/1/AUKUS_and_the_EU_A_Snub_for_the_Bloc_%2D_Egmont
_Institute.pdf (downloaded 24 September 2021)  107 Conclusion  
 
The formed alliance with the United Kingdom and Australia demonstrates that 
the United States is loo king for alliances with nations who regard China as a danger. 
The alliance in question arose in response to Beijing's military build -up in the South 
China Sea. As a result, the region may become one of the new hotspots in the 
international system. The intr oduction of AUKUS cooperation following QUAD and 
similar pacts implies that the United States, which has departed Afghanistan, a 
formerly vital strategic hub in the middle of the Eurasian landmass, would concentrate 
on encircling China from the south and p reserving its supremacy in the Indo -Pacific 
region.  
 
Australia, a Pacific country, will attain technological parity with China on 
submarines as a result of this collaboration. China will confront a new regional 
adversary in South -east Asia as part of its c ollaboration with the Russian Federation 
in North -east Asia. If the United States, which dominates the Bering -New Zealand 
Power Longitude, captures Australia together with the United Kingdom, it will be a 
major setback for China which aspires to open up ma ritime lanes to the Indian Ocean 
by crossing the Malay Area and going around Australia.  
 
Despite the fact that China is a Pacific -coast state which must breach the Wall 
of the USA erected by the United States on its coasts and find a route to the rest of t he 
world across the sea. China is in a state of panic because, in moments of crisis, China's 
One Road Project will be unable to find a passage even from the China Sea. It should 
also have realised that Australia, which is developing submarines with nuclear  
reactors to breach the Wall of Australia on its shore, will not be the last state to achieve 
this capacity.  
 
The security pact also signifies the restoration of nuclear deterrence policy. The 
submarines that Australia would deploy with nuclear fuel can on ly be transformed 
into nuclear submarines carrying nuclear weapons if the required procedures are 
followed and it will be helpful from a military standpoint for the efficient use of the 
pact's military presence in the Asia -Pacific region. It will publicly use a nuclear trump 
to discourage China. This signifies the return of deterrence and a restoration in the 
balance of power politics.  
 
It is obvious that the cause for the new global blocks and the new cold war 
analogies is a new power struggle, yet a diffe rent conflict dynamic from the Cold War 
period may emerge. A space may be established in which we can go beyond the non -
conflict state that existed throughout the cold war. Pacific geopolitics is getting 
increasingly complicated and deadly. This is due to a variety of factors; specifically, 
with the advent of AUKUS, the region's geopolitical competitiveness grew and as a 
result of this geopolitical battle, the region's governments boosted their defence 
spending, opening the path for the spread of nuclear we aponry in other locations 
through submarines.  
 
On the one hand, China is attempting to broaden the scope of the order it wishes 
to build; on the other hand, the United States is attempting to limit/surround Beijing, 
as it has done with AUKUS and QUAD (tog ether with Australia, Japan and India). 
The EU – and its rationale, the strategic autonomy policy – do not appear to be able 108 to compete with these new alternative institutions. The EU's fragility is not the sole 
cause for this. The presence of France and G ermany in the Pacific demonstrates that 
the EU cannot fight alone because it lacks physical strength and military might.  
 
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 BECHEV , D.: Is NATO in crisis? 2021.  
https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2021/9/25/will -the-aukus -pact-undermine -
nato (downloaded 28 September 2021)  
 BECKLEY , M. – BRANDS , H.: The End of China’s Rise, Beijing Is Running Out 
of Time to Remake the World;  2021.  
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2021 -10-01/end -chinas -rise 
(downloaded 2 October 2021)  
 BISCOP , S.: AUKUS and the EU: A Snub for the Bloc?  2021. 
http://aei.pitt.edu/103610/1/AUKUS_and_the_EU_A_Snub_for_the_Bloc_%2
D_Egmont_Institute.pdf (downloaded 24 September 2021)  
 DE HOOP SCHEFFER , A. – QUENCEZ , M.: The new AUKUS Alliance is yet 
another transatlantic cri sis for France; 17/09/2021. 
https://www.gmfus.org/news/new -aukus -alliance -yet-another -transatlantic -
crisis -france (downloaded 21 September 2021)  
 DEMPSEY , J.: The United States and China: The Return of a Bipolar World; 
2012.  https://carnegieeurope.eu/strate giceurope/49969 (downloaded 2 
September 2021)  
 GIRARD , B.: China’s AUKUS Response Highlights Beijing’s Bunker Mentality;  
2021. https://thediplomat.com/2021/10/chinas -aukus -response -highlights -
beijings -bunker -mentality/, (downloaded 2 October 2021)  
 HUANG , Y.: The U.S. -China Trade War Has Become a Cold War; 2021. 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/09/16/u.s. -china -trade -war-has-become -
cold-war-pub-85352 (downloaded 19 September 2021)  
 KASSAM , N. – LIM, D.: Successful deterrence: Why AUKUS is good news for 
Taiwan; 2021.  https://www.smh.com.au/world/asia/successful -deterrence -why-
aukus -is-good -news -for-taiwan -20210918 -p58su7.html (downloaded 22 
September 2021)  
 LE CORRE , P.: France’s Indo -Pacific “Third Way”; 2021. 
https://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/8552 5 (downloaded 7 October 2021)  
 LEONARD , M.: The false promise of AUKUS;  2021. https://ecfr.eu/article/the -
false -promise -of-aukus/ (downloaded 2 October 2021)  
 MIGLANI , S. – NEEDHAM , K.: Australia will join naval drills involving India, 
U.S., Japan; 2020.  https://www.reuters.com/article/india -military -exercises -
idUSKBN2741J1 (downloaded 19 September 2021)  109  MILLER , J.: From Afghanistan to AUKUS: The Painful Pivot to Asia; 2021.  
https://harvardpolitics.com/painful -pivot -to-asia/ (downloaded 9 October 2021)  
 MOSS, D.: Will Australia's Nuclear Sub Gamble Pay Off? 2021.  
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021 -09-26/why -the-aukus -deal-
is-a-major -strategic -gamble -for-australia (downloaded 29 September 2021)  
 NIBLETT , R. Dr. CMG: AUKUS reveals much about the new global strategic 
context;  2021. https://www.chathamhouse.org/2021/09/aukus -reveals -much -
about -new-global -strategic -context (downloaded 20 September 2021)  
 PACKHAM , C.: Australia sees China as main suspect in state -based 
cyberattacks, sources say;  2020.  https://www.reuters.com/article/us -australia -
cyber -idUSKBN23P3T5 (downloaded 18 September 2021)  
 PAJON , C.: AUKUS, the Indo -Pacific, and France’s Role: Fluctuat Nec Mergitur;  
2021. https://www.ifri.org/en/publications/publications -ifri/aukus -indo-pacific -
and-frances -role-fluctuat -nec-mergitur (downloaded 22 September 2021)  
 PEROT , E.: The Aukus agreement, what repercussions for the European Union?  
2021. https://researchportal.vub.be/en/publications/the -aukus -agreement -what -
repercussions -for-the-european -union (downloaded 29 September 2021)  
 REISINEZHAD , A.: What AUKUS and Afghanistan Tell Us About the US Asia 
Strategy; 2021. https://thediplomat.com/2021/09/what -aukus -and-afghanistan -
tell-us-about -the-us-asia-strategy/ (downloaded 23 September 2021)  
 SUPRIYANTO , R. A.: Why Southeast Asia Should Welcome  AUKUS; 2021 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/28/southeast -asia-asean -australia -aukus -
china -united -states/ (downloaded 2 October 2021)  
 TANAKA , M.: 'Quad' and AUKUS put Biden's Indo -Pacific shift under 
microscope; 202 1. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2021/09/26/asia -
pacific/quad -aukus -biden -china/ (downloaded 30 September 2021)  
 TOCCI , N.: After the Honeymoon, How to Make the EU -US Relationship Work;  
2021. https://www.belfercenter.org/publication/after -honeymoon -how-make -
eu-us-relationship -work (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 VARMA , T.: After AUKUS: The uncertain future of American and European 
cooperation in the Indo -Pacific; 2021.  https://ecfr.eu/article/after -aukus -the-
uncertain -future -of-american -and-european -cooperation -in-the-indo-pacific/ 
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 WALT, S. M.: The AUKUS Dominoes Are Just Starting to Fall; 2021. 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/18/aukus -australia -united -states -
submari nes-china -really -means/ (downloaded 24 September 2021)  
 WESTCOTT , B.: Australian government tears up Victoria's Belt and Road 
agreement with China, angering Beijing; 2021  
https://edition.cnn.com/2021/04/22/business/australia -china -belt-and-road-
initiative -intl-hnk/index.html (downloaded 18 September 2021)  
 110  WINTOUR  Patrick: As China threat rises, can Aukus alliance recover from 
rancorous birth? 13 November 2021; 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/nov/23/as -china -threat -rises-can-
aukus -alliance -recover -from-rancorous -birth (downloaded 25 November 2021)  
 ZHU, M.: Aukus alliance: what is it, what does it have to do with China, and 
why is France angry? 2021.  
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3151700/aukus -alliance -
what -it-what -does-it-have -do-china-and-why (downloaded 10 October 2021)  
 111 RITA BIHARI   
SECURITY ISSUES IN T HE WESTERN BALKANS   
 
 
Abstract  
 
The Western Balkans is the only sub -region of Europe which, after the Cold 
War, sought a solution to its own individualisation aspirations in conflict -induced war. 
Although relations between the countries of the region have changed, they remain 
prone to national and inter -national disputes. Although the Western Balkans now 
present a more consolidated security pic ture, with national security indicators that are 
barely below those of EU Member States, the Balkan countries face a number of 
problems in terms of cross -border challenges. Ethnic tensions, corruption, organised 
crime, Islamic radicalism, which are at the core of internal regional security issues in 
South -Eastern Europe. This paper attempts to present these four main transnational 
challenges with regional relevance.  
 
Keywords : Western Balkans, ethnic conflicts, corruption, organised crime, 
radicalism  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
Events in the Western Balkans in the 1990s are still having an impact more than 
20 years later. The transition process is still ongoing, leaving the region with a number 
of uncertainties. The Western Balkans settlement has led to a more frag mented 
geographical picture, the emergence of several new states which, after two decades of 
construction, present a more consolidated picture from a security perspective, and, 
although the internal security challenges of the states are among the uncertain ties, the 
so-called security indicators have shifted towards what can be called transnational 
problems. While the overall data confirm that the national security scores of the 
Western Balkan countries are barely below the European average, the cross -border  
challenges are prominent in the region.1  
 
Although the countries of the region do not have a uniform understanding of the 
basis of their security policies, it is certain that the strategy papers of the Western 
Balkan states identify terrorism, organised crime, proliferation of conventional and 
weapons of mass destruction, environmental challenges, extremism at global level 
and, although to varying degrees, all countries are concerned by these issues.  
 
 
Security dynamics in the Western Balkans  
 
The term " Western Balkans" is not a geographical term, but a political term that 
entered the political discourse in the 1990s, during the process of building relations 
                                                      
1  UNODC: Crime and its impact on  the Balkans and affected countries., UNODC Research, 
2008. pp. 7 -24 112 with the European Union. In 1999, the Stabilisation and Association Process2 between 
the European Union and the Western Balkans was launched, and the group of 
Western -oriented Balkan states involved was named after them. Today, 6 countries 
stand on the threshold of European integration - Serbia, Montenegro, Albania, 
Northern Macedonia, Bosnia and Herze govina, Kosovo. Geographically, it therefore 
covers the south -eastern part of Europe, which is culturally, religiously, ethnically and 
politically diverse, with a history of religious and ethnic strife and conflicts of interest 
between the great powers - hence the term Balkans and Balkanisation are very often 
used pejoratively.3 
 
The region, as is well known, was plagued by numerous conflicts, which went 
hand in hand with constantly redrawing state borders - often separating ethnic groups, 
and thus cultures  and religions, and thus manifesting themselves in territorial claims 
in the course of time. There is hardly a country in the Western Balkans today that does 
not have territorial claims on another. With the break -up of the Cold War regime in 
the 1990s, the  socialist federal republic then known as Yugoslavia fell apart in war 
conditions. The events between 1991 and 1995 were the most deadly conflict in 
Europe since the Second World War. I will not go into the chronological events of the 
conflict, but it is w orth noting that Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia and Bosnia and 
Herzegovina became independent first, and then, in the second phase of the war, the 
clashes of 1999 led to Kosovo coming under international control under UNSC 
Resolution 1244. This did not yet r ecognise its independence from Serbia, so the 
Albanian leaders of the former autonomous province unilaterally declared Kosovo's 
independence in 2008, but the status of the territory remains a source of international 
dispute.4 
 
The Western Balkans is thus k nown as the only sub -region of Europe that has 
sought a solution in conflict -induced war rather than opting for a transition to 
democracy after the Cold War. The Western Balkans have not been fully integrated 
into NATO and the EU since then, and remain pro ne to national and international 
disputes and conflicts of a nationalist nature. As a consequence of this power 
asymmetry, NATO and the EU have a responsibility to push the region towards the 
European security complex, thus creating a barrier to the potent ial for reopening open 
conflict. However, cooperation without full NATO and EU membership is very 
difficult. In the last decade, the relationship between the countries of the region has 
shifted from war to peace, isolation and then to bilateral and multila teral agreements 
and cooperation. Of course, not only the changes at the state and regional level, but 
also the impact of global trends cannot be ignored. These have an impact on trends in 
the development of political, technological, economic, social and e nvironmental 
                                                      
2  The Stabilisation and Associa tion Process (SAP) was launched in 1999, under which the 
European Union signed Stabilisation and Association Agreements (SAA) with countries 
that expressed their wish to join the Union. The Agreements are based on the EU acquis 
and are based on its proclam ation in the legislation of the cooperating states. The Western 
Balkan countries are currently at the heart of the process.  
3  DOBROWIECZKI , Péter – OROSZ , Anna: A Nyugat -Balkán; In: SZÁLKAI , Kinga – BARANYAI , 
Tamás Péter – SZARKA , E. Luca (eds.): Biztonsá gpolitikai Corvinák I.; Antall József 
Tudásközpont, Budapest, 2019. pp. 275 -276. 
4  Ibid. 113 dimensions – and they have obviously not been ignored or avoided in the Western 
Balkans. 5 
 
It is undeniable that the Balkan region certainly presents a more consolidated 
security picture, with no imminent threat or armed conflict in sight, bu t it is also a lack 
of perspective, with political elites and societies unable, despite their perceptions of 
their members, to define, think through and prioritise the foundations of their security 
policy in a structured way. However, following internation al pressure and with 
international assistance, the first security documents for the countries of the region 
were practically in place from the turn of the year 2000 until 2006.6 
The documents contain a classic threefold division into groups of internal, re gional 
and global threats – and in all three areas we find so -called nontraditional security 
challenges.7 
 
 
Environmental indicators of nontraditional security challenges  
 
The Western Balkans is rich in porous borders and geostrategically important, 
located at the crossroads of Europe and the Mediterranean Sea, on the East -West axis, 
between Europe and Asia. This has a fundamental impact, but is also attractive for 
various trade flows. And the issue of border control is a rather sensitive one, as it i s 
best described as incomplete and corrupt, which in turn means that it is not only the 
shortest route to reach Europe via the Western Balkans, but also a less risky option 
compared to other alternatives. Weak border controls therefore imply corruptible 
border and customs officials. This is further compounded by the fact that there are no 
visa requirements between most Western Balkan countries and cross -border trade 
accounts for a large share of national GDP, with a parallel increase in cross -border 
crime. Weak institutions, weak economies, lack of transparency create an excellent 
breeding ground for corruption and the security sector is no exception. The police, 
customs officials and the judicial system are not immune to political interference. 
Ethnic diver sity is a tool for cross -border collusion, in addition to being a source of 
conflict. For the time being, organised crime appears to be a regional 'cooperation' in 
the Western Balkans that is able to transcend ethnic differences.8 
 
The phenomenon of corrup tion will be discussed later in this paper, but it is 
worth mentioning not only as a persistent security challenge, but also as a cause, given 
the interests of various major powers in the region. Countries and their ruling political 
elites in the region se ek to maintain a delicate balance between these powers. This 
balance can be beneficial to them, in the form of economic agreements or political 
                                                      
5  TERZIEV , Venelin – KOLECI , Redon – KOLECI , Baki: Security Dilemmas and Defense 
Challenges in Kosovo and Western Balkans. Journal of Innovation and Sustainability V ol. 
4, No 3., 2018. pp. 75 -84. 
6  ABUSURA , Adel: Comparative analísis of the strategic documents of the Western Balkans. 
In: HADZIC , Miroslav – TIMOTIC , Milorad – PETROVIC , Pregrad (eds.): Security Policies in 
the Western Balkans. Belgrad Centre for Securi ty Policy, Belgrade, 2010. pp. 165 -183. 
7  ANDREYCHUK , Raynell: Security in the Western Balkans. Report, Political Committe, Sub -
committe on NATO Partnership (PCNP), 178 PCNP, 18 E rev, 1. final, 2018. pp. 1 -4. 
8  KEMP, Walter: Global Initiative against Tr ansnational Organized Crime Crooked 
Kaleidoscope Organized Crime in the Balkans; 2017. https://globalinitiative.net/wp -
content/uploads/2017/07/OC_balkans.pdf  (downloaded 12 May 2021)  114 support, and it is a general, unspoken rule in the Western Balkans that stability and 
strategic partnership take  precedence over revising or questioning these relations.9 
Russian relations are overwhelmingly present, and are an obstacle to the process of 
EU integration.10 
 
A further, but perhaps the most significant, pillar of the region's vulnerability is 
the legacy  of the conflicts of the 1990s. For the Balkan states in general, it may be 
true that they are still in a post -conflict phase, which is a breeding ground for further 
ethno -nationalist action or organised crime. The South Slavic wars were intertwined 
with o rganised crime, as smuggling was a livelihood for many at the time. The legacy 
of the war is that even today many weapons are still in private hands in the region. In 
the 1990s, arms were acquired partly at the profit of drug smuggling. Organised crime 
has therefore been a survival strategy for sanctioned regimes, but it can also be said 
that if this activity sustains the ruling regime, i.e. profits from instability, there is no 
incentive to seek peace. Vulnerability attracts all this, but political and eco nomic 
development does not prosper as a result.11 
 
In this environment, therefore, so -called nontraditional security challenges have 
taken root and persist. In the Western Balkans, there are four major groups to consider, 
such as ethnic conflicts and tensio ns, organised crime, corruption, and the rise of 
extremism, including Islamic radicalism.  
 
 
Ethnic conflicts, tensions  
 
As we have seen, the security concerns in the region are partly the result of the 
war and partly the result of incomplete or non-implemented political and economic 
transition. The successor states to Yugoslavia that emerged after the break -up of 
Yugoslavia are still sources of conflict because of their multiethnic character. This 
can be seen in the ethnically tinged political di scourses that continue to maintain 
divisions, tensions and mistrust in society. The political palette in the region, although 
fragmented, is still dominated by a nationalist political elite, based mainly on fear for 
their rights and opportunities.12 Ethnic tensions are almost invariably evident in all six 
Western Balkan countries, but are most pronounced in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Northern Macedonia and Kosovo.  
 
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country where the compromises that defined the 
framework of the Dayto n Peace Agreement13 have led to increasing tensions over 
time, by giving constitutional guarantees to nationalism. However, for pragmatism to 
                                                      
9  Ibid. 
10  Major powers in the region: Russia, China, Turkey, UAE, Saudi  Arabia, Qatar, Iran.  
11  KEMP (2017) op. cit. pp. 11 -12. 
12  DOBROWIECZKI – OROSZ  (2019) op. cit. p. 277.  
13  The Dayton Agreement was signed by former Serbian President Slobodan Milošević, 
former Bosnian President Alija Izetbegović and Croatian President Franjo Tuđman at the 
conclusion of a conference held from 1 November to 21 November 1995 at Wright -
Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, USA. The Dayton Peace Agreement is a general 
framework agreement for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The agreement  was intended 
to bring the three and a half year war in Bosnia to an end and to ensure a post -conflict 
political settlement.  115 prevail over nationalist politics, a radical change in the attitude of society is needed at 
a very deep level, and the confrontational relationship between one ethnic group and 
the other is too great. Bosnia and Herzegovina's internal and external administrative 
borders, its nation -state status and three different ways of imagining itself. Bosniaks 
support centralisati on, which could increase the efficiency of the country's functioning 
at the state level. Serbs oppose Bosniak ambitions. The centralised Bosnian idea 
would take away significant powers from the entities, and Serbs see it as an attack on 
them.14 The Croat po sition is that they are thinking of a third entity.  Ethnic 
discrimination in the exercise of public power is almost a natural phenomenon, 
exacerbated by the nationalist political rhetoric of the parties. The constituent nations, 
the Bosniaks, Croats and S erbs, elect their own presidents, so that politicians need 
only convince their own ethnic group. However, nationalist, emotive rhetoric does not 
lead to reconciliation or promote reform in the longer term. The practice of religion is 
also highly politicise d, as the political narrative often sees orthodox, Catholic and 
Muslim sentiment as a tool.15 
 
In Northern Macedonia, the persistence of problematic relations can be traced 
back to the Slavic Macedonians and the Macedonian Albanians. On 13 August, the 
Ohrid  Framework Agreement16 sought to settle the constitutional rights of the 
Macedonian Albanians. The Agreement accelerated the peace process and raised the 
possibility of the creation of a Macedonian -Albanian political entity, which led to 
heightened antagoni sm between members of the former National Liberation Army 
(ONA)17 and the Albanian National Army (ANA)18. Nearly 20 years after the adoption 
of the Convention, the relationship between the state and civil society in Macedonia, 
both within and between themsel ves, is weak. The issue of ethnicity is therefore more 
dominant than that of citizenship. The Ohrid Framework Agreement sought to strike 
a balance by strengthening the role of the state, which would reduce the number of 
ethnic conflicts. Despite the decent ralising power of the Framework Agreement, 
ethnic fault lines remain. Although the Convention is intended to promote social 
reconciliation, it does not explicitly take into account the basic social and security 
situation in the Balkans.19 
 
Minority issues i n Kosovo remain unresolved, despite the efforts of the Kosovo 
authorities and the international community. Tensions and violence between ethnic 
groups were a defining feature of the armed conflicts of the 1990s, and three 
generations of what is generally c onsidered the "post -trauma forgetting period" have 
                                                      
14  KEMENSZKY , Ágnes: Bosznia -Hercegovina, a mozaikosra töredezett állam. Mediterrán és 
Balkán Fórum, X. évfolyam, 1 -2. szám, 2016. pp. 49 -51. http://www.mbforum.hu/wp -
content/uploads/2016/12/41_Mediterr%C3%A1n -%C3%A9s -Balk%C3%A1n -
F%C3%B3rum_2016_1_2.pdf  (downloaded 17 April 2021)  
15  NÉMETH , Olivér: Bosznia -Hercegovina: politikai helyzet és az euroatlanti integráció 
esélyei (2019. 05. 12.) https://diplomaci.blog.hu/2019/05/12/bosznia -
hercegovina_politikai_helyzet_es_az_euroatlanti_integracio_eselyei  (downloaded 19 
March 2020)  
16  In 2001, the agreement ending the Macedonian -Albanian armed conflict, which gave the 
Albanian minority more e xtensive rights.  
17  Albanian guerrilla organisation, Osloboditelna Narodna Armija (ONA)  
18  Albanian National Army (ANA), Armata Kombëtare Shqiptare (AKSh)  
19  BIHARI , Rita: Társadalom és identitás a Nyugat -Balkánon; Felderítő Szemle 2020/1.  116 not yet passed, so ethnic divisions in society are still a dividing line.20 This 
fragmentation plays a role in advocacy at the grassroots and top political levels. Its 
conflict of interest and ethnic confli ct is uniformly pronounced in relation to Serbia. 
The integration of Serb -inhabited areas, which is problematic. Kosovo declared 
independence on 17 February 2008, which has not enjoyed full international 
recognition since then. There remains a significant Serb minority, which suffered 
serious atrocities at the turn of the millennium. Almost 51,00021 people were killed in 
violence that lasted for nearly four years, many of them forced to flee. This is the last 
conflict of this scale in the 21st century Albani an-Serbian relationship, and although 
the political leadership is trying to keep control, the tension is palpable.  
 
 
Organised crime  
 
Organised crime is not a new phenomenon in the Western Balkans, as the 
region's geographical location on the East -West tr ade route makes it a particularly 
attractive target for organised crime circles.22 
 
The Balkan routes used for smuggling goods and people have been identified 
over time, ranging from the traditional Balkan route, the two alternative routes 
developed during the war, and the southern route from Turkey through Bulgaria, 
northern Macedonia and Albania, mainly to Italy, Austria and Germany, which has 
been used since the 2000s. However, France, Belgium and the Scandinavian and 
Baltic States, which are destinations  for illicit firearms trafficking, should be 
mentioned.23 
 
The regional characteristics of organised crime are determined by the legacy of 
the South Slavic wars, whether it be political factors, the emphasis on ethnic and 
religious differences or the weakne ss of the established Yugoslav successor states. 
The newly formed states often focused on nationalism, even in the field of law 
enforcement.24 The bureaucratic, centralised structure worked against corruption and 
in many cases limited mechanisms such as pol ice interventions and justice. A marked 
vulnerability in the region is that certain criminal circles have reached high political 
levels.25 
 
                                                      
20  REMÉNYI , Péter: Koszovó; In: KOLLER , Boglárka – ÖRDÖGH , Tibor (eds.): Európaizáció a 
Nyugat -Balkánon; Dialóg Campus, Budapest, 2018. pp. 237 -238. 
21  DOBROWIECZKI – OROSZ  (2019) op. cit. p. 280.  
22  CRAMPTON , Richard J. – ALLCOCK , John B. – DANFORTH , Loring: Balkans in: 
Encyclopaedia Britannica; https://www.britannica.com/place/Balkans  (downloaded 15 
December 2020)  
23  GÁSPÁR , Miklós: A balkáni szervezett bűnözés és hatásai – az illegális lőfegyver 
kereskedelem. In: ANTALÓCZY  – GÁSPÁR  – ISTVANOVSZKI  – NYESTE  – PATÓ – SZENDREI  – 
SZŰCS  (eds.): A nemzetközi és honos szervezett bűnözés története, XX. századi fejlődése 
és várható tendenciái; KÖFOP -2.1.2 -VEKOP -15. „A jó kormányzást megalapozó 
közszolgálati fejlesztés.” 2020. p. 133.  
24  MITIC, Kiril – VASILIE VSKI, Goran: Illicit trafficking in firearms – type of organised crime 
as a destabilisation factor for the security of the states in Southeast Europe; 2013. p. 58.  
25  ANASTASIJEVIC , Dejan: Organised Crime in the Western Balkans; 2006. p. 4.  117 Since the 2000s, it is safe to say that organised crime in the Western Balkans 
has focused on three main areas of ope ration: drugs, arms and human trafficking. 
These activities cross borders and Balkan criminal groups are simultaneously 
cooperating with Western European organisations and, despite their ethnic conflicts, 
Serbian, Bosnian, Croatian and Albanian smugglers m aintain close links with each 
other in the logistics between the source and the destination of the smuggled goods. 
This applies to drugs, crime against persons and arms trafficking. There is now also 
an economic shift in the focus of activities, with the p rinciple of lower risk but higher 
profit predominating.26 
 
  
Figure 1. Share of persons convicted of drug production and trafficking, trafficking in 
persons, smuggling of migrants and firearms -related crimes in the Western Balkans, by 
links to organized crime, 2012 -201827 
 
 
                                                      
26  GÁSPÁR  (2020 ) op. cit. p. 135.  
27  UNODC elaboration of national criminal justice data. In:  Measuring Organized Crime in 
the Western Balkans, United Nations office in Drugs and Crime, Vienna 2020.  
118 Drug trafficking  
 
In the Western Balkans, heroin smuggling is the most lucrative, although almost all 
types of drugs can be found and accessed in the region. Approximately 90% of heroin 
originating in Afghanistan reaches European market s via the Balkan route.28 This 
operation is facilitated by ethnic groups with a history of smuggling, living in isolated 
communities, weak border controls and alternative mountain routes. Easy crossing of 
borders is quite typical of Kosovo, so it is not sur prising that Albanian organised crime 
rings are prominent in the drug trade. The slow and corrupt judicial system in Kosovo 
also complicates the situation. Of course, it is not only Kosovo that is affected by the 
illegal trade in narcotics. Drugs enter Kos ovo via Albania and northern Macedonia, 
where they are stored in areas close to the Serbian border and then smuggled through 
easily accessible areas near the Presevo Valley. In Serbia, those involved in organised 
crime have close political links. In the We stern Balkans, Bosnia and Herzegovina is 
the next stop on the southern smuggling route, where the drug smuggling problem has 
long been a local problem, but where specialised units are now working to track 
organised crime rings.29 
 
 
Figure 2. Number of pers ons convicted for drug production and trafficking in the Western 
Balkans 2013 -201730 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of a multi -layer drug trafficking group in the Western Balkans31 
                                                      
28  UNODC: Drug Money: the illicit proceeds of opiates trafficked on the Balkan route. 
UNODC Research, 2015. p. 19.   
29  GÁSPÁR  (2020) op. cit. pp. 136 -138. 
30  UNODC elaboration of national criminal justice data ; In: Measuring Organized Crime in 
the Western Balkans, United Nations office in Drugs and Crime, Vienna 2020.  
31  Data from interviews with prisoners conducted under the MACRO project; In: Measuring 
Organized Crime in the Western Balkans, United Nations office in Drugs and Crime, 
Vienna 2020.  
119 Trafficking and smuggling of human beings  
 
The Western Balkan manifestation of trafficking in human beings mainly 
concerns trafficking in women, children and, in the latter category, infants. Statistics 
show that almost 30% of trafficking in human beings to the EU comes from Albania, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. Nevertheless, t he fight against trafficking in 
human beings is the most successful area. It should be noted here that the Western 
Balkan states have ratified the relevant Palermo Convention and its Protocol, which 
includes criminal sanctions for trafficking in human bein gs, with a focus on trafficking 
in women and children, yet the slow pace of justice and the sentences imposed do not 
deter those involved in the act. It is futile to call this segment a success in terms of 
action, when what we are seeing is a kind of sympt omatic treatment by the authorities 
in the Western Balkans rather than a root -cause solution mechanism.32 
 
 
Figure 4. Number of persons convicted for drug production and trafficking in the Western 
Balkans, 2013 -201733 
 
 
The illegal arms trade  
 
In terms of a rms trafficking, it is safe to say that a large number of mainly illegal 
small arms have accumulated since the events of the 1990s. In terms of localisation, 
the arms trade can be either internal or cross -border, and in the Western Balkans it 
can be region al.  
 
As with other goods, arms smuggling is already taking place along the well -
established Balkan route, using different methods and in different forms:34 
- transhipment of international road consignments from legal businesses , 
- for smaller quantities, by distributing them in truck stashes , 
- using false documents , 
-  reporting false theft activities . 
                                                      
32  GÁSPÁR  (2020) op. cit. pp. 138 -139. 
33  UNODC elaboration of national crim inal justice data  op. cit.  
34  MITIC– VASILIEVSKI  (2013) op. cit. pp. 61 -62. 
120 In the case of arms, land -based smuggling predominates, greatly assisted by its 
geostrategic and human resource situation. The latter is inherently due to the fact that 
the unsatisfactory economic situation has generated high unemployment rates, making 
the promise of money linked to the illicit trade attractive to individuals without 
economic prospects. At this point, it is worth pointing out that drug traff icking also 
involves waterborne transport, although the Internet is becoming increasingly popular 
as a means of selling on the Dark Web ,35 whether for weapons, drugs or even as a 
back office for trafficking in human beings.36 
 
 
Figure 5. Number of persons c onvicted for firearms related in the Western Balkans, by 
links to organized crime, 2013 -201737 
 
 
Corruption  
 
Since the turn of the millennium, the EU's enlargement policy has delivered 
results in terms of corruption pressures, but the region has lost momentum and lags 
behind the worst performing EU members in terms of corruption. Looking back over 
the last 4 year s, corruption has increased in four of the six Western Balkan countries 
still to join, affecting Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Kosovo and Serbia. In 
contrast, Albania and Northern Macedonia saw marginal decreases in the run -up to 
the promise of the o pening of accession negotiations in 2019. This shows that in 
countries where there is more direct political pressure from the EU, negative trends 
                                                      
35  The term dark web or darknet dates back to 1971, when it referred to networks independent 
of ARPANET, the ancestor of the modern internet. The Dark Web is a layer of information , 
its functioning dependent on layers built on top of the Internet. It is the smallest part of the 
web. Its use is mainly subject to technical preconditions, which in turn provide greater 
anonymity to the users of the platform, making it popular in crimina l circles.  
36  GÁSPÁR  (2020) p. 145.  
37  UNODC elaboration of national criminal justice data ; op. cit.  
121 may be curbed in the short term, although there is a general view in both Albania and 
Northern Macedonia that there is little confidence in government policies on 
corruption measures. Monitoring of anti -corruption actions and progress therefore 
remains important, including through EU engagement with civil society in the region. 
There is a need to strengthen the te chnical aspects of the accession negotiations, to 
step up the fight against corruption and to develop mechanisms that can neutralise the 
harmful effects of authoritarian political elites. This is necessary because corruption 
is damaging in itself, but if t he European Union does not, Russia and China will move 
towards the Western Balkans and fill the resulting great power vacuum. Russia has a 
proven track record of exploiting fault lines within and outside the EU in order to halt 
or reverse Euro -Atlantic int egration in the region. Russia is present in the region in 
many areas, economically, culturally and in its social aspects. China, on the other 
hand, defines itself as supporting enlargement, but exploiting and perpetuating 
corruption and the authoritarian political model of the Western Balkan countries in its 
own interests, which are mainly economic.38  
 
It is therefore necessary to translate promises of anti -corruption reforms into 
tangible action in the Western Balkans, as corruption pressures remain quite  high 
throughout the region. Serbia has an outstanding record in this respect, with a rate of 
27% - confirmed by the rather high protest potential of society - twice as bad as the 
worst performing member of the European Union in the same reference year.39 A 5%40 
pendulum swing in the corruption rate, which would already be an acceptable rate 
over a period of approximately 5 -10 years, could be achieved through concerted 
efforts. This would still be a positive forecast, as there is an economic component 
behind it, as this result can be achieved through sustained economic growth, with a 
steady rise in incomes. One might think this process unlikely in a region where bribery 
is also perceived as a daily occurrence. This in turn hinders economic development. 
The EU could of course extend its support instruments for the rule of law to the 
Member States, which is likely to be linked to the fate of financial assistance to the 
Western Balkans. But the role of the national side is unquestionable here too, whether 
it be in  setting up state bodies, effectively prosecuting corrupt practices in the form of 
criminal proceedings, involving civil society and building the necessary capacity to 
investigate money laundering and other crimes.  
 
 
Islamic radicalism  
 
The phenomenon of travellers to the conflict zone and returning foreign fighters 
has undoubtedly defined the security landscape in the Western Balkans over the past 
10 years. The most obvious manifestation of this has been the large number of fighters 
from  the region who have left for Syria and Iraq and, to a lesser extent, Ukraine. Of 
the six Western Balkan countries, the most affected were Albania, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Northern Macedonia and Kosovo. Not surprisingly, these countries 
have dysfunctional administrations, have suffered several frozen conflicts, and are 
                                                      
38  Corruption in the Western Balkans 2019: Trends and Policy Options. SELDI policy brief 
no. 9 December 2019. pp. 5 -6. 
39  Ibid. p. 7.  
40  Ibid. 122 characterised by unresolved identity issues and weak governance.41 In any case, it is 
worth noting that the terrorist threat in the region is only in the moderate category, 
and the radicalisat ion associated with high -level terrorism is rather overrated. The 
region's national security services estimate the number of people travelling to Syria 
and Iraq at approximately less than 1,100, of which women and children account for 
a perceived 35%.42 The risk is further reduced by the fact that there were also a number 
of elderly men who did not make up the number of fighters. The general presumption 
in the four Western Balkan countries is that religious radicalisation, the politicisation 
of religion, is a potential threat to the country, with Salafism undermining democratic 
values in an already difficult socio -political space. The political fragility of the 
country is seen as a key contextual factor for radicalisation, in which both nonviolent 
religious a nd nationalist extremist ideologies are being promoted. The propensity to 
leave the country peaked in 2014, with 70% of those leaving for the conflict zone 
already in Syria and Iraq. The reasons for this phenomenon certainly include the fact 
that ISIS's co re Syrian -Iraqian organisation has become peripheral to its operations, 
regional and international efforts have become more prominent, mainly in terms of 
prosecuting returning fighters, and the intensification of fighting in the conflict zone, 
which has ma de it increasingly difficult to leave the ranks of terrorist organisations, 
but has also depleted their staff.43 For security and law enforcement professionals in 
the Western Balkans, the temporary or permanent cessation of returnees and, at the 
same time, of exits, means that they need to shift their focus to other forms of 
extremism, including groups long burdened by tensions over ethnicity and national 
identity. This is not helped by the fact that local media and political discourse is a 
hotbed of ethno -nationalism.44 
 
Three important moments in terms of radicalisation and recruitment are worth 
noting. Firstly, that the outflows were almost invariably of Muslim faith, and 
secondly, that recruitment was more successful in countries where Muslims were in 
relative minority, as minority groups and diasporas are generally perceived as more 
prone to radicalisation towards violent extremism. This is also possible because they 
suffer perceived or real discrimination by the majority group around them, and are 
thus pa rt of political, social and economic marginalisation. Thirdly, an interesting 
trend is that there is a significant difference in the extent to which violence is used. 
Individuals radicalised in the Western Balkans did not engage in acts of violence 
against  their own country of origin, and thus did not define themselves as being 
against the Western Balkans.45 
 
There are a number of problems in addressing this phenomenon in the region. It 
is essential that the management mechanisms involve the whole of society  and that 
the systemic drivers behind the phenomenon are understood. Emphasis must be placed 
on prevention, with deradicalisation, reintegration and resocialisation programmes 
                                                      
41  BIHARI , Rita: Radikalizmus a Nyugat -Balkánon; Hadtudomány, Magyar Hadtudományi 
Társaság, DOI: 10.17047/Hadtud omány 2020.  30. E. p. 165.  
42  AZINOVIC , Vlado: Understanding Violent Extremism in the Western Balkans. Extremism 
Research Forum, Regional Report. 2018. p. 3. 
43  OROSZ , Anna – SZALAI , Máté – WAGNER , Péter: A külföldi harcosok jelentette fenyegetés 
a „kalifátus” bukását követően (2.) – Európai válaszok a hazatérők problémájának 
kezelésére, E -2019/35. Külügyi és Külgazdasági Intézet, Budapest, 2019. pp. 9 -10. 
44  AZINOVIC  (2018) op. cit. pp. 3 -4. 
45  Ibid. pp. 5 -7. 123 designed to unravel the specific web of these factors, helping to identify and 
understand the root causes.46 It is also important to recognise that there is no single 
profile of exiting fighters and radicalised individuals. Behind the personal reasons, 
there is also a need to address the functional dysfunctionality linked to the countr y, as 
the countries of the region are relatively young, their institutions are not fully 
developed and fragile, and the problems of economic deprivation, corruption and the 
political and institutional dysfunctionality just mentioned are problems that are 
present throughout the region.47 This leads to both an economic and social identity 
crisis, which is mainly due to high youth unemployment and social 
disenfranchisement.48 
 
The fact that the fault lines that emerged in the 1990s can still be easily activated 
today does not paint a very positive picture of the region. The majority of returning 
fighters may be such an activator, but they do not represent a clear threat of violence. 
The majority of them are serving prison sentences, although this also carries a n umber 
of risks, as local prisons are not equipped to deal with them, and it is possible that 
returnees could pose a potential threat to other prisoners from a radicalisation 
perspective. Despite this, the Western Balkan countries are still pursuing this ap proach 
of monitoring events, when prevention would be of great importance. Obviously, it 
does not help the process that returnees return to the same economic situation that 
triggered the process, making it increasingly difficult to achieve reintegration. T he 
apolitical nature of the issue of returnees also slows down the process, as it prevents 
the development of the necessary context -specific programmes. However, religious 
sensitisation and awareness of the role of the internet should be an important part of 
the programme to be implemented, as it is often exploited, the lack of understanding 
of religion is exploited by recruiters who, according to their own interpretation of 
Islam, pass on self -interested reduced information to followers. And the Internet i s 
now arguably the easiest and most dangerous arena for spreading extremist messages. 
networking. Facebook and Twitter are therefore the most valuable from a propaganda 
perspective. Nor is it irrelevant that content outstrips its creator on web -based 
platforms. The last 10 years have thus been surrounded by the phenomenon of Islamic 
radicalisation, yet no country has implemented a fully comprehensive programme to 
tackle it. It is predominantly a top -down series of actions in which society is not 
involved. A lthough there are updated CVE49 strategies and action plans, 
implementation in practice is very difficult, mainly due to the economic obstacles 
countries face. A whole -of-government approach is needed to develop a whole -of-
society security model, with gover nment and citizens acting as partners, in order to 
develop a bottom -up initiative.50 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
46  KIS-BENEDEK , József (2016): Dzsihadizmus, radikalizmus, terrorizmus; Zrínyi Kiadó, 
Budapest, 2016. p. 90.  
47  PETROVIC , Predrag: Islamic radicalism in the Balkans, EUISS, 2016. p. 2. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2014_2019/documents/dsee/dv/10_balkan_radi
calism/10_balkan_radicalismen.pdf  (downloaded 11 April 2021 )  
48  AZINOVIC  op. cit.  
49  Countering Violent Extremism  
50  AZINOVIC  op. cit. pp. 2 -17. 124 EU conclusions, recommendations  
 
Overall, all six Western Balkan countries are struggling to join the European 
Union. Recognising this, the European Union has outlined a credible enlargement 
strategy for all six Balkan states for 2018: Serbia, Montenegro, Albania, Northern 
Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. The Strategy foresees the first 
accession by 2025. It is important to stress, however, that this is not a target date, but 
part of an overall roadmap. The Strategy sets out aspirations and reforms, presents a 
possible roadmap, and brings together the steps and measures the EU needs to take to 
maintain a credible perspective.51 All of this, of course, while co ntinuing to focus on 
the rule of law, fundamental rights, the fight against corruption and organised crime, 
and ensuring overall stability in the region. The European Union has an interest in the 
stability of the Western Balkans and in return for its suppo rt, it expects credible efforts 
to promote reforms. The Strategy underlines that joining the European Union is a 
choice. It requires political and social consensus. This is generally absent or very weak 
in the region.  
 
All four of the security challenges o utlined above were addressed in the 
European Parliament's post -2020 Summit report on the Western Balkans. The 
European Parliament's recommendations to the Balkan states focus mostly on 
strengthening democracy and the rule of law, helping them on their inte gration path. 
In the integration negotiation process, they are strongly expected to give priority in 
the opening of chapters on justice, corruption and organised crime, and to give priority 
to human rights, minority rights and freedom of expression. Of cou rse, the 
development of state capacity is an indispensable step in this direction, because it is 
undoubtedly the only way to successfully fight corruption and organised crime and to 
implement judicial verdicts and judicial reforms without any residual effe cts. With 
this in mind, the Western Balkan countries need to place greater emphasis on regional 
cooperation to combat radical extremism, terrorism and organised crime in all its 
manifestations. In view of the UK's ties to the region, they should work in cl ose 
alliance with the UK, beyond the regional concept, both to strengthen the fight and to 
achieve the objectives of the missions carried out under the Common Security and 
Defence Policy, in addition to the proposals mentioned above.52 
 
In addition to havin g the right apparatus in place and working together at 
political level, it is important that civil society is an integral part of the development 
process. A meaningful and comprehensive dialogue should be initiated to develop 
European values in the fight a gainst corruption, as security challenges across the 
region are mainly seen as mechanisms of influence due to corruption, which can be 
traced back to local power structures and organisations with dubious funding and 
perceptions. Accordingly, there is a nee d to improve the coherence, efficiency, 
visibility and transparency of EU funding, in which IPA III funding has a key role to 
                                                      
51  Communication From The Commission To The European Parliament, The Council, The 
European Economic And Social Committee And The Committee Of The Regions A 
credible enla rgement perspective for and enhanced EU engagement with the Western 
Balkans. European Commission, Strasbourg, 6.2.2018 COM (2018) 65 final.  
52  European Parliament recommendation of 19 June 2020 to the Council, the Commission and 
the Vice -President of the C ommission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign 
Affairs and Security Policy on the Western Balkans, following the 2020 summit, Brussels 
(2019/2210(INI))  125 play. In this way, particular attention to strengthening conditionality can be noted 
among the results achieved in macro -financial  assistance, the fight against corruption 
and the management of ethnic tensions. In order to promote positive actions for ethnic, 
national and religious minorities, the implementation of anti -discrimination policies 
should be actively supported, in particu lar the development of inclusive policies to 
protect fundamental rights. The European Union calls for a decisive step by the 
Western Balkans to allocate resources to support reforms, which will require the 
development of a rules -based economic system with competitive conditions and the 
adoption of EU standards on citizens' social rights.53 
 
Of course, the European Union's claim and its implementation are not in 
themselves sufficient. In the meantime, the EU's approach to addressing security 
challenges is imp ortant. Although it requires further investigation, it is clear that the 
human security situation in the region may contribute to the persistence and escalation 
of transnational security challenges. This is because the transnational nature of 
nontraditiona l security issues means that security cannot be confined to national 
territorial defence alone, and therefore security issues must be addressed not only with 
reference to the state, but also to individuals and social groups. In the aftermath of 
war, the We stern Balkans, and with it Europe, face threats that are diverse but less 
visible or predictable. Given its geographical proximity, the EU plays a crucial role in 
maintaining peace and stability. The pattern of security threats and the vulnerabilities 
of the post -conflict situation can hardly be addressed by a traditional approach to 
security. The multidimensional nature of the concept of human security seems to be 
appropriate to the security challenges in post -conflict societies. It could also be a 
suitabl e tool for the European Union to redefine its role in the region. The conclusion 
drawn from the HSI (Human Security Index) indicators measuring human security is 
that the economic, social and environmental tissue indices, which are an overarching 
category,  are also fraught with problems that carry additional short -, medium - and 
long-term risks. 54 
 
In my view, security issues, especially those of a nontraditional nature, should 
not be treated superficially, but should be tackled at their root causes. Along t hese 
lines, it can be shown that the human security priority does not exclude but enhances 
national security, which may be particularly true in the Western Balkan area under 
study, although I assume that EU integration is mostly a process that reduces the value 
of security challenges, but cannot be a complete solution to the security situation in 
the region.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
53  Ibid. 
54  AĞIR, Bülent Sarper – GÜRSOY , Barış – NECIP ARMAN , Murat: European Perspective of 
Human Security and the Western Balkans, RSP, No. 50. 2016. pp. 41 -54. 126 Bibliography:  
 
 ABUSURA , Adel: Comparative analísis of the strategic documents of the Western 
Balkans. In: HADZIC , Miroslav – TIMOTIC , Milorad – PETROVIC , Pregrad (eds.): 
Security Policies in the Western Balkans. Belgrad Centre for Security Policy, 
Belgrade, 2010. pp. 165 -183. 
 AĞIR, Bülent Sarper – GÜRSOY , Barış – NECIP ARMAN , Murat: European 
Perspective of Human Security and the Wester n Balkans, RSP, No. 50. 2016. 
pp. 41 -54. 
 ANASTASIJEVIC , Dejan: Organised Crime in the Western Balkans; 2006.  
 ANDREYCHUK , Raynell: Security in the Western Balkans. Report, Political 
Committe, Sub -committe on NATO Partnership (PCNP), 178 PCNP, 18 E rev, 
1. final, 2018. pp. 1 -4. 
 AZINOVIC , Vlado: Understanding Violent Extremism in the Western Balkans. 
Extremism Research Forum, Regional Report. 2018. p. 3.  
 BIHARI , Rita: Radikalizmus a Nyugat -Balkánon; Hadtudomány, Magyar 
Hadtudományi Társaság, DOI: 10.17047/Had tudomány 2020.  30. E. p. 165.  
 BIHARI , Rita: Társadalom és identitás a Nyugat -Balkánon; Felderítő Szemle 
2020/1.  
 Communication From The Commission To The European Parliament, The 
Council, The European Economic And Social Committee And The Committee 
Of The Regions A credible enlargement perspective for and enhanced EU 
engagement with the Western Balkans. European Commission, Strasbourg, 
6.2.2018 COM (2018) 65 final.  
 Corruption in the Western Balkans 2019: Trends and Policy Options. SELDI 
policy brief no. 9 D ecember 2019. pp. 5 -6. 
 CRAMPTON , Richard J. – ALLCOCK , John B. – DANFORTH , Loring: Balkans in: 
Encyclopaedia Britannica; https://www.britannica.com/place/Balkans  
(downloaded 15 December 2020)  
 DOBROWIECZKI , Péter – OROSZ , Anna: A Nyugat -Balkán; In: SZÁLKAI , Kinga – 
BARANYAI , Tamás Péter – SZARKA , E. Luca (eds.): Biztonságpolitikai Corvinák 
I.; Antall József Tudásközpont, Budapest, 2019. pp. 275 -276. 
 European Parliament recommendation of 19 June 2020 to the Council, the 
Commission and the Vice -President of the Commission / High Representative 
of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the Western Balkans, 
following the 2020 summit, Brussels (2019/2210(INI))  
 GÁSPÁR , Miklós: A balkáni szervezett bűnözés és hatásai – az illegális lőfegyver 
keresked elem. In: ANTALÓCZY  – GÁSPÁR  – ISTVANOVSZKI  – NYESTE  – PATÓ – 
SZENDREI  – SZŰCS  (eds.): A nemzetközi és honos szervezett bűnözés története, 
XX. századi fejlődése és várható tendenciái; KÖFOP -2.1.2 -VEKOP -15. „A jó 
kormányzást megalapozó közszolgálati fejlesz tés.” 2020. p. 133.  127  KEMENSZKY , Ágnes: Bosznia -Hercegovina, a mozaikosra töredezett állam. 
Mediterrán és Balkán Fórum, X. évfolyam, 1 -2. szám, 2016. pp. 49 -51. 
http://www.mbforum.hu/wp -content/uploads/2016/12/41_Mediterr%C3%A1n -
%C3%A9s -Balk%C3%A1n -F%C3%B3ru m_2016_1_2.pdf  (downloaded 17 
April 2021)  
 KEMP, Walter: Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime 
Crooked Kaleidoscope Organized Crime in the Balkans; 2017. 
https://globalinitiative.net/wp -content/uploads/2017/07/OC_balkans.pdf  
(downloaded 12  May 2021)  
 KIS-BENEDEK , József (2016): Dzsihadizmus, radikalizmus, terrorizmus; Zrínyi 
Kiadó, Budapest, 2016. p. 90.  
 Measuring Organized Crime in the Western Balkans, United Nations office in 
Drugs and Crime, Vienna 2020.  
 MITIC, Kiril – VASILIEVSKI , Goran:  Illicit trafficking in firearms – type of 
organised crime as a destabilisation factor for the security of the states in 
Southeast Europe; 2013. p. 58.  
 NÉMETH , Olivér: Bosznia -Hercegovina: politikai helyzet és az euroatlanti 
integráció esélyei (2019. 05. 1 2.) https://diplomaci.blog.hu/2019/05/12/bosznia -
hercegovina_politikai_helyzet_es_az_euroatlanti_integracio_eselyei  
(downloaded 19 March 2020)  
 OROSZ , Anna – SZALAI , Máté – WAGNER , Péter: A külföldi harcosok jelentette 
fenyegetés a „kalifátus” bukását követ ően (2.) – Európai válaszok a hazatérők 
problémájának kezelésére, E -2019/35. Külügyi és Külgazdasági Intézet, 
Budapest, 2019. pp. 9 -10. 
 PETROVIC , Predrag: Islamic radicalism in the Balkans, EUISS, 2016. p. 2. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2014_2019/documents/dsee/dv/10_b
alkan_radicalism/10_balkan_radicalismen.pdf  (downloade d 11 April 2021)  
 REMÉNYI , Péter: Koszovó; In: KOLLER , Boglárka – ÖRDÖGH , Tibor (eds.): 
Európaizáció a Nyugat -Balkánon; Dialóg Campus, Budapest, 2018. pp. 237 -
238. 
 TERZIEV , Venelin – KOLECI , Redon – KOLECI , Baki: Security Dilemmas and 
Defense Challenges in  Kosovo and Western Balkans. Journal of Innovation and 
Sustainability Vol. 4, No 3., 2018. pp. 75 -84. 
 UNODC: Crime and its impact on  the Balkans and affected countries., UNODC 
Research, 2008. pp. 7 -24 
 UNODC: Drug Money: the illicit proceeds of opiates trafficked on the Balkan 
route. UNODC Research, 2015. p. 19.  
 
 
 128 GÁBOR BOLDIZSÁR1 
SIGNIFICANCE OF CULT URAL/RELIGIOUS VALUE S IN PEACE 
OPERATIONS2  
 
 
“And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell 
followed with him. And power was given unto 
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with 
sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with 
the beasts of the earth.”  
(John, Revelation 6: 8) 
  
After the end of the bipolar world order, Hungary envisioned its future within 
the framework of the Euro -Atlantic orientation. For the sake of the wider area, the 
region and global peace and security, Hungary's forces have joined the international 
peace operations in the context of finding a way. Initially, under the auspices of the 
United Nations, unarmed military observers served to resolve crises in remote areas. 
The complexity of the security of the new world order, its new orientations and 
integra tion aspirations, the operational experience gained and the building of mutual 
political trust have deepened peacekeeping activities. The Hungarian Defense Forces 
took part in increasingly complex (more security dimensions, conflict sources and 
participant s) increasingly dangerous, more and more faraway international operations 
with increasing military ties and tasks with an increasing risk of failure. The 
operational experience of the Force had an invigorating effect on the evolution of the 
forces’ units, assets and operational/tactical procedures. The indoctrination, 
preparation, training and instruction, and a wide range of combat equipment, the 
procedures applied during operations, the doctrinal background all evolved 
continuously in response to the chal lenges of security and operational environment.  
 
As a result of taking part in increasingly complex operations it has become 
evident that conflicts can only be dealt with in a holistic vision and comprehensive 
approach. It has become increasingly clear tha t in order to resolve conflicts within 
states, it is not only necessary to find a solution in the dimension of physical security 
(military and homeland security), but also in economic (scarce resources and self -
sustaining economy) and political/administrat ive (power sharing, central and local 
                                                      
1  The author is an associate professor at the National Civil Service University and a head of 
department at the Ministry of Defense. During his military career, he served twice in UN 
(Mozambique, Kosovo), three times in NATO (twice in ISAF and once in RSM in  
Afghanistan) operations, as well as in command and command. At home, he was involved 
in the development of MH’s cognitive operational abilities. Research, educational and 
publishing area – which is in English at home and abroad – the non -kinetic operation s 
components of the future complex operations environment and forces the participants to 
work together.  
2  The international and domestic literature uses several terms and a complex system of 
definitions to define international crisis management (UN: essen tially peacekeeping and 
peace enforcement, NATO: a six -part subsystem of peace support operations), the author 
uses the term peace operations here.  129 administration, management and organization of the performance of state functions), 
but the stability and predictability of the social or social security dimension has also 
become increasingly important.  
 
The recogniti on that the behavior of individuals and communities affects the 
development of the security environment, and what roots such behavior stems from, 
has made the application of a wide range of social sciences a key issue in order to 
better understand human be havior and its relationship to the conflict.  
 
International intervention during peace operations of the armed forces can only 
succeed if the sources of the conflict are taken into account and effective responses to 
them are found both separately and in an integrated way. Sources of conflict of social 
origin stem from human behavior, getting to know and influencing which is 
indispensable for a successful operation.  
 
In the armed forces, the set of capabilities that provide a solution to the problem 
of getti ng to know and winning is evolving continuously and during these complex 
operations. One of the main focuses of the increasingly complex operations, civil -
military cooperation, psychological operations, information operations, 
reconnaissance and intelligen ce, non -kinetic capabilities is the exploration of the 
retention and motivation of the conflict zone at the individual and group level.  
 
Behavior is determined by individual observations, experience, faith, and 
customs, passed on from generation to generat ion by the individual and the collective 
group. Among these determining factors, the formation of group consciousness and 
group identity and the linguistic, ethnic and religious dimensions are essential. This 
study presents the development of the relations hip between the Hungarian Armed 
Forces and this religious dimension through the system of international crisis 
management and peace operations.  
 
 
The evolution of the armed forces in a changing security environment3 
 
The basis of state existence is the existence of a functioning and efficient force . 
The creation and sustenance of physical security, the guaranteeing of sovereignty  and 
territorial integrity  is essential to ensure implementation of state functions displayed 
in the everyday life of the state  and of the citizen (withdrawal, distribution, control, 
sanctions, mirroring values and interests, protection).  
 
Throughout history, the environment, security, power, and economic conditions 
continued to induce changes in the force structure, its capabilit ies, command and set 
of missions. The Basic Law of Hungary4 defines the mission of the Hungarian 
Armed Forces in a complex way:  
 
 
                                                      
3  BOLDIZSÁR , Gábor: The place and role of the armed forces in dealing with security 
challenges.  Budapest, National University of Public Service, 2019, pp. 67 -70. 
4  Articles 45 and 48 -54 of the Basic Law of Hungary  130 - the armed protection of the homeland, the preservation of its sovereignty 
and territorial integrity;  
-  the fulfillment of international obligations, including peace operations 
and humanitarian aid;  
-  contribution to disaster management missions in the field of ensuring 
safety of life and property for the benefit of the population and the state;  
-  in some unusual cases, it a lso performs tasks in cooperation with other state 
actors for the protection and security of the country within the framework 
of the special legal order.  
 
In the early 90's, countries that  achieved freedom from the grip of the Cold War, 
sought their place in a more complex new world, full of dangers. In a region that 
became free from influence after the disappearance of the Warsaw Pact treaty and the 
Comecon, after the collapse of Soviet, orientation towards the West and the Euro -
Atlantic integration began in earnest. The Hungarian armed force formed in the Cold 
War, was a mass army, whose doctrine  was based on the Prussian -Russian 
movement -centered military culture and was defined by the order -oriented  
command structure present at all levels. Organized and prepared for missions that 
were fundamentally offensive in nature, the conscripted armed forces faced a huge 
challenge at the time of the country’s independence. Instead of a high intensity 
offensive war to be waged within the framework of an alliance, an effective response 
to the challenges stemming from the disintegration of the Yugoslav state had to be 
found. The civil war process required completely different forces, equipment and 
procedures . With the legacy of the Warsaw Pact, performing these missions  
presented constant challenges. Thus, in the summer of 1991, the newly independent 
Hungary had to guarantee its statehood and the security and life of its citizens in a 
series of crisis management operations lasting for years.  
 
In parallel with the disinte gration in Yugoslavia, political and professional 
dialogue and building relationship with the West began . Initially, in addition to 
conferences, meetings and short -term courses, unarmed military observers started our 
country’s contribution to global peace and security. These shared experiences in crisis 
management peace operations and the NATO -led search of the way ahead in the mid 
90’s led to the declaration of NATO’s Partnership for Peace (PfP) and to Hungary’s 
accession to it in 1995.  
 
1995 was a milestone in the development and transformation of the Hungarian 
armed forces.  
-  joining NATO PfP,  
-  the Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended four years of Yugoslav 
disintegration,  
-  NATO begins the first out -of-area peace operation in its his tory,  
-  which was joined by Hungary as a partner country, contributing an engineer 
battalion (within the IFOR then SFOR mission),  
-  in the autumn of that year two designated platoons of the HDF are deployed 
in Cyprus (UN) and the Sinai (MFO) as armed pea cekeepers.  
  
With the development of operational cooperation, the quality and content of 
international training and education also improved continuously.  
 131 In the period leading up to Hungary’s accession to NATO in 1999, relations 
became increasingly deepen ed not only in the area of education, training, exercises, 
conferences, but also in the area of peace operations.  
 
Another milestone was Hungary’s accession to NATO in 1999, and following 
that the contribution of a guard and service support battalion to a NATO operation in 
Kosovo (KFOR).  
 
Restructuring of the Hungarian armed continued into the 2000s as well. 
Hungarian military units were contributed to a coalition operation, in Iraq, and to a 
NATO operation in Afghanistan to perform combat missions. In 2004 , EU 
membership had also set new missions of a new alliance that we had to be ready to 
accomplish in a year when conscription was suspended in this country, so the 
organizational structure of the armed forces became that of an all professional one. In 
the same year, a Hungarian light infantry company started its mission in Afghanistan. 
In the second half of the 2000s the process of operational transformation of the 
Hungarian armed forces culminated in the Hungarian contribution to the mission 
in Afghanistan . As a lead nation, HDF units performed complex state buildings tasks 
in the triple context of developing public administration, rehabilitation of the 
economy and improving the security situation in the northern province of Baghlan 
with an area of 21,000 s quare km -s. The operational contribution was characterized 
by combat operations by the Operations Military Liaison Team (OMLT), which 
mentored, trained and supported an Afghan military battalion, and by various units of 
the Hungarian Special Operations For ces. In addition to combat operations, the 
complex development also included the development of the capabilities of the Afghan 
security forces, and our soldiers performed consulting and training tasks in the areas 
of logistics, artillery, engineering and h elicopters. The increase in the number and 
complexity of operations has not stopped: Mali, Iraq, the Central African Republic, 
Sudan are just a few crisis areas where Hungarian soldiers have been deployed and 
are still serving today.  
 
The Hungarian armed forces’ transformation beginning in the 90s brought about 
great changes by the second decade of the 21st century. In addition to co -operations, 
education/training, joint exercises, and alliance membership, the experience of joint 
operat ions helped the Hungarian armed forces to be able to fulfill its basic mission in 
the new age as well. Increasingly dangerous missions accomplished in an 
increasingly complex operational environment, and operations with increasing 
contingencies in increasi ngly remote crises, required more skilled, experienced 
leadership and execution. The operations that were complex i n all respects and 
performed in remote areas and in a multi -national environment affected and to this 
day affect military thinking, decision making and problem solving, thus helping the 
leadership move from an order -oriented leadership culture towards a mission 
command  one, thus preparing the way for quick decisions and interventions adapted 
to the quickly changing operational environment, crea ting a leadership mentality 
based on knowledge, trust, risk -taking and initiative.  
 
The experience gained during peacekeeping operations , allied cooperation 
and procedures have significantly contributed to the accomplishment of national 
defense missions and the development of defense capabilities, which since 2014 has 
once again become the focus of allied capability development. NATO member 132 countries decided on this change of priorities, the direction of the Alliance's territorial 
defense concept and reaf firmation at the NATO Summits in Wales and Warsaw in 
2014 and 2016,5 due to radical changes in the security environment.  
 
 
Development of peace operations  
 
The transformation of the Hungarian Defense Forces is taking place in an ever -
changing international  security environment. Management of crises in the 
international background is a complex system, just as the crisis itself. The use of force 
is one such tool, essentially in addition to political/diplomatic and economic pressure. 
The domestic crisis manage ment (in case of conflicts raging in neighboring countries) 
and peace operations conducted in remote areas (the countries taking part in the peace 
operation are not directly involved in the crisis) undergo continuous changes, but 
according to their time an d complexity, the wide ranging literature discusses them 
divided into certain periods.  
 
Apart from the early peacekeeping operations,  which took place before and 
during the First World War in Crete, the Balkans and China, the peacekeeping 
operations carrie d out by the United Nations during the Cold War are considered a 
classic peacekeeping operation. The most fundamental difference between this 
classical or traditional peacekeeping and the subsequent generations of peacekeeping 
operations is that in the fir st case we are talking about conflicts between states, while 
in subsequent cases there are crises between groups, groups and states. In the case of 
conflicts within the state, the importance of the groups' sense of identity and belonging 
to the community b ecomes more and more important. Grouped according to the 
similarities in groups of the same value - develop a system of interest and a strong 
bond between the members. The cohesive force of these groups can be varied, but 
bonds and identities withstanding time and great challenges lie, in addition to interests 
and values, in culture, religious and popular beliefs, customs and perceptions, in 
addition to linguistic, religious and ethnic criteria.  
 
For us, Hungarians, the first of the four known early peace o perations, 
“firefighting operations” according to the terminology of the day, is particularly 
important, when on 4 February 1897, Gyula Pintér, Consul of the Austro -Hungarian 
Empire had sailors from a warship of the Monarchy deployed on the Isle of Crete t o 
quell street riots resulting from the Greco -Ottoman conflict. Later, mandated by the 
European powers and through their military intervention, Gyula Pintér, as leader of 
this multinational mission, achieved a political success in as much as the Ottoman 
Empire created a new legal status for the Cretan (basically Greek) population and 
thereby put an end to civil war conditions.6 
 
                                                      
5  NATO NAC (2014): NATO Wales Summit Declaration.  
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2014_2019/documents/sede/dv/sede240914wale
ssummit_/sede240914walessummit_en.pdf  (downloaded 15 March 2018)  
NATO  NAC (2016): NATO  Warsaw Summit 2016 Declaration.  
http://www.msz.gov.pl/en/foreign_policy/nato_2016/documents/nato_warsaw_summit_2
016_declaration  (downloaded 15 March 2018)  
6  BOLDIZSÁR op. cit.  133 The first-generation or traditional peacekeeping is linked  to the establishment 
of the United Nations and the global acceptance of  the Security Council's decisions. 
Although these operations were inter -state struggles with their regular armed forces, 
in which essentially military targets were damaged, they nevertheless caused 
significant suffering to the populations of the countries concerned.  
 
The basic feature of second generation, also known as multidimensional 
peacekeeping , and of subsequent generations, is that conflicts also take place within 
the state. Part of the population does not accept the supremacy of the state or differe nt 
groups (based on language, ethnicity or religion) turn to face each other. Another 
characteristic is that the will of the state, the central control, is weakened or in many 
cases even terminated. The internationally recognized method of measuring the 
relationship between the state and the citizen and the differences between groups 
within the state is the Fragile State Index  (FSI).7 This index is compiled annually by 
Fund For Peace, an independent nonprofit organization, and examines the stability of 
each state in five categories along 12 factors. Of the five categories (cohesion, 
economic, political, social, and overarching), the cohesion, political, and social 
elements fundamentally examine the relationship between the state and its citizens 
and groups w ithin the state.8 
 
In case some of the citizens reject the central authority, it cannot perform the 
essential public functions and services as well as control of the territory, the removal 
of the state monopoly in the possession and use of force, then the state sets off on the 
road of weakening to disintegration, and ultimately towards elimination. In these 
conflicts, the search for self and community identity is valued, as belonging to a 
community can provide not only spiritual and spiritual reinforcement,  but also 
physical protection. Another important root of inter -group conflicts is access to 
dwindling resources. If the country and the region do not have the necessary quantity 
and quality of the goods necessary for individual and community existence, the n a 
constant struggle will start for the distribution of these, in which the community 
identity, belonging to the bloodline, to the religious and linguistic community will be 
highly appreciated.  
 
Further generations of peace operations show a  more complex picture. After 
the crushing of a rebellious power in the country in coalition war, it is through state -
building to make that country a stable and predictable player again . The 21st century 
history of Iraq and Afghanistan is an example of this complex inter national 
peacekeeping operation. But in recent years, non-state actors and stateless “states”, 
quasi -states such as the Islamic State , have emerged . After the fight against, and 
victory over it, it is necessary to build a stable and predictable state from the ruins 
here as well.  
 
The hybrid threat and attack is another level of conflict. In the case of multi -
phase pressure, the fact of a complex attack cannot be established at first. The 
aggressor has been proven to be unidentifiable, creating tensions in t he economic, 
                                                      
7  FUND for Peace (2017): Fragile States Index 2017 . pp. 26 -33. 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/951171705 -Fragile -States -Index -
Annual -Report -2017.pdf (downloaded 15 March 2018)  
8  BOLDIZSÁR op. cit. pp. 58 -60. 134 social and physical security space through the use of intelligence methods and even 
the use of organized criminal groups. In a region destabilized in this way, the good 
relationship between the state and its citizens is disrupted, political st ability is 
damaged and weakened, which can eventually lead to disintegration through civil 
war.9 
 
It is necessary, even essential, in peace operations to explore and understand the 
root causes of the conflict. Intra -state violence The existence of quasi -states is the 
aggression of non -state actors, the common feature of hybrid attacks is that it puts 
pressure on individuals, on communities.  The different characteristics of different 
communities lead not only to the development of self- and community identit y, but 
also to the recognition and persecution of otherness in an age of climate change, 
religious impatience and intolerance, competing for dwindling resources of 
shrinking living space.  
 
 
Cognitive knowledge and skills, development of the ability to win  
 
The behavior of the local population in the area of operation, can be of three 
kinds in relation to the international peacekeeping forces and the process of 
reconciliation: friendly and supportive, neutral or abstaining, hostile or dismissive. 
This attitu de, personal preferences or group thinking is to help or complicate the 
success of international intervention. In traditional societies, the imprinting and the 
durability of the attitude is much stronger. Based on the knowledge of the factors 
determining t he behavior of the individual and the communities, it is possible to 
predict what kind of behavior and reaction to expect on the part of the individual and 
the community in the given situation. For those who are exposed to physical danger 
and who compete on a daily basis for scarce resources , a basic condition of 
existence is belonging to a community that, if its standards are maintained, provides 
security where possible. If you succeed to meet the needs at the individual or family 
level at the two  lower levels of the Maslow pyramid of needs,10 physiological and 
physical security, life can be called stable and predictable. This is the desire of all 
people in all crisis areas of the world. In a crisis situation, the formation and 
maintenance of group identity is key, as the strength of the community exerts its 
impact not only through physical security, help, but also through spiritual support. 
Belonging to a community in emergencies, conflicts and armed aggression is 
determined by the commonly spoken l anguage, professed faith, ethnic cohesion . 
 
And the behavior of individuals and communities is determined by interests and 
values, family and traditions, beliefs and customs, experiences and beliefs, past and 
teachings. But the organizing principles of bel onging to a community, the 
determinants of behavior, hide not only benefits but also risks. Visible, recognizable 
elements for enemy troops, which manifestations of group identity (building, clothing, 
decoration, and sacred signs, customs, behavior) become  suitable for discrimination, 
                                                      
9  BOLDIZSÁR op. cit.  
10  Maslow's needs pyramid: it systematizes the different need s of human existence in a way 
that builds on each other (from basic to complex). Level 1: physiological level 2: physical 
security, level 3: love and togetherness, level 4: self -esteem, level 5: self -realization.  135 exclusion, persecution, rejection of otherness. Groups competing for scarce resources 
thus identify not only provide protection for individuals but also serve them as targets.  
 
Knowledge of the factors that shape the belonging  of the group provides an 
opportunity to use the broad material knowledge with the right preparation to 
influence (persuade) the thinking of the target group to change its behavior.  
 
Recognition: Peacekeeping forces able to deal, and capable of dealing, wi th the 
complex challenges of a changing world must recognize the origins and complexity 
of conflicts during the analysis of the security situation. The need for complex security 
and its components are mapped at both the individual and group levels. The 
social/social security dimension has become essential due to the influence of the 
factors outlined above in intra -state conflicts in civil war conditions.  
 
Cognition: Exploring and understanding the roots of a conflict is a long process 
and requires the regio n-specific and joint application of many fields of social science . 
The historical, religious, cultural, cultural – anthropological, political science, 
economic, sociological and psychological knowledge is  indispensable in the process 
of cognition. The comb ined application of the above knowledge can ensure the 
“human space” to understand the behavior of the local population, to predict its 
reactions and the possible directions of acceptance and persuasion. This information 
and knowledge, method and experienc e are also passed on during the preparation of 
peacekeeping forces, and this knowledge is developed by the functional elements 
entrusted with the management of the 'human space' and the building of relationships.  
 
Persuasion: Using the opportunities provid ed by cognition, knowledge can be 
used to change the behavior of the selected target group of the “human space” to be 
influenced . Hostile behavior can be neutralized or supportive behavior can be 
developed. The first step in persuasion is to get to know the target audience and then 
create messages for the desired behavior. Finally, these messages need to be 
transformed and delivered in a form and content that is acceptable to the local 
population.  
 
Organizational elements of persuasion: In the complex man agement of 
complex crises, many actors are involved in different security dimensions, whose 
efforts need to be coordinated in order to succeed.11 Based on operational experience, 
peacekeepers are continuously developing their knowledge of the “human space”,  
potential target groups and the organizational units that manage them, as well as 
cooperation with the local population.  
 
Initially, in the era of basically multidimensional peacekeeping, the co -operation 
and coordinated efforts of the actors, the explora tion of the needs and values of the 
local population could be found in the UN peace operations. A quarter of a century 
later, the Civil -Military Cooperation (CIMIC) , as an organization that liaises with 
the local population, government and influencers, app ears as a medium in NATO's 
IFOR and then SFOR operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The next element - 
considering its domestic introduction - the basic purpose of psychological 
                                                      
11  BOLDIZSÁR Gábor (2014b): Paratroopers in  future operations; Security and Defense 
Quarterly,  No. 2014/2. p. 47.  136 operational capability (PSYOPS) is to influence and persuade, so the CIMIC abi lity 
actively complements and builds on the acquired knowledge in this subject. Due to 
the increasingly complex operational environment, an integrating military capability 
of Information Operations (INFOOPS) came into being , which, in addition to the 
other  six components (computer network based operations, electronic warfare, use of 
force and threat thereof, information and operations security, deception) also includes 
cognitive abilities. In addition to the CIMIC and PSYOPS the key leader engagement 
(KLE) and the presence, posture and profile (PPP) have a joint effect on the local 
population and its opinion forming.  
 
NATO has established a CIMIC Center of Excellence (CCOE) in the 
Netherlands, of which Hungary is a member, in order to better understand and 
persuade civil -military cooperation, interactions with the local population, to process 
experience (lessons learnt) and to develop doctrine. The knowledge transfer of the 
center is also utilized by the Hungarian Military Non -Kinetic Capability Organization,  
the Hungarian Civil -Military Cooperation and Psychological Operations Center.  
 
An important element in getting to know communities, especially traditional 
societies, groups living in crisis areas is the exploration of religious ties, beliefs - 
and its imp act on thinking. The power of religion, faith is complex. Not looking here 
at the spiritual emotion and value -determining effects, its community -building 
and retention, providing protection, guidance, opinion -forming functions are 
what make it crucial in respect of community existence and survival. The above triple 
(practical) function is what necessitates learning  the religious environment, system 
of beliefs, habits and norms even for peace operation forces coming fro m different 
cultures.  
 
The army’s non -kinetic capabilities complemented with functional experts of 
CIMIC possessing specialized knowledge provide an opportunity to achieve the 
desired peacetime conditions not only through violent means, but through affecti ng 
the hearts and minds of the local population.  
  
The “human space”, the condition for learning about and influencing human 
behavior, is the knowledge and ability to apply social science to specific communities 
and regions. During peace operations, compli ance with, and observance of, laws and 
agreements/treaties governing warfare, armed conflicts and management of 
international crises, the Washington Treaty , the UN Charter and Security Council 
Decisions, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and requir ements of other 
international documents is indispensable for the legitimacy and success of the 
operations. But in addition to these regulations, international peace operation 
personnel also need a number of specific professional documents , to use a profess ional 
term, a doctrinal background, without which the desired lasting peace and security 
cannot be achieved.  These documents prescribe mandatory practical, readily usable 
and experience -/research -based knowledge and procedures, or make 
recommendations for their use. This doctrinal background is of dual importance in 
international crisis management and peace operations. First, they create the document 
hierarchy of transforming political decisions into professional instructions, their 
operationalization at th e planning -organization, command and control, 
implementation level . On the other hand, they are important in the training of 
designated forces, both as professional regulators and as recommendations and 137 guidelines. During the preparation for peacekeeping m issions, two types of 
knowledge transfer take place, on the one hand for the specific transfer of social 
science knowledge in the education system to the general crisis area, and on the other 
during the general and pre -deployment special preparation of the  forces assigned to 
the operations, in the context of training . The doctrinal regulatory system is 
constantly changing and evolving as a result of changes in operational experience, 
changes in the security and operational environment, political decisions a nd 
guidelines, the tools used and other specialist procedures.  
 
The doctrinal regulatory background of learning about and managing, 
influencing and cooperating with the “human space” should be reviewed in relation 
to the UN and NATO . Having regard to the fact that from the perspective of our 
country’s operational participation these two organizations are relevant, it is 
important to know the mentality and system of regulations that are formulated around 
issues of religion, religious communities in the form of recommendations or specific 
requirements.  
 
Based on the chronology of the peacekeeping periods, in the course of the UN's 
international crisis management activities, basically from the age of post -Cold War 
multidimensional peacek eeping (Generation 2) it becomes more and more important 
to get to know and understand the population.  
 
In its course description issued in 1994 to train military observers, the United 
Nations sets out the obligation and necessity of educating cultural dif ferences .12 
 
The service must be performed in compliance with the principles set out in the 
above -mentioned 1995 General Peacekeeping Guidelines, such as the principles of 
neutrality, impartiality and objectivity .13 
 
Published in 1997, the United Nations Peacekeeping Handbook in addition to 
history, customs and beliefs classifies religious knowledge  as culture and the local 
culture .14 
 
The Guidelines for the Selection and Training of Military Observers, also issued 
in 1997, require the transfer of historical, demographic, cultural and traditions 
knowledge relevant to the crisis area in the general operational knowledge category 
in a broader context during preparation. This document, in the chapter “We are the 
UN peacekee pers”, presents respect for local customs, traditions, culture and religion 
at all times as a mandatory rule of conduct.15 
 
                                                      
12  United Nation: UNITED NATIONS MILITARY OBSERVER TRAINING 
CURRICULUM (UN, New York, 1995)  
13  United Nation: GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS (UN, 
New York, 1995)  
14  United Nation: UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING HANDBOOK FOR JUNIOR 
RANKS (UN, New York, 1997)  
15  United Nation: SELECTION STANDARDS AND TRAINING GUIDELINES FOR 
UNITED NATIONS MILITARY OBSERVERS (UN, New York, 1997) p. 47.  138 The concept and content of the CIMIC are already published in the Military 
Observer Handbook, published in 2001, and the importance o f learning about cultural 
differences is reiterated in the context of social customs and behavior.16 
 
The detailed UN Multidimensional Peacekeeping Operations Manual, published 
in 2003, requires respect for and protection of cultural rights in addition to ( often 
as part of) civil, economic, political and minority rights in accordance with UN 
mandates.17 
 
Taking into account the UN recommendations and requirements of the similar 
international courses, two curricula compiled by the UN Department of 
Peacekeeping  Operations – UN DPKO in 2017 and 2020 have been incorporated in 
domestic peace operations training courses; these  cover  social diversity, cultural 
knowledge, religious knowledge and inherent values , and the conduct of 
peacekeeping forces in societies with  different cultures make it obligatory to define 
the teaching of topics and also provide educational aid for this.18 
 
NATO intervened in the disintegration process in Yugoslavia as a result of its 
search for a path/direction, from 1995 onwards with ground f orces to curb the civil 
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement. From 
the very beginning, it was clear to the Alliance that without getting to know and 
winning over the civilian population, lasting peace and reconciliation , a functioning 
state and later nation -building could not be achieved.  
 
NATO, to discharge this responsibility in 1995 applied civil-military 
cooperation (CIMIC) capability with its staff elements  on the organization -planning 
level and on the level of the executive subunits. The professional work of both 
organizational elements were supported by a special element, the CIMIC Functional 
Experts Group who have specialized in -depth expertise and experience. These 
experts cover five main functional areas : admini stration, infrastructure, 
humanitarian affairs, economy, culture and education. Research, exploration and 
knowledge of religious issues and traditions are part of the latter field.19 
 
The issue, importance and the need for the knowledge of religious matters  not 
only at expert level, but also in various CIMIC assessments (urban, quick, full, 
summary assessments) together in the context of cultural affairs, the history of the 
population linguistic/cultural/community composition, together with study aspects of 
monuments and cultural heritage, in a complex way.20 
 
Preparations for cultural issues, which are also important for the overall 
peacekeeping force, are increasingly reflected in the training of CIMIC personnel. 
                                                      
16  United Nation: NATIONS MILITARY OBSE RVERS HANDBOOK (UN, New York, 
2001) p. 27, p. 119.  
17  United Nation: HANDBOOK ON UNITED NATIONS MULTIDIMENSIONAL 
PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS (UN, New York, 2003) p. 101.  
18  UN 5th STANDARDIZED TRAINING MODULE (2020) Chapters 5A and 5B and 
UNDPKO CORE PRE-DEPLOYMENT TRAINING MATERIALS (20 17) 3.2. module  
19  CCOE CIMIC/CMI FIELD HANDBOOK 3rd EDITION (Civil -Military Co -operation 
Center of Excellence, Netherlands, 2012) pp. 5 -9. 
20  Ibid. Annex 6 -1 and 6 -2 and 9 -1 139 Eliminating uncertainty resulting from differ ent cultural conditions, customs and 
religious differences may be necessary to remove the effect of shock, but at least to 
reduce it.21 
 
The NATO CIMIC Center of Excellence (CCOE), as a professional knowledge 
center, experience processor, doctrine developer, knowledge transfer and training 
organization, draws on and processes its experience of peacekeeping and state -
building in crisis areas , and strongly recommends that in-depth knowledge of 
different cultures facilitates the strengthening of the state, thus the given country 
setting foot on the path of stable and self -sustaining peace can once again become a 
reliable partner in the international relations.22 
 
Another result of the development of NATO's operational procedures and 
doctrines in this field at the end of 2010 was that there are factors that affect several 
areas simultaneously in several security dimensions, so their examin ation, 
understanding and application require a holistic approach. These so -called “cross -
cutting topics – CCT”  are an important element of the Cultural Property 
Protection .23 These goods embody the culture, religion , traditions and history, 
values and merit s of a community . The physical appearance of these goods as 
symbols of the cohesive power of the community, the physical destruction of which 
results in spiritual damage, intimidation, loss of identity and hatred. The protection of 
these goods is of paramo unt importance in order to resolve conflicts on a lasting basis 
and to promote reconciliation.  
  
By embracing international examples, trends, allied regulations and 
expectations, understanding and influencing the behavior of individuals and 
communities als o plays a key role in the development of Hungarian peacekeeping 
capabilities. The HDF CMCPOC (Civil -Military Cooperation and Psychological 
Operations Center)  since its establishment in 2004 has been regularly issuing its 
CIMIC Manuals, regularly updated an d adapted to various crisis zones, containing 
complex assessments (the Balkans, Kosovo, Afghanistan, Baghlan, Iraq). The Center 
has also compiled the Mission Basics Handbook , which places great emphasis on 
working with different cultural circles to address  religious differences.24 
  
Conflicts with society, stemming from cultural diversity and religious 
differences have been and continue to be increasingly important in both international 
organizations. Getting to know the way of thinking  of peoples with cultural and 
religious differences and their better understanding of was given a serious impetus 
by the mid -90s when the peace operation forces tasked to resolve civil war conditions 
were faced  with the horrors of human brutality, religious intolerance  and ethnic 
                                                      
21  GUIDANCE FOR CIMIC OPERATORS CIMIC FIELD  HANDBOOK (Civil -Military 
Co-operation Center of Excellence, The Netherlands, etc.)  
22  GOOD GOVERNANCE MAKES SENSE A WAY TO IMROVE YOUR MISSON 
(Civil -Military Co -operation Center Of Excellence, The Netherlands, 2012)  
23  Cultural Property Protection (CPP) https://library.cimic -coe.org/wp -
content/uploads/20 18/07/20180701_UC_CCOE -Fact-Sheet -Cultural -Property -Protection -
CPP.pdf  (downloaded 15 August 2020)  
24  MISSION BASIC KNOWLEDGE HANDBOOK (Hungarian Armed Forces Command, 
2010) pp. 70 -114 140 cleansing  in Bosnia and Herzegovina (e.g.: Srebrenica), Rwanda, East Timor or later 
in Kosovo.  
 
 
Summary  
  
The last 30 years have been a time of change for the world freed from the 
captivity of the bipolar order, but lasting peace has not come. Th e conflicts are 
becoming more complex  new actors and threats, sources of conflict and solving 
experiments have appeared. In this changing world, the Hungarian armed forces are 
being transformed, participating with increasing force, in increasingly distant and 
dangerous, increasingly complex and high -risk operations. During these operations, it 
becomes increasingly clear that getting to know and understanding the origin of 
conflicts, influencing it is vital for peace and security . Recognizing that in changin g 
conflicts, human behavior is decisive, the identity and cohesiveness of the individual 
and the community, ethnicity, religion, and language are three important guiding 
principles along which organized communities are able to defend themselves, 
effectivel y represent their interests and values.  
 
The relationship and good relations between the state and its citizens are a basic 
condition for a stable and predictable international existence, security and 
development.  
 
During the complex operations dealing wit h complex crises, the role and impact 
of the applied social sciences has increased. It is important to get to know the given 
community in order to get to know, understand and positively influence human 
behavior and reactions (friendly, neutral, rejecting).  Over the past 30 years, during 
domestic and international peace operations such knowledge and expertise has been 
accumulated that is indispensable for the development of national defense capabilities 
and for adapting to the challenges of the human space a t all times.  
 
Among the planning, organizing, command and control and executive functional 
elements of the armed forces, such as the knowledge base, the doctrinal foundations 
and education / training also appeared in their capabilities, which are intended for 
winning over human space.  Certain elements of CIMIC, PSYOPS and INFO OPS are 
the very non -kinetic capabilities whose main purpose is winning over, “overwriting” 
hostile emotions and actions.  
 
Human behavior is determined by a myriad of factors, but faith and culture , 
customs and traditions, language and ethnicity, experience and beliefs are essential. 
To change people’s behavior in a positive direction, these factors need to be known, 
respected, protected, but if need be, changed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 141 Bibliography:  
 
 Articles 45 and 48 -54 of the Basic Law of Hungary  
 BOLDIZSÁR , Gábor (2014b): Paratroopers in future operations; Security and 
Defense Quarterly,  No. 2014/2.  
 BOLDIZSÁR , Gábor: The place and role of the armed forces in dealing with 
security challenges.  Budapest, National University of Public Service, 2019.  
 CCOE CIMIC/CMI FIELD HANDBOOK 3RD EDITION (Civil -Military Co -
operation Center of Excellence, Netherlands, 2012)  
 Cultural Property Protection (CPP) Source: https://library.cimic -coe.org/wp - 
content / uploads / 2018/07 / 20180701_UC_CCOE -Fact-Sheet -Cultural -
Property -Protection -CPP.pdf  (downloaded 15 Aug ust 2020)  
 FUND for Peace (2017): Fragile States Index 2017 . 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/951171705 -Fragile -
States -Index -Annual -Report -2017.pdf  (downloaded 15 March 2018)  
 GOOD GOVERNANCE MAKES SENSE A WAY TO IMROVE YOUR 
MISSON (Civil -Military Co -operation Center Of Excellence, The Nether lands, 
2012)  
 GUIDANCE FOR CIMIC OPERATORS CIMIC FIELD HANDBOOK (Civil -
Military Co -operation Center of Excellence, The Netherlands, etc.)  
 MISSION BASIC KNOWLEDGE HANDBOOK (Hungarian Armed Forces 
Command, 2010)  
 NATO NAC (2014): NATO Wales Summit Declaratio n. 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2014_2019/do cuments/sede/dv/sede2
40914walessummit_/sede240914walessummit_en.pdf  (downloaded 15 March 
2018)  
 NATO NAC (2016): NATO  Warsaw Summit 2016 Declaration.  
http://www.msz.gov.pl/en/foreign_policy/nato_2016/documents/nato_warsaw_
summit_ 2016_declaration  (downloaded 15 March 2018)  
 UN 5th STANDARDIZED TRAINING MODULE (2020) Chapters 5A and 5B 
and UNDPKO CORE PRE -DEPLOYMENT TRAINING MATERIALS (20 
17) 3.2. module  
 United Nation: GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PEACEKEEPING 
OPERATIONS (UN, New York, 199 5)  
 United Nation: HANDBOOK ON UNITED NATIONS 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS (UN, New York, 
2003)  
 United Nation: NATIONS MILITARY OBSERVERS HANDBOOK (UN, 
New York, 2001)  142  United Nation: SELECTION STANDARDS AND TRAINING GUIDELINES 
FOR UNITED NATI ONS MILITARY OBSERVERS (UN, New York, 1997)  
 United Nation: UNITED NATIONS MILITARY OBSERVER TRAINING 
CURRICULUM (UN, New York, 1995)  
 United Nation: UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING HANDBOOK FOR 
JUNIOR RANKS (UN, New York, 1997)  
 143 ANDRÁS NOVÁK   
IMPACT OF THE CORONA VIRUS EPIDEMIC ON IL LEGAL 
MIGRATION TO EUROPE   
 
 
Abstract  
 
The coronavirus epidemic is increasingly affecting migration and illegal 
migration processes, a significant proportion of migrants to European destinations 
reached the EU border during this time of period. The number of migrants confirmed 
to be infected wi th the coronavirus on the Western Balkans migration route cannot be 
considered high due to timely and strict regulations, despite overcrowding and poor 
hygiene opportunities for migrants with typically weakened immune systems. 
However, it is feared that a drastic increase in illegal migration routes to Europe is 
expected in the future thanks to the effects of the coronavirus.  
  
Keywords : coronavirus epidemic, European illegal migration, migration routes, 
destination countries, strict regulations, health car e, public hygiene, transit country, 
epidemiological protection measures  
 
 
 
The coronavirus epidemic has been in our daily lives for more than a year now 
and, like everything, is increasingly affecting migration and illegal migration 
processes. Prior to the  outbreak, a significant proportion of migrants to European 
destinations1 reached the EU border via the Western Balkans - from Turkey to Greece, 
then to Hungary via northern Macedonia and Serbia, or to Croatia via Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. On 29 February 202 0, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, President of Turkey, 
decided not to detain migrants intending to leave for the European Union. As a result 
of the measure, and the mass transport of migrants by bus near the Greek borders, tens 
of thousands of migrants tried to cro ss the Turkish -Greek land and sea borders in the 
spring. (Many of them succeeded)  The escalating clashes and the situation were frozen 
for a while2 by the frightening spread of the coronavirus epidemic.  
 
As part of the epidemiological protection measures o f the countries along illegal 
migration routes, the procedures and rules for entry, immigration and treatment of 
illegal migrants have been temporarily changed. The brief presentation of this can 
provide a comprehensive picture of illegal migration in Euro pe in the shadow of 
Covid -19. 
 
                                                      
1  Germany, France, Great -Britain, and western countries  
2  KOCSIS , Máté: Overview of illegal migration in Europe;  
https://biztonsagpolitika.hu/egyeb/a -gorog -migracios -valsag -es-az-eu-torok -
egyuttmukodes  (downloaded 21  March 2021)  144  
Figure 1: Disinfection in a refugee camp by WHO, Syria, Refugees Camp3 
 
 
The situation has also brought significant changes to the migration route4 in the 
east-central Mediterranean. The number of migrants landing in Italy from Tunisia and 
Libya nearly tripled last year.  
 
And from Western Africa, the more dangerous route to the Spanish Canary 
Islands set a record 22,600 arrivals, a number eight times  higher compared to the 
previous year and the highest since Frontex5 began collecting data in 2009. According 
to the organization, most people came from the Gambia, Senegal, and Mauritania. 
However, not all migrants were so lucky. According to official UNHCR6 statistics, 
last year at least 913 people drowned or disappeared  on a sea voyage7 to the islands. 
In the months following the outbreak of the coronavirus epidemic in Europe, the trend 
was reversed, and thousands of North Africans returned home to their homeland for 
fear of the epidemic, some with the help of human traf fickers8. Spain is in a special 
situation as it is the only European country with several autonomous provinces (Ceuta 
and Melilla) on the African continent. Due to the migration popularity of the islands 
and provinces, the government has been forced to pur sue a consistent and rigorous 
migration policy, as part of which the authorities do not transfer asylum seekers from 
the provinces or islands to the Spanish mainland. Nevertheless, the reasons for the 
migration popularity of the Spanish islands are as foll ows. 
 
On the one hand, border closures due to the virus have diverted smugglers, 
mainly to alternative routes, and on the other hand, due to the situation in Libya, some 
sub-Saharan Africans have already embarked on this route. Based on the nationality 
                                                      
3  www.reuters.com  2020 March  
4  Typically departing from Africa to Spain or Italy.  
5  Frontières extérieures, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency  
6United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  
7  ABDULRAHIM , Raja: Covid -19 Restrictions Decrease Illegal Migration to Europe; 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/covid -19-restrictions -decrease -illegal -migration -to-europe -
11610130562  (downloaded 26 March 2021)  
8  AL-ALAOUI , Mohamed Mamouni: Pandemic sparks reve rse migration from Spain to 
Morocco; https://thearabweekly.com/pandemic -sparks -reverse -migration -spain -morocco 
(downloaded 27 March 2021)  
145 of the arrivals, the majority – sometimes travel up to 1,500 km by sea – for economic 
reasons and not for reasons stated among the five reasons of the Geneva convention9. 
The situation is only exacerbated by the fact that, due to the pandemic, the Spanish 
government was also unable to carry out deportations based on bilateral agreements 
because the issuing countries did not receive the planes. Thus, due to migrants 
gathered on the islands, it is questionable how the crisis will affect the region’s already 
bleeding10 tourism sector11. 
 
In Europe, Italy and Spain were the most affected by the first wave of the virus, 
so this route was blocked until May due to measures restricting free movement and 
closing borders. Under epidemiological regulations, migrants in Ital y had to stay in 
designated camps, so the government had to deal with the daily care of 85,000 people. 
Not only the supply, but also the closure and guarding of the camps and compliance 
with the curfew restrictions posed a serious challenge to the authorit ies. In most cases, 
this was very difficult or impossible to handle. At several points in the country, the 
armed forces had to prevent several violent attempts to break out, which also resulted 
in injury and significant material damage. In addition to the demonstrations, due to 
their culture, coronavirus -infected Africans were in many cases aggressive, failing to 
comply with regulations, as exemplified by an incident at a Roman hospital in late 
August. After being told by a Nigerian asylum seeker that he wa s coronavirus, he 
angrily bit the doctor and abused12 the staff rushing to his aid. Mandatory 14 -day 
quarantine for newcomers has been introduced in the country since March.  
 
 
Figure 2. Disinfection in a refugee camp by WHO, Syria, Refugees Camp13 
                                                      
9  A refugee who is persecuted on the grounds of race, religion, nationality, membership of a 
particular social group or political opinion.  
10  Many immigrants were housed in tourist buildings, but it is not uncommon for tent camps 
to be set up in military facilities.  
11  Many immigrants were housed in tourist buildings, but it is not uncommon for tent camps 
to be set up in  military facilities.  
12  Nigerians attack staff at Rome Covid -19 treatment center; 
https://www.thelocal.it/20200830/nigerians -attack -staff-at-rome -covid-19-treatment -
centre/  (downloaded 28 March 2021)  
13  www.reuters.com  2020 March  
146 In May 2020, due to the pandemic, there were so many missing or returning 
guest workers that Italy's agricultural workforce was significantly reduced. This has 
become a burning issue because they feared there would be no one to harvest the crop 
of the agricultura l sector. In response, the government approved14 the residence 
permits of half a million unregistered immigrants for work purposes. Interestingly, 
since mid -2020, most people have come to Italy, not from Libya, but from Tunisia – 
typically Tunisian national s – which has changed due to increased unemployment due 
to the viral situation and the worsening economic situation. In addition, the Italian 
government does not have an effective migration policy and has withdrawn most of 
Matteo Salvini's previous strict migration regulations, which had previously 
effectively reduced the number of arrivals. However, the renegotiation of the Spanish 
Moroccan migration agreement, which resulted in 28% fewer illegal migrants 
compared to the previous year,15 can be seen as a po sitive development.  
 
The austerity measures taken due to the pandemic situation - increased border 
controls, travel restrictions – also had a significant impact on the dynamics of the 
migration route in the Western Balkans. On March 17, 2020, hotspots in Greece  were 
closed, affecting thousands of migrants sensitively: the camps could not be left by the 
residents there, and humanitarian organizations and NGO ’s16 could not reach those in 
need as easily as before. During and after the security incident – and, of course, 
because of the epidemic - Greece is stepping up its action against illegal migration, 
both in terms of border protection and legislation. Therefore, despite the pandemic 
situation, many asylum seekers left the country and continued their i llegal migration 
journey to their European destination countries in the Western Balkans, which also 
showed an increase of 78% compared to 2019, which is not a calming number. Greece 
has not only used the relatively calmer months of the epidemic to strength en its land 
borders but is also looking for concrete solutions to prevent and address existing 
migration problems. As part of this,17 Athens is trying to address the current situation 
with faster and more effective repatriations, tightening the legal enviro nment and 
relieving the Greek islands, while using effective deterrence tactics with alternative 
solutions such as floating fences or strengthening land fences. On September 8, a 
nearly 11,500 -strong Moria refugee camp burned down because of deliberate ars on, 
which, according to follow -up investigations, was set on fire by residents because of 
stricter quarantine measures. Some of the camp's inhabitants have disappeared, some 
have been received by European Member States and some by the Greek authorities 
have been transported18 to other, also overcrowded, camps. Since then, by the way, 
the camp has been set up again and is fully operational again.  
 
A state of emergency has been declared in Serbia , and nearly nine thousand 
migrants in the country have been unab le to leave reception centers. In Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, severe restraint measures were introduced, which also applied to the 
                                                      
14  FELEGYI , Júlia: Italy's migration policy. Reconnaissance Review, 2020/3. p. 65.  
15  JANIK , Szabolcs – MARSAI , Viktor: Overview of illegal migration in Europe; p. 1., 7. 
https://www.migraciokutato.hu/wpcontent/uploads/2021 /01/20210113_MKI_GYORSEL
EMZES_2021_1_europai_illegalis_migracios_korkep.pdf  (downloaded 25 March 2021)  
16  non-governmental organization  
17  JANIK  – MARSAI  op. cit. p.  1. 
18  UNHCR shocked by fires at Moria asylum center, ramping up support for affected asyl um 
seekers; https://www.unhcr.org/news/briefing/2020/9/5f5b3a774/unhcr -shocked -fires-
moria -asylum -center -rampi ng-support -affected -asylum.html  (downloaded 26 March 2021)  147 camps, and the free movement of migrants was transported by the authorities to camps 
in the Canton of Una -Sana.  To facilitate the  accommodation of large numbers of 
migrants gathered around Bihács, the authorities set up two temporary camps .19 
Migrants have demonstrated several times in both Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia 
to protest the measures. And the population, which was alrea dy strained by the 
pandemic, was demonstrating for even more stringent measures and against crimes 
committed by migrants, typically in the vicinity of the camps. Hungary is heavily 
guarded due to the temporary security border, but migrants continue to try to cross 
illegally from Serbia or from the area of the Serbian Romanian -Hungarian triple 
border on a daily basis. Some of the successful passers -on are still caught near the 
border section, and some of them in the western part of the country, during the co ntrol 
of highways and international trains. On the other hand, it is undeniable that in many 
cases they also get through Hungary and can go further to their Western European 
destinations.  
 
The number of migrants confirmed to be infected with the coronaviru s on the 
Western Balkans migration route cannot be considered high due to timely and strict 
regulations, despite overcrowding and poor hygiene opportunities for migrants with 
typically weakened immune systems. By the end of April 2020, 715 people had been 
monitored in the Bihács area on suspicion of the disease, and a total of four cases had 
been detected in refugee camps in the area. In Greece, three migrant coronavirus tests 
were positive20 at the Moria camp in Lesbos on March 25 and at the Ritzona camp in  
early April.  
 
 
Figure 3. Disinfection in a refugee camp (Kindergarten) Syria, Refugees Camp21 
 
                                                      
19  The camps in the northern part of Lipa and Bihács were set up by the IOM, NGOs and 
authorities. Lipa was closed by NGOs in 2021 citing inappropriate conditions.  
20  NÉMETH , Ferenc – OROSZ , Anna – WAGNER , Péter: Coronavirus epidemic and migration 
situation; p. 5. https://kki.hu/wp -content/uploads/2020/04/42_KKI -
elemzes_ME NA_Balkans_Nemeth_Orosz_Wagners_20200427 -1.pdf  (downloaded 22 
March 2021)  
21  www.reuters.com  2020 March  
148 On the migration route in the Western Balkans, but also in Europe, Serbia was 
the first to start vaccinating illegal migrants against organized coronavirus. The 
country used as a migration corridor not only protects its own population from the 
spread of infections, but immigrants to Western European countries do not continue 
to carry the disease to EU Member States. AstraZeneca vaccinations were started on 
March 26 for more than 570 people22 in reception centers. In my opinion, this is an 
important and useful financial investment that pays off in the long run, especially for 
the western destination countries, so I would not be surprised to hear in the future tha t 
Germany, for example, supports similar campaigns in countries along migration 
routes, either financially or with vaccines. I mention here as an interesting fact that 
among migrants with a specific culture, in many cases, the danger of the coronavirus 
and the importance of its prevention need to be raised by more specific means than an 
average media campaign. A good example of this is the case of immigrants in Finland 
and Somalia: the rate of virus infection was much higher among a community of more 
than 2 0,000 people, so they were produced a series of bilingual soap operas to draw 
attention to the dangers of the virus. The campaign was considered a success23 in the 
light of the statistics.  
 
 
Figure 4. Disinfection in a refugee camp (Kindergarten) Syria, Refugees Camp24 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
22  Serbia starts COVID -19 vaccinations at migrant camps; 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us -health -coronavirus -serbia -migrants -idUSKBN2BI2A4  
(downloaded 27 March 2021)  
23  Finland ’s Somali community uses soap opera a nd TV talk show in coronavirus awareness 
push; 
https://hiiraan.com/news4/2020/Oct/180480/finland_s_somali_community_uses_soap_op
era_and_tv_talk_show_in_coronavirus_awareness_push.aspx?utm_source=hiiraan&utm_
medium=SomaliNewsUpdateFront (downloaded 26 March  2021)  
24  www.reuters.com  2020 March  
149 Summary, or the effects of the pandemic on migrants and the population living 
in illegal migration routes in European target countries . 
 
 In several countries of transit and destination, the processing of asylum 
applications, family reunification applications and other entry permits has been 
suspended for months, citing the pandemic, so that migrants intending to stay 
are in a more difficult situation. crime, illegal activities and even the tendency to 
extremism may increase among tho se who turn to integration assistance, such as 
those who may temporarily turn to their compatriots or fellow travelers.  
 The pandemic also reduced the labor market and available job opportunities, 
drastically reducing the income opportunities of both legal and illegal migrants.25 
 The nearly 160,000 migrants trapped in the countries along the Balkan route still 
want to reach the EU's economically developed countries.  
 The risk of infection is also high, according to the OECD and other world 
organizations, among  migrants with weakened immune systems and often 
inadequate hygiene and health care in overcrowded camps. At the same time, 
rigorous and consistent measures introduced in a timely manner prevented a 
significant proportion of mass deaths and infections.  
 Experts say Covid -19's travel restrictions have made smuggling more dangerous 
and expensive, both within countries and across borders, although this has not 
stopped activity altogether.26 As a result of the restrictions, illegal migrants are 
choosing much more risky, more dangerous sea routes and alternative methods 
of human trafficking, with a lmost no chance of getting help .27 
 The causes of migration and illegal migration would not only ha ve decreased 
during the pandemic, but rather increased significantly for the citizens of 
countries deteriorating from the deteriorating economic and public security 
situation and the increasingly fallen statehood, as well as those that have already 
fallen. 
 The population of both migratory transit countries and European destination 
countries has become less and less tolerant of the presence of illegal migrants 
over the past year. The reasons for this can also be found in the coronavirus 
infection, as the med ia is willing to report cases of infections in the camps, news 
about migrants escaping from quarantine measures, escaping - possibly infected. 
It is also a fact that some of the people living in security situations, who are in 
an increasingly difficult eco nomic situation, see migrants as a potential source 
of infection, and some of them are increasingly open to resentment due to the 
growing number of smaller, typically property -related, crimes.  
                                                      
25  SCARPETTA , Stefano – DUMONT , Jean -Christophe – LIEBIG , Thomas: What is the impact of 
the COVID -19 pandemic on immigrants and their children? 
http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy -responses/what -is-the-impact -of-the-covid -19-
pandemic -on-immigrants -and-their-children -e7cbb7de/#contactinfo -d7e2917  
(downloaded 25 March 2021)  
26  ABDULRAHIM  op. cit.  
27  SANCHEZ , Gabriella: Stranded: The impacts of COVID -19 in irregular migration and 
migrant smuggling; https://blogs.eui.eu/migrationpolicycentre/stranded -impacts -covid -19-
irregular -migration -migrant -smuggling/  (downloaded 24 March 2021)  150  According to Frontex information, the number of illegal border crossings into 
the EU fell by 13% in 2020 to 124,000, an unprecedented decrease since 2015.28 
However, this is only due to strict measures in response to the coronavirus 
epidemic, and it is feared that a drastic increase in illegal migration routes to 
Europ e is expected in the future, precisely because of the effects of the 
coronavirus. In this case, the involvement of Hungary may increase further, of 
course still primarily as a transit country.  
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 ABDULRAHIM , Raja: Covid -19 Restrictions Decrease Illegal Migration to 
Europe; https://www.wsj.com/articles/covid -19-restrictions -decrease -illegal -
migration -to-europe -11610130562  (downloaded 26 March 2021)  
 AL-ALAOUI , Mohamed Mamouni: Pandemic sparks reverse migration  from 
Spain to Morocco; https://thearabweekly.com/pandemic -sparks -reverse -
migration -spain -morocco (downloaded 27 March 2021)  
 FELEGYI , Júlia: Italy's migration policy.  Reconnaissance Review, 2020/3. p. 65.  
 Finland ’s Somali community uses soap opera and TV talk show in coronavirus 
awareness push; 
https://hiiraan.com/news4/2020/Oct/180480/finland_s_somali_community_use
s_soap_opera_and_tv_talk_show_in_coronavirus_awareness _push.aspx?utm_s
ource=hiiraan&utm_medium=SomaliNewsUpdateFront (downloaded 26 
March 2021)  
 JANIK , Szabolcs – MARSAI , Viktor: Overview of illegal migration in Europe; 
https://www.migraciokutato.hu/wpcontent/uploads/2021/01/20210113_MKI_G
YORSELEMZES_2021_1_europai_illegalis_migracios_korkep.pdf  
(downloaded 25 March 2021)  
 KOCSIS , Máté: Overview of illegal migration in E urope;  
https://biztonsagpolitika.hu/egyeb/a -gorog -migracios -valsag -es-az-eu-torok -
egyuttmukodes  (downloaded 21 March 2021)  
 NÉMETH , Ferenc – OROSZ , Anna  – WAGNER , Péter: Coronavirus epidemic and 
migration situation ; https://kki.hu/wp -content/uploads/2020/04/42_KKI -
elemzes_MENA_Balkans_Nemeth_Orosz_Wagners_20200427 -1.pdf  
(downloaded 22 March 2021)  
 Nigerians attack staff at Rome Covid -19 treatment center; 
https://www.thelocal.it/20200830/nigerians -attack -staff-at-rome -covid -19-
treatment -centre/  (downloaded 28 March 2021)  
 
 
                                                      
28  ABDULRAHIM  op. cit.  151  SANCHEZ , Gabriella: Stranded: The impacts of COVID -19 in irregular migration 
and migrant smuggling; https://blogs.eui.eu/migrationpolicycen tre/stranded -
impacts -covid -19-irregular -migration -migrant -smuggling/  (downloaded 24 
March 2021)  
 SCARPETTA , Stefano – DUMONT , Jean -Christophe – LIEBIG , Thomas: What is 
the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on immigrants and their children? 
http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy -responses/what -is-the-impact -of-the-
covid -19-pandemic -on-immigrants -and-their-children -e7cbb7de/#contactinfo -
d7e2917  (downloaded 25 March 2021)  
 Serbia starts COVID -19 vaccinations at migrant camps; 
https://www.reute rs.com/article/us -health -coronavirus -serbia -migrants -
idUSKBN2BI2A4  (downloaded 27 March 2021)  
 UNHCR shocked by fires at Moria asylum center, ramping up support for 
affected asylum seekers; 
https://www.unhcr.org/news/briefing/2020/9/5f5b3a774/unhcr -shocked -fires-
moria -asylum -center -ramping -support -affected -asylum.html  (downloaded 26 
March 2021)  
 www.reuters.com  
 152 VIRÁG NOVÁK -VARRÓ   
A REGIONAL POWER IN ACTION – TURKEY’S RO LE IN 
AFGHANISTAN’S FUTURE   
 
 
Abstract  
 
In August 31 2021 both the American and NATO missions have come to an end, 
and definitely a new era begun in Afghanistan’s life. A power vacuum is growing 
bigger day by day as the international forces left the Central Asian state at an ever -
increasing pace. It seems that as the attention of the great powers is diverted to other 
parts of Asia, the attention of the regional powe rs towards Afghanistan is increasing. 
One of the prominent players in this is Turkey, which has taken more and more steps 
to pacify the region over the years. Although Turkey has been using the tools of soft 
power in the Afghan conflict since its inception , over the past few years, the country’s 
shift in foreign policy has become increasingly clear; a greater role was given for the 
military. A new manifestations of this turn is Ankara’s attempt to operate the Hamid 
Karzai International Airport in Kabul, whi ch can be seen as a clear sign of Turkey’s 
regional power aspirations in the Central Asian region. The study analyses the changes 
in the Turkish -Afghan relations, pointing out to Ankara’s participation in the Afghan 
reconciliation attempts, with particular  reference to the current events.  
 
Keywords : Turkish foreign policy, Afghan reconciliation, Taliban, regional 
powers  
 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
In the middle of August the most powerful fundamentalist Islamic organization 
of Afghanistan, the Taliban took power. They re -occupied the country in an incredible 
pace and finally they marched into Kabul on 15. August without firing a shot. In the 
last month a new regime began to take shape; the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan re -
established. Similarly to the former Talib an regime the current one also lacks the 
formal recognition of the international community, even though they have a constant 
connection with some – mainly regional – actors.1 Besides the two neighbouring great 
powers – China and Russia – who desire take ad vantage of the benefits from the 
vacuum left by the United States and NATO, another country’s name is constantly 
arises: Turkey .  
 
Turkey’s attempts to become the strongest regional power has become 
increasingly apparent in recent years; thinking back to T urkish offensive into north -
eastern Syria, or to the Libyan intervention, or even to the European migration crisis. 
                                                      
1  NOUWENS , Meia – ROY-CHAUDHURY , Rahul – RAINE, John – LEVESQUES , Antoine – 
HOKAYEM , Emile – GOULD -DAVIES , Nigel – ÖZCELIK , Burcu – ALHASAN , Hasan: Adapting 
to a new reality in Afghanistan; The International Institute of Strategic Studies. 
https://www.iiss.org/blogs/analysis/2021/08/afghanistan -taliban -region -response  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  153 Under president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Ankara has embarked on an assertive foreign 
policy , branding itself as a growing Sunni Muslim power an d wading into regional 
conflicts.2 As the Justice and Development Party came into power, both domestic and 
foreign policy began to change slowly but steadily, in parallel with the national 
identity. Changes in Turkey's foreign policy were mainly perceptibl e after the 
attempted coup d’état in 2016.3 The central elements of changes of the Turkish foreign 
policy are: the militarization, the Sunni Islam as a tool of regional domination, and 
the deviation from Western civilization.4 
 
Turkey has always maintained  friendly relations with Afghanistan and it seems 
like it will not be interrupted by the changes of the leadership in Kabul. Ankara has 
been holding talks with the movement’s leaders since they seized power, which can 
be seen as an evidence of their intent  to adopt a political and security role in 
Afghanistan. However the Turkish military contingent has been pulled out by August 
27, Ankara expressed its desire to become the Taliban’s primary interlocutor with the 
West.5  
 
 
2. A shift in Turkish foreign poli cy 
 
Turkey has declared itself as a part of the West since the late Ottoman Empire, 
and this was reinforced by the reforms of Atatürk in the first half of the 20th century. 
Since the foundation of the modern Turkish state, security has been a top priority of 
the country both at global and regional levels.  
 
Examining the country’s foreign policy, it can be observed that it has undergone 
several significant changes in the 21st century. The most defining element in Turkey's 
foreign relations in the 20th century was its Western orientation – as it created strong 
connection with the West through various international organizations.6 The new 
millennium has brought a shift in strategic paradigm on a global scale, therefore the 
Turkish foreign policy has also  followed. The strategic concept of Turkish foreign 
                                                      
2  HACAOĞLU , Selcan: Turkey Gears Up for Risky Afghan Mission That No One Else Wants, BNN 
Bloomberg, Jun 25, 2021. https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/turkey -gears -up-for-risky-afghan -
mission -that-no-one-else-wants -1.1621605  (downloaded 26 September 2021)   
3  LECHA , Eduard Soler i: The International Impact of the Failed Coup in Turkey. Barcelona Center 
for International Affairs, Opinión 425, July 2016. 
https://www.cidob.org/en/publications/publication_series/opinion/mediterraneo_y_oriente_medio
/the_i nternational_impact_of_the_failed_coup_in_turkey  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
4  ÖZTÜRK , Ahmet Erdi (2021): Turkey’s Post -2016 Foreign Policy Drivers: Militarisation, Islam, 
Civilisation and Power. HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR EUROPEAN & FOREIGN POLICY 
(ELIA MEP), Policy Paper # 58/2021 https://www.eliamep.gr/wp -content/uploads/2021/03/Policy -
paper -58-Erdi-Ozturk_final.pdf  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
5  YAZICI , Ezgi – ÜNLÜ, Doga – GÖK, Kursat: Turkey Aims to Play Stabilizing Role in Afghanistan 
after NATO Withdrawal. Institute for the Study of War, September 3, 2021. 
https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/turkey -aims-play-stabilizing -role-afghanistan -
after-nato-withdrawal  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
6  YAPAR , Hakan: From Strategic Depth to Blue Homeland and Beyond: Un derstanding Turkey's 
Drift towards Greater Strategic Autonomy. Instituto Espanol de Estudios Estratégicos, Opinion 
Paper, 12 April 2021. pp. 2 -3. 
https://www.ieee.es/Galerias/fichero/docs_opinion/2021/DIEEEO40_2021_HAKYAP_Turquia_
ENG.pdf  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  154 policy for the 21st century was defined by the “strategic  depth”  published by Ahmet 
Davutoğlu.7 The concept brought the states of the region and the wider Muslim world 
into the focus of the Turkish foreig n policy. Davutoğlu, as Foreign Minister, sought 
to put into practice his theory: he had initiated strategic cooperation, mainly with 
neighbouring countries, increased trade and solidarity with them in the framework of 
the “zero problem with neighbours” po licy. The main tool during this period was 
clearly soft power , with this tool Turkey could easily reach the wider Muslim world, 
with an emphasis on religion, culture and political dialogue. However, amid the 
notable changes in the region in 2010s (the Arab  Spring or the Eastern Mediterranean 
debates), the continuation of Davutoğlu’s foreign policy threatened to isolate the 
country.  To avoid this, Turkish foreign policy has changed direction and – especially 
after the coup attempt in 2016 – has shifted  notic eably towards hard power .  
 
The Turkish foreign policy became increasingly assertive, even though some 
elements of Davutoğlu’s doctrine appear in the  new foreign policy but in a much lower 
profile. Turkey’s new foreign policy is characterised by the change s on three main 
areas; military, religion and power.8 
 
2.1. Militarization – development of defence industry  
 
Turkey’s military expenditure saw a significant increase, from 2015 to 2020 the 
defence budget has ascended from approximately 11 to 16 billion US$.9 Turkey has 
always had a powerful army for historical reasons, but the recently seen active usage 
its military capacity in the wider region is definitely the cornerstone of Erdoğan’s 
foreign policy. Beside the launched operations’ (Syria, Libya) and b ases established 
(e.g. Iraq, Qatar, Cyprus) in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean Turkey focused 
on developing its defence industry in recent years. The growing defence industry gives 
Turkey greater manoeuvrability in its foreign policy by ensuring l ess reliance on arms 
imports and more autonomy.10 By 2019 Ankara has transitioned from importing 70 
percent of its military hardware to 30 percent.11 However the accomplishment of the 
Turkish government in this area is remarkable, the growing defence industr y is as 
more about projecting an image of power to the domestic population.  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
7  GRIGORIADIS , loannis N.: The Davutoğlu Doctrine and Turkish Foreign Policy. 
HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR EUROPEAN AND FOREIGN POLICY (EL IAMEP) 
Working Paper Nr 8/2010 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318298808_The_Davutoglu_Doctrine_and_Tur
kish_Foreign_Policy  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
8  ÖZTÜRK (2021) op. cit. pp. 3 -4. 
9  HACKETT , James (edt.): The Military Balance 2021. The International Institute for Strategic 
Studies. Routledge, London, p. 152.  
10  GURINI , Ferhat: Turkey’s Unpromising Defense Industry.  Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, October 09, 2020 https://carnegieendowment.org/sada/82936  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
11  Directorate of Communications, Presidency of the Republic of Türkiye. 30.08.2020 
https://www.iletisim.gov.tr/english/haberler/detay/we -have -reduced -our-external -
dependency -in-defense -industry -from -around -70-to-around -30 (downloaded 26 
September 2021)  155 2.2. The leading state of the Islamic (Sunni) world  
 
Although Turkey is a predominantly Muslim country, it has mainly retained its 
secular character. Secularism has been one of the key elements in Turkey’s 
modernisation, from Atatürk to the AKP coming to power. Currently it seems that 
religion has become a new element of Erdoğan’s Turkey and it has been transforming 
many areas, as well as foreign policy.12 The ‘New Turkey’ is s ynthesising religion 
with nationalism and actively using the resulting product as a tool of foreign policy.13 
Through the Presidency of Religious Affairs Turkey cooperates with other domestic 
and international Islamic organizations such as the National Outl ook Movement. The 
ideology of this movement had a great impact on Turkey’s approach both to the 
Islamic world and the West.14 While Erdoğan turns away from the western civilization 
often represent himself as a leader of the Muslim world. Sunni Islam became the link 
between Turkey and the Central Asian and Middle Eastern countries.  
 
2.3. Hard power in action - power projection  
 
Between 2002 and 2011 Turkey – despite being a middle power – practiced a 
deliberate foreign policy. After the Arab Spring Ankara ha d to adapt to the new 
circumstances in the Middle East, and especially after the 2016 coup attempt it started 
to portray itself as more powerful than actually was.15 The transformation of domestic 
politics into an authoritarian regime also supported the mor e adventurous foreign 
policy. One of the most spectacular element in the changes of Turkish foreign policy 
concept is the increasing military involvement. The strategic power projection of 
Ankara is based the existing diplomatic relations extended with bas ing, military 
exercises, defence -industrial cooperation and military interventions.16 On the one 
hand the network of defence and strategic partnership of Turkey provides a greater 
room for manoeuvre in the region, as well as further diplomatic influence and  
geopolitical assurance. The network also provides a counterbalance to the great and 
regional powers acting in the area of interest of Turkey – China (in Africa), Iran (in 
Iraq and Syria), and Russia (Black Sea Caucasus).17 On the other hand, Erdoğan can 
also use the harder power projection for some domestic political gain, even if a foreign 
intervention or a new mission can only increase the AKP's support in the short term.  
 
 
 
                                                      
12  YAVUZ , M. Hakan – ÖZTÜRK , Ahmet Erdi: Turkish secularism and Islam under the reign 
of Erdoğan. Southeast European and Black Sea Studies, 19:1, pp. 1 -2. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14683857.2019.1580828 (downloaded 27 
September 2021)  
13  ÖZTÜRK (2021) op. cit. p. 5. 
14  ÇAĞAPTAY , Soner: Secularism and Foreign Policy in Turkey. The Washington Institute 
for Near East Policy. Policy Focus #67, April 2007. pp. 1 -4. 
https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy -analysis/secularism -and-foreign -policy -
turkey -new-elections -troubling -trends  (downloaded 28. September 2021)  
15  ÖZTÜRK (2021) op. cit. p. 7.  
16  OUTZEN , Rich: Deals, Drones, and Natio nal Will. The New Era in Turkish Power 
Projection. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, Policy Notes, July 2021 No. 
108. p. 7. https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy -analysis/deals -drones -and-national -
will-new-era-turkish -power -projection  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
17  OUTZEN  (2021) op. cit. p. 11.  156 3. Historical ties between Turkey and Afghanistan  
 
Turkey’s foreign policy towards Afghanistan is based on four pillars: 
maintenance of unity and integrity of Afghanistan; providing security and stability in 
the country; strengthening of broad based political structure in which popular 
participation is a priority and finally rest oration of peace and prosperity by eliminating 
terrorism and extremism.18 
 
The relations between Turkey and Afghanistan are historically steady and 
friendly, dating back to the pre -Republican period. Following the opening of the 
Turkish Grand National Assem bly on April 23 1920, one of the first decisions taken 
by the first government established in Ankara on May 3 was to send a Turkish officer 
of Afghan origin to Kabul as a representative. Then the Afghan counterpart sent Sultan 
Ahmet Khan, who supported the  War of Independence in Afghanistan, to Ankara as 
an ambassador . With the Turkish -Afghan Alliance Agreement signed in Moscow on 
March 1 1921, Turkey indirectly recognized the independence of Afghanistan and the 
Ankara Government as the representative of th e Turkish state in Afghanistan .19 The 
agreement was the first legally valid international political bond between the Turkish 
and Afghan government. Afghan King Amanullah Shah, who was impressed by 
Atatürk's revolutions and his efforts to put the Republic on  solid and modern 
foundations, visited Turkey in 1928. This visit was the first state visit to the Republic 
of Turkey. During this visit, a new agreement was signed on May 25, 1928 with the 
name of “Friendship and Co -operation Agreement between Turkey and 
Afghanistan” .20 The bilateral relations turned into strategic relations as this exerted 
influence in several sectors in Afghanistan such as military, economy, education or 
administration.21 
 
Even after Amanullah Shah abdicated the throne the Turkish -Afghan r elations 
continued to flourish under the new rulers of Afghanistan. Under the reign of Zahir 
Shah, who was the last king of the Afghans, the Turkish -Afghan Agreement of 
Friendship and Cooperation was renewed in 1937. Therefore Afghanistan continued 
receivi ng Turkish financial, technical, military, educational and medical assistance.22 
 
In the post -World War II period, Turkey made efforts for Afghanistan to join the 
Baghdad Pact, which was established in 1955. The relations, which were interrupted 
                                                      
18  Turkey -Afghanistan Bilateral Political Relations. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Republic of 
Turkey. https://www.mfa.gov.tr/turkey_afghanistan -bilateral -political -relations.en.mfa  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
19  ÖZLÜ, Hüsnü: ’Türk -Afgan doktluk ve işbirliği anlaşması’ kapsamında Atatürk dönemi 
Türkiye Afganistan ilişkilerine bakış, Uluslararası Avrasya Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, Yıl: 3, 
Sayı: 8, Eylül 2012, p. 35. https://dergipark.org.tr/tr/pub/ijoess/issue/8534/105953  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
20  KIREN, Akın: Afganistan’ın Yeniden Yapılandırılmasında Türkiye’nin Rolü. İstanbul 
Üniversitesi  
Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü, Yüksek Lisans Tezi, 2012. pp. 65 -68. 
https://tez.yok.gov.tr/UlusalTezMerkezi/tezDetay.jsp?id=WI vAceuNEF -
4O1sMx6W06A&no=Jph2Gay7CxrMymH3Ck_TbA  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
21  GENÇTÜRK , Ahmet: A history of fraternal Turkish -Afghan relations. Anadolu Agency, 22. 
08. 2021. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/asia -pacific/a -history -of-fraternal -turkish -afghan -
relations/2342587  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
22  KIREN (2012)  op. cit. pp. 68 -70.  157 during the Soviet occupation, were revived with the end of the occupation. During 
this period, Turkey made efforts to ensure peace and stability in Afghanistan and to 
remove Afghanistan from being a territory that constitutes a base for extremism, 
terrorism and drug trafficking, and also invited the international community to show 
active interest in the Afghan problem.  
 
Even though Turkey participated in the Bonn Meeting as an observer it played a 
constructive role by using its good relations with all groups. It has e ndeavoured to 
achieve consensus among ethnic groups and to establish a broad -based, representative 
government.  Turkey, in order to contribute to the establishment of security and 
stability in Afghanistan, decided to join the International Security Assista nce Force 
(ISAF), which was established by the UN Security Council upon the call of the 
Afghan groups at the Bonn Meeting. The Turkish military contingent had performed 
non-combat duties at several parts of the country. Turkey also established a Provincial  
Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Wardak and it was operational between 2006 -2013.23 
 
Another way to transform civil and military efforts in Afghanistan into 
permanent gains is to strengthen the basis of dialogue and cooperation between 
Afghanistan and its neig hbours. In line with this understanding, Turkey initiated a 
trilateral dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan with its mediation. Therefore 
Ankara has hosted several meetings of the Turkey -Afghanistan -Pakistan Trilateral 
Summit process.24 Besides the Pak istani way Turkey initiated a more broader regional 
forum for the resolution of the Afghan -issues. The so called "Friendship and 
Cooperation in the Heart of Asia" organized with the participation of Afghanistan, its 
neighbours and observer states and inter national organizations . 
 
3.1. Turkey as a soft power in Afghanistan  
 
Throughout the past twenty years Turkey had the goodwill of the Afghan people 
even though they were part of the United States -led international intervention. The 
reasons behind this constant positive attitude of the people of Afghanistan can be 
summarized as follows:  
 
 Perceptions – brotherhood  
 
The Turkish mentality usually takes Central Asia (including Afghanistan) as the 
root of their culture and for the government in power it is n atural to assist or to 
cooperate these states. Turkey from an interest -based approach wants to have a 
connection in the areas of Central Asia, Afghanistan and Pakistan to promote common 
goals. The perceptions of the Afghans about Turkey and Turkish people were always 
positive due to the historical connections of the two countries. During the last two 
decades Turkey could strengthen the people of Afghanistan’s positive attitude – 
especially in the city centres, where there is a positive interpretation to Tur kish 
contribution to Afghan daily life. Even the Taliban spoke appreciatively about 
                                                      
23  ERONEN , Oskari: PRT Models in Afghanistan. Approaches to Civil -Military Integration. 
CMC Finland Civilian Crisis Management Studies Volume 1: Number 5/2008. pp. 23 -24. 
24  SHAH, Rahat: Pakistan -Afghanistan -Turkey Trilateral Summits and its implication for the 
region; https://moderndiplomacy.eu/2020/02/24/pakistan -afghanistan -turkey -trilateral -
summits -and-its-implication -for-the-region/ (downloaded 26 September 2021)   158 Turkey: “Turkey is a great Islamic country. Afghanistan has had historical relations 
with it. We hope to have close and good relations with them as a new Islamic 
government  is established in the country in future. ”25 
 
 Military presence – ‘they are one of us’  
 
Turkey joined to the NATO mission in Afghanistan as early as 2003, and 
throughout the past 20 years it has always played a key role in the mission. Ankara 
led a non -combat mission from the first day of the NATO mission started, and this 
created an increasi ngly positive attitude towards the Turkish soldiers. Moreover 
Turkey was the only Muslim -majority country, which also strengthened this 
fundamentally positive image.  
 
Turkey positioned itself as a low -key ally in the global war on terror, as they 
used the  soft power  from their ‘arsenal’. Putting the emphasis on soft power was in 
line with the main direction of Turkish foreign policy of the 2000s. Among the ‘soft’ 
tasks of the Turkish forces the train, advise, assist  ‘trinity’ had a central role well 
before  the second act of the NATO’s mission, the Resolute Support has started. In 
2006 a Turkish -led Provincial Reconstruction Team has been created in Wardak, 
located the central region of Afghanistan, in the proximity of Kabul. Ankara did not 
use an already ex isting PRT model created by other countries, but it set up its own. It 
was the only civilian -led organization , and its focus were on governance and 
development, which gave a uniqueness to the Turkish model.26 The Turkish forces 
rather took on logistical and  security duties, from which the most remarkable was the 
security tasks at Kabul Airport.27 Because Turkey provided troops for strictly non -
combat roles, it has contributed to their positive perception. Therefore, there is a 
common saying in Afghanistan abo ut Turks: ‘No Afghan was ever killed by a Turkish 
bullet’ and ‘no Afghan trained by Turks has ever betrayed his country’. How could 
Turkey have reached this status? Turkey’s tasks were conducted not with paternalism 
or the imperial arrogance of an occupyin g power; therefore, they gained the trust and 
respect of the Afghan people.28 
 
 Financial support  
 
During the two decades of the international community’s missions in 
Afghanistan beside the military presence an enormous amount of aid were given to 
the Centr al Asin state. Turkey also took its share from this activity; altogether it spent 
more than 1 billion dollar mainly on capacity building initiatives (health, education, 
economy), on its military role, and on its mediator and facilitator role in multiple pe ace 
processes.  
 
                                                      
25  TASTEKIN , Fehim: Türkiye için mayınsız bir Afgan rotası mümkün mü? AL -Monitor, 06. 
24. 2021. https://www.al -monitor.com/tr/originals/2021/06/turke y-needs -build -support -
new-afghan -mission  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
26  ERONEN , Oskari: PRT Models in Afghanistan. Approaches to Civil -Military Integration. 
CMC Finland Civilian Crisis Management Studies Volume 1: Number 5/2008 pp. 23 -24. 
27  YAZICI  – ÜNLÜ – GÖK (2021)  op. cit. p. 1.  
28  WALBERG , Eric: From Postmodernism to Postsecularism: Re -emerging Islamic 
Civilization, Clarity Press, 2013. pp. 394 -395. 159 Turkey launched its development assistance program in 2004 for Afghanistan. 
The focus of relief efforts in Afghanistan was the reconstruction of the country, 
increasing the capacities of the Afghan army and police, and training areas, espe cially 
for girls. In 2015 Ankara’s largest share of bilateral development co -operation for 
Afghanistan still had a prominent place despite the ongoing Syrian crisis.29 Most of 
the Turkish companies operating in Afghanistan were working on the field of 
const ruction and contracting sectors. The remaining 10% of the companies operated 
in services – such as health, logistics or consultancy, etc. – and in the energy and 
mining sector. The above -mentioned companies have realized 701 projects between 
2003 and 2018,  amounting to approximately USD 6,6 billion.30 In 2019 Afghanistan 
was the 5. in the list of countries most benefitting from the bilateral official 
development assistance with the amount of 32,94 million US dollars.31 The Turkish 
Cooperation and Coordination  Agency (TIKA), has completed more than 1,000 
projects – especially on developing education, health, agriculture and infrastructure. 
Turkey also made contributions to Afghanistan on multilateral level – via UN and 
NATO – as well.  
 
 
4. Afghanistan as a the atre of opportunities  
 
4.1. Turkey’s current goals  
 
It seems like Turkey wants to strengthen its position in Central Asia. Moving 
away from its traditional sphere of interest, Turkey is also looking for those areas on 
the southern border of the Turkish republics of Central Asia where it can set foot. 
Analysing the steps of the Turkish leadership in the reconciliation process of the 
Afghan conflict makes it clear that Turkey’s aim is to play a central role in the post -
US era in Afghanistan. Turkey, which is NATO’s only Muslim majority member state 
displays some unique characteristics and has a long history of diplomatic co -operation 
with Afghanistan, which entails a more active policy in the Central Asian state 
compared to other Western countries.32  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
29  Turkey’s Official Development Assistance, OECD https://www.oecd.org/dac/dac -global -
relations/turkeys -official -development -assistanceoda.htm  (downloaded 26 Septermber 
2021)  
30  Turkey -Afghan Economi c and Trade Relations. Directorate of Communications, 
Presidency of the Republic of Türkiye https://www.mfa.gov.tr/turkey_s -commercial -and-
economic -relations -with-afghanistan.en.mfa  TASTEKIN , Fehim: Türkiye için mayınsız bir 
Afgan rotası mümkün mü? AL -Monitor, 06. 24. 2021. https://www.al -
monito r.com/tr/originals/2021/06/turkey -needs -build -support -new-afghan -mission  
(downloaded 27 September 2021)  
31  Turkish Development Assistnace Report 2019. Turkish Deleopment addidtance report 
2019.  p.21.  
The above -mentioned companies have realized 701 project s between 2003 and 2018, 
amounting to approximately USD 6,6 billion.  
32  USUL, Ali Resul: What’s next for Turkey – Afghanistan relations after the Taliban takeover? 
TRT World, 25 Aug 2021 https://www.trtworld.com/opinion/what -s-next-for-turkey -
afghanistan -relations -after-the-taliban -takeover -49460  (downloaded 27 Septe mber 2021)  160  Providing security  
 
Even though by 31 August all international forces have left Afghanistan and 
have evacuated most of their citizens, Turkey – unlike other NATO members – 
decided to maintain its diplomatic presence in Kabul. Ankara is also considering to 
operate the Hamid Karzai Airport in Kabul33 and it has begun negotiations with the 
Taliban even before the U.S. withdrawal.  
 
In a meeting on June 14. Joe Biden and the Turkish president Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan agreed on the Turkish presence in the capital of Afghanistan. Turkey could 
run security at the airport if the US president provided it with the “diplomatic, 
logistical and financial support” required for the mission.34 Even though the American 
and the Turkish president agreed on launching a new, Turkish -led mission,35 for the 
first time the Taliban – which came to power in the meantime – expressed a clear 
disapproval of Erdoğan’s plan following his announcement. The spokesperson of the 
Taliban’s Political Bureau in Qatar highlighted: " The airport is Afghan territory and 
Afghans are responsible for their land, institutions and honour. […] No country in 
the world accepts the security of its own airport by someone else. We also ask 
everyone to respect the rules and sovereignty of visiting the country. "36 However , a 
month later the newly formed Taliban government were the one who asked for 
technical assistance from Ankara and Doha to be able to run the international airport.37 
The issue of operating the airport is currently off the agenda, as Turkey insists on 
using its own security forces to secure the airport, to which the Taliban do not consent. 
Yet it would be beneficial for both parties to reach a consensus in the case; as  Turkey's 
influence would be enhanced by its personal military presence in the Central Asian 
country, while for the Taliban, Kabul airport is the main window to the world.  
 
 Refugees and migration  
 
Turkey’s past and planned investments to boost Afghanistan ’s security situation 
is not an altruistic act, rather it can be seen as a further step in creating a more stable 
and predictable environment for itself. As the level of violence shows an increasing 
tendency in Afghanistan in the last year,38 more and more Afghan decides to leave the 
                                                      
33  GÖKSEDEF , Ece: Ankara’da Kabil Havalimanı’yla ilgili olarak hangi değerlendirmeler 
yapılıyor? BBC Türkçe 17. 08. 2021. https://www.bbc.com/turkce/haberler -turkiye -
58248131  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
34  Turkey tries to cement role in Afghanistan; Financial Times, 07. 07. 2021. 
https://www.ft.com/content/2a5ab86d -a416 -4f91-a011 -a24c342ac84d  (dow nloaded 26 
September 2021)   
35  According to the first draft, the purpose of the Turkish -led mission would be to guard Kabul 
airport, which would be implemented together with Hungary and Pakistan.  
36  Taliban says it asked for Turkey's support in Afghanista n; Daily Sabah, 25 Aug 2021. 
https://www.dailysabah.com/politics/diplomacy/taliban -says-it-asked -for-turkeys -support -
in-afghanistan  (down loaded 27 September 2021)  
37  درخواست  طالبان  از ترکیه برای کمک در اداره میدان هوایی  کابل , Tolonews, 4 September 2021. 
https://tolonews.com/fa/afghanistan -174398  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
38  Afghanistan – Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict Midyear Update: 1 January to 30 
June 2021. pp. 1 -2. 
https://unama.unmissions.org/sites/default/f iles/unama_poc_midyear_report_2021_26_jul
y.pdf  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  161 country.39 Although mostly the immediate neighbours are affected by the refugees’ 
flow, a significant part of them go beyond this area – making Turkey as a transit and 
a destination country at the same time. Since the Syrian cris is broke out Ankara hosted 
3.6 million registered Syrian refugees and approximately 320,000 persons from other 
nationalities. In the following years – especially since 2018 – Afghanistan has become 
the main country of origin for newly arriving refugees in Turkey.40 According to data, 
provided by Directorate General of Migration Management (DGMM), as of 
September 2021 44,565 unregistered Afghans were identified by Turkish authorities41 
and other 22 ,606 Afghan citizen applied for international protection.42 Even  though 
Turkey emphasises the fraternal relationship with Afghanistan, refugees and migrants 
are placing an increasing economic burden on the state. The growing tensions created 
a domestic political issue in Turkey; therefore, the Turkish leadership was de termined 
to take stronger actions43 to avoid harsh political consequence of a potential refugee 
crisis.44 
 
 
5. Conclusions  
 
Afghanistan is not the graveyard of empires, rather it is their crossroads. Amid 
the chaos of the Taleban takeover regional players ha ve been working on 
strengthening their position in Afghanistan and in the region as well. The steps Turkey 
have taken in the Afghan soil is part of a bigger picture; through its wide range of 
activities and (planned) cooperation with the Taliban regime Ank ara seeks to achieve 
its foreign policy objectives.  
 
The Turkish -Afghan relations have always been special since the foundation of 
the modern Turkish state. There is a sense of togetherness and a kind of kinship 
between the two nations, and using this as a base, the Turkish foreign policy was able 
to build deeper connection with the main actors of the Afghan conflict, creating a 
better position for themselves in the race between the great powers.45 Even though a 
concrete military intervention in Afghanistan  led by Turkey was removed from the 
agenda, Turkey will definitely intends to play an important role in the Central Asian 
                                                      
39  BBC News: Afghanistan: How many refugees are there and where will they go? 31 August 
2021. https://www.bbc.com/new s/world -asia-58283177  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
40  The Situation of Afghan Refugees in Turkey; Stiftun Pro Asyl. Expert opinion. March 2021. 
p. 6. https://www.proasyl.de/wp -content/uploads/PA_Expert -Opinion_The -Situation -of-
Afghan -Refugees -in-Turkey.pdf  (downloaded 27 September 202 1)  
41  T.C. İçişler Bakanlığı Göç İdaresi Genel Müdürlüğü. Düzensiz Göç 
https://www.goc.gov.tr/duzensiz -goc-istatistikler  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
42  T.C. İçişler Bakanlığı Göç İdaresi  Genel Müdürlüğü. Uluslararası koruma 
https://www.goc.gov.tr/uluslararasi -koruma -istatistikler  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
43  E.g.: Ankara decided to reinforce its Iranian border w ith a three -metre wall to block Afghan 
refugees. Turkey reinforces Iran border to block Afghan refugees. The Guardian, 23 Aug 
2021 https:// www.theguardian.com/world/2021/aug/23/turkey -reinforces -iran-border -to-
block -afghan -refugees  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
44  Selim Sazak: Turkey’s Refugee Problem Is Reaching a Breaking Point. Foreign Policy, 
September 8, 2021 https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/08/turkey -refugee -erdogan -akp-
crisis -chp-syria -afghanistan/  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
45  KEMAL , Levent: Turkey's role in Afghanistan: a major risk. Al Jazeera Centre for Studies, 
August 29 2021. https://studies.aljazeera.net/en/analyses/turkeys -role-afghanistan -major -
risk (downloaded 28 September 2021)  162 state. Afghanistan always had a special place in Turkish foreign policy and it will 
remain in the ‘herat of Asia’ and the Turkic World  that Turkey attaches great 
importance.46 
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 Afghanistan – Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict Midyear Update: 1 
January to 30 June 2021; 
https://unama.unmissions.org/sites/default/files/unama_poc_midyear_report_2021_
26_july.pdf pp. 1-2. (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
 ÇETIN, Seçkin: Türkiye ve Pakistan öyelinde bölgesel güvenliği tehdit eden unsurlar 
olarak kaçakçılık ve terörizm; In: GÜRER , Oben: Güvenlik ve İşbirliği Semineri I. 
Türkye Pakistan; Harp Akademileri Basımevi, Yenilevent  İstanbul, 09 Aralık 2009. 
https://www.msu.edu.tr/saren2/files/sempozyum_yayinlari/Turkiye_Pakistan_Guv
enlik_Isbirligi_I_Aralik2009 .pdf (downloaded 28 September 2021)  
 ERONEN , Oskari: PRT Models in Afghanistan. Approaches to Civil -Military 
Integration; CMC Finland Civilian Crisis Management Studies Volume 1: Number 
5/2008  
 GENÇTÜRK , Ahmet: A history of fraternal Turkish -Afghan relation s; Anadolu 
Agency, 22. 08. 2021. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/asia -pacific/a -history -of-fraternal -
turkish -afghan -relations/2342587  (downloaded 26 Sept ember 2021)  
 GÖKSEDEF , Ece: Ankara’da Kabil Havalimanı’yla ilgili olarak hangi 
değerlendirmeler yapılıyor? BBC Türkçe 17. 08. 2021. 
https://www.bbc.com/turkce/haberler -turkiye -58248131  (downloaded 27 
September 2021)  
 GRIGORIADIS , loannis N.: The Davutoğlu Doctrine and Turkish Foreign Policy; 
HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR EUROPEAN AND FOREIGN POLICY 
(ELIAMEP) Working Paper Nr 8/2010 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318298808_The_Davutoglu_Doctrine_a
nd_Turkish_Foreign_Policy  (downloaded 28 September 2021)  
 GURINI , Ferhat: Turkey’s Unpromising Defense Industry; Carnegie Endow ment for 
International Peace, October 09, 2020 https://carnegieendowment.org/sada/82936  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 HACAOĞLU , Selcan: Turkey Gears Up for Risky Afghan Mission That No One Else 
Wants; BNN Bloomberg, Jun 25, 2021. https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/turkey -
gears -up-for-risky -afghan -mission -that-no-one-else-wants -1.1621605  (downloaded 
26 September 2021)  
 HACKETT , James (edt.): The Military Balance 2021. The International Institute for 
Strategic Studies. Routledge, London, p. 152.  
                                                      
46  https://www.trtworld.com/opinion/what -s-next-for-turkey -afghanistan -relations -after-the-
taliban-takeover -49460  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  163  JONES , Dorian: Turkey looks to play pivotal role in Taliban's new Afghanistan; RFI 
International R eport, 14/09/2021 https://www.rfi.fr/en/podcasts/international -
report/20210914 -turkey -looks -to-play-pivotal -role-in-taliban -s-new-afghanistan  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 KEMAL , Levent: Turkey's role in Afghanistan: a major risk; Al Jazeera Centre for 
Studies, August 29 2021. https://studies.aljazeera.net/en/analyses/turkeys -role-
afghanistan -major -risk (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 KIREN, Akın: Afganistan’ın Yeniden Yapılandırılmasında Türkiye’nin Rolü; 
İstanbul Üniversitesi. Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü, Yüksek Lisans Tezi, 201 2. 
https://tez.yok.gov.tr/UlusalTezMerkezi/tezDetay.jsp?id=WIvAceuNEF -
4O1sMx6W06A&no=Jph2Gay7CxrMymH3Ck_TbA  (downloaded 26 September 
2021) 
 LECHA , Eduard Soler i: The International Impact of the Failed Coup in Turkey; 
Barcelona Center for International Affairs, Opinión 425, July 2016. 
https://www.cidob.org/en/publications/publication_series/opinion/mediterraneo_y_
oriente_medio/the_international_impact_of_the_failed_coup_in_turkey  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 MURPHY , Teri – SAZAK , Onur: Turkey’s civilian capacity in post -conflict 
reconstruction; Istanbul Policy Center, Sabanci University, 2012. 
http://research.sabanciuniv.edu/21550/1/IPM -Turkish -CivCap.pdf  (downloaded 26 
September 2021)  
 NOUWENS , Meia – ROY-CHAUDHURY , Rahul – RAINE, John – LEVESQUES , Antoine 
– HOKAYEM , Emile – GOULD -DAVIES , Nigel – ÖZCELIK , Burcu – ALHASAN , Hasan: 
Adapting to a new reality in Afghanistan; The International Institute of Strategic 
Studies. https://www.iiss.org/blogs/analysis/2021/08/afghanistan -taliban -region -
response  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 ÖZLÜ, Hüsnü: ’Türk -Afgan do ktluk ve işbirliği anlaşması’ kapsamında Atatürk 
dönemi Türkiye Afganistan ilişkilerine bakış; Uluslararası Avrasya Sosyal Bilimler 
Dergisi, Yıl: 3, Sayı: 8, Eylül 2012, p. 35.  
 ÖZTÜRK , Ahmet Erdi: Turkey’s Post -2016 Foreign Policy Drivers: Militarisation,  
Islam, Civilisation and Power; HELLENIC FOUNDATION FOR EUROPEAN & 
FOREIGN POLICY (ELIAMEP), Policy Paper # 58/2021 
https://www.eliamep.gr/wp -content/up loads/2021/03/Policy -paper -58-Erdi-
Ozturk_final.pdf  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 SHAH, Rahat: Pakistan -Afghanistan -Turkey Trilateral Summits and its implication 
for the region; https://moderndiplomacy.eu/2020/02/24/pakistan -afghanistan -
turkey -trilateral -summits -and-its-implication -for-the-region/ (downloaded 26 
September 2021)  
 Taliban says it asked for Turkey's support in Afghanistan; Daily Sabah, 25 Aug 
2021. https://www.dailysabah.com/politics/diplomacy/taliban -says-it-asked -for-
turkeys -support -in-afghanistan  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
 TASTEKIN , Fehim: Türkiye için mayınsız bir Afgan rotası mümkün mü? AL -
Monitor, 06. 24. 2021. https://www.al -monitor.com/tr/originals/2021/06/turkey -
needs -build -support -new-afghan -mission  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  164  The Situation of Afghan Ref ugees in Turkey; Stiftun Pro Asyl. Expert opinion. 
March 2021 https://www.proasyl.de/wp -content/uploads/PA_Expert -Opinion_The -
Situation -of-Afghan -Refugees -in-Turkey.pdf  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  
 TURAN , Rabia Iclal: Why the US -trained Afghan army failed to fend off Taliban; 
Anadolu Agency, 17. 08. 2021. https://www.aa.com.tr/en/world/why -the-us-trained -
afghan -army -failed -to-fend-off-taliban/2337959  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 Turkey tries to cement role in Afghanistan; Financial Times, 07. 07. 2021. 
https://www.ft.com/content/2a5ab86d -a416 -4f91-a011 -a24c342ac84d  
(downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 Turkey ’s Official Development Assistance; OECD https://www.oecd.org/dac/dac -
global -relations/turkeys -official -development -assistanceoda.htm  (downloaded: 26 
September 2021)  
 Turkey -Afghan Economic and Trade Relations; Directorate of Communications, 
Presidency of the Republic of Türkiye, https://www.mfa.g ov.tr/turkey_s -
commercial -and-economic -relations -with-afghanistan.en.mfa  (downloaded 26 
September 2021)  
 Turkey -Afghanistan Bilateral Political Relations; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Republic of Turkey. https://www.mfa.gov.tr/turkey_afghanistan -bilateral -political -
relations.en.mfa  (downloaded: 26 September 2021)  
 Turkish Development Assistnace Report 2019; Turkish Deleopment addidtance 
report 2019.   
 USUL, Ali Resu l: What’s next for Turkey – Afghanistan relations after the Taliban 
takeover? TRT World, 25 Aug 2021 https://www.trtworld.com/opi nion/what -s-
next-for-turkey -afghanistan -relations -after-the-taliban -takeover -49460  
(downloaded 27 September 2021)  
 WALBERG , Eric: From Postmodernism to Postsecularism: Re -emerging Islamic 
Civilization; Clarity Press, 2013.  
 YAPAR , Hakan: From Strategic Depth  to Blue Homeland and Beyond: 
Understanding Turkey's Drift towards Greater Strategic Autonomy; Instituto 
Espanol de Estudios Estratégicos, Opinion Paper, 12 April 2021 
https://www.ieee.es/Galerias/fichero/docs_opinion/2021/DIEEEO40_2021_HAKY
AP_Turquia_ENG.pdf  (downloaded 26 September 2021)  
 YAZICI , Ezgi – ÜNLÜ, Doga – GÖK, Kursat: Turkey Aims to Play Stabilizing Role 
in Afghanistan after NATO Withdraw al; Institute for the Study of War, September 
3, 2021. https://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/turkey -aims-play-
stabiliz ing-role-afghanistan -after-nato-withdrawal  (downloaded 26 September 
2021)  
 درخواست  طالبان  از ترکیه برای کمک در اداره میدان هوایی کابل ,,Tolonews, 4 September 2021. 
https://tolonews.com/fa/afghanistan -174398  (downloaded 27 September 2021)  165 ANNA PUSKÁS   
CULTURE MATTERS: EUR OPEAN INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS’ POLIC IES FOR CULTURAL PRO PERTY 
PROTECTION IN CONFLI CT AND CRISIS SITUAT IONS   
 
 
Abstract 
 
Cultural property protection (CPP) has been raised more and more explicitly to 
the international peace and security agenda in recent years due to the growing volume 
of international terrorism and identity -based armed conflicts. Along with it, several  
international organizations recognized the necessity to stand up for the protection of 
cultural values and sites as an indispensable element of their external activities. By 
applying an institutional approach, the aim of the paper is to shed light on what  
international rules and standards exist in the framework of four international 
organizations critically impacting the European security environment (Council of 
Europe, EU, NATO, OSCE) regarding cultural property protection in conflict 
prevention, crisis s ituations or in post -conflict environments based on publicly 
available documents and the results of a survey conducted in this regard.  
 
Keywords : Cultural property protection, Council of Europe, NATO, OSCE, EU  
 
 
Introduction  
 
The aim of this paper1 is to present the activities and strategies regarding cultural 
property protection (CPP) of four international organizations determining European 
defence and security structures and policies either as a security -focused organization 
by nature (North Atlan tic Treaty Organization  – NATO), Organization for Security 
and Co -operation in Europe – OSCE), or as an initially economy -oriented (European 
Union – EU) or even as a primarily human rights (Council of Europe – CoE) 
organization. The research leans partly o n the results of a questionnaire survey entitled 
“International organizations’ standards and experience in cultural property 
protection in operational environments”  conducted throughout the spring of 2021, 
partly on the publicly available documents (report s, strategies, regulations, etc.) of the 
examined organizations.  
 
The questionnaire was circulated among the relevant departments of CoE, EU, 
NATO and OSCE.2 After a clarification of the organizations’ definition of cultural 
property (CP), the questionnair e was built around four main segments, which provides 
the structure of the present paper as well, examining (1) the relevant strategic 
                                                      
1  SUPPORTED BY THE ÚNKP -20-3-II-NKE -54 NEW NATIONAL EXCELLENCE PROGRAM OF THE 
MINISTRY FOR INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY FROM THE S OURCE OF THE NATIONAL 
RESEARCH , DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION FUND. 
2  The followi ng departments or institutions contributed to the survey: Council of Europe 
Culture and Cultural Heritage Division; European Commission DG for Education, Youth, 
Sport and Culture in cooperation with DG HOME and EU EEAS; NATO Civil -Military 
Cooperation Cent re of Excellence; OSCE (not specified)  166 documents & framework regulations; (2) the operational experience of the 
organizations regarding CPP; (3) the existing cooperation & partnerships with other 
intergovernmental organizations, international non -governmental organizations or the 
local community in this regard; and finally (4) the potentially existing 
recommendations or requirements for their members3 on CPP. T he survey aimed to 
outline a comparison of:  
- what role CPP has in strategies, guidelines and in the operational experience of 
the examined organizations in conflict prevention, crisis situations or in post -
conflict environments;  
- what standards exist within the examined organizations as regards CPP that 
member/participating states shall conform with either during the training of the 
security forces personnel, the establishment of regulations for special legal order 
or as for the deployment of personnel in pea ce operations; and finally,  
- what objectives and priorities the examined organizations have in the 
development of CPP within their activities for the future.  
 
First and foremost, it is important to refer briefly to the differences in the 
terminology used by  the organizations regarding this field. NATO and OSCE do not 
dispose of their own definition for “cultural property” but use the term adopted by the 
1954 Hague Convention and the 1970 UNESCO Convention4 respectively. An 
important difference between the tw o terms is that while the first includes immovable, 
the second focuses exclusively on movable property.5 As for CoE, the later elaborated 
Nicosia Convention adopted in 2017 introduces a new definition for CP, which covers 
both movable and immovable element s – a term principally inspired by the 1970 
UNESCO Convention and the EU Directive 2014/60 in relation to movable property 
and UNESCO’s (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) 
1972 World Heritage Convention as regards immovable p roperty.6 While in relevant 
documents of the EU, we meet either the term “cultural goods”7 – based on the 
definitions of the 1970 UNESCO and the 1995 UNIDROIT (International Institute for 
the Unification of Private Law) Convention8 – referring to movable c ultural property 
                                                      
3  The applied terminology is Member state in the case of EU and CoE, member country as 
for NATO and participating state in the case of OSCE.  
4  Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import , Export and 
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (Paris, 1970)  
5  In Merryman’s approach, the two conventions represent two different attitudes concerning 
CP: the 1954 Convention – applying an internationalist approach – regards CP as part of 
common  human culture independently of origin protecting it from damage or destruction, 
while in the 1970 Convention, CP is part of a nation’s cultural heritage, supporting the 
retention of cultural objects by source nations, thus conveying different values and m eaning 
of protection. Source: MERRYMAN , John Henry: Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural 
Property; The American Journal of International Law , Oct., 1986/4. pp. 831 -853. 
6  Explanatory Report to the Council of Europe Convention on Offences relating to Cultural 
Property. Nicosia, 19.V.2017.  
7  The EU’s definition of cultural goods is heavily relying on the definition of its Member 
States. (see : Directive 2014/60 /EU of the Eu ropean Parliament and of the Council). A list 
of categories of cultural goods/objects is laid down by Annex I of Council Regulation 
116/2009 and by Annex of Regulation 2019/880 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council  respectively.  
8  UNIDROIT Conven tion on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects (Rome, 1995)  167 or the wider category of “cultural heritage”9 involving built and intangible heritage 
too. This divergence of terms already anticipates the differences in the focus of 
relevant actions of the organizations elaborated in the below chapters.  
 
 
1. Strategic documents & regulatory frameworks for CPP  
 
The present study is principally focusing on two types of threats CP can face in 
armed conflicts:10 on the one hand, the destruction of or damage to built heritage either 
deliberately or as collater al damage, the former often being an element of intentional 
attacks on identity, and on the other hand, the theft, appropriation and illegal 
trafficking in artefacts and its possible links with terrorism and organized crime. These 
two aspects give the two main axes of the examined tools and activities presented in 
the next chapters. The growing importance of and attention to security threats related 
to CP – reflected by the below presented documents – predominantly lies in the fact 
that there is increasing evidence about their potential to cause significant harm to 
identity and collective memory attached to cultural sites and thus impede 
reconciliation, besides important economic consequences.  
 
As a strongly value -oriented organization, the activity of the CoE is based on the 
protection and promotion of its core values (human rights, democracy and the rule of 
law) throughout Europe. Disposing of a wide range of culture -related conventions, the 
Convention on Offences relating to Cultural Property  (often referred to as Nicosia 
Convention or “Blood Antiquities Convention”) adopted in 2017 can be regarded as 
an important milestone in the organization’s role played in CPP in conflict - and crisis -
relate d situations as it is the first international legal instrument aiming to stand up to 
prevent, fight against and criminalize destruction, damage, and illegal trafficking of 
CP. The Convention – drafted in collaboration with other international organizations  
including UNESCO, EU, UNIDROIT and UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime) – is open for signature for any country at a global level, although at the 
time of the finalization of the present study, it has not entered into force yet.11 Its 
preamble explicitly states that the organization is concerned about the growing 
number of such crimes and that terrorist groups are involved in the deliberate 
destruction of cultural heritage and also profiting from the illicit trade of CP, being 
                                                      
9  The definition given to cultural heritage by the Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts 
and crises is as follows: „the resources inherited from the past in all forms and aspects -
tangible, intangible and digital, including monuments, sites, landscapes, skills, practices, 
knowledge and expressions of human creativity, as well as collections conserved and 
managed by public and private bodies such as museums, galleries, libraries and arch ives. 
It originates from the interaction between people and places through time and it is 
constantly evolving.”  Source: 9962/21. Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. 
A component for peace and security in European Union’s external action. 1 9 April 2021. 
p. 4.  
10  The paper will only refer to some elements of the regulatory framework as regards CPP in 
relation to natural or man -made disasters.  
11  As of 1 August 2021, Cyprus, Greece, Latvia and Mexico have ratified the Convention and 
other 8 countries signed it. The condition of entry into force is 5 ratifications including at 
least 3 member states of the CoE. Chart of signatures and ratifications o f Treaty 221. 
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full -list/-
/conventions/treaty/221/signatures?module=signatures -by-treaty&treatynum=221  
(downloaded 01 August  2021)  168 one of the most pr ofitable ways of transnational organized crime.12, Furthermore, the 
emerging role of social media and deep web in the trading also sets new challenges 
that international organizations as well as state entities must respond to.13 Applying 
an encompassing approach by providing criminal regulation for all phases of the trade, 
the Convention – as a gap -filling initiative – can provide an effective method for 
policing illicit trade in cultural objects – either stolen artefacts or rece ntly excavated 
antiquities.14 
 
On a broader scale, the Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage for Society  
(also known as Faro Convention) adopted in 2005 shall be mentioned, which is 
building on the strong relationship between cultural heritage, human  rights and 
democracy, putting heritage as a key resource for social inclusion, human rights and 
community15 and whose impact is well reflected in the later mentioned projects.16 
 
Although the principal purpose of NATO – the military alliance of European and  
North American countries based on the principle of collective defence – is not directly 
linked with CPP, the preamble of its founding treaty states that the “Parties [...] are 
determined to safeguard freedom, common heritage and civilisation of their 
peop les”.17 Reflecting on the changing nature of 21st-century conflicts and on lessons 
learned from NATO operations and missions, a Science for Peace and Security (SPS) 
Programme has been launched on CPP in 2014 to improve NATO’s activities and 
institutional fr amework in this field, uniquely using both a conceptual and a practical 
military approach. The final report of the project has formulated several 
recommendations for enhancing the establishment of a NATO CPP framework, 
emphasizing that as CPP has a cross -cutting nature, it is an element to be 
mainstreamed in the whole range of NATO activities.18  
                                                      
12  Offences relating to Cultural Property. Council of Europe, Culture and Cultural heritage. 
https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/cultural -property  (downloaded 23 Jul y 
2021)  
13  Explanatory Report to the Council of Europe op.cit.  
14  FINCHAM , Derek: The Blood Antiquities Convention as a paradigm for cultural property 
crime reduction ; Cardozo Arts & Entertainment , 2019 /2. pp. 299-336. 
15  Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage for Society; Council of Europe, Culture and 
Cultural heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/faro -convention  
(dow nloaded 23 July 2021)  
16  In the case of CoE, we shall mention other legal instruments shaping the organization’s 
activities in the field of heritage protection (using the broader term of cultural heritage in 
these cases). For instance, the EUR -OPA Major Ha zards Agreement aims to promote 
prevention and resilience of major natural and technical disasters by strengthening 
cooperation in this field. Cultural heritage appears here as a separate topic, because of its 
exposure to catastrophes and its negative soci oeconomic consequences on local 
communities, involving a loss of identity -generating values and of cultural diversity. 
Source: Cultural heritage. European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement, Council 
of Europe. https://www.coe.int/en/web/europarisks/cultural -heritage1  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
17  North Atlantic Treaty, Washington D. C., 4 April 2019.  
18  The key recommendations of the report were: 1) elaboration of a bi -command CPP 
directive; 2) working on a NATO standardization agreement on CPP; 3) Inserting CPP in 
NATO Crisis Management Process;  4) developing NATO CPP terminology; 5) inserting 
CPP elements in NATO policy and allied joint doctrine publications; 6) completing ong oing 
NATO initiatives to create GIS CPP data layer for NATO maps; 7) sustaining a dialogue 
with relevant non -NATO associates; and 8) considering the need for elaborating a NATO 169 As a result of a work starting in 2016 between NATO’s two strategic commands 
(Allied Command Operations [ACO] and Allied Command Transformation [ACT]), 
a Bi-Strateg ic Command Directive was adopted in 2019, which sets direction and 
guidance regarding the organization’s activities in the field of CPP in the preparation, 
planning and realization of its missions and operations, training and education 
programmes, and its evaluation activities. The physical harm to CP – as a growing 
security threat due to the changing nature of conflicts19 –and its effect on social 
cohesion, post -conflict recovery and reconciliation are at the centre of NATO’s 
attention, emphasizing the stro ng link between collective identity and CP related to 
the given community. Applying a comprehensive approach, CPP is a task to be 
considered across the spectrum of conflict and all branches of the organization.20 An 
important element of NATO’s handling of C PP is its role in strategic communication 
of the organization’s activities, recognising also that the failure to protect CP in 
operational environment may have significant consequences on the operation’s 
success and NATO’s legitimacy.21 
 
At a branch level, CIMIC is the most affected area, several CIMIC documents22 
include regulations on CPP as one of NATO’s 5 so -called cross -cutting topics,23 
describing the importance of supporting and taking a proactive role in CPP (against 
damage, destruction, theft etc.) as  part of building a safe and secure environment.24 
NATO’s Policy for the Protection of Civilians  (2016) is the framework document for 
the protection of civilian persons, objects and services, implicitly including CPP. 
Since its 2019 London Summit, a Human S ecurity approach is being given shape 
inside NATO which indicates a shift in the organization’s security conception 
gathering under a unified multi -sectoral concept the efforts in relation to certain cross -
cutting topics, including CPP.25 
 
                                                      
policy on CPP. Source: ROSÉN , Frederik Dr.: NATO and Cultural Property. Embraci ng 
New Challenges in the Era of Identity Wars;  Report of the NATO SPS Project Best 
Practices for Cultural Property Protection in NATO -led Military Operations. CHAC, 2017. 
pp. 31 -35. 
19 The above -mentioned report outlines the following developments in the st rategic 
environment of 21st century conflicts as the main – strongly interrelating – drivers for a 
changing role of CP: new regime of international norms for CP; the evaluation of identity 
in armed conflicts; globalization and urbanization of conflicts; ri se of hybrid warfare; the 
growing issue of looting and illicit trafficking of antiquities. Source: ROSÉN  op.cit. pp. 13 -
16. 
20  NATO Bi -Strategic Command Directive 086 -005 on Implementing Cultural Property 
Protection in NATO Operations and Missions, 1 April  2019.  
21  Response on the questionnaire  
22  For instance, as part of CIMIC CCOE’s „Makes sense” series already two editions of a 
volume on CPP (later referred) have been published, or the later referred CIMIC handbook 
also includes provisions on this topic.  
23  The current cross -cutting topics – i.e. topics which could affect a mission in several ways, 
but are not part of the military’s primary responsibilities – are the protection of civilians; 
children and armed conflict; women, peace and security; cultural property protection; 
building integrity. CIMIC Handbook. Chapter VII, https://www.handbook.cimic -coe.org/  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
24  CIMIC Handbook ibid. Chapter VII, 7.6.  
25  Human S ecurity. NATO. https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_181779.htm  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  170 As for future cha llenges, NATO documents indicate several lines of 
development, such as in the field of databases, information sharing and 
standardisation, education and training, partnerships both between the civil and the 
military sector and between specialised military departments. Furthermore, it is also 
important to provide that data on CP be available and incorporated in an early stage 
of the operations planning cycle which is a key for effectively protect CP in the field 
of operation.26 
 
The EU – as a regional coopera tion established on common inheritance and 
values – was primarily meant to create economic integration, but spilled over to other 
fields to become nowadays an international security organization characterized by 
collective security. In addition, since the adoption of the Lisbon Treaty, it shows traits 
of collective defence with regard to its member states as well.27 The importance of 
heritage protection is well reflected in the Treaty of the European Union, stating that 
the organization “shall ensure that Eu rope's cultural heritage is safeguarded and 
enhanced.”28 Apart from a range of regulations in the field of risk management,29 
culture has been getting at the forefront of its external policies since 2016. Building 
upon the joint communication of the European Parliament (EP) and the Council in 
2016 visioning an EU strategy for international cultural relations,30 the Council 
conclu sions adopted in 2019 recognized the importance of the combat against illicit 
trafficking and of culture and cultural heritage in peacebuilding and in post -conflict 
situations.31 
 
It became apparent from 2018, that cultural heritage preservation and protect ion 
has a role in the activities of EU’s Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) 
missions: in the Council conclusions of 19 November 2018 on the establishment of a 
civilian CSDP compact – by highlighting the importance of this dimension in EU’s 
integrate d approach concerning external conflicts and crises – the Council expressed 
that “the preservation and protection of cultural heritage is one of the focus areas for 
Civilian Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) missions.”32 The adoption by 
the Council on its 21st June 2021 meeting its Conclusions on EU approach to cultural 
heritage in conflicts and crises  can be considered as a further, particularly significant 
step in this regard . It demonstrates an express political commitment on and provides 
a politi cal and operational framework for cultural heritage protection in conflicts and 
crises, giving the issue strategic importance. The document regards cultural heritage 
                                                      
26  Cultural Property Protection (CPP). A CCOE Fact Sheet. CIMIC Centre of Excellence. 
https:/ /www.cimic -coe.org/resources/fact -sheets/fact -sheet -cpp-2020.pdf  (downloaded 23 
July 2021)  
27  MOLNÁR , Anna: Az Európai Unió – a biztonsági közösségtől a kollektív védelemig terjedő 
folyamat; In: MOLNÁR , Anna – MARSAI , Viktor – WAGNER , Péter (Eds.): Nemzetközi 
biztonsági szervezetek; Dialóg Campus, 2019. pp. 81 -98. 
28  Document 12012M/TXT. Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union  
29  The conclusions on risk management in the area of cultural heritage 26 May 2020; or the 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 -2030 shall be mentioned in which 
latter the EU played a key role in the negotiations and provides support in its 
implementation.  
30  JOIN (2016) 29 final. Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council. 
Towards a n EU strategy for international cultural relations.  
31  2019/C 192/04. Council conclusions on an EU strategic approach to international cultural 
relations and a framework for action.  
32  Response on the questionnaire  171 as possessing a twofold strategic role: a potential trigger for and a target in conflicts 
and crises and a subject to disinformation or information manipulation, but also a tool 
for fostering peace, reconciliation, mutual understanding, intercultural dialogue and 
sustainable development.33 The Conclusions invite the European External Action 
Service (EEAS) to make efforts in streamlining cultural heritage and its protection in 
the whole spectrum of EU’s toolbox regarding conflict prevention and crisis 
management – including CSDP –, also setting a reporting obligation on a regular basis 
on the prog ress in this field. It is important to note that the Conclusions make 
provisions regarding the integration of aspects of cultural heritage protection into the 
appropriate financial instruments too, especially NDICI – Global Europe 
(Neighbourhood, Developme nt and International Cooperation Instrument), thus 
providing financial means for its external actions in this field.34 The basis of the 
Council’s decision, the Concept elaborated by the EEAS – recognizing cultural 
heritage as a “powerful and complementary c omponent for the revitalisation of the 
EU approach to peace, security and development”  – defines the main axes of EU’s 
future engagement and priorities in this field in line with the humanitarian -peace -
development nexus which builds on the handling of huma nitarian needs together with 
the strengthening of resilience and preventive measures. To ensure the horizontal 
implementation of the provisions, the Concept also set up an informal inter -service 
task force for cultural heritage in conflicts and crises coor dinated by EEAS.35 
 
It shall be noted that Hungary – building on the experiences of the Hungary 
Helps Program which supported several (principally) religious heritage rehabilitation 
projects in the framework of its humanitarian and development activities in  conflict -
stricken areas – has taken an active role in the elaboration of the Concept and the 
relating Conclusions. On the occasion of the adoption of the Conclusions, the 
Permanent Representation of Hungary to the EU together with EEAS has organized a 
roundtable discussion entitled “Cultural heritage, as a new component for peace and 
security in the EU’s external action”  to provide a platform for gathering best practices 
and encouraging a stronger engagement of the EU institutions in this field.36  
 
The oth er area where the EU actively engages to safeguard CP is in the fight 
against illicit trafficking, especially as regards its possible links with terrorism 
financing. In a row of documents relating to the fight against terrorism and terrorism -
financing, the  EU stressed its concerns in this regard, and it is also highlighted in the 
Council Conclusions of 2021, The Conclusions recall the development of an Action 
Plan on tackling illicit trade of cultural goods by 2022, already schemed by the EU 
strategy to tac kle organised crime  adopted in April 2021 by the Commission. It was 
in line with the EU Security Union Strategy adopted in July 2020, which also stated 
                                                      
33  The importance of cultural heritage in conflict prevention and resolution was also 
emphasized by the Council in its Conclusions on EU Peace Mediation of 7 December 2020. 
(13573/20)  
34  9837/21. Council Conclusions on EU Approach to Cultural Heritage in con flicts and crises.  
35  Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit.  
36  Round -table discussion at the Permanent Representation entitled “Cultural Heritage, as a 
new component for peace and security in the EU’s external action”. Permanent 
Representation of Hungary to the EU. https://eu -brusszel.mfa.gov.hu/eng/news/round -
table -discussion -at-the-permament -representation -entitled -cultural -heritage -as-a-new-
component -for-peace -and-security -in-the-eus-external -action  (downloaded 01 August 
2021)  172 that “[…] trafficking in cultural goods has also become one of the most lucrative 
criminal activities, a  source of funding for terrorists as well as organised crime and 
it is on the rise. Steps should be explored to improve the online and offline traceability 
of cultural goods in the internal market and cooperation with third countries where 
cultural goods a re looted as well as providing active support to law enforcement and 
academic communities.”37  
 
OSCE – the Euroatlantic institution of cooperative security rooting in the 
relenting atmosphere of the Cold War – is operating with primarily soft power tools, 
of which the human dimension includes culture.38 The mandate of the organization in 
the field of CPP is based on, among others, the OSCE Border Security and 
Management Concept  (BSMC,) adopted in 2005, as regards its contribution and 
assistance to participati ng States in the prevention and fight against all forms of cross -
border illicit trafficking (implicitly including cultural property).39 OSCE’s activities 
on organized crime are set out by the 2020 Declaration on strengthening co -operation 
in countering tran snational organized crime  (MC.DOC/1/20) in correlation with 
Ministerial Council Decisions No. 3/05 on combatting transnational organized crime  
and No. 5/06 on organized crime ; although neither of them naming cultural property 
explicitly. The Ministerial Co uncil Declaration on strengthening OSCE efforts to 
prevent and counter terrorism (2016), however, indicates the need to take appropriate 
steps in preventing and suppressing terrorism financing refraining from direct or 
indirect in trade in CP and other ite ms of archaeological, historical, cultural, rare 
scientific and religious importance in favour of terrorist organizations and emphasized 
the key importance of information -sharing in this regard.40 The Parliamentary 
Assembly’s 2014 Resolution on Protection o f cultural property in the OSCE area  
shall be also mentioned here, which emphasized the importance of CPP, constituting 
an integral part of the organization’s efforts. For this purpose, the document called 
participating States for taking appropriate measur es and also to establish an OSCE 
mechanism “to prohibit and prevent within conflict zones any illicit export, other 
removal or transfer of ownership of cultural property, or archaeological excavation, 
any alteration to, or change of use of, cultural proper ty which is intended to conceal 
or destroy cultural, historical or scientific evidence, any form of theft, pillage or 
misappropriation of, and any acts of vandalism directed against cultural property”.41 
 
In the framework of efforts to effectively address transnational threats, the OSCE 
Transnational Threats Department is currently working on a programme dedicated to 
the fight against illicit trafficking in CP in the OSCE area in order to enhance the 
capacities of law enforcement organizations and handle it s direct links to organized 
crime and terrorism financing, money laundering and corruption networks.42 
                                                      
37  COM (2020) 605 final. Communication from the Commission on the EU Security Union 
Strate gy.  
38  REMEK , Éva: A Európai Biztonsági és Együttműködési Szervezet – kooperatív biztonság; 
In: MOLNÁR , Anna – MARSAI , Viktor – WAGNER , Péter (Eds.): Nemzetközi biztonsági 
szervezetek; Dialóg Campus, 2019. pp. 99 -114. 
39  Response on the questionnaire  
40  MC.DOC/1/16. OSCE Ministerial Council: Declaration on Strengthening OSCE efforts to 
prevent and counter terrorism. 9 December 2016.  
41  Resolution on Protection of cultural property in the OSCE area. OSCE Parliamentary 
Assembly, 2014.  
42  Response on the ques tionnaire  173 2. Operational experience and CPP -related activities in the field  
 
Figure 1 shows what specific, CPP -related task(s) the examined organizations 
can perfor m in the field (either in the framework of missions/ field operations /crisis 
management operations or through realization/financing of projects) based on the 
questionnaire.  
 
 
Figure 1: Fields of activity potentially performed based on the operational experience 
of the examined organizations based on the responses of the questionnaire  
(Author’s own edition)  
 
 
The EU’s activities in this regard include realizing/ contributing to concret e 
projects on the one hand and acting in the frame of civilian CSDP actions on the other 
hand. The NDICI – Global Europe – the financial tool supporting EU’s external 
action43 – and the IcSP ( Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace )44 – providing 
funding for actions on conflict prevention, crisis response, peacebuilding and global 
or response t o trans -regional threats – have supported / are supporting projects in the 
Balkans, Middle East and the Maghreb both in reconstruction of heritage and in the 
fight against illicit trafficking.45 Additionally, based on a Memorandum of 
Understanding signed in  2012, significant cooperation with UNESCO has been 
realized by supporting joint initiatives funded by the European Commission and 
                                                      
43  European Commission welcomes the endorsement of the new €79.5 billion NDICI -Global 
Europe instrument to support EU's external action. European Commission. 19 March 2021. 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_1267  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
44  Some examples: building on the positive outcomes of previous actions and also expan ding 
activities, the Interim Response programme in favour of Kosovo  (2021 -24) aims to improve 
inter-community trust through the protection of cultural heritage. The „Protecting cultural 
heritage and diversity in conflicts”  project in Iraq, Libya and Yemen which ran between 
2017 and 2019 aimed to provide rapid assessments and immediate safeguarding measures 
to the cultural resources affected by the conflicts, together with reducing the vulnerability 
of the populations by contributing to UNESCO’s efforts in i mproving the integration of a 
cultural dimension into conflict stability and peacekeeping efforts. Sources: Response on 
the questionnaire; Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace. Report. European 
Commission. https://icspmap.eu/pdf/?format  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
45  Response on the questionnaire  
174 implemented by UNESCO with the objective of reducing illicit trafficking of CP in 
the area of EU and partner countries.46  
 
On the other hand, possible actions in the framework of EU’s civilian CSDP 
efforts might include a wide range of activities from the provision of strategic advice 
to capacity building either to preserve and protect built heritage or to fight illicit trade 
in CP.47 The need to integrate cultural heritage protection in CSDP framework first 
appeared in 2017 from the part of EEAS,48 in parallel with the gradual expansion of 
civilian CSDP priority areas as a response to a changing international security 
context.49 It has then culminated in the establishment of the EUAM Iraq as the first 
(and to day the only) CSDP mission employing a dedicated expert in the field and 
with a mandate which includes the support of Iraqi authorities to protect their cultural 
heritage, on t he initiative of Italy, Germany and France to increase political awareness 
on the issue. Reflecting on the widespread destruction perpetrated by ISIL (Islamic 
State in Iraq and the Levant) in the country, the advisory mission deployed since 2017 
could reac h important results – heavily building on member state contributions 
(especially Italy) – in raising awareness and in training local forces amongst others.50  
The mission organized a round of three workshops (“The Casket of our History”) 
during 2018 -19 on t he topic of the fight against illegal trade in cultural goods bringing 
together international and local key actors to strengthen the collective efforts in 
preserving cultural heritage.51 
 
The experience of EULEX Kosovo may also be recalled here as the missi on 
provided support in the establishment and technical assistance in the work of the 
                                                      
46  For instance, the project entitled „Fighting illicit trafficking of cultural property in the 
Western Balkans”  launched in 2020, aims to improve the legal, t echnical and institutional 
capacities and frameworks in the combat against illicit trafficking of CP. The project is 
supported by the EU with 2.8 million EUR and implemented by UNESCO. An  other 
example, the Emergency Safeguarding of the Syrian Heritage  project implemented between 
2014 and 2016 with an overall objective or contributing to the restoration of social cohesion, 
stability and sustainable development through cultural heritage protection and preservation 
through capacity -building, awareness -raising and technical assistance. Source: UNESCO’s 
Cooperation with the European Union to Fight Illicit Trafficking of Cultural Property. 
UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/fighttrafficking/eu -cooperation  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
47  Response on the questionnaire  
48  EEAS(2017) 977 REV 2. Issues Paper – Preservation and Protection of Cultural Heritage 
in CSDP Missions and Operations. Working document of the European External Action 
Service.  
49  JUNCOS , Ana E.: Beyond civilian power? Civilian CSDP two decades on; In: FIOTT, Daniel: 
The EU’s legacy and ambition in security and defence; EU Institute for Security Studies, 
2020. pp. 74 -87. 
50  PARKES , Roderick dr. – PIETZ, Tobias: CSDP Missions and the Protection of Cultural 
Heritage. Lessons from EUAM Iraq and the Way Forw ard; Workshop Note. DGAP – ZIF, 
17 November 2020. https://dgap.org/sites/default/files/article_pdfs/zif_dgap_workshop -
note_protection_of_cultural_heritage_oct_2020.pdf  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
51  The Casket of our History – EUAM Iraq fights illegal trade in cultural goods. Delegation 
of the European Union to the Dominican Republic. 27 November 2019. 
https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/dominican -republic/71130/casket -our-history -
%E2%80%93 -euam -iraq-fight s-illegal -trade -cultural -goods_lt  (downloaded 23 July 20 21) 175 Kosovo Police Cultural Heritage Unit, besides contributing to the rehabilitation of 
cultural sites in the territory of Kosovo.52 
 
The possibilities of future EU engagement are laid down in the above -mentioned 
2021 Concept, promoting  EU engagement for CPP throughout all the conflict cycle 
and with a cross -cutting (i.e. integrating it to all actions in EU toolbox for conflicts 
and crises) and “conflict sensitive” approach.  Drafting a comprehensive approach for 
mainstreaming cultural heritage protection in its political, diplomatic and legislative 
engagement, the concept determines the possible activities of EU in the field of 
prevention, safeguarding and recovery of cultural he ritage as well. The Concept 
envisions the elaboration of a mini -concept dedicated to the security challenges 
related to the protection of cultural heritage which will specifically consider the 
possible areas of civilian CSDP compact’s engagement. 53 
 
In the  case of NATO, CPP is a factor to be considered in all decision -making 
processes in the organization’s operations from planning through targeting to risk 
assessment and risk mitigation. Its significance also has to be emphasized from the 
aspect of strategi c communication. The specific CPP -related tasks that NATO is 
involved depend on the concrete situation and the relating mandate.54 The example of 
KFOR (Kosovo Force) shall be emphasized here, as the mandate of the peace -support 
operation includes the protec tion and the support of the protection of cultural and 
religious sites in the territory of Kosovo55 – as a response to claims coming from the 
Serbian Orthodox Church. The 2004 riots also highlighted the critical role of heritage 
and NATO’s role in safeguard ing it. Until 2013, KFOR was responsible for the 
protection of securing nine designated sites of religious and cultural importance.56 
Nowadays, NATO forces are present only at Decani Monastery, primarily as a third 
responder providing support for Kosovo aut horities and EULEX upon request.57 
 
Although aspects of CPP were not institutionalized in the organization’s 
activities in Afghanistan, NATO forces participated in a number of initiatives and 
projects regarding CPP on an ad hoc basis, including the provisio n of courses, the 
building of temporary facilities for storing archaeological objects, contribution to the 
reconstruction of the National Museum and to the protection of Ghazni’s cultural 
heritage.58 
 
The Libyan intervention of 2011 serves an important and widely praised 
example of how aspects of CPP can be integrated in military operation planning. 
During NATO’s Operation Unified Protector, a cultural “No -strike List” made up of 
about 1450 sites was composed based on data gained from the preceding Operation  
                                                      
52  EEAS (2017) 977 REV 2. op. cit.  
53  Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit. 12.  
54  Response on the questionnaire  
55  NATO’s role in Kosovo; NATO. https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_48818.htm  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
56  The sites included: Gazimestan Monument, Gracanica Monastery, Zociste Monastery, 
Budisavci Monastery, Gorioc Monastery, the Archangel site, Devic Monastery, Pec 
Patriarchate , and Decani Monastery.  
57  ROSÉN  op. cit., 22 . 
58  Cultural Property Protection. NATO. 
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_166114.htm  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  176 Odyssey Dawn, UNESCO and academia amongst others in order to evade collateral 
damage in cultural heritage during NATO airstrikes.59 These operational experiences 
led NATO to launch the above -mentioned SPS programme on CPP in 2014 to map 
further possibiliti es of developing NATO’s engagement in this field. A further 
element that underlines the importance of handling CPP aspects within NATO, that 
in recent years, CPP has been integrated into training exercises as well, like Trident 
Jaguar (2018) and Trident Ja ckal (2019).60 
 
CoE does not have an external presence on a regular basis (apart from its field 
offices responsible for the implementation of certain cooperation activities), its 
contribution in this field is principally focusing on awareness -raising about the 
importance of multi -stakeholderism in the governance of cultural heritage, increasing 
knowledge of and adherence to the organization’s standards and enhancing formal 
and informal exchange of practices.61  CoE is present in post -conflict situations with 
concrete projects which touch upon cultural heritage – utilizing its potential for post -
conflict reconciliation, – ranging from the rehabilitation of the built environment to 
using heritage in a cross -sectorial way as a tool for encouraging inter -community  
dialogue and fostering sustainable economic development. As an example, the PIAG 
project ( "Post -Conflict Actions for the Social and Economic Revitalisation of the 
Communities and the Cultural Environment in the Municipality of Gori" ) in Gori shall 
be mentioned which was a response to damage to cultural heritage and more broadly, 
the built environment by the 2008 conflict in Georgia. Through the rehabilitation 
process, the project aimed to enhance economic development and prevent the 
impoverishment and abandonment of a conflict -stricken, culturally rich land, 
reflecting the strong interrelations of cultural heritage and economy.62 The cross -
sectorial Joint Programme “European Union/Council of Europe Support to the 
Promotion of Cultural Diversity in Kosovo  (PCDK)”  which ran between 2009 and 
2015 used cultural heritage as an instrument to encourage inter -community dialogue 
and also to enhance economic development.63 
 
OSCE is primarily intervening in the prevention and fight against illicit 
trafficking of CP, through organizing workshops, trainings and providing advocacy 
for local organs. The relevance of CPP has been growing since 2016 within the 
activities of the organization. In the survey as a positive result, the increased outreach 
to local authorities was  mentioned – especially in the Balkans and South -Eastern 
Europe – and also increased communication and cooperation with local stakeholders 
                                                      
59  FOLLIANT , Yvette maj.: Cultural Property Protection Makes Sense. A Way to Improve Your 
Mission ; Civil -Military Cooperation Centre of Excellence (CCOE), The Hague, The 
Netherlands, 2015. https://nllp.jallc.nato.int/iks/sharing%20public/ cpp-makes -sense -final-
version -29-10-15.pdf  (downloaded 23  July 2021)  
60  BERENDS , Jolien: Cultural Property Protection Makes Sense. A Way To Improve Your 
Mission; Second edition. Civil -Military Cooperation Centre of Excellence (CCOE) 2020. 
p. 6. 
61  Response  on the questionnaire  
62  Post-Conflict Actions for the Social and Economic Revitalisation of the Communities and 
the Cultural Environment in the Municipality of Gori (PIAG). Council of Europe, Culture 
and Cultural heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/piag  (downloaded 
01 August  2021)  
63  EU/CoE support to the promotion of cultural diversity in Kosovo. Council of Europe, 
Culture and Cultural heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/kosovo  
(downloaded 01  August  2021)  177 in the field of CPP. But due to the constantly evolving nature of related crimes, there 
is a continued need for condu cting awareness -raising exercises as well as regular 
assessments. As the Head of OSCE Border Security and Management Unit put it: “this 
problem can be tackled efficiently only by increasing the knowledge of the officers 
from different government agencies a nd promoting co -operation among them."64 
Furthermore, in certain cases, there is still a lack of full awareness of how states could 
be affected by or involved in the phenomenon as potential host -, transit - or destination 
countries.65 
 
Regional workshops on c ombating illicit cross -border trafficking in CP have 
been organized in the OSCE area and also for the Asian partners for cooperation by 
OSCE Border Security and Management Unit in recent years, in which Italy and the 
Italian Chairmanship have taken a leadi ng role.66 
 
 
3. Cooperation & partnerships at an international and local level  
 
Considering the complexity of activities related to CPP and the scale and 
outreach of the issue, broad cooperation can be seen among the different actors at an 
international lev el. Based on the responses of the questionnaire, Figure 2 shows the 
network of cooperation of the examined organizations, which include crime 
prevention, crime policing/law enforcement and customs organizations; other 
regional/global security organizations  and heritage -protection related international 
governmental and non -governmental organizations as well.  
 
In the examined organizations we can perceive a multilateral approach, 
collaborating with several partners regarding CPP. Based on the survey, the exam ined 
organizations cooperate with each other too (only between NATO and CoE, there was 
no cooperation detected), and the EU disposes of the widest range of connections in 
this field. In its 2016 strategy, the EU laid down that its international cultural re lations 
                                                      
64  OSCE and Cyprus police organize international seminar on combating trafficking of 
cultural property and antiquities. 2 November 2017. OSCE. 
https://www.osce.org/secretariat/354326  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
65  Response on the questionnaire  
66  In 2017 in Vizenza, Italy, covering the Mediterranean region organized by the Border 
Security and Management Unit of the OSCE Transnational Threats Department, with the 
support of Italy, as the 2017 Chair of the OSCE Contact Group with the Mediterranean 
Partners for Co -operation, and in co -operation with the Center of Excellence for Stability 
Police Units (CoESPU) of Italy’s Carabinieri service. In 2018 a Workshop was organized 
in Podgorica, Montenegro for South -Eastern Europe and the Caucasus Region by the Italian 
OSCE Chairmanship in co -ordination with the Border Security and Management Unit of 
the OSCE Transnational Threats Department, the OSCE Mission to Montenegro and the 
Ministry of Culture of Montenegro. An  other was in Tashkent covering the Central Asian 
region (2018) Italian Chairmanship. Most recently, in the region of the OSCE Asian 
partners for cooperation held in Mongolia. (2019) organized in close coordination between 
the Border Security and Management  Unit of the OSCE Secretariat, the Italian OSCE Chair 
of the Asian Contact Group, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of 
Education, Culture, Science and Sports of Mongolia. Source: Workshop on combating 
illicit cross -border trafficking in cultural property in the region of the OSCE Asian partners 
held in Mongolia. 2 September 2019. https://www.osce.org/secretariat/428906  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  178 contribute to the strengthening of its role as a global actor, and as regards cultural 
heritage protection in conflict zones, CoE and UNESCO are highlighted as its most 
important partners.67 The commitment to cooperating with other international 
organizations in prevention, protection, documentation and restoration has also been 
affirmed by the European Parliament highlighting UN (United Nations), UNESCO, 
ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of 
Cultural Prope rty) and ICBS (International Committee of the Blue Shield) besides 
civil and military authorities, cultural institutions and professional associations.68 The 
Concept elaborated by EEAS determines the promotion of partnerships and 
multilateralism as one of t he organization’s principles in its engagement for cultural 
heritage protection in conflicts and crises in which regional organizations (like 
ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations], African Union, GCC [Gulf 
Cooperation Council], and Arab League) an d other European institutions (as NATO 
or CoE) as well as UN and its specialized agencies (UNESCO, UNODC), other 
intergovernmental organizations (ALIPH [International alliance for the protection of 
heritage in conflict areas], ICCROM, ICOMOS [International  Council on Monuments 
and Sites], ICOM [International Council of Museums], WCO [World Customs 
Organization]), civil society organizations and the academic world are key.69 
 
OSCE is cooperating closely with INTERPOL (International Criminal Police 
Organizatio n) in the creation of national specialized units in fighting CP -related 
crimes and with WCO in increasing capacities and structures of customs services.70 
The organization’s Joint Action Plan for the period 2018 -2019 with UNODC – as a 
new element to previous  ones – also covered combating trafficking in CP.71 
 
UNESCO – as the main global player in the field of culture – has a central role 
in the activities related to CPP in conflicts and crisis situations, all the examined 
organizations are cooperating with UN’ s specialized agency in culture. As for NGOs, 
ICBS shall be outlined, partnering with OSCE, EU and NATO as well. NATO 
SHAPE and ICBS signed a letter of intent in 2020 to foster further cooperation in CPP 
– among others in information exchange and training –, but ICBS had already taken 
part in NATO operation exercises before.72 
                                                      
67  JOIN(2016) 29 final. op. cit.  
68  2014/2149(INI). European Parliament resolution of 8 September 2015 towards an 
integrated approach to cultural heritage for Europe  
69  Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit. 9.  
70  Response on the questionnaire  
71  OSCE and UNODC sign new 2018 -2019 joint action plan. 31 January 2018. OSCE. 
https://www.osce.org/secretary -general/368856  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
72  NATO & BSI sign Letter of Intent for CPP. Blue Shield International . 
https://theblueshield.org/nato -and-blue-shield -sign-letter -of-intent -for-cpp/ (downloaded 
01 August 2021)  179  
Figure 2:  Network of cooperation of the examined organizations in relation to cultural 
property protection based on the responses of the questionnaire  
(Author’s own edition)  
 
 
As for  cooperation with local non -governmental organizations in the operational 
environment, concrete examples can be found on a mission level. As for NATO, 
conducting key visits by commanders and staff – besides acknowledging CP – are 
aiming to improve situatio nal understanding but also force acceptance and force 
protection.73 Developing close ties with local CP experts and NGO -s is of key 
importance amongst others in countering looting and trafficking of CP in order to 
dispose of up -to-date information.74 
 
In the  case of the EU, the 2021 Conclusions stressed the importance of the need 
for local ownership and engagement at all stages of cultural heritage protection efforts 
in the aftermath of conflicts or crises.75 The associated Concept recognizes the role of 
cultu ral heritage protection in economic recovery and development (through job 
creation and tourism), but also in the fight against disinformation by supporting the 
development of local networks of different stakeholders. To serve the goals of the 
Concept, the organization encourages dialogue and regular exchanges with civil 
society organizations, including local religious communities and faith -based 
organizations as well.76 
 
                                                      
73  Response on the questionnaire  
74  BERENDS , op. cit. 59. 
75  Council Conclusions on EU Approach to Cultural Heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit.  
76  Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit.  
180 As regards OSCE, for example, its mission in Montenegro cooperates with the 
local counci l of museums. Its mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina is closely 
cooperating with the NGO Centre for the Fight against Trafficking in Art77 in raising 
awareness by among others organizing training courses for law enforcement forces,78 
or disseminating related materials through traditional media, social networks and 
other events.79 
 
 
4. Recommendations or requirements for members  
 
It is well beyond the limits of the present study to address in full detail the full 
scale of regulations to uching on recommendations or requirements for members of 
the examined organizations, this chapter rather seeks to highlight some key elements 
of the relevant normative framework. As for OSCE, in its Resolution, the 
Parliamentary Assembly stressed the need from the part of participating states to adopt 
appropriate national -level legislation including on the prohibition of illicit activities 
in cultural sites and on the rendering of effective criminal sanctions against 
perpetrators and inciters interrelated w ith CP -related crimes determined by 
international law (especially the 1954 Hague Convention and its protocols).  The 
Assembly encouraged participating States to agree on common standards, exchange 
information, working in synergy with each other and with ot her competent 
international partners.80 
 
The 2019 NATO Bi -Strategic Command sets out the provision of CPP -related 
training as a national responsibility so that personnel of armed forces have knowledge 
on and abide by the relevant legal framework.81 Dedicated  trainings on CPP exist in a 
number of member countries such as the Army Monument Officers Training  (AMOT) 
program, a partnership between the U.S. Army Civil Affairs and Psychological 
Operations Command and the Smithsonian Cultural Rescue Initiative to dev elop 
training for U.S. Army Reserve Civil Affairs Soldiers.82 The Greek Hellenic 
Multinational Peace Support Operations Training Center  has also provided a course 
for NATO -member country participants on CPP co -organized with OSCE.83 
Furthermore, Poland estab lished an  International Centre for Training and Research 
                                                      
77  Response on the questionnaire  
78  Smuggling and illegal trade in art and cultural property focus of OSCE -supported training 
course in Bosnia and Herzegovina. OSCE, 29 July 2019. https://www.osce.org/mission -to-
bosnia-and-herzegovina/426794  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
79  Brochure on the protection of cultural property (in Bosnia and Herzegovina); OSCE Polis. 
21 April 2021. https://polis.osce.org/brochure -protection -cultural -property -bosnia -and-
herzegovina  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
80  Resolution on Protection of cultural property in the OSCE area. Parliamentary Assembly, 
2014.  
81  NATO Bi -Strategic Command Directive 086-005 op. cit.  
82  Military Training. Smithsonian Cultural Rescue Initiative. 
https://culturalrescue.si.edu/what -we-do/resilience/military -training/  (downloaded 01 
Augu st 2021)  
83  Cultural Property Protection (CPP) Pilot Coursse; Hellenic Multinational Peace Support 
Operations Training Center. https://mpsotc.army.gr/en/cultural -proper ty-protection -cpp-
pilot-course  (downloaded 01 August 2021)  181 on Culture Heritage in Danger operating from 2020 with the aim of providing training 
for civilian and military personnel on CPP.84 
 
In the case of EU, the 2021 Council Conclusions – in a spirit of mul ti-
stakeholderism – emphasize the need from the part of the Member States to increase 
collaboration between competent ministries, regional and local authorities, actors of 
civil society and of the academic world, but also with relevant international, regio nal, 
intergovernmental and non -governmental organizations, and the importance of 
collection and sharing of best practices in relating initiatives.85 In the field of 
preventing of and combating against illicit trade of cultural goods, there exists certain 
legislative acts to provide unified regulations at an EU level as regards the export of 
cultural goods outside the customs territory of the EU86, the ensuring of uniform 
control on certain imports,87 or the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from 
the territory of a Member State.88 
 
The CoE’s Nicosia Convention sets a number of provisions for its State Parties 
that shall be introduced in national criminal law. Chapter II enumerates the relevant 
offences that shall be criminalized by domestic legal syst ems (theft and other forms 
of unlawful appropriation, unlawful excavation and removal, illegal importation and 
exportation of movable CP, or the acquisition, placing on the market of these objects, 
falsification of documents, and the destruction or damagin g of movable or immovable 
CP or the unlawful removal of any elements from them with a goal of impartation, 
exportation or placing on the market). Chapter III sets out the need to ensure that 
persons and services responsible for the investigation shall be s pecialised in this field 
or trained for this purpose. The provisions of the convention also encourage stronger 
cooperation among State Parties. Chapter IV sets out the preventive and other 
administrative measures to be taken at a national level, amongst ot hers the 
development of inventories or databases, introduction of import and export control 
measures, enabling of the monitoring and reporting of suspicious dealings on the 
internet and providing and adequate institutional framework for the coordination of  
CPP-related tasks.89 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
84  Międzynarodowy Ośrodek Szkoleń i Badań nad Dziedzictwem Kultury w Zagrożeniu – 
wspólna inicjatywa MKiDN i MON; Ministerstwo Kultury, Dziedzictwa Narodowego i 
Sportu . https://www.gov.pl/web/kulturaisport/miedzynarodowy -osrodek -szkolen -i-badan -
nad-dziedzictwem -kultury -w-zagrozeniu -wspolna -inicjatywa -mkidn -i-mon (downloaded 
01 August 2021)  
85  Council Conclusions on EU Approach to Cultural Heritage in conflicts and crises. op. cit.  
86  Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods  
87  Regulation (EU) 2019/880 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 
regarding the treatment of non -EU cultural goods entering the customs territory of the 
Union.  
88  Directive 2014/60/EU o f the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on 
the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State and 
amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012  
89  Council of Europe Convention on Offences relating to Cultural  Property. op. cit.  182 Conclusion  
 
We can see a rise in the commitment and the instruments from the second half 
of the 2010s, in line with the large -scale destructions in the territories of Iraq and Syria 
and in Mali, drawing the attention of the international community to the issue These 
events have gradually led to the recognition of the strategic role of CP in contemporary 
armed conflicts and of the strong interrelation of CPP with international security and 
humanitarian issues. The paper aimed to give a panorama of policies and practices  of 
the four examined organizations in relation to CPP, however, a deeper analysis would 
be needed to be able to provide an all -encompassing description of all the related 
instruments in this regard.  
 
Although the organizations are not signatories of the international legal 
instruments that serve the basis of CPP in conflict or crisis situations (ex. 1954 Hague 
Convention and its Protocols or the 1977 Protocols of the Geneva Convention), the 
personnel acting on their behalf have an obligation to comply wit h relevant legal 
provisions, furthermore, the organizations through their external activities can provide 
support for host nations to abide by the relevant international law.  
 
Recognizing the cross -cutting nature of CPP and its complementary role to reach 
wider goals in crisis management, two of the examined organizations (NATO, EU) 
have already established a comprehensive strategic document towards CPP aiming to 
widely integrate its aspects in their activities: the NATO released a bi -strategic 
command dire ctive in 2019 and further efforts are being made for streamlining CPP 
in its missions and operations. The EU – by recently adopting its Council Conclusions 
on cultural heritage protection in conflicts and crises – aims to strengthen the role of 
this issue in its external actions, providing also an institutional and financial 
background for the realizations of its goals. The Nicosia Convention elaborated by 
CoE is a unique international instrument to enhance the investigation and prosecution 
of offences agai nst either movable or immovable CP. In the case of OSCE, there is no 
dedicated strategic document or framework regulation on CPP in place, but in 
practice, efforts have been made in broadening the outreach of the organization on 
capacity building and aware ness-raising in CPP especially as regards the combat 
against illicit trafficking.  
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 13573/20. Council Conclusions on EU Peace Mediation of 7 December 2020.  
 2019/C 192/04. Council conclusions on an EU strategic approach to 
international cult ural relations and a framework for action  
 9837/21. Council Conclusions on EU Approach to Cultural Heritage in conflicts 
and crises.  
 9962/21. Concept on Cultural heritage in conflicts and crises. A component for 
peace and security in European Union’s exter nal action. 19 April 2021.  183  BERENDS , Jolien: Cultural Property Protection Makes Sense. A Way To Improve 
Your Mission; Second edition. Civil -Military Cooperation Centre of Excellence 
(CCOE) 2020. p. 59.  
 Brochure on the protection of cultural property (in Bosnia and Herzegovina); 
OSCE Polis. 21 April 2021. https://polis.osce.org/brochure -protection -cultural -
property -bosnia -and-herzegovina  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Chart of signatures and ratifications of Treaty 221; 
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full -list/-
/conventions/treaty/221/signatures?module=signatures -by-
treaty&treatynum=221  (downloaded 01 August 2021)  
 CIMIC Handbook; Chapter VII, 7.6. https://www.handb ook.cimic -coe.org/  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 COM605 final; Communication from the Commission on the EU Security Union 
Strategy. 2020  
 Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage for Society. Council of Europe, 
Culture and Cultural heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-
heritage/faro -convention  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of 
cultural goods  
 Cultural heritage. European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement, 
Council of Europe. https://www.coe.int/en/web/europarisks/cultural -heritage1  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Cultural  Property Protection (CPP) Pilot Coursse; Hellenic Multinational Peace 
Support Operations Training Center. https://mpsotc.army.gr/en/cultural -
property -protection -cpp-pilot-course  (downloaded 01 August 2021)  
 Cultural Property Protection (CPP). A CCOE Fact Sheet. CIMIC Centre of 
Excellence. https://www.cimic -coe.org/resources/fact -sheet s/fact -sheet -cpp-
2020.pdf  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Cultural Property Protection; NATO 
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_166114.htm  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
 Directive 2014/60/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 
2014 on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of 
a Member State and amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012  
 Document 12012M/TXT. Consolidated version of the Treaty on Euro pean 
Union  
 EEAS (2017) 977 REV 2. Issues Paper – Preservation and Protection of Cultural 
Heritage in CSDP Missions and Operations; Working document of the European 
External Action Service.  
 EU/CoE support to the promotion of cultural diversity in Kosovo; Co uncil of 
Europe, Culture and Cultural heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-
heritage/kosovo  (downloaded 01 August 2021)  184  European Commission welcomes the endorsement of the ne w €79.5 billion 
NDICI -Global Europe instrument to support EU's external action. European 
Commission. 19 March 2021. 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21 _1267  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Explanatory Report to the Council of Europe Convention on Offences relating 
to Cultural Property; Nicosia, 19.V.2017.  
 FINCHAM , Derek: The Blood Antiquities Convention as a paradigm for cultural 
property crime reduction; Cardozo Arts & Entertainment , 2019/2. pp. 299 -336. 
 FOLLIANT , Yvette maj.: Cultural Property Protection Makes Sense. A Way to 
Improve Your Mission;  Civil -Military Cooperation Centre of Excellence 
(CCOE), The Hague, The Netherlands, 2015. 
https://nllp.jallc.nato.int/iks/sharing%20public/cpp -makes -sense -final-version -
29-10-15.pdf  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Human Security. NATO. 
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_181779.htm  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
 Instrument contributing to Stability and Peace. Report. European Commission. 
https://icspmap.eu/pdf/?format  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 JOIN (2016) 29 final; Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the 
Council. Towards an EU strategy for international cultural relations.  
 JUNCOS , Ana E.: Beyond civilian power? Civilian CSDP two decades on; In: 
FIOTT, Daniel: The EU’s legacy and ambition in security and defence; EU 
Institute for Security Studies, 2020. pp. 74 -87. 
 MC.DOC/1/16. OSCE Ministerial Council: Declaration on Strengthening OSCE 
efforts to prevent and counter terrorism; 9 December 2016.  
 MERRYMAN , John Henry: Two Ways of Thinking About Cultural Property; The 
American Journal of International Law , Oct., 1986/4. pp. 831 -853. 
 Międzynarodowy Ośrodek Szkoleń i Badań nad Dziedzictwe m Kultury w 
Zagrożeniu – wspólna inicjatywa MKiDN i MON; Ministerstwo Kultury, 
Dziedzictwa Narodowego i Sportu . 
https://www.gov.pl/web/kulturaisport/miedzynarodowy -osrodek -szkolen -i-
badan -nad-dziedzictwem -kultury -w-zagrozeniu -wspolna -inicjatywa -mkidn -i-
mon (downloaded 0 1 August 2021)  
 Military Training. Smithsonian Cultural Rescue Initiative. 
https://culturalrescue.si.edu/what -we-do/resilience/military -training/  
(downloaded 01 August 2021)  
 MOLNÁR , Ann a: Az Európai Unió – a biztonsági közösségtől a kollektív 
védelemig terjedő folyamat; In: MOLNÁR , Anna – MARSAI , Viktor – WAGNER , 
Péter (Eds.): Nemzetközi biztonsági szervezetek; Dialóg Campus, 2019. pp. 81 -
98. 185  NATO & BSI sign Letter of Intent for CPP; Blu e Shield International. 
https://theblueshield.org/nato -and-blue-shield -sign-letter -of-intent -for-cpp/ 
(downloaded 01 August 2021)  
 NATO Bi -Strategic Command Direct ive 086 -005 on Implementing Cultural 
Property Protection in NATO Operations and Missions; 1 April 2019.  
 NATO’s role in Kosovo; NATO. 
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natolive/topics_48818.htm  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
 North Atlantic Treaty, Washington D. C., 4 April 2019.  
 Offences relating to Cultural Property; Council of Europe, Culture and Cultural 
heritage. https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/cultural -property  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 OSCE and Cyprus police organize international seminar on combating 
trafficking of cultural property and antiquities; 2 November 2017. OSCE. 
https://www.osce.org/secretariat/354326  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 OSCE and UNODC sign new 2018 -2019 joint action plan. 31 January 2018. 
OSCE. https://www.osce.org /secretary -general/368856  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
 PARKES , Roderick dr. – PIETZ, Tobias: CSDP Missions and the Protection of 
Cultural Heritage. Lessons from EUAM Iraq and the Way Forward;  Workshop 
Note. DGAP – ZIF, 17 November 2020. 
https://dgap.org/sites/default/files/article_pdfs/zif_dgap_workshop -
note_protection_of_cultural_heritage_oct_2020.pdf  (downloaded 23 July 
2021)  
 Post-Conflict Actions for the Social and Economic Revitalisation of the 
Communities and the Cultural Environment in the Municipality of Gori 
(PIAG). Council of Europe, Culture and Cultural heritage. 
https://www.coe.int/en/web/culture -and-heritage/piag  (downloaded 01 August 
2021)  
 Regulation (EU) 2019/880 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 
April 2019 regarding the treatment of non -EU cultural goods entering the 
customs territory of the Union.  
 REMEK , Éva: A Európai Biztonsági és Együttműködési Szervezet – kooperatív 
biztonság; In: MOLNÁR , Anna – MARSAI , Viktor – WAGNER , Péter (Eds.): 
Nemzetközi biztonsági szervezetek; Dialóg Campus, 2019. pp. 99 -114. 
 Resolution on Protect ion of cultural property in the OSCE area. OSCE 
Parliamentary Assembly, 2014.  
 Resolution on Protection of cultural property in the OSCE area. Parliamentary 
Assembly, 2014.  
 ROSÉN , Frederik Dr.: NATO and Cultural Property. Embracing New Challenges 
in the Era  of Identity Wars;  Report of the NATO SPS Project Best Practices for 
Cultural Property Protection in NATO -led Military Operations. CHAC, 2017.  186  Round -table discussion at the Permanent Representation entitled “Cultural 
Heritage, as a new component for peace and security in the EU’s external 
action”. Permanent Representation of Hungary to the EU. https://eu -
brusszel.mfa.gov.hu/eng/news/round -table -discussion -at-the-permament -
representation -entitled -cultural -heritage -as-a-new-component -for-peace -and-
security -in-the-eus-external -action  (downloaded 01 August 20 21) 
 Smuggling and illegal trade in art and cultural property focus of OSCE -
supported training course in Bosnia and Herzegovina. OSCE, 29 July 2019. 
https://www.osce.org/mission -to-bosnia -and-herzegovina/426794  (downloaded 
23 July 2021)  
 The Casket of our History – EUAM Iraq fights illegal trade in cultural goods. 
Delegation of the European Union to the Dominican Republic. 27 November 
2019. https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/dominican -republic/71130/casket -our-
history -%E2%80%93 -euam -iraq-fights -illegal -trade -cultural -goods_lt  
(downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 UNESCO’s Cooperation with the European Union to Fight Illicit Trafficking of 
Cultural Property. UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/fighttraff icking/eu -
cooperation  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 Workshop on combating illicit cross -border trafficking in cultural property in 
the region of the OSCE Asian partners held in Mongolia. 2 September 2019. 
https://www.osce.org/secretariat/428906  (downloaded 23 July 2021)  
 
 187 GRÉTA VANESSZA VÁRADI   
THE ASPIRATIONS OF T HE HUNGARIAN DEFENCE  FORCES’ – 
MILITARY DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME IN 2020   
 
 
Abstract  
 
The most comprehensive development program of the last quarter of a century 
is the Zrínyi Defence and Military Development Program. The purpose of the study 
is to present last year's military procurements and aspirations as well as review the 
new organizat ional units of the Hungarian Defence Forces. In respect of the military 
equipment, last year the Hungarian Defence Forces carried out several procurements 
which means the foundation stone of modernization. Thanks to the overall 
modernization and the procur ements so far, the carrying capacity has been re -
established, the rotary -wing capability has been reconstructed, the country has 
regained its protective ability and the country's defence capability is constantly 
improving so it can increasingly contribute to the Euro -Atlantic security and the 
maintenance of European peace.  
 
Keywords:  Hungary, Defence and Military Development Program, 
modernization, military equipments  
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
The most comprehensive development program of the last quarter of a centu ry 
is the Zrínyi 2026 Defence and Military Development Program published in the 
1298/2017. (VI.2.) government decree.1 The development of the Hungarian defence 
industry is highly important, nevertheless the Hungarian Defence Ministry places a 
strong emphas is on the innovations and modernization of military technology, the 
preparation of human resources, providing reinforcements, scheduled salary increase 
and the social recognition of soldiers.2 During the process of developing the Zrínyi 
Defence and Militar y Development Program the main task was to create such defence 
forces that are ready to face the security challenges of the present and future.3 Since 
the launch of the Military Development Program in 2017, in the last 4 years, the 
renewal of Hungarian Def ence Forces has been carried out according to plan. During 
the session of the Parliament’s National Security Committee in October 2020 the 
                                                      
1  1298/2017. (VI.2.) Korm. határozat a Zrínyi 2026 Honvédelmi és Haderőfejlesztési 
Program megvalósításáról; 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=A17H1298.KOR&txtreferer=00000001.TXT  
(downloaded 21 September 2020)  
2  Parlament.hu: Honvédelmi Minisztérium, 
https://www.parlament.hu/irom 41/00503/adatok/fejezetek/13.pdf , p. 3. (downloaded 21 
September 2020)  
3  2026 -ra a térség meghatározó haderejévé kell tenni a Magyar Honvédséget, 2017. 
https://www.kormany.hu/hu/honvedelmi -miniszterium/hirek/2026 -ra-a-terseg -
meghatarozo -haderejeve -kell-tenni -a-magyar -honvedseget  (downloaded 21 September 
2020)  188 Hungarian Minister of Defence, Tibor Benkő said that the results attained by the 
program can ensure that Hungary beco mes one of the decisive military forces of the 
region. Given the right amount of subsidy the program is constantly expanding, so the 
name “Zrínyi 2026” cannot be considered adequate any longer. Besides the first stage, 
(until 2026) the planning of the seco nd stage has already started, the implementation 
of which is estimated between 2030 -2032.4 
 
The present study summarises the most substantial goals of 2020 and their 
implementation. In respect of the military equipment, last year the Hungarian Defence 
Forces carried out several procurements which means the foundation stone of 
modernization. 216 billion HUF, 30% of the 616 billion HUF overall defence budget 
was invested in the improvement of the Hungarian Defence Forces.5 This not only 
made possible the procurement of modern equipment and tools, but also had a positive 
impact on the ratio of defence spending to GDP. Thanks to the increasing tendency, 
the country may reach this year the 1,66%, which is getting closer and closer to the 
2% specified by the N ATO. According to the government’s budgetary proposal for 
2021, the amount of defence spending increased with 162 billion HUF, 25 -30% of 
which was spent on further developments.6 
 
 
Innovations of military technology in 2020  
 
The Hungarian Minister of Defence, Tibor Benkő expounded at the annual 
progress and task allocating conference for 2020: “we need modern, fighting fit, well 
prepared defence forces which consist of soldiers loyal to their country to ensure 
Hungary’s and th e Hungarian citizens’ security.”7  
 
It is worth analysing last year on several aspects. It is the soldiers who are in the 
centre of the Military Development Program, since the aim is to create a military 
career program, but the procurement of the military equipment is also treated as a 
priority. According to the government’s current plans the sum aimed to improve the 
Hungarian Defence Forces could exceed the 3500 billion HUF by 2026.8 During the 
course of last year, the procurement of the Leopard 2A4 tanks,  the Lynx infantry 
fighting vehicles, the Airbus H145M light multi -role helicopters, the ZLIN trainer 
                                                      
4  MH/MTI: Benkő: Ütemterv szerint halad a haderőfejlesz tés, 2020. 
https://www.magyarhirlap.hu/belfold/20201027 -benko -utemterv -szerint -halad -a-haderofejlesztes  
(downloaded 05 May 2021)  
5  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: R ekordnagyságú lesz a honvédelmi költségvetés 2020 -ban, 2019. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/rekordnagysagu -lesz-a-honvedelmi -koltse gvetes -2020-
ban.html  (downloaded 22 September 2020)  
6  Folytatódnak a honvédelmi fejlesztések, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -
hirek/folytatodnak -a-honvedelmi -fejlesztesek.html  (downloaded 22 September 2020)  
7  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Magyarország biztonsági környezete szabja meg a feladatokat, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/magyarorszag -biztonsagi -kornyezete -szabja -meg-a-
feladatokat.html  (downloaded 12 October 2020)  
8  Zrínyi 2026, A haza védelmében, pp. 4. http://www.katona -suli.hu/img/zrinyi2026_190_190.pdf  
(downloaded 22 September 2020)  189 aircrafts, the NASAMS surface -to-air missile system and the 3D radar system all show 
that the procurement of the most modern military equipment is going o n.9 
 
 
The military technology improvement of the ground forces in 2020  
 
Last year, one of the most substantial aspects of the program was an innovation 
of the ground forces, the deployment of the Leopard 2A4 “trainer” tanks, for the 
procurement of which an  agreement was signed between the Hungarian Defence 
Forces and the German Krauss -Maffei Wegmann factory in 2018. The Hungarian 
Defence Forces leased 12 tanks altogether from the German manufacturer, the 
delivery of which was continuous between June and Dec ember. The first 4 tanks 
arrived on 22nd July 2020 in MH 25. Brigade Klapka György of Tata with a Hungarian 
ensign. In spite of the pandemic situation, the first leased pieces of the Leopard 2A4 
tanks were transported on time by the German factory and thus , with the help of 
Austria, the training and re -training of the staff could be started in time.10 After the 
arrival of the 4 tanks, further 2 tanks arrived on 8th September, 29th October, 24th 
November 2020. After the November shipment, finally on 1st Decem ber the last 2 
pieces arrived at the establishment, thus enough military equipment to implement the 
adequate training with tanks.11 After the arrival of the last tanks, last December a live 
fire training was held with them on the shooting range of Szomód.12  
 
 
Figure 1: Leopard 2A4 tanks in Tata13 
                                                      
9  MTI: Vegyesvállalatot alapít gyalogsági harcjárművek gyártására egy német céggel 
Magyarország, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/vegyesvallalatot -alapit -gyalogsagi -
harcjarmuvek -gyartasara -egy-nemet -ceggel -magyarorszag.html  (downloaded  11 February 2021)  
10  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Négy csúcsragadozó érkezett a tatai dandárhoz, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/negy -csucsragadozo -erkezett -a-tatai-
dandarhoz.html  (downloaded 21 September 2020)  
11  Teljes a „létszám”, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/teljes -a-letszam.html  (downloaded 
12 February 2021)  
12  ANTAL , Ferenc: Megtörtént az utolsó két Leopard harckocsi belövése is, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/megtortent -az-utolso -ket-leopard -harckocsi -belovese -is.html  
(downloaded 04 February 2021)  
13  Source: https://www.portfolio.hu/global/20201203/megerkezett -tatara -mind -a-12-leopard -
2a4-harckocsi -460280#  (downloaded 03 February 2021)  
190 The tanks “are armoured vehicles with great firepower and quick 
manoeuvrability,”  said Ferenc Korom14, that time  commander of the Hungarian 
Defence Forces.  They have such innovations as the fire conductor and choke system, 
titanium tower armour, laser target finder, gun stabilizer and the night -vision optics. 
The top speed of these 55 -ton-tanks can even reach the 68km/h.15 New technology 
needs new storage conditions, for the sake of which new hangars were delivered. T he 
hangar created last October provides modern storage conditions and besides being 
covered, it is also lockable.16  
 
Besides the consolidation of the ground forces, the other aim was to modernize 
the military technology, the process of which was initiated by the procurement of the 
Leopard 2A4 tanks, however, these new “top predators” in fact represent only a 
transition between the T -72 “old warriors” and the 44 pieces of high -tech Leopard 
2A7+17 tanks, the delivery of which is estimated between 2023 and 2025 . According 
to the commander of the Hungarian Defence Forces the arrival of the Leopards means 
an epoch -changing event and it is to be considered as the most important stage of last 
year’s procurements.18  
 
Besides the Leopard tanks, the so -called Lynx infa ntry fighting vehicle (IFV)  
are also last year’s predominant equipment. The Hungarian State concluded a contract 
and founded a joint venture with the German Rheinmetall company, thanks to which 
the production of the Lynx IFV can commence in Hungary too, at  the same time a 
more than 2 billion euro worth of program was launched, thus Hungary is the first EU 
and NATO member state, which decided on the procurement of the Lynx IFV.19 
Hungary is going to produce more than half of the 218 pieces of Lynx KF41 IFV (172 
pieces) in the factory of Zalaegerszeg.20 The foundation stone of the factory was laid 
on 17th December 2020, thereby one of last year’s most important investment was 
                                                      
14  MTI: Korom Ferenc vezérezredes: átmenetet jelentenek a most érkezett új harckocsik, 
2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/korom -ferenc -vezerezredes -atmenetet -
jelentenek -a-most -erkezett -uj-harckocsik.html  (downloaded 22 September 2020)  
15  ERDŐS , Norton: Harckocsikkal megpakolt katonai konvojra kell számítani a hazai utakon, 
2020. https://www.vezess.hu/vezetunk/2020/09/07/harckocsikonvojra -kell-szamitani -a-
hazai -utakon/  (downloaded 10 December 2020)  
16  SNOJ, Péter: Leopar dok korszerű hangárban, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/leopardok -korszeru -hangarban.html  (downloaded 01 
February 2021)  
17  SNOJ, Péter: Bemutatkoztak az első magyar felségjelzé sű Leopardok, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/bemutatkoztak -az-elso-magyar -felsegjelzesu -
leopardok.html  (downloaded 12 October 2 020) 
18  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Négy csúcsragadozó érkezett a tatai dandárhoz, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/negy -csucsragadozo -erkezett -a-tatai-
dandarhoz.html  (downloaded 21 September 2020)  
19  BARANYAI , Gábor: Hiúzokkal erősít a Magyar Honvédség, 2020. 
https://magyarnemzet.hu/belfold/hiuzokkal -erosit -a-magyar -honvedseg -8541843/  
(downloaded 13 May 2021)  
20  TRAUTMANN , Balázs: Lynx: magyar gyártás, magyar fejlesztés, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/lynx -magyar -gyartas -magyar -fejlesztes.html  (downloaded 12 
October 2020)  191 commenced and as a result of this Hungary got closer to its commitment made to the 
NATO  that it would restore its ground forces.21 
 
 
Figure 2: Lynx infantry fighting vehicle22 
 
 
Innovations in the Air Force  
 
This year was not only of great importance for the ground forces, Hungary’s air 
force and air defence also went through important changes. In the framework of a new 
airplane procurement of the Hungarian Defence Forces, the Airbus H145M multi -role 
helicopter and the ZLIN engine powered trainer aircraft were procured. As to the 
procurement of the total number of 20 pieces of Airbus H14 5 helicopters, 7 pieces are 
already used by the Hungarian Defence Forces, since the procurement of the 
helicopters already began at the end of 2019 – the first 4 pieces arrived in Hungary, 
at the 86. helicopter base of Szolnok23 of the Hungarian Defence For ces in November 
and December 2019 – however, one is not to forget about last year’s procurements 
either. Last year 9 helicopters arrived altogether – this year further 4 pieces will arrive 
of the same type whose arrival can be regarded pretty continuous. W ith a few months’ 
time difference the 8th and the 9th helicopters also arrived (July 2020)24, then the next 
two landed in Szolnok for the first time in October 2020. With these 11 helicopters, 
half the number of the complete fleet has been reached.25 This nu mber was increased 
in November with further 2 pieces, then other 3 helicopters landed on the base in 
                                                      
21  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Hadiipari üzem épül Zalaegerszegen, 2020. 
https://honvede lem.hu/hirek/lynx -megkezdodott -az-epitkezes.html  (downloaded 10 
February 2021)  
22  Source: https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/lynx -megkezdodott -az-epitkezes.html  (downloaded 
03 Februar y 2021)  
23  Új helikoptertípus, új évtized, új korszak – Rendszerbe áll a H145M, 2020. 
https://harcihelikopter.blog.hu/2020/01/02/uj _helikoptertipus_uj_evtized_uj_korszak_ren
dszerbe_all_a_h -145m  (downloaded 12 October 2020)  
24  SNOJ, Péter: Újabb két H145M helikopter érkezett, 2020. 
https:// honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/ujabb -ket-h145m -helikopter -erkezett.html  
(downloaded 30 January 2021)  
25  Újabb két Airbus helikopter érkezett, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu /hirek/ujabb -ket-airbus -
helikopter -erkezett.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
192 December. Thus, the number of helicopters with a Hungarian ensign reached 16 by 
the end of 2020. Besides the continuous arrival of equipment, the re -traini ng of pilots 
also started in Donauwörth, Germany. At the end of last year colonel Tamás Bali, the 
deputy commander of the helicopter base reported that 24 pilots have been re -trained, 
20 of whom already have licences.26 
 
If we take a closer look at the cons truction of the helicopters, we might notice 
that fundamentally they have a homogenous construction, however, they will have the 
following equipment later on: 10 pieces of light transport helicopters, 5 pieces of 
search and rescue helicopters and 5 pieces of fire support helicopters.27 
 
 
Figure 3: Airbus H145M helicopters arrived in Hungary28 
  
 
Besides the rotary wing procurements, the procurement of the ZLIN trainers 
continued last year. The corps already had from this kind of trainers, since 2 pieces 
arrived in 2017 and 2018 as well – in 2018 further 2 –, which provide a more advanced 
technology instead of the old -fashioned JAK -52 type of airplanes. During the course 
of last year 4 airplanes joined the current fleet, so their increased to 8.29 Major gen eral 
Nándor Kilián, the military observer of the MHP air force, at the time of the 
demonstration of the ZLIN airplanes said that these aircrafts provide the basis of the 
pilots’ training as well as the selection of the navy crew. In his speech he said that  
                                                      
26  Újabb helikopterek érkeztek, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/ujabb -helikopterek -
erkeztek.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
27  Új helikoptertípus, új évtized, új korszak – Rendszerbe áll a H145M, 2020. 
https://harcihelikopter. blog.hu/2020/01/02/uj_helikoptertipus_uj_evtized_uj_korszak_ren
dszerbe_all_a_h -145m  (downloaded 12 October 2020)  
28  Source: https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/ujabb -ket-h145m -helikopter -
erkezett.html  (downloaded: 03 February 2021)  
29  BALOGH , Ákos: Három új ZLIN motoros kiképző repülőgép érkezett Szolnokra, 2020. 
https://www.szoljon.hu/kozelet/helyi -kozelet/harom -uj-zlin-motoros -kikepzo -repulogep -
erkezett -szolnokra -3105241/  (downloaded 30 J anuary 2021)  
193 “the airplane can fly for approximately 4,5 hours and can travel a distance of roughly 
1000 km.”30 
 
Besides the procurement of the rotary wing aircrafts and trainers, a contract was 
signed with the Embraer company to procure 2 Brazilian -made KC -390 Milleni um 
type millenary transport airplanes, thereby Hungary will be the third operator of these 
planes.31 After the withdrawal of the Antonovs, the cargo aircrafts, capable of air 
replenishment are very much needed, their arrival is estimated between 2023 and 
2024. Thanks to it, airlift capability could also get back to normal in Hungary by 
2024.32  
 
 
Air defence/airspace protection  
 
The procurement of the anti -aircraft missile system also met the requirements 
specified by the NATO.33 The contract regarding the purchase of the anti -aircraft 
missile systems was signed last November. The system developed by the Norwegian 
Kongsberg and the American Raytheon companies (Norwegian Advanced Surface to 
Air Missile System – NASAMS) is considered  as one of the most advanced 
short/medium -scale ground -based anti -aircraft missile systems in the world. This 
system will replace the current Russian KUB missile system which has been in 
military use for 4 decades. The system will not only guarantee the se curity of the 
Hungarian airspace, but also that of the NATO and the member states of the European 
Union.34 The system delivered to the MH 12. Arrabona Anti -Aircraft Missile System 
in Győr will be the newest type of NASAMS (NASAMS -3) that the Norwegian air 
force used for the first time in 2019. As a result, our country will the 6th NATO 
member state that uses this kind of weapon system.35 
                                                      
30  Töretlenül halad a légierő fejlesztése, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/toretlenul -halad -
a-legiero -fejlesztese.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
31  DRAVECZKI -URY, Ádám: A Magyar Honvédség pontosan tudja, mit kell venni; Interjú 
Maróth Gáspárral, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/a -magyar -honvedseg -pontosan -
tudja -mit-kell-venni.html  (downloaded 07 May 2021)  
32  DRAVECZKI -URY, Ádám: KC -390-es hadszíntéri szállító repülőgépeket vásárol a Magyar 
Honvédség, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/kc -390-es-hadszinteri -szallito -
repulogepeket -vasarol -a-magyar -honvedseg.html  (downloaded 01 February 2021)  
33  Európai viszonylatban is jelentős a magyar haderőfejlesztés, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/europai -viszonylatban -is-jelentos -a-magyar -
haderofejlesztes.html  (downloaded 10 February 2021)  
34  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Csúcstechnológia a légvédelem szolgálatában, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/csucstechnologia -a-legvedelem -szolgalataban.html  
(downloaded 01 February 202 1) 
35  TRAUTMANN , Balázs: NASAMS, a közös védőernyő, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/nasams -a-kozos -vedoernyo.html  (downloaded 11 February 
2021)  194  
Figure 4: Norwegian Advanced Surface to Air Missile System36 
 
 
Air defence is just as important as airspace protection. Fo r the sake of a complete 
air space security in the country, such a multi -functional 3D radar system is needed 
that covers the full territory of the country. The country would like to secure it by the 
contract regarding the procurement of an air space surve illance system signed on 11th 
December 2020.37 
 
If we take a look at last year in the aspect of the air force, then December of 2020 
was the most significant. We can call the final month of the last year the „happy 
month” of the air force, since during this  one month the contracts were signed 
regarding the air defence missile development, the transport aircrafts and the new 
radar system (NASAMS). It was this month when the last three pieces of the H145M 
helicopters also arrived.  
 
Figure 5 : The process of the procurement of the Leopard 2A4 tanks  
(Author’s own edition)  
                                                      
36  Source: https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/nasams -a-kozos -vedoernyo.html  (downloaded 03 
February 2021)  
37  Csúcstechnika a légtérvédelemért, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/csucstechnika -a-
legtervedelemert.html  (downloaded 10 February 2021)  
 Number  Date of arrival  
Leopard 2A4 tank  4 pc.  22 July 2020  
2 pc.  8 September 2020  
2 pc.  29 October 2020  
2 pc.  24 November 2020  
2 pc.  1 December 2020  
 
H145M helicopter  2 pc.  20 July 2020  
2 pc.  6 October 2020  
2 pc.  13 November 2020  
3 pc.  8 December 2020  
 
ZLIN trainer airplane  2 pc.  March 2017  
2 pc.  March 2018  
4 pc.  December 2020  
Total:  29 pieces  195 With the help of the table one can keep track of the process of the procurements 
and can also see how many pieces of military equipment arrived altogether at the 
Hungarian Defence Forces during the course of last year. Beyond the equipment that 
already arrived, a number of contracts have also been signed, based on which we  can 
establish that the Defence and Military Development Program affects the entire 
Hungarian Defence Forces.  
 
 
Other facts  
 
Besides the development of the ground and air forces, the structure of the 
Hungarian Defence Forces is also undergoing a constant development. Firstly, it 
deserves to be mentioned that on 1st August 2020 the Command Transformation of 
the Hungarian Defence forces was founded – the high responsibility of which is to 
train officers and junior officers – subordinated to the MH Academy of  Junior 
Officers, the MH Bakony Combat Training Centre, the MH Peace Support Training 
Centre and the Ludovika Battalion. According to Tibor Bozó, the commander of the 
Command Transformation, what is not a financial task in military development, but 
theoret ical and related to knowledge, can be considered as a transformational task.38 
Secondly, it can be stated that because of the newly established Material Supply 
Warehouse of the Hungarian Defence Forces, military logistics will also play a role 
in the 21. ce ntury. The function of the logistics warehouse base handed over in 
Szentkirályszabadja in December, last year is to support the Hungarian Defence 
Forces and the organizations of the Ministry of Defence both in peacetime and during 
the time of a special leg al order. The 21.000 square meter warehouse with a gallery 
shelving system and a headroom of 10 m can store more than 24.000 pallets.39 Thirdly, 
in the summer of 2020 in Szentes the MH 37. II. Rákóczi Ferenc Engineer Regiment 
Technical Support Battalion was  founded with assignments of military installation, 
road and camp building and technical rescue. Basically, the country can notice the 
importance of the battalion in a  specific legal order , however, their special features 
are used in peacetime too, during the renovation of barracks, for example. Besides all 
this, in Gyula, during the course of last year the construction of the factory or the 
Airbus also began, whose reinforced concrete structure was completed at the 
beginning of May this year. Gáspár Maróth  spoke confidently about the fact that in 
2022 the production is expected to begin and that with the completion of the factory 
Hungary can also participate in the Next Gen Medium Multi -Role Helicopter program 
announced by the European Union at the end of l ast year.40 Besides the factory in 
Gyula, the Hungarian State also made an agreement with the Rheinmetall group on 
the construction of an ammunition and explosives factory. The two parties made the 
agreement in December about the construction of the factory  to be built in the 
                                                      
38  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Új utakon, Transzformáció minden szinten, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hi rek/uj -utakon -10-19.html  (downloaded 03 February 2021)  
39  ÖRDÖG KOVÁCS , Márton: A 21. századba lépett a katonai logisztika, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/a -21-szazadba -lepett -a-katonai -logisztika.html  (downloaded 
03 February 2021)  
40  MOLNÁR , Szabina,  SOMKUTI , Bálint: Épül a gyulai Airbus -gyár, 2021. 
https://index.hu/gazdasag/2021/05/06/innovacios -es-technologiai -miniszterium -gyula -
airbus -gyar-kozlekedes/  (downloaded 11 May 2021)  196 surrounding area of Várpalota. The ammunition of a caliber of 30 mm and 1 20 mm 
will be made for the Lynx infantry fighting vehicles and the Leopard tanks.41 
 
 
Summary  
 
To summarise the facts, it can be said that the military equipment of  the 
Hungarian Defence Forces underwent and is undergoing a full -scale modernization. 
Thanks to the procurements so far, the transport capacity has got back to normal, the 
rotary wing capability has been rebuilt and the country has regained its protective 
capability.42 According to Gáspár Maróth, government commissioner responsible for 
defence development, “A complete modernization is going on regarding military 
equipment in the framework of the Defence and Military Development Program, 
which will affect all  branches of military equipment.”43 Thanks to the so far 
accomplished plans of the program, the Hungarian defence industry is constantly 
improving so Hungary can increasingly contribute to the Euro -Atlantic security and 
the maintenance of European peace. Ac cording to Tibor Benkő, the Hungarian 
Minister of Defence, “The Hungarian Defence Forces has now reached the adequate 
standard to join the 21st century with its devices.44 Besides the European Union, the 
positive changes have also been confirmed by the NATO  at the virtual meeting of the 
defence ministers in October 2020. After completing the current study and the survey 
I have conducted about last year I think it can be said that our country’s Defence and 
Military Development program is successful so far and  it is in accordance with the 
strategic purposes of the European Union and the NATO.45 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 1298/2017. (VI.2.) Korm. határozat a Zrínyi 2026 Honvédelmi és 
Haderőfejlesztési Program megvalósításáról; 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=A17H1298.KOR&txtreferer=00000001.
TXT  (downloaded 21 September 2020)  
 
 
                                                      
41  SZABÓ , Péter: Lőszer - és robbanóanyaggyár épülhet Várpalotán, 2020. 
https://varpalotaihircentrum.hu/loszer -es-robbanoanyaggyar -epulhet -varpalotan/  
(downloaded 15 February 2021)  
42  DRAVECZKI -URY, Ádám: „A Magyar Honvédség pontosan tudja, mit  kell venni” Interjú 
Maróth Gáspárral, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/a -magyar -honvedseg -pontosan -
tudja -mit-kell-venni.html  (downloaded 07 May 2021)  
43  Ibid.  
44  RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Négy csúcsragadozó érkezett a tatai dandárhoz, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/negy -csucsragadozo -erkezett -a-tatai-
dandarhoz.html  (downloaded 21 September 2020)  
45  Magyarország haderőfejlesztési programja sikeres és összhangban van a NATO céljaival, 
2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/magyarorszag -haderofejlesztesi -programja -sikeres -es-
osszhangban -van-a-nato-celjaival.html  (downloaded 11 May 2021)  197  2026 -ra a térség meghatározó haderejévé kell tenni a Magy ar Honvédséget, 
2017. https://www.kormany.hu/hu/honvedelmi -miniszterium/hirek/2026 -ra-a-
terseg -meghatarozo -hader ejeve -kell-tenni -a-magyar -honvedseget  (downloaded 
21 September 2020)  
 ANTAL , Ferenc: Megtörtént az utolsó két Leopard harckocsi belövése is, 2020. 
https: //honvedelem.hu/hirek/megtortent -az-utolso -ket-leopard -harckocsi -
belovese -is.html  (downloaded 04 February 2021)  
 BALOGH , Ákos: Három új ZLIN motoros kiképző repülőgép érkezett 
Szolnokra, 2020. https://www.szoljon.hu/kozelet/helyi -kozelet/harom -uj-zlin-
motoros -kikepzo -repulogep -erkezett -szolnokra -3105241/  (downloaded 30 
January 2021)  
 BARANYAI , Gábor: Hiúzokkal erősít a Magyar Honvéd ség, 2020. 
https://magyarnemzet.hu/belfold/hiuzokkal -erosit -a-magyar -honvedseg -
8541843/  (downloaded 13 May 2021)  
 Csúcstechnika a légtérvédelemért, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/csucstechnika -a-legtervedelemert.html  
(downloaded 10 February 2021)  
 DRAVECZKI -URY, Ádám: „A Magyar Honvédség pontosan tudja, mit kell 
venni” Interjú Maróth Gáspárral, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/a -magyar -
honvedseg -pontosan -tudja -mit-kell-venni.html  (downloaded 07 May 2021)  
 DRAVECZKI -URY, Ádám: KC -390-es had színtéri szállító repülőgépeket vásárol 
a Magyar Honvédség, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/kc -390-es-
hadszinteri -szallito -repulogepe ket-vasarol -a-magyar -honvedseg.html  
(downloaded 01 February 2021)  
 ERDŐS , Norton: Harckocsikkal megpakolt katonai konvojra kell számítani a 
hazai utakon, 2020. 
https://www.vezess.hu/vezetunk/2020/09/07/harckocsikonvojra -kell-szamitani -
a-hazai -utakon/  (downloaded 10 December 2020)  
 Európai viszonylatban is jelen tős a magyar haderőfejlesztés, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/europai -viszonylatban -is-jelentos -a-magyar -
haderofejlesztes.html  (downloaded 10 Fe bruary 2021)  
 Folytatódnak a honvédelmi fejlesztések, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/folytatodnak -a-honvedelmi -
fejlesztesek.html  (downloaded 2 2 September 2020)  
 Magyarország haderőfejlesztési programja sikeres és összhangban van a 
NATO céljaival, 2020. https://honv edelem.hu/hirek/magyarorszag -
haderofejlesztesi -programja -sikeres -es-osszhangban -van-a-nato-celjaival.html  
(downloaded 11 May 2021)  
 MTI: Vegyesvállalatot alapít gyalogsági harcjárművek gyártására egy német 
céggel Magyarország, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/vegyesvallalatot -
alapit -gyalogsagi -harcjarmuvek -gyartasara -egy-nemet -ceggel -
magyarorszag.html  (downloaded 11 Febru ary 2021)  198  MH/MTI: Benkő: Ütemterv szerint halad a haderőfejlesztés, 2020. 
https://www.magyarhirlap.hu/belfold/20201027 -benko -utemterv -szerint -halad -
a-haderofejlesztes  (downloaded 05 May 2021)  
 MOLNÁR , Szabina,  SOMKUTI , Bálint: Épül a gyulai Airbus -gyár, 2021. 
https://index.hu/gazd asag/2021/05/06/innovacios -es-technologiai -
miniszterium -gyula -airbus -gyar-kozlekedes/  (downloaded 11 May 2021)  
 MTI: Korom Ferenc vezérezredes: átmenetet jelentenek a most érkezett új 
harckocsik, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/korom -ferenc -
vezerezredes -atmenetet -jelentenek -a-most -erkezett -uj-harckocsik.html  
(downloaded 22 September 2020)  
 ÖRDÖG KOVÁCS , Márton : A 21. századba lépett a katonai logisztika, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/a -21-szazadba -lepett -a-katonai -logisztika.html  
(downloaded 03 February 2021)  
 Parlament.hu: Honvédelmi Minisztérium, pp. 3. 
https://www.parlament.hu/irom41/00503/adatok/fejezetek/13.pdf  (downloaded 
21 September 2020)  
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Csúcstechnológia a légvédelem szolgálatában, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/csucstechnologia -a-legvedelem -
szolgalataban.html  (downloaded 01 February 202 1) 
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Hadiipari üzem épül Zalaegerszegen, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/lynx -megkezdodott -az-epitkezes.html  
(downloaded 10 February 2021)  
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Magyarors zág biztonsági környezete szabja meg a feladatokat, 
2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/magyarorszag -biztonsagi -
kornyezete -szabja-meg-a-feladatokat.html  (downloaded 2020 -10-12) 
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Négy csúcsragadozó érkezett a tatai dandárhoz, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/ha zai-hirek/negy -csucsragadozo -erkezett -a-tatai-
dandarhoz.html  (downloaded 21 September 2020)  
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Rekordnagyságú lesz a honvédelmi költségvetés 2020 -ban, 
2019. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/rekordnagysagu -lesz-a-
honvedelmi -koltsegvetes -2020 -ban.html  (downloaded 22 September 2020)  
 RÉVÉSZ , Béla: Új utakon, Transzformáció minden szinten, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/uj -utakon -10-19.html  (downloaded 03 February 
2021)  
 SNOJ, Péter: Bemutatkoztak az első magyar felségjelzésű Leopardok, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/bemutatkoztak -az-elso-magyar -
felsegjelzesu -leopardok.html  (downloaded 12 October 2020)  
 SNOJ, Péter: Leopardok korszerű hangárban, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/leopardok -korszeru -hangarban.html  (downloaded 
01 February 2021)  199  SNOJ, Péter: Újabb két H145M helikopter érkezett, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/ujabb -ket-h145m -helikopter -
erkezett.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
 SZABÓ , Péter: Lőszer - és robbanóanyaggyár épülhet Várpalotán, 2020. 
https://varpalotaihircentrum.hu/loszer -es-robbanoanyaggyar -epulhet -
varpalotan/  (downloaded 15 February 2021)  
 Teljes a „létszám”, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/teljes -a-letszam.html  
(downloaded 12 February 2021)  
 Töretlenül halad a légierő fejlesztése, 2020. 
https://honvede lem.hu/hirek/toretlenul -halad -a-legiero -fejlesztese.html  
(downloaded 30 January 2021)  
 TRAUTMANN , Balázs: Lynx: magyar gyártás, magyar fejlesztés, 2020. 
https://honvedele m.hu/hirek/lynx -magyar -gyartas -magyar -fejlesztes.html  
(downloaded 12 October 2020)  
 TRAUTMANN , Balázs: NASAMS, a közös védőernyő, 2020. 
https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/nasams -a-kozos -vedo ernyo.html  (downloaded 11 
February 2021)  
 Újabb helikopterek érkeztek, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/ujabb -
helikopterek -erkeztek.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
 Újabb két Air bus helikopter érkezett, 2020. https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/ujabb -
ket-airbus -helikopter -erkezett.html  (downloaded 30 January 2021)  
 Új helikoptertípus, új évtized, új korsz ak – Rendszerbe áll a H145M, 2020. 
https://harcihelikopter.blog.hu/2020/01/02/uj_helikoptertipus_uj_evtized_uj_k
orszak_rendszerbe_al l_a_h -145m  (downloaded 12 October 2020)  
 Zrínyi 2026, A haza védelmében, pp. 4. http://www.katona -
suli.hu/img/zrinyi2026_190_190.pdf  (downloaded 22 September 2020)  
 https://www.portfolio.hu/global/20201203/megerkezett -tatara -mind -a-12-
leopard -2a4-harckocsi -460280#  (downloaded 03 February 2021)  
 https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/lynx -megkezdodott -az-epitkezes.html  
(downloaded 03 February 2021)  
 https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/hazai -hirek/ujabb -ket-h145m -helikopter -
erkezett.html  (downloaded 03 February 2021)  
 https://honvedelem.hu/hirek/nasams -a-kozos -vedoernyo.html  200 OLIVER ANDONOV  
POLITICAL -CULTURAL ASPECTS OF INFLUENCE ON THE 
ABOLITION OF THE MACEDONIAN NATION1  
 
 
Abstract  
 
In the modern developments in the Balkans, we are witnessing continuous 
political action in order to abolish the Macedonian nation. This process, which was 
intensified with the signing of the Agreement with Bulgaria in 2017 and with Greece 
in 2018, in addition to the political aspects, included the cultural aspects.  
This paper aims to make a brief overview of the con nection between the political and 
cultural aspects through which Bulgaria and Greece influence or more precisely lead 
the process of abolition of the Macedonian nation. In the light of these aspects, one 
should look at the contemporary attitudes of Bulgari a and Greece (certainly not 
alternately together) towards Macedonia and issues related to history, language and 
culture as basic features of the Macedonian nation.  
Through this paper we will make a scientific overview of current developments in 
political r elations between North Macedonia and Greece, North Macedonia and 
Bulgaria, but with special reference to cultural issues affecting the Macedonian nation 
with consequences for its abolition, but also with political consequences for the region 
in terms of it s destabilization, by moving similar processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
above all.  
The focus of the review will be primarily on the Macedonian -Bulgarian relations and 
the dispute over history and language, which basically has an identity -political 
signifi cance for the uniqueness of the Macedonian people and the creation of the 
Macedonian nation. Of course, the focus on North Macedonia's relations with 
Bulgaria is stimulated by the current developments in bilateral relations between the 
two countries and th e consequences of the signed "Good Neighbor Agreement", on 
the basis of which Bulgaria openly shows strength by threatening North Macedonia 
with veto of the start of negotiations for full membership in the European Union.  
Understanding this dispute motivat ed solely by Bulgaria's political and strategic 
motives is very important, especially for the scientific and academic public in Europe. 
The reason is that this is a socio -political construction as a unique phenomenon, but 
which can have extremely large pol itical -security consequences on other regions in 
Europe in the first place, and as an empirical result of this process related to North 
Macedonia and the Macedonian question that for two centuries Europe has no power 
to solve it. North Macedonia is still a  European country and the Balkans and North 
Macedonia as the root of the modern Christian European civilization are of great 
importance for Europe, its stability and future.  
 
Keywords:  Political aspects, cultural aspects, North Macedonia, Bulgaria, 
Greece,  Europe, history  
 
                                                      
1  The author doesn’t agree with some provisions of the Prespa Agreement but as a legal 
obligation he uses the new constitutional name of the country, North Macedonia throughout 
this paper. Nonetheless, „Macedonian” as an adjective like Macedonian nation, people, 
language etc. can freely be used acccording to the above mentioned agreement.  201 Introduction  
 
The achieved political goal of Greece and Bulgaria to politically -diplomatically 
break North Macedonia and to succeed in corrupting and politically and socially 
compromising the current Macedonian government, thus achieving the formal 
political goal called "changing the name of the state of (North) Macedonia", has 
become an accelerator for the con tinuation of their long -term strategic goal "abolition 
of the Macedonian nation and state".  
 
This strategic goal is simply not able to be achieved exclusively through the 
political aspect of the name change and constitutional changes through the formal 
naming of Macedonians as "citizens of the Republic of North Macedonia", which is 
an unnational and vague synonym. For its full realization, it is necessary to realize the 
second segment, which we consider to be more important than the purely political 
one, an d refers to the cultural aspects and characteristics of the Macedonian people. 
The nations, and thus the Macedonian nation, are not defined exclusively by the 
territory, the name of the state, the state system and the exercise of power. Above all, 
at the r oot of nations are cultural features - characteristics of the nation such as 
language, ethnography, folklore, tradition, culture and art and of course the common 
history and historical heritage that actually connects and shapes the nation by 
distinguishing  it from an ethnic group, a religious group. or another social group, and 
especially it is the common memory of a people.  
 
That is why the most important segments of the two agreements (with Bulgaria 
and Greece) are not the change of the name of the countr y, but the cultural 
consequences and the obligations undertaken in the agreements by the Macedonian 
government of Zoran Zaev. Those obligations refer to opening issues with neighbors 
for which there is no formula for a positive solution, ie they violate th e characteristics 
of the Macedonian nation. In this way, in practice, it becomes pointless to talk about 
cultural changes in the characteristics of the nation, and which characteristics were 
built over the centuries and led to the formation of the Macedoni an nation.  
 
This is where the question of defined history begins, which completely destroys 
the fabric of the nation. This process, which is taking place in front of the eyes of the 
world and in Europe itself, instigated by EU member states, is a cultural genocide 
against a nation and a culture, but its eventual realization does not go back to the 
beginning. It brings us back to the political strategic goals of Bulgaria and Greece, 
which is the abolition of the Macedonian nation and turning Macedonia into a n 
undefined territory with a geographical landmark "Northern", but without 
Macedonian people and politically defined nation, its cultural features and historical 
continuity as empiricism. and the collective memory through which the nation is 
created and ma intained dynamically.  
 
If we have in mind that in the agreement with Greece, Greece itself agreed to 
recognize the existence of the Macedonian language "as part of the group of Slavic 
languages, verified at the UN in 1974", it is not in the agreement with Bulgaria and 
here we have the use of terminology "The official languages of the two countries" or 
"the constitutional language". In conditions when the current government of North 
Macedonia, through the disputed Law on Languages on the entire territory of 
Macedonia introduced bilingualism, ie introduced Albanian as the second official 202 language, it is only a matter of time before that formulation in two official languages 
will be req uired to be included in the Constitution of North Macedonia, and as a 
political demand of the Albanian minority in North Macedonia. After this, the term 
"constitutional or official languages" will become extensible. Hence, one can see the 
depth of Bulgaria 's political strategy in relation to  North  Macedonia and that the issue 
of language as a political, above all identity -cultural feature is only one of the key 
instruments for the abolition of the Macedonian nation.  
 
When this is followed by the political t endency of Greece, which through the 
Prespa Agreement in 2018 managed to realize the distinction of continuity of the 
origin of the Macedonian nation from the Macedonian people as a historical process, 
and by creating discontinuity by appropriating the anc ient history of Macedonia as 
exclusively Greek (Hellenistic) which is certainly a big untruth, because the cultural 
heritage of North Macedonia is extremely multicultural and even in antiquity, then we 
are amazed by the steps of Bulgaria to take over medie val and modern Macedonian 
history as Bulgarian. This is the way to take away the historical -cultural aspect of the 
creation of the Macedonian nation through the collective history, memory, culture and 
language of the Macedonian people as by far the largest  in North Macedonia (about 
67% of the total population). Precisely for these reasons, the conduct of the census 
and especially the column for declaring the population by ethnicity on an ethnic basis 
is politically manipulated. In this way, the Macedonian n ation is abolished, but not 
only the Macedonian nation, but also the Macedonian people as a pillar and creator of 
the Macedonian nation, which means that on an immature simple political decision of 
a current political nomenclature in North Macedonia is cre ated a new  non-existent 
quasi nation in a territory called "North" Macedonia, which is not allowed to claim 
the right to historical, cultural and linguistic heritage, but is an undefined amorphous 
mass that has yet to be formed. In Bulgarian contemporary p olitical thought it is called 
"re-Bulgarianization of Macedonia", and this process in the area of Macedonia2 is 
known from the late 19th and early 20th century when Greece in the struggle to 
conquer territories, and with the help of the Constantinople Patr iarchate carried out a 
"re-Hellenization" of the Macedonian Christian population, in accordance with their 
"Megali Idea".  
 
The results of the processes around Macedonia as the last Ottoman province in 
Europe in the 19th and early 20th century were the Balk an Wars and the division of 
the territory of Macedonia. If at that time Europe was comforting and calming its 
conscience with the fact that Turkey was expelled from Europe, now in modern times, 
the games with North Macedonia, the tendencies to abolish the Macedonian nation 
and turn North Macedonia into an undefined territory with an amorphous mass of 
people, is a long -term Europe's political blindness, conformism and undemocracy, as 
well as disrespect for basic human rights and the right to self -determinati on. This 
inevitably leads to the opening of a crisis region which will include not only North 
Macedonia's neighbors, but also the wider region as well as global political actors. 
Consciously or unconsciously, Europe is pushing North Macedonia and the Balka ns 
to repeat history. It is as if both neighbors and Europe have forgotten how bloody the 
Balkan wars were.  
                                                      
2  The territory of Macedonia as a historical, geographical and ethno -cultural region includes 
Aegean Macedonia in today’s Greece and Pirin Macedonia in today’s Bulgaria besides the 
area of today’s North Macedonia or geographical name Vardar Macedonia  203 The political aspects of the influence, as well as the cultural influence and their 
consequences will be presented in the following text of the pape r. 
 
 
1. Political aspects of the influences for the abolition of the Macedonian 
nation  
 
The basic idea of political influence in order to abolish the Macedonian nation, 
and thus the Macedonian people as a bearer in the functioning of the nation is the 
historical annulment of "Macedonianism". The so -called "Macedonianism" is an 
inevitable historical and political process of the Macedonian people to create their 
own state and nation which is a positive process for the Macedonian people, while 
North Macedonia' s neighbors interpret it in a negative connotation, using countless 
historical half -truths and untruths. In fact, through the so -called destruction of 
Macedonianism, it is a matter of implementing in practice a reverse historical process, 
ie the Macedonian  people who in the last two centuries fighting for their national and 
church -spiritual independence and managed to create their own national state on 
August 2, 1944. It should now be brought back into a process of historical re -
examination and dismantling.  This process does not refer exclusively to the 
Macedonian statehood, but inevitably refers to the issue of the Macedonian Orthodox 
Church -Ohrid Archbishopric with a tendency to in the area of church autocephaly and 
spiritual freedom of the Macedonian peop le and their local church, the situation went 
back to 250 years, ie at the time of the abolition of the Ohrid Archbishopric. The 
Macedonian people, creating the Macedonian national state in practice laid the 
foundations of the phrase "Macedonia of the Mace donians" and the territory of 
Macedonia raised to the level of a nation -state at least a part of its geographical whole 
Macedonia, which with the Bucharest Peace Agreement in 1913 was completely 
unnaturally fragmented.  
 
If we know that nations created on t he principle of "nation -state" are composed 
of many different peoples, ethnic groups, religious or cultural minorities, but within 
which one nation is the bearer, then it is very clear that under the pressure of historical 
events Macedonian people, by shap ing their nationality and fighting for the autonomy 
and independence of Macedonia, managed to create the Macedonian nation and state. 
This historical process is natural and de facto and de jure was completed, and it shows 
all the features of the formation of the nation and its modern dynamics.  
 
The basic characteristic of the modern nation and everything related to it is its 
modernization 3.  
 
Therefore, we can say that the emergence of Macedonianism as a tendency to 
create a Macedonian nation and state is a process that took place for almost two 
centuries in specific historical circumstances and environment. That tendency in the 
relevant histor ical circumstances and the historical moment led to the formation of the 
Macedonian nation with all its attributes as an expression of Macedonianism in 
practice. At the same time, the national, historical, cultural, linguistic and 
ethnographic distancing o f the Macedonians from the neighboring nations is literally 
                                                      
3  WAEVER, Ole – BUZAN , Barry – KELSTRUP , Morten – LAMAITRE , Pierre: Identity, Migration 
and the new Security Agenda in Europe;  Printer Publishers, Ltd, London, 1993. p. 49.  204 realized, which achieves the political distancing represented by the formation of their 
own state as a political entity and international legal entity.  
 
Therefore, the basic political goal of the influence for the abolition of the 
Macedonian nation is the historical annulment of Macedonianism as a national 
platform. Within this goal, each of North Macedonia's neighbors plays its role of 
influence within th eir national strategies. This game of North Macedonia's neighbors 
is directly related to the consequences that will occur as a result of the return of 
historical processes and the possible re -reduction of North Macedonia to a territory 
without a leading pe ople and its own nation. That is why the question arises as to 
whether Europe has learned the historical lessons on the issue of North Macedonia 
and the Balkans, because it allowed the opening of the "Macedonian question" 70 
years later after its closure i n 1944 and the formation of the Macedonian state, and as 
a political interest first of Greece, awakened the appetites of all neighbors. In this way, 
Europe, through the institutions of the European Union, justifies and encourages abuse 
of the power that me mber states derive from the EU as a global actor. It is obvious 
that the Balkan countries see Macedonia as a potential territory for their political -
territorial and national expansion in some form and in the long run, but also as one of 
the key regional in terests in the implementation of their national strategies.  
 
The opening of the Macedonian question under the pretext of protecting 
geopolitical interests in the clash of global actors, primarily the United States and 
Russia, which inevitably takes place o n the territory of Europe, and there is no more 
suitable place for these games in the Balkans, is a political short -sightedness of 
Europe. which in its own backyard awakens and fuels a strong potential for conflict. 
If this conflict escalates, the situatio n will be even worse than in 1912 -1913, because 
the conflict will inevitably involve Albania, Kosovo, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Croatia, Bulgaria and of course Turkey and Greece.  
 
Realizing their chance for historical revisibility of the processes, G reece and 
Bulgaria, above all, set out towards the strategic destruction of Macedonianism, ie its 
presentation as a historical fabrication. In that context, both countries found 
themselves in the same positions of interest towards North Macedonia. Greece b y 
appropriating Macedonia historically giving Greek character and appropriating the 
name of the entire geographical territory of Macedonia, while Bulgaria appropriating 
the Macedonian people for Bulgarian, and presenting the Macedonian language as a 
dialec t of the Bulgarian language, as well as problematizing the events and 
personalities of the new  history of Macedonia. In this way, they help each other, 
because Greece gets the historical heritage of the name Macedonia, which historically 
"justifies" its vi olence and ethnic cleansing during the conquest of Macedonia a 
century ago, as Bulgaria shows the "Bulgarian" character of Macedonia based on the 
composition of the population and the cultural features and history. The historical 
potential of "Megali idea"  is visible in both concepts and the idea of "San Stefano 
Bulgaria",4 a potential that led to several horrific wars in the Balkans, precisely among 
these current "allies" in the European Union.  
                                                      
4  Great Bulgaria including the territory of Macedonia was created as a result of the Sa n 
Stefano Peace Treaty closing the Russian -Ottoman war in 1878 and abolished on the Berlin 
Congress by other great powers in the same year to avoid overwhelming Russian influence 
in the region. Bulgaria’s national goal was to re -establish this „San Stefano ’s Bulgaria 205 However, let us not forget that Serbia also has its own intere sts in North 
Macedonia and that is why already for more than 50 years has kept the "church 
question" open regarding the recognition of the Macedonian Orthodox Church -Ohrid 
Archbishopric. It is actually a political issue which Serbia keeps open so that they  can 
be an active player in relation to Macedonia, especially in the relations with Bulgaria 
and with Albania and their interests in Macedonia. Of course all the actors -neighbors 
of North Macedonia have one common goal, and that is the abolition of the 
Macedonian nation and the Macedonian people as the bearing people of the nation 
and the state of North Macedonia. That's the way for destruction of Macedonianism 
and turning North Macedonia into an undefined territory, amorphous mass of 
population. This tende ncy is not new, Macedonian revolutionaries and patriots have 
met it and fought against it in the 19th century, so the members of the "Secret 
Macedonian Committee" in Sofia in 1885: Naum Evro, Kosta Grupce, Vasil 
Karajovov and Temko Popov, who wrote in thei r native language - Macedonian, said: 
"The main thing is for Macedonia to become more Macedonian".   
 
Prompted by this situation around North Macedonia and the modern challenges 
of political - security aspect of regional security in Europe, within this pape r, through 
the prism of the analysis of the Bulgarian strategy we will be able to see the synergies 
of every neighbors' strategies. Especially the Greek and Bulgarian strategy towards 
North Macedonia, their abuse of membership in the European Union and the  European 
institutions, but also to see the concrete indicators of future conflict potential, 
precisely between the "allies", the neighbors of North Macedonia, regardless of 
whether they are members of the European Union or aspire to it, or NATO members 
just like North Macedonia.  
 
1.1. A look at the Bulgarian strategy towards North Macedonia  
 
In the context of the current developments in the relation North Macedonia - 
Bulgaria and the tendencies of  Bulgaria for influence on the abolition of the 
Macedonian n ation, we will consider the "Strategy for  Bulgaria's relations with the 
Republic of Macedonia"  by Ljubomir Ivanov, a study prepared in  Sofia in 20085. 
Considering the allegations and the strategic and operational political goals  exposed 
in this strategy we  will be able to understand why Bulgaria is pushing so hard towards  
realization of the cultural goals, ie the history, language and culture of the Macedonian  
people, with the main goal of destroying Macedonianism as a historical process 
realized i n appropr iate political -historical conditions.  
 
The strategic basis of the Bulgarian strategy is: "The Macedonian nation is 
invented and  the Macedonian doctrine is a product of Serbia and its geopolitical 
strategy in  the region".  
 
The explanation of this strategic basis given in the strategy itself is:  "The 
Macedonian nation and state were formed in the process of realization and evolution 
of the Serbian political construction, first published in 1889, supported by a solution 
                                                      
during three lost wars (Second Balkan War, First and Second World War). Date of San 
Stefano Treaty (3rd of March) is the National Day of Bulgaria.  
5  IVANOV , Lyubomir et al: Bulgarian Policies om the Republic of Macedonia;  Eirst Edition, 
Manfre d Worner Foundation, Sofia, 2008.  
 206 of The Communist International in Moscow  in 1934 and realized between 1944 and 
1991  year in the part of the historical -geographical region of Macedonia known as 
Vardar  Macedonia".6  
 
The accusations that the Macedonian nation is a Serbian concept are practical  
political phrase for calculating wi th Serbian interests in Macedonia, because it is a 
fact that when  part of Macedonia (present -day Republic of North Macedonia) was 
under the administration of the Kingdom of Serbia, o f The Kingdom of SHS and the 
Kingdom of Yugoslavia in the period from 1912  to 1941, with certain  interruptions in 
this territory called "Southern Serbia" or Vardar Banovina , Serbian hegemony  
dominated. The Macedonian people were not recognized, and in no way did a word 
came up for Macedonian nation, although in those state creat ions the Slovenian nation 
and the Croatian nation existed as an integral part of the state . Even today, in modern 
conditions the practical  behavior of the Serbian Orthodox Church or part of its clergy 
towards the Macedonian Orthodox Church -Ohrid Archbishopric is a relapse of this 
Greater Serbian policy.  
 
Basically, the approach of Bulgaria's strategy is much broader. It aims  to lead 
the reader or analyst to the conclusion that the Macedonian nation is artificial ly 
created and that it is part of th e Bulgarian nation, which is why "Macedonianism" 
should be  destroyed 7. The thesis was put forward that: "today's ethnic Macedonians, 
(non-Bulgarians) and the ethnic Bulgarians in the Republic of Macedonia are the 
same , that  there is no difference between them, and this is understand in a completely 
opposite sense and by all of them  some understand that they are all Macedonians or 
non-Bulgarians, while others bear in mind that they are all Bulgarians in some sense 
or at least in re -Bulgarianization process.  " 
 
The second phase of the process of destruction of the Macedonian nation is in 
fact "Re -Bulgarianization" of the Macedonian people and this is as clearly stated as 
we quoted, thus a more detailed explanation is not required. It is happening in Europe 
on the European political scene in regional and bilateral relations in the Balkans in the 
eyes of the European Union which through the European Parliament and the European 
Commission with various documents, and for short -sighted political goals sometimes 
support this "re -Bulgarianization". At the same time, Europe seems completely 
unaware for the consequences that will arise in the long run and escalate conflicts in 
the Balkans. First of all, the question is raised: "Will at some point if the Bulgarian 
strate gy for the re -Bulgarianization of North Macedonia "succeeds" in its realization, 
Greece will allow any form of enlargement, territorial or political domination of 
Bulgaria in the Balkans" ? How will react to that Serbia, Albania and Kosovo? The 
EU's capacit y to influence and control such an escalating conflict process, with the 
escalating potential like the one into Bosnia and Herzegovina is questionable.  
 
Details of operational political action in accordance with the objectives of the 
Bulgarian  strategy tow ards Macedonia are operationalized in the "strange" so -called 
"Agreement for good neighborliness” which precisely covers the areas of history, 
education and of course inevitably the Macedonian language.  
                                                      
6  Ibid, p . 33 
7  Ibid, part 1.1.3., p 37 . 207 "Termination of history education with textbooks that  completely falsify history 
and contain offensive qualifications for the Bulgarian state and nation, bordering on 
open racism. At the Bulgarian request, in the textbooks, officially approved by the 
competent authorities of the Republic of Macedonia to expl icitly emphasize the 
Bulgarian ethnicity (established by world historical science) of prominent figures 
from our general history as St. Clement of Ohrid, Tsar Samuel, brothers Miladinovci, 
Goce Delchev."8 
 
Here are in fact the disputed and unspoken Article s 8 and 11 of the "Agreement 
for good neighborliness "with Bulgaria, which was signed by the Macedonian 
government in 2017, and the consequences will be inconceivable on the further 
existence of the Macedonian nation and state, which in  context of the Mace donian 
language and culture will be explained later in the text.  
 
Analyzing Bulgaria's strategy towards North Macedonia, it is interesting to give 
a brief overview of the actions and implications for the other neighbors of North 
Macedonia, which is in fact  a perception of the Bulgarian regional policy and its 
strategic and long -term positioning in the Balkans.  
 
"An insignificant part of the attempts for retrospective remediation of the 
Serbian -Yugoslav project for the creation of a Macedonian nation are the  efforts of 
Skopje to join that project of the descendants of the Macedonian Bulgarians in Greek 
Macedonia and some areas of Albania and Kosovo."  
 
In this context of the use of the term "Greek Macedonia", we talk about the 
meaning of Greece in the implemen tation of politics in the Balkans through “the 
relevance of politics and behavior of Greece towards the good neighborly relations 
between Bulgari a and the Republic of Macedonia .". "...the Greek territory includes 
over half of the geographical region of Mac edonia, as it is from the 19th century 
onwards and of course, thanks to thei r historical memory the Greeks – just like the 
Albanians - are aware of the Bulgarian ethnic character of Vardar Macedonia in the 
past and its evolution in recent decades."9 
 
"Bulg aria and Greece could initiate, in the European Union elaboration, the 
development and acceptance of appropriate acquis communautaire of education, 
which should provide a certain general standard of objectivity in school  and academic 
history education ”. 
 
This is a complete harmonization of the current policy of Greece and Bulgaria 
to Macedonia and their requests. Their EU membership is based on the fact that they 
will actively use all opportunities (instruments and mechanisms) to achieve their 
national goal s which they set as demands to North Macedonia, and through the 
"Agreement for good neighborliness" with Bulgaria from 2017 and the "Prespa 
Agreement" with Greece from 2018.  These disputed agreements have already been 
accepted by the Macedonian government , which only facilitated the procedure in front 
of the international community so that Greece and Bulgaria can act in a spirit of 
respect of international agreements.  
                                                      
8  Ibid, part 1.1.4., p . 39 
9  Ibid, part 1.2 and 1.3. p . 40-41. 208 This last statement is confirmed by the "Action Plan" in the above Bulgarian's 
strategy, which states: "In the first place, a solid internal Bulgarian preparation is 
necessary, of a package of historical, cultural, political, geographical, economic and 
other arguments, in favor of the above theses, a package that would become the basis 
for for eign politics and position of the state".  
 
"This Bulgarian package should be well balanced with a consistent policy of 
Athens to protect Greek interests from the bad neighborly policy of Macedonia , so 
that the general application is cooperative towards Sko pje, and preferably - 
cumulative and coordinated ". 10 
 
In the strategy it is visible that Bulgaria is making a strategy towards the 
Republic of North Macedonia which should be balanced, cooperative and 
cumulatively coordinated with Greece. For clarificatio n and analysis, this means that 
no country in the world will support strategic national interests of another state if its 
own national interests are not more important and do not depend on the realization of 
the interests of that state, and refer to a thir d state. This is a simple rule in international 
relations.  
 
In this context, it remains to emphasize the position of Bulgaria visible in the 
strategy, and that refers to opposing Serbian influence in Macedonia, which 
undoubtedly as historical experience wi ll not deter Serbia from acting, but on the 
contrary will motivate it to implementing its own strategy that will undoubtedly 
confront the Bulgarian strategy.  
 
Guided by these remarks and the interests of the Balkan states, the behavior of 
Europe is astonis hing, especially the institutions of the European Union and their 
inaction in order of prevention. Certainly an exception to this EU behavior is the 
Resolution of the European Parliament of October 2020, regarding the situation in 
Bulgaria in relation to r espect the human rights and the rule of law in Bulgaria in 
general, and in which the case of OMO Ilinden11 is mentioned, which was rejected by 
the Bulgarian Parliament.  
 
A key aspect s in the new circumstances in North Macedonia are the cultural 
aspects  which emphasize the Macedonian language which will be discussed in the 
next chapter of the paper.  
 
 
2. Cultural aspects of influence for the abolition of the Macedonian nation  
 
The Macedonian cultural experience that has been crystallizing for more than a 
millennium is organically associated with the great civilizations of Ancient culture 
and Byzantine art. Hence, Macedonian culture will characterize the beauty, the art of 
the sublime of ancient Byzantine civilization. In particular, it will develop in medi eval 
iconoclasm as its own authentic expression in painting, poetry and medieval music. 
                                                      
10  Ibid, part 2.2.1. and 2.2.2., p . 43. 
11  Human rights organization of the Macedonian minority in Bulgaria. Existence of 
Macedonian minority is denied by Bulgarian authorities.  209 Although the Macedonian culture in itself assimilates part of the ancient and 
Byzantine culture, it will get its own specific aesthetic autonomous experience.  
 
Macedoni an culture, predominantly Dionysian, consists of specific colors, 
sounds and words characteristic of the uniqueness of the Macedonian artistic fabric, 
with a specific sensibility in the aesthetic tragic experience of the world. The 
Macedonian cultural spir it not once was closed by the influences and penetrations of 
other cultures and arts. With that the Macedonian characteristic autochthony was not 
lost, but on the contrary, was enriched and deepened its unique essence.  
 
Macedonian culture is characterized by the permanent opposition of the 
violence. For a century and a half, monstrous means have been created to destroy 
Macedonian culture, language and art and they do not stop to this day.  
 
But it was through the opposition to violence that Macedonia managed  to 
preserve its identity.  
 
2.1. Brief overview of the Macedonian language as a separate language in the 
group of Slavic languages and the goals that Bulgaria wants to achieve  
 
The basic conflict between the Macedonian and Bulgarian sides in terms of 
langu age is concentrated on the authenticity of the Macedonian language as a separate 
language in the group of Slavic languages. The problem is actualized by the Bulgarian 
side with reliance on some "facts" from the period of the 19th century and the 
influence that the church (later the Bulgarian Exarchate) had in that period through 
the Liturgical Church -Slavic language (or Old Slavonic). Exactly the Church Slavonic 
language or the Old Slavonic language is the basis of all Slavic languages, which 
below in the p aper we will explain through a review of the Ohrid Literary School from 
the IX century, but to speak and encourage a tendency for non -recognition of a 
separate Macedonian language is certainly nothing more than simple political malice. 
Namely, it is clear that languages suffer changes, especially in the spoken part, but of 
course in the grammar and the literary part too. However, the Macedonian language 
began its differentiation at the beginning of the 19th century through The Church -
Spiritual Awakening, th e time of the "Renaissance" and a whole century of Cultural 
National turmoil in the period from 1802 to 1903 .12 
 
The chronology of the events in the crucial 19th century for the Macedonian 
national, and in that time linguistic differentiation and self -knowl edge is actually a 
chronology of the output of The Balkans from the Ottoman "Millet System" and the 
movement of people towards the path of creation of nations. This chronology in the 
19th century and the beginning of the 20th century can be divided into se veral periods:  
 
1. Cultural -educational and ecclesiastical -spiritual awakening of the 
Macedonian people (1802 -1844).  
2. "Our history" as a separatist expression of national consciousness in the 
struggle for its church and language (1845 -1859).  
                                                      
12  RISTOVSKI , Blaze: Key Problems in the Macedonian Revival Process; The Development of 
Macedonian Literature, Institute of Macedonian Literature, Skopje, 2011.  pp. 31-32. 210 3. The emergence of national and religious propaganda and the literature of 
national awakening  (1859 -1875).  
4. National - political programs and acts, revolutionary liberation movements 
and mass uprisings (1876 -1893).  
5. Decade of Consolidation of National Liberation Thought and Ac tion 
(1893 -1902).  
6. Ilinden as an expression of the political urge of the people for freedom and 
for their state, the unused Mirczest reforms, the Revel meeting and the anti -
Macedonian Young Turk coup (1903 -1908).  
7. Period of historical feats and fateful defea ts (1913 -1918), struggle for the 
preservation of the territorial integrity for the unification of the Macedonian 
people and the affirmation of  cultural -national identity.  
 
In the mentioned periods of national, spiritual and cultural awakening of the 
Macedo nian people and the affirmation of national identity there are constant attempts 
to represent Macedonian uniqueness before the international public, as well as the 
formation and codification of Macedonian as a separate language in the group of 
Slavic langu ages.  
 
Thus, Milan Grasev, who is the editor of the magazine "Macedonia", in Sofia, in 
1902 writes: "Ivan S. Aksakov advised his Macedonian students in 1866 to separate 
Macedonian literary jargon and to amaze the world with their independence... So far 
no one understood them. "Recently we heard that a Macedonian student association 
was being formed in St. Petersburg, which will work on the Macedonian language ”13  
 
In the newspaper "Denica", Sofia from 1890, the editor Ivan Vazov says: "The 
Macedonian dialec t, all too far away and even completely foreign to the dialect in 
western Bulgaria cannot be deprived of its right to remain completely special 
independent dialect ."14  
 
In the newspaper "Svoboda", Sofia, year VI, no. 744 p.3. from 18.02.1892 it is 
said:  "Тhis is not the first time such political and literary ideas have appeared among 
Macedonians. If our memory works fine, Mr. K. Shapkarev started writing books right 
from the very beginning of the revival of the national idea among the Macedonians in 
Macedon ian dialect. His plan to create a special Macedonian letter failed as any 
unnatural thing fails, and his efforts are buried in the archives of eternity."  
This is a glaring example of how the Bulgarian authorities led in the late 19th 
century organized stat e struggle against the Macedonian language. Quite similar to 
today, which shows that Bulgarian politics is the same as in the 19th century which is 
not a feature of a member state of EU.   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
13  GRASHEV , Milan: New Fatal Roads and Prolomies – Macedonia;  book IX, Sofia, 1903 , 
pp. 27-28. 
14  Ivan Vazov  (1850 -1921) is Bulgarian author and academic, called father of the Bulgarian 
literature, and during the period from  1897 to 1899 was a Bulgarian minister of educa tion 
and science.  211 Conclusion  
 
Detailed explanation of the political and cultural influence of Bulgaria and 
Greece on the dismantling of the Macedonian nation requires much more space for 
historical, linguistic, cultural and experiential retrospective of the creation of the 
Macedonian nation as a centuries -old struggle of the Macedonian  people for their 
national and state independence. Therefore, at the end of this paper we will address 
exclusively the role of Europe through its institutions in relation to tolerating the 
politics of Bulgaria and Greece and the possible consequences on th e security of The 
Balkans, and thus the security and political stability of Europe as a global actor.  
 
It should be noted that the dismantling of the Macedonian nation, and the 
destruction of the Macedonian people and its "re -Bulgarianization" in the first  place 
covers a large number of disputes that Bulgaria and then Greece will pose as a 
"problem" at the beginning of North Macedonia's accession negotiations for its full 
membership in the European Union. In the first place, these will be questions from a 
historical aspect, especially about the Macedonian revolutionary movement and the 
key figure in the Macedonian struggle for national and state freedom and 
independence from the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, Goce 
Delchev. Then, the a ttack will be focused on the uniqueness of the Macedonian 
language and all historical facts and features that make the Macedonian people special 
from the other Balkan nations and leaders in their formation of its national state and 
the Macedonian nation.  
 
The role of Europe that consciously, for political reasons, allows Bulgaria and 
Greece to abuse their position as EU members and put pressure on North Macedonia 
through setting up blockades on membership in the Union is a self -destructive path of 
the Europ ean Union. This can be seen from two points in the Balkans:  
 
First, as an example of abusing full membership for the sake of achievement of 
great state aspirations of individual members, which is contrary to the commitments 
of the Union. This abuse will ar ouse additional conflict in the Balkans over the 
Macedonian question, which will inevitably involve Serbia, Albania and Kosovo in 
the conflict, which will mean entering the next stage of a conflict with strong potential. 
That phase will be each of the neig hboring countries of Macedonia to enter into 
conflict with each other for only one reason. An opportunity to satisfy their interests 
towards Macedonia without their mutual conflict in the literal sense, does not exist. 
Europe saw it once and allowed it in 1913, but the experience of that period showed 
us that not resolving the Macedonian issue and not allowing the Macedonian people 
to form their own independent state of Macedonia and in it Macedonian nation, have 
provoked wars between the states concerned, internal conflicts and tensions.  
 
Second, if the destruction of the Macedonian people and the Macedonian nation 
and the state of North Macedonia is allowed, Europe will send a message that justifies 
these great aspirations, so that the next conflict withou t a solution will be Bosnia and 
Herzegovina in which undoubtedly will join Turkey (and in relation to North 
Macedonia, too), which will cause a regional conflict. One such regional conflict will 
not pass without the involvement of global actors, ie the Uni ted States and Russia, 
and all this will still happen on European soil. Such developments further will weaken 212 the Union, involve NATO in the conflict and create long -term instability in the 
Balkans and Europe.  
 
The solution to avoid such a scenario and sta bilize the European security and the 
construction of a n European security identity in the Balkans is a support of The 
European Union of North Macedonia and the survival of the Macedonian people 
against the aspirations of Bulgaria and Greece. The Macedonian  people as a special 
people in the Balkans with their own history, language, culture and all the attributes 
of a nation cannot be denied in the 21st century and subjected to violent assimilation, 
and Europe to be silent about it, because North Macedonia an d the Macedonian people 
have its share in world culture both in the past and in the present.  
 
In the end, there is only one solution expressed more than 150 years ago by The 
British Prime Minister William Gladstone on the occasion of resolving the 
Macedoni an issue, who will summarize the solution in the maxim "Macedonia of the 
Macedonians".  
 
It is meaningless 80 years after the creation of the modern Macedonian state and 
thirty years after its independence, to go back in history and again raising the resolv ed 
question of the existence of the Macedonian people and the Macedonian state and 
nation. Within the maxim Macedonia of the Macedonians and the Macedonian nation, 
all citizens, ethnic and religious groups living in Macedonia, are included, because 
they ar e part of Macedonia and together with the Macedonian people make up the 
Macedonian nation.  
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 GRASHEV , Milan: New Fatal Roads and Prolomies – Macedonia;  book IX, Sofia, 
1903.  
 IVANOV , Lyubomir et al: Bulgarian Policies om the Republic of Macedonia;  
Eirst Edition, Manfred Worner Foundation, Sofia, 2008.  
 RISTOVSKI , Blaze: Key Problems in the Macedonian Revival Process; The 
Development of Macedonian Literature, Institute of Macedonian Literature, 
Skopje, 2011.  
 WAEVER , Ole – BUZAN , Barry – KELSTRUP , Morten – LAMAITRE , Pierre: 
Identity, Migration and the new Security Agenda in Europe;  Printer Publishers, 
Ltd, London, 1993.  
 
 213 INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION SECURITY  
 
RUDOLF NAGY PHD – TAMÁS SOMOGYI   
THE FINANCIAL INFR ASTRUCTURE AS A CRIT ICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND I T'S SPECIALITIES   
 
 
Abstract  
 
What if no bankcard services available and money transfer is down as well? This 
article introduces the infrastructure used for financial services as a critical 
infrastructure. The specialities of this critical sector is described based on the EU and 
Hungarian regulations and the relevant literature. Moreover, some example from the 
world is also discussed.  
Finally, proposals are made in order to further enhance the protection of fina ncial 
critical infrastructures and improve their preparedness for disastrous events.  
 
Keywords : Critical Infrastructure, Financial Sector, Financial Infrastructure, 
Disaster Recovery  
 
 
Introduction  
 
The daily life of civilisations in this ever changing wor ld is being threatened 
more and more as new problem arise. Although cold war is ended by the end of the 
XX. century, the possibility of a wide and devastating war is still exists. 
Environmental changes rooted in the activity of mankind also endangers the l ife and 
infrastructure on Earth as Nagy pointed out1. Moreover, other non -military related 
safety aspects had been determined (e.g. running out of certain raw materials)2. In 
addition, as new technologies emerge, governments and disaster management bodies 
face new challenges from time to time.  
 
Beyond doubt that answering these aforesaid challenges is crucial from our 
future's point of view. As the politicians and respective experts realised this, much 
effort had been made and still has been made in order to identify, prepare for and 
prevent the catastrophic situations and those infrastructures that essential for the 
accustomed daily life of our civilisation.  
 
As financial services plays a vital role in the growth of economy and in the 
political stability t hrough the well -being of the people, financial infrastructure should 
be considered part of the critical infrastructure and be protected accordingly.  
 
 
                                                      
1 NAGY, Rudolf: A természeti katasztrófák, mint globális kihívások, In: Védelem tudomány, 
2017/3. pp. 156 -169. ISSN 2498 -6194  
2 VÁMOS , Zoltán: Biztonságpolitikai aspektusok; In: BOGNÁR , Balázs – BONYAI , Tünde 
(Eds.): Kritikus infrastruktúrák védelme I. Budapest, Dialóg Campus Kiadó, 2019. pp. 11 -
27. 214 Critical Infrastructure  
 
The idea of protecting the important or even vital infrastructure may be rooted 
in the ancient civilisations where for examples wells, dams or shallows were guarded. 
It can easily be accepted that realising the fact that some natural or man made structure 
is needed to survive is not new. What is new nowadays, at the beginning of the X XI. 
century, is the high cross -border impact. In the EU due to the already developed 
integration and the still increasing connection between member states, a disruption in 
the essential services may have an effect on more member states. Hence the critical 
infrastructure (CI) had been defined at EU level, as well as the framework for 
identifying, assessing and operating the essential services vital for the safety and well -
being of member states .3 The overall objective of EU member states is to improve the 
protection of the CIs and be well prepared for managing the disruptive events.  
 
In 2006, an EU -level programme called European Programme for Critical 
Infrastructure Protection  had been adopted, and in 2008, the 2008/114/EC EU 
Council Directive on the identif ication and designation of European critical 
infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection  had been 
adopted. This directive had been applied since 12 January 2009.  
 
The terms critical infrastructure (CI) and European critical i nfrastructure (ECI) 
had been defined in Article 2 :4 
I critical infrastructure „ means an asset, system or part thereof located in Member 
States which is essential for the maintenance of vital societal functions, health, 
safety, security, economic or social well-being of people, and the disruption or 
destruction of which would have a significant impact in a Member State as a 
result of the failure to maintain those functions “ 
II European critical infrastructure „ means critical infrastructure located in 
Member Sta tes the disruption or destruction of which would have a significant 
impact on at least two Member States. The significance of the impact shall be 
assessed in terms of cross -cutting criteria. This includes effects resulting from 
cross -sector dependencies on  other types of infrastructure “ 
 
The Council Directive named two ECI and, moreover, created a framework to 
identify additional ECIs. The two originally named ECIs are related to the 
Transportation sector and Energy sector. No doubt, both the transportation  and the 
energy sector should be treated as critical infrastructure, as their services are essential 
services. Nevertheless, other sectors with essential services should have been analysed 
to identify other CIs.  
 
Hungary, as an EU member state, in line wi th the respective Council Directive, 
identified other CIs5, as Table1 shows.  
 
 
                                                      
3 EU Council Directive 2008/114/EC, https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -
content/HU/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32008L0114, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
4 EU Council Directive 2008/114/E C, Article2  
5 Act CLXVI of 2012, Annex 1, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1200166.tv, 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  215 Sector  Relevant Hungarian regulation  
Energy  374/2020 Government Decree  
Transportation  161/2019 Government Decree  
Agriculture  540/2013 Government Decree  
Healthcare  246/2015 Government Decree  
Finance  330/2015 Government Decree  
ICT 249/2017 Government Decree  
Water  541/2013 Government Decree  
Public safety  512/2013 Government Decree  
National defence  359/2015 Government Decree  
National insurance   -  
Figure1: Hungarian critical infrastructure  
(Author’s own edition)  
 
 
 
Figure  2. hierarchy of critical infrastructures based on the 2008/114/EC EU Council 
Directive  
(Author’s own edition)  
 
 
Figure 1 shows the hierarchy of the CIs including the financial sector as well, 
based on the definitions of the 2008/114/EC EU Council Directive.  
Must be noted that regulations relating to information security also have to be applied 
to CIs, since cyber security plays an important role in the (critical) infrastructure 
protection. In the EU the Network and information security directive took effect on 8 
August 20166. In Hungary the national regulation relating to information security is 
Act L of 2013 which also have to be applied to CIs7. 
                                                      
6 EU Directive 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council, https://eur -
lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/1148/ojgre, (downloaded 8 October 2 021) 
7 Act L of 2013, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1300050.tv, (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
216 Critical infrastructure protection  
 
A Green Paper had been presented by the Commission of the EU, in which 
critical infrastructure protection (CIP) is defined as „the ability to prepare for, protect 
against, mitigate, respond to, and recover from critical infrastructure disruptions or 
destru ction“ .8 According to the advised strategy and principle, member states are 
responsible for their CIP. Worth to mention that the Green Paper also introduced a 
Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network.  
 
In line with the above mentioned principle and the adopted framework, the 
responsibility of disaster management bodies in Hungary had been determined and 
the national system for CIP had been created as Act CLXVI of 2012 had come into 
effect .9 The legislative background and institutional structure i s prepared for new 
challenges, new problem or newly identified essential services .10 
 
 
Threats in the financial sector  
 
The financial sector can be considered as the backbone of the economy. 
Financial institutions offers a large array of services and produc ts to individuals and 
to the largest corporations as well. Without these financial services, our life would be 
unimaginable. Beyond dispute, significant disruption of the financial services has 
economical, social and political effect. Taking into considera tion the networks of 
parent companies and subsidiary companies, the effect can easily cross the borders 
and impinge on other states.  
 
Threats in the financial sector can be divided into two main groups, as a threat 
can be either a general threat affecting more sectors or a sector -specific threat.  
 
 
General threats  
 
Beyond dispute that all kind of CI has been threatened by natural disasters and 
intentional man made destruction, regardless the sector of the essential service. In the 
financial sector the threa t of these kind of disasters is twofold. First, the infrastructure 
of the OES itself is menaced or other CI that financial services depend on. Second, 
natural disaster and man made attack can cause serious damage to customers, e.g. 
damage in properties.  
 
Infrastructure of the financial sector is designed, built and operated in such a way 
that service continuity is maintained. National Bank of Hungary, as the sector -specific 
authority, recommends that business continuity plans should exist, and OES be 
                                                      
8 Green Paper on a European programme for critical infrastructure protection, https://eur -
lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52005DC0576 , (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
9 Act CLXVI of 2012, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1200166. tv, (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
10 BONNYAI , Tünde: Special tasks for professional disaster management bodies related to the 
identification, designaton and protection of critical infrastructures in Hungary; AARMS, 
2014/4. pp. 519 -524. 217 prepar ed for the unavailability of site of operation, the unavailability of IT 
infrastructure and the disruption in the services of other critical sectors11. Therefore 
in the financial sector location of headquarters, data centres and branches has been 
carefully chosen and appropriate security controls have been applied. Backup sites are 
maintained and redundant IT infrastructure is operated in order to meet the 
recommendations of service continuity. If possible more service provider has been 
contracted in order t o decrease the exposure.  
 
Severe damage in properties of customers have a significant impact on the 
financial sector. The work of Barth et al. demonstrates that after natural disasters both 
deposit and loan rates are being increased12. The study carried out  by Noth and 
Schüwer revealed that in the affected region non -performing asset ratios, foreclosure 
ratios and probabilities of default are being increased while return on assets and equity 
ratios are being lowered13. All of these have a temporal but signifi cant weakening 
effect on the stability of banks that are active in the affected region. Furthermore, 
McDermott et al. established a link between low levels of financial sector 
development and the negative effects of a natural disaster on economic growth14. 
 
 
Sector -specific threats  
 
Threats endangering the infrastructure of the financial sector are considered 
sector -specific threats. Among these threats IT and cyber risk had been very much 
increased as the European Central Bank pointed out: “40% of the banks  were the target 
of at least one successful cyberattack in 2019, a considerable increase from the 28% 
reported in 2018”15. As the supervisor’s figures shed light on, the number of cyber 
incidents is increasing, especially the number of phising attacks, whic h had been the 
leading type of incidents in 2020.  
 
Emergence of the highly sophisticated cyber attacks also can be seen. The 
European supervisor reports an example in which a widely used monitoring software 
was illegally modified in order to make OES download a malware as if it was a normal 
regular update16. 
 
As these data demonstrate white collar criminals targeting the infrastructure of 
the financial sector which implies that the increasing challenge of cyber risk should 
be better addressed.  
 
                                                      
11 National Bank of Hung ary: Recommendation 8/2020., https://www.mnb.hu/letoltes/8 -
2020 -informatikai -rendsz -vedelmerol.pdf, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
12 BARTH , James et al.: Banks and Natural Disasters; SSRN Electronic Journal 2019. 10/2139. 
ssrn.3438326 . 
13 NOTH, Felix – SCHÜWER , Ulrich: Natural Disaster and Bank Stability: Evidence from the 
U.S. Financial System; SAFE Working Paper No. 167. 2018. ssrn.292100 0 
14 MCDERMOTT , Thomas et al.: Disasters and development: natural disasters, credit 
constraints and economic growth; Oxford Economic Press, 2014/3. pp. 750 -773. 
15 European Central Bank: IT and cyber risk: a constant challenge, Supervision newsletter 18 
August 2021 . 
16 Ibid. 218 Througho ut the COVID -19 crisis the usage of online bank and insurance 
services had been increased significantly while the majority of the staff was working 
from home. Future studies will have to explore the effect of these factors on the 
increasing number of cyber  attacks against the infrastructure of the financial sector in 
Europe and in Hungary as well.  
 
 
Financial infrastructure in Hungary  
 
In line with  EU Council Directive 2008/114/EC, the financial sector in Hungary 
had been identified as a sector that provid es essential services. Three part of the 
financial sector had been defined as CI17: 
I commerce, payment and clearing of monetary assets and liabilities  
II security of banks and credit institutions  
III cash management  
 
According to the relevant national regulation (3 30/2015 Government Decree), 
the Minister responsible for financial sector (a.k.a. Minister of finance) - based on the 
recommendation of the National Bank of Hungary, as proposing authority - nominates 
parts of the financial sector for CI18. The Minister is supported by a committee 
composed of experts of the financial sector.  
 
The National Bank of Hungary is the supervisor and control coordinator of CIs 
in the financial sector19. As a supervisor, may call the operator of essential service 
(OES) to fulfil the r elevant requirements; call for modification of the operational 
security plan (OSP); or impose a fine.  
 
The protection of the identified financial CI should be organised in accordance 
with the OSP20. Emergency cases in the financial sector had been defined by 330/2015 
Government Decree21: 
I disruption of a control system that has no alternatives within 30 minutes 
or for the recovery the OES has to be supported;  
II disruption of ICT or other facility necessary for the fundamental activities 
that has no alternatives  within 1 hour or for the recovery the OES has to 
be supported;  
III more than 1 hour long outage or breach of the service level agreement of 
account management services, e -channel services and cash management;  
IV more than 1 day long outage or breach of the servi ce level agreement of 
cash management;  
V quarantine at the OES;  
VI outage of human resources causing a shutdown of CI.  
 
 
                                                      
17 Act CLXVI of 2012, Annex1  
18 330/2015 Government Decree, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1500330. kor, 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
19 Ibid. 
20 BONNYAI (2014)  pp. 519 -524. 
21 330/2015 Government Decree, Section 7/A, 7/B, 7/C  219 Realising the significant impact of the events listed above on the state, possibly 
on more states, OESs have to be prepared for such disrupt ive events. Worth to 
mention, that each OES had to appoint a contact person who is the single point of 
contact between the OES and the relevant authorities.  
 
 
Financial infrastructure in the world  
 
Examples can be seen for treating the financial sector as part of the national CI 
within the EU and outside of the EU as well.  
 
Financial system had been determined as CI in Poland. CI and CIP had been 
defined just as relevant principles had been established by Act of 26 April 200722. The 
major tasks relating to C IP are:  
I information collection on CI and threats;  
II implement CIP procedures;  
III restore CI;  
IV cooperation between public administration and respective bodies;  
V create OSP and maintain necessary backup systems;  
VI a contact person had to be appointed at each OES.  
 
In Poland the legal and institutional basis for improve the CIP had been created 
similarly to the Hungarian way.  
 
The financial sector in the USA is also considered as CI. According to the 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 , creating a sector -specific plan for CIP is 
the responsibility of the US Department of the Treasury. This sector -specific plan is 
part of the overall National Infrastructure Protection Plan , which is integrating all 
sector -specific plans of the national C Is. In the above mentioned Presidential 
Directive the private -public collaboration had been ordained, therefore there is a close 
work between the Department of the Treasury and the Financial Services Sector 
Coordinating Council.  This collaborative work ens ures the achievement of security 
goals relating to CIP in the USA23. 
 
Finance is among the critical infrastructure sectors according to the Canadian 
National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure . In Canada all the responsibilities for CI 
are shared by feder al, provincial and territorial governments, local authorities and 
OESs, however, the first response is the OES's duty. A partnership had been 
implemented among the different levels of government and OESs to protect the CI 
from all type of hazards. Led by B ank of Canada, the Canadian Financial Sector 
Resiliency Group  is responsible for coordinating and support the resiliency activities 
within the financial sector. Furthermore, to strengthen the sector networks, a National 
                                                      
22 WRÓBEL , Rafal – DERENDA , Zuzanna: The concept of critical infrastructure protection in 
Poland for years 2015 -2017; Védelem tudomány  2017/3. pp. 66 -83. ISSN 2498 -6194  
23 The Department of Homeland Security: Banking and Finance: Critical Infrastructure and 
Key Resources Sector -Specific Plan as input to the National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 
May 2007. ISBN 978 -1503022256  220 Cross -Sector Forum  is established to  have a better information sharing across the 
different sectors of the essential services24. 
 
 
Improvement ideas  
 
The field of security and infrastructure protection is subjected to continuous 
improvement. To be better prepared for incidents and disruptive events, a public -
private partnership is highly recommended, especially in the following areas.  
1)  Training for employees of the sector -specific agencies, disaster management 
bodies and OESs should be required. Training is essential to spread a security 
culture, develop the awareness, strengthen the „human firewall“ and increase the 
level of preparedness25. Therefore more kind of training should have been 
organised in cooperation with the members of the financial sector and those 
authorities that are possibl y involved in disaster recovery. It is worth thinking 
about a mandatory special course for certain positions.  
2)  Although tests and simulations are regularly held, these are organised 
individually. During a disastrous event, communication between and 
coop eration of authorities and OESs are essential. Therefore simulations and 
tabletop exercises should be organised for respective members of the financial 
sector and relevant disaster management bodies.  
Taking into account that some of the CIs have a significant impact on each other 
(e.g. telecommunication and finance), simulations and exercises also should be 
organised for authorities and entities acting in different sectors.  
3)  Research & Development programs should be started in cooperation with 
academic institutions. A better understanding of the natural, intentional and 
accidental hazards; the advanced infrastructure architecture; the human and 
social issues surely contributes to more developed operational security plans.  
4)  As new technologies e merge and new services become part of our daily life, risk 
assessments should be comprehensive and cover the innovations and new things. 
Partnership with startup companies should be considered as the understanding 
and usage of new technical solutions may h ave a benefit in CIP.  
5)  Legislation should be ready to change the regulations when necessary, and 
should be open to feedback from the respective public and private members of 
the complex system of CIP. Sector specific authorities and agencies may have 
an important role in information sharing between sector members and 
legislators. In addition, legislator is supposed to give priority to certain exercises.  
6)  Competent independent audit against the accepted standards of CIP can 
contribute to a higher level  of preparedness within the whole financial sector by 
identifying weak points at OES.   
                                                      
24 Public Sa fety Canada: National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure . ISBN: 978 -1-100-
11248 -0, Bank of Canada: Bank of Canada announces partnership to improve resilience in 
financial sector, 27 June 2019.  https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/srtg -crtcl-
nfrstrctr/index -en.aspx, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
25 FRANCHINA , Luisa et al.: Passive and active training approaches for critical infrastructure 
protection; International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 2021. V ol 63, 102461 , ISSN 
2212 -4209 . 221   
Figure 3: the complex system of CIP and the possibilities of improvement  
(Author’s own edition)  
 
 
The increased cross -border interconnectedness of financial institutions is a fact 
of life, and a cross -border impact of a disruptive event is highly possible. 
Consequently future studies will have to examine the circumstances under which an 
international CIP program is feasible, with for example cross -border simul ations and 
international R&D programs.  
 
 
Summary  
 
In our daily life the benefits of the financial services is very much enjoyed. 
Economic growth, which contributes to well -being and political stability, is also 
stimulated by the financial sector. This arti cle based on the regulations and relevant 
literature underpins the idea that the services of the financial sector are essential, part 
of the critical infrastructure, therefore should be protected accordingly. Threats of the 
financial sector are described a nd related trend is also shown.  
 
To increase the level of preparedness for any kind of hazard, examples of EU 
and not EU countries were provided as good practices, just as improvement 
possibilities were recommended.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222 Bibliography:  
 
 161/2019 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1900161.kor, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 246/2015 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=A1500246.KOR, (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
 249/2017 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar. hu/jogszabaly?docid=A1700249.KOR, (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
 330/2015 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1500330.kor, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 359/2015 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1500359.kor, (dow nloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 374/2020 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=A2000374.KOR, (downloaded 8 
October 2021)  
 512/2013 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1300512.kor, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 540/2013 Gover nment Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1300540.kor, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 541/2013 Government Decree, 
https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1300541.kor, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 Act CLXVI of 2012, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly? docid=a1200166.tv, 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 Act L of 2013, https://net.jogtar.hu/jogszabaly?docid=a1300050.tv, 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 Bank of Canada: Bank of Canada announces partnership to improve resilience 
in financial sector, 27 June 2019., https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2019/06/bank -
of-canada -announces -partnership -improve -resilience -financial -sector/, 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 BARTH , James et al.: Banks and Natural Disasters; SSRN Electronic Journal 
2019. 10/2139. ssrn.3438326.  
 BONNYAI , Tünde : Special tasks for professional disaster management bodies 
related to the identification, designaton and protection of critical infrastructures 
in Hungary; AARMS, 2014/4. pp. 519 -524. 223  EU Council Directive 2008/114/EC, https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -
conte nt/HU/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32008L0114, (downloaded 8 October 
2021)  
 EU Directive 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 
https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/1148/ojgre, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 European Central Bank: IT and cyber risk: a constant challenge, Supervision 
newsletter 18 August 2021, 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/publications/newsletter/2021/
html/ssm.nl210818_3.en.html, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 FRANCHINA , Luisa et al.: Passive and active training approaches for critical 
infrastructure protection; International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction V ol 
63, 2021. 102461, ISSN 2212 -4209.  
 Green Paper on a European programme for critical infrastructure protection, 
https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52005DC0576 , 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 MCDERMOTT , Thomas et al.: Disasters and development: natural disasters, credit 
constraints and economic growth; Oxford E conomic Press, 2014/3. pp. 750 -773. 
 NAGY, Rudolf: A természeti katasztrófák, mint globális kihívások; Védelem 
Tudomány, 2017/3. pp. 156 -169. ISSN 2498 -6194  
 National Bank of Hungary: Recommendation 8/2020., 
https://www.mnb.hu/letoltes/8 -2020 -informatikai -rendsz-vedelmerol.pdf 
(downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 NOTH, Felix – SCHÜWER , Ulrich: Natural Disaster and Bank Stability: Evidence 
from the U.S. Financial System, SAFE Working Paper No. 167. 2018. 
ssrn.2921000  
 Public Safety Canada: National Strategy for Critical  Infrastructure. ISBN: 978 -
1-100-11248 -0, https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/srtg -crtcl-
nfrstrctr/index -en.aspx, (downloaded 8 October 2021)  
 The Department of Homeland Security: Banking and Finance: Critical 
Infrastructure and Key Resources S ector -Specific Plan as input to the National 
Infrastructure Protection Plan, May 2007. ISBN 978 -1503022256  
 VÁMOS , Zoltán: Biztonságpolitikai aspektusok; In: BOGNÁR , Balázs – BONYAI , 
Tünde (Eds.): Kritikus infrastruktúrák védelme I.; Dialóg Campus Kiadó, 
Budapest, 2019. pp. 11 -27. 
 WRÓBEL , Rafal – DERENDA , Zuzanna: The concept of critical infrastructure 
protection in Poland for years 2015 -2017; Védelem Tudomány 2017/3. pp. 66 -
83 224 LAFEE ALSHAMAILEH – TIBOR KOVÁCS   
CYBERATTACK ON THE SMART POWER GRID   
 
 
Abstract   
 
As the risk of cyberattacks are high at everywhere and anytime, and the damages 
caused by the attacks are also steep and effect both governments and individuals, more 
preventive cautiousness should be implemented about cyberattacks and their effect on 
critical or otherwise important governmental organizations. This paper reviews the general 
literature about the power grids and its components. Also, define the cyberattacks in a 
general concept, and pays particular attenti on to attacks on power grids. Additionally, 
explains on how smart power grid is depending on many standards, has numerous 
vulnerabilities, and security challenges, and how to protect smart power grids from 
cyberattacks. The paper also provides a case study  of cyberattack which was the Ukrainian 
power grid attack. The case study consists of many aspects following the scenario of the 
attack such as opportunities, chain mapping, delivery, and installation and finally the 
recommendations  
 
Keyword : cyberattack, cybersecurity, Ukrainian power grid, power grid, smart grid  
 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Using  computers,  Internet  of Things  (IoT),  network,  and data sharing  in 
infrastructure  technologies significantly advance this sector. By using IoT and other 
smart technologies, infrastructure systems become vulnerable and exposed to a risk 
of cyberattacks and electronic sabotage. These attacks can be for stealing data or 
changing the setting or even controlling the whole  system.  
 
The smart  power  grid infrastructure  gives  the ability to manage  the power  system  
in a smart way, which includes a verification of energy measures and operations such  
as 
• Demand Response (DR): this technology provides monitoring and controlling the 
system depending on the load and the power supply informati on in real -time. Even 
collects the data of consumption and production of the electrical power over a year 
in a way that monitors the expected behavior of the power grid and makes a 
balance between the production and the consumption.1 
• Advanced Metering Infr astructure (AMI): This technology is responsible for 
improving the efficiency of electrical power meter and providing monitor and 
control capabilities. This technology gives the grid operators the ability to 
disconnect the service for customers remotely or  add new control paths, which can 
affect the customer’s behavior in a way that has not been experienced by grid 
operators .2  
                                                      
1  GKATZIKIS , L. – KOUTSOPOULOS , I. – SALONIDIS , T.: The role of aggregators in smart grid demand 
response markets; IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2013/7. pp. 1247 -1257.  
2  GHOSAL , A. – CONTI, M.: Key management systems for smart grid advan ced metering 
infrastructure: A survey; IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 2019/3, pp. 2831 -225 New technology brings a new level of risk. Security is a great challenge in the 
smart grid. AMI network gives access to functions t hat control the whole grid, which 
may affect the integrity of the system or the availability of data in case of unauthorized 
person can get the right to access this network. This can have a significant risk on 
human safety and the privacy of the consumer’s  data. Therefore, protecting the system 
and mitigating the risk of cyberattacks are vital in this technology.3  
 
Recently, the market penetration and cyber threat increased for criminal or 
cyberwarfare reasons and attackers learning and developing malware,  virus, phishing 
attacks, password theft, so the system should be improved and fixed the security gaps 
for all types of infrastructure. For instance, smart meters can be hacked to cut power 
bills as happened in Spain in 2014 or due to a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
attack or malware infection, gives the attackers access to the communication and 
control over the system network, causing damage or halt on the energy production. It 
is effective on several systems, for instance, in the case of cyberattac k on the 
Ukrainian Power Grid on December 23, 2015.4  
 
This paper highlights the main security challenges, demonstrating how to 
protect, and mitigate the risk of cyberattacks on smart grid systems, and investigates 
the cyberattack on the Ukrainian power gr id as an example of a national threat.  
 
 
2. Power  grid 
 
The classic  power  grid is facing  a lack of robustness  and flexibility  to transfer  
electricity  between the  generating  stations  and customers  with the one-way 
transmission;  hence  it is not available to share information. In addition, the response 
to the disaster or problem on the transmission network is slow and cannot self -restore 
the capability of energy.5  
 
 
Figure 1: Classic power grid with one direction conne ction6  
 
 
                                                      
2848.  YAN, Y. –QIAN, Y. – SHARIF , H. – TIPPER , D.: A survey on cyber security for smart 
grid communications;  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  Tutorials,  2012/4,  pp. 998-1010.  
3  CASE, D. U.: Analysis  of the cyber -attack  on the Ukrainian  power  grid; 2016;  Electricity 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, vol. 388,  2016.  
4  ZHOU, J. – HE, L. – LI, C. – CAO, Y. – LIU, X. – GENG, Y.: What’s the difference between 
traditional power grid and smart grid? – from dispatching perspective; in: 2013 IEEE PES 
Asia-Pacific Power and Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC) 2013. pp. 1 -6. 
5  CUNJIANG , Y. – HUAXUN , Z. – LEI, Z.: Architecture  design  for smart  grid;  Energy  
Procedia, 2012. vol. 17, p. 1524 -1528.  
6  Source: ANJANA , K. – SHAJI, R.: A  review  on the features  and technologies  for energy  
efficiency of smart grid; International Journal of Energy Research, 2018/3, pp. 936 –952. 
226 On the other hand, the smart grid is an electrical grid integrated with various 
operational, innovative measurement and communication technology that efficiently 
controls energy pro - duction and electricity distribution.  
 
 
Figure 2: Smart power grade7 
 
 
 
2.1 Architecture of smart grid  
 
There are several architectural systems are being developed by stakeholder and 
international companies. Therefore, the National Institute of Standard and Technology 
(NIST) and smart grid inter -operability panel (SGIP) created a standard policy, what 
any smart grid frameworks should achieve. This international standard has many 
advantages. It accelerates the time of development, guarantees more integration 
between equipment from different companies, provides more benefit s for the high -
tech smart grid market and ensures a high level of security.8  
 
There are some architectural goals and recommendations should any smart 
power grid achieve:9  
• Options: The architecture framework should support a broad range of hi -
technology a nd flexible enough to work with legacy equipment and incorporate 
evolving technology in a standard way that avoids additional capital investment.  
                                                      
7  Source:  GREER , C. – WOLLMAN , D. A. – PROCHASKA , D. E. – BOYNTON , P. A. – MAZER , 
J. A. – NGUYEN , C. T. FITZPATRICK , G. J. – NELSON , T. L. – KOEPKE , G. H. – HEFNER  Jr, A.  
R., et al.: Nist framework  and roadmap for smart grid interoperability standards, release 3.0;  
2014.  
8  EGOZCUE , E. – RODRÍGUEZ , D. H., – ORTIZ, J. A. – VILLAR , V. F. – TARRAFETA , L.: Smart 
Grid Security: Recommendations for Europe and Member States; European Union Agency 
For Network And Information Security (ENISA),  2012.  
9  Ibid.  
227 • Interoperability: Architectures should support standard interfaces with other 
system and manual processes and work with third -party product and 
cybersecurity infrastructure.  
• Upgradeability: Architectures should support the system’s ability to be enhanced 
without any difficulties and remain operational during partial system upgrades.  
• Innovation: Architectures should enable and enhance innovation. This includes 
the ability to accommodate innovation in regulations and policies; business 
processes and procedures; information processing, technical communications, 
and integration of new and innovative energy systems . 
• Scalability: Architectures should have architectural elements suitable for the 
applications built within them. The architectures must support the development 
of massively scaled, well -managed, and secure systems with lifespans 
appropriate for the type of  system, which ranges from 5 to 30 years  
• Maintainability: Architectures should support the system’s ability to be safe, 
securely, and reliably maintained throughout their life cycle.  
• Legacy: Architectures should support legacy system integration and migrat ion. 
• Security: Architectures should support the capability to resist un -
vetted/unauthorized intrusion, access, or use of physical and cyber assets. This 
support must satisfy all security requirements of the system components.  
• Flexibility: Architectures sho uld allow an implementer to choose the type and 
order of implementation. Flexibility also allows parts of implementation to 
deviate from the original plan without incurring a  penalty.  
• Governance : Architectures  should  promote  a well-managed  system  that will be 
enabled through consistent policies over its continuing design and operation for 
its entire life  cycle.  
• Affordability : Architectures  should  fundamentally  enable  capital  savings  as well 
as life- cycle savings through standards -based operations and maintenance. They 
must enable multi -vendor procurement of interoperable smart grid equipment 
through the development of mature national and international  markets.  
 
 
2.2 Framework  core 
 
The core is a set of desired cybersecurity activities and outcomes organized into 
categories and  aligned  with informative  references.  The framework  core is designed  to 
be intuitive  and act as  a translation  layer  to enable  communication  between  multi -
disciplinary  teams  using  simplistic and non -technical language. The core consists of 
three parts: Functions, Categories, and Subcategories.  The core includes  five high-
level  functions:  Identify,  Protect,  Detect,  Respond, and Recover. These five functions 
are not only applicable to cybersecurity risk management but also to regul ar risk 
management at large.10  
 
 
                                                      
10  Ibid. 228 2.3 Communication networks in smart  grids  
 
Figure  3 illustrates  a standard  communication  network  architecture  of a smart  
grid, and we can see how it physically separated between each section of the  power 
grid, which provides more secure communication.11  
 
 
Figure 3: The communication network on the smart grid12  
 
 
3. Cyberattacks  
 
The traditional grid power is upgraded to a smart power grid depending on two -
way digital communication,  which  supports  most other  technology  such as intelligent  
monitoring  and measurement,  which  provide  more  efficient  power  management  and 
raise  the dependence on  renewable  energy.  However,  the complex  system  comes  with 
many  vulnerabilities  in communication technology,  software,  and devices  that work  in 
a smart  power  grid. Providing  security  for all components and communication line 
from cyberattack or sudden malfunctions is not an easy task.13  
 
Hence,  the smart  power  grid creates  a new type of problem.  Some  problem  we 
cannot  well- understood and need to study the case and analyze the situation, potential 
vulnerabilities, and then solutions can be recommended,  also there are some  problems  
with a good  background knowledge  about  it, but it needs  a complex result and 
explanation.  One of the most complex  security case problems,  when  related  to the privacy 
data and information of a consumer, so it needs to develop legal and regulatory 
                                                      
11  MATTIOLI , R. – MOULINOS , K.: Communication network interdependencies in smart grids; 
European Union Agency For Network And Information Security (ENISA),  2015.  
12  Source: HAHN, A. – GOVINDARASU , M.: Cyber  attack  exposure  evaluation  framework  for 
the smart grid; IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2011/4, pp. 835 -843. 
13  BENDOVSCHI , A.: Cyber -attacks –trends,  patterns  and security  countermeasures;  Procedia 
Economics and Finance, 2015. vol. 28, pp. 24 -31. 
229 regimes that respect consumer privacy and promote consumer access to his 
information by the third -party  company.14  
 
In the next several  years,  the smart  power  grid security  will face serious  
problems  in securing processes, identifying the gaps in systems and organization  
tasks.  
 
3.1 Smart grid cybersecurity  challenges  
 
This challenge can be summarized as follows:15  
• Lack of expertise and budget  limits  
• A robust and resilient  grid 
• Data protection and secure data  handling  
• Lack of awareness among manufacturers and  operators  
• Technical  challenges  
1. proper integration of equipment and software in the  system  
2. unauthorized access to systems or  devices  
3. availability of traffic analyzers, communications monitoring, and 
application log monitoring  
• Incomplete or inexistent  regulations  
• Common vulnerabilities and risk factors in smart grid communication 
networks  
• Vulnerable consumers: the intelligent devices of the smart power grids can 
handle huge information and data of the customer and power demand then 
send this information and data to the service provider by a bi -directional 
communication line. Therefore, prot ect private consumer data and 
consumption habits is particularly necessary to prevent unauthorized 
disclosure of information.16  
• The massive number of devices: the massive number of devices lead the 
system to several networks connection between them, which provide a 
communication line to manage the demands and supply electricity with 
many features covered by the power grid. Therefore, the system will be 
complicated to manage. On the other hand, the vulnerabilities could result 
in intelligent devices or netwo rk being used as entry attack points to the 
network.17  
 
                                                      
14  SGOURAS , K. I. – BIRDA , A. D. – LABRIDIS , D. P.: Cyber  attack  impact  on critical  smart  
grid infrastructures; IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference, ISGT, 
2014, pp. 1 -5. 
15  YAN, J. – HE, H. – ZHONG , X. – TANG, Y.: Q -learning -based  vulnerability  analysis  of 
smart grid against sequential topology  attacks; IEEE Transactions on Information 
Forensics and Security, 2016/1, pp. 200 -210. 
16  ISLAM , S. N. – BAIG, Z. – ZEADALLY , S.: Physical layer security for the smart grid: 
Vulnerabilities,  threats,  and countermeasures;  IEEE  Transactions  on Industrial  Informatics, 
2019/12, pp. 6522 -6530.  
17  ALOUL , F. – AL-ALI, A. – AL-DALKY , R. – AL-MARDINI , M. – EL-HAJJ, W.: Smart grid 
security: Threats, vulnerabilities and solutions; International Journal of Smart Grid and 
Clean Energy, 2012/1, pp. 1 -6. 230 • Coexistence of legacy and new devices: Integration of smart grid 
technologies is an immense challenge in developing and deploying smart 
grids, especially the compatibility between them without malfunc tions. 
This coexistence may result in possible incompatibilities at physical and 
protocol levels vulnerabilities and threats due to possible interdependencies 
between devices and networks.18 
• Implicit trust M2M by default: Several devices in their Machine to  Machine 
(M2M) communications use an implicit trust. This is a critical weakness 
due to the interdependency with the other machine led to the appearance of 
additional vulnerabilities. If an attacker gains control of the other machine 
involved or pretends t o be it, he could send incorrect data to the first 
machine or receive confidential and private data. Data Spoofing is a threat 
to Device -to-Device communication in control systems. Even more, this 
implicit trust can be used by attackers to carry out Man -in-the-Middle 
attacks, compromising the network interconnection between these devices 
and even the rest of the network.19  
• Commercial hardware and software: Commercial hardware and software 
usually developed separately from the operator’s grid, creating a pro blem 
incompatibility between different hardware, and might not be implemented 
the security protocol or communication. Therefore, using commercial 
software and hardware creates vulnerabilities inherently, such as backdoor 
or sudden malfunction, what present  serious vulnerabilities for the 
system.20  
• Communication protocols: communications between devices in the smart 
grid upgraded using wireless protocols, i.e., Bluetooth, ZigBee, Infrared, 
WiMAX, Wi -Fi, LTE, UMTS or GPRS also is a source of vulnerabilities 
and well -known by attackers.21  
• Human factors: Even with the increasing sophistication of cyberattacks 
from outside sources, human errors still cause the most significant 
proportion of data losses and failures. The operators depend on software to 
protect dat a and information from cyberattacks instead of humans because 
it is more secure and integrated. However, we can avoid mistakes from a 
human by training employees to receive and the take security actions for 
the organizations, especially regarding the use o f network communications 
and the management. Configuration of the smart grid assets to ensure that 
their communications are done securely and reliably is also a challenge.22 
 
                                                      
18  PAUL, S. – NI, Z.: Vulnerability  analysis  for simultaneous  attack  in smart  grid security; in 
2017 IEEE Power&Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference,  
ISGT, 2017. pp. 1 -5. 
19  ISLAM  – BAIG – ZEADALLY op. cit.  
20  LIANG , G. – WELLER , S. R. – ZHAO, J. – LUO, F. – DONG, Z. Y.: The 2015  Ukraine  
blackout:  Implications  for false data injection  attacks;  IEEE  Transactions  on Power  
Systems,  vol. 2016/4, pp. 3317 -3318.  
21  Ibid. 
22  ALOUL  – AL-ALI – AL-DALKY  – AL-MARDINI  – EL-HAJJ op. cit.  231  
Figure 4 Cyber -attacks reported in 201823 
 
 
4. Case study: The attack on the Ukrainian power  grid 
 
The cyberattacks in Ukraine are considered the first incidents to result power 
outages. It is important to study the effect of this attack on customers and the 
operators.  
 
However, the  operators’  rating in  these  incidents  highly  important  because  they 
can measure  the system’s  reliability. Moreover, it is important to understand the 
vulnerabilities and develop the defense system, which  provides  mitigation  strategy  
concepts  related  to the attack.  This attack  was demonstrated varying  tactics and 
techniques to match the defenses and environment of the three impacted targets.24 
The following list summarizes the technical components used by the attackers:25 
• Spear -phishing to access the business networks of the  power suppliers;  
• Identificati on of Black Energy 3 at each one of the impacted power suppliers;  
• Theft of credentials from the business  networks;  
• Using virtual private networks (VPNs) to enter the ICS  network;  
• Using  the existing  remote  access  tools  within  the environment  or issuing  
commands  from a remote station which is like an operator  HMI;  
                                                      
23  Source: Infographic, 2018  
24  KHAN, R. – MAYNARD , P. – MCLAUGHLIN , K. – LAVERTY , D. – SEZER , S.: Threat analysis 
of blackenergy malware for synchrophasor based real -time control and monitoring in 
smart grid; 4th International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Securit y Research 
2016,  pp. 53 -63. 
25  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  
232 • Serial -to-ethernet communications devices impacted at a firmware  level;  
• Using a modified Kill Disk to delete the master boot record of impacted 
organization systems;  
• Using UPS systems to affect connected load with a planned service  outage.  
 
4.1 Opportunities  
 
The firewall  allowed  the attacker  to remote  the admin  out of the environment  by 
using a remote access capability native to the systems. In addition, according to 
media reports, there did  not appear  to be any resident  capability  to monitor  the ICS 
network  continually  and search for abnormalities and threats through active defense 
measures, like network security monitoring.  These  vulnerabilities  would  have  
provided  the attacker  with the chance  to persist  within  the environment  for more  than 
six months  to do reconnaissance  on the environment  and eventually execute the 
attack.26  
 
4.2 ICS Cyber kill chain  mapping  
 
1. Reconnaissance:  It is the first stage  for attackers  before  the target  and final 
attack  plan is set. Attackers  leverage  information  from  various  sources  and factors  that 
help them  understand their target more, identifying vulnerable and insecure software. 
But there were no reports of  observed  suspicion  of traffic  in the network  before  
targeti ng the energy  companies. However,  the attack  and targeting  plan was highly  
coordinated,  which  indicate that  there  was reconnaissance before the attack and 
analysis of the affected system. They were enabling the remote opening of breakers 
in several substations.27  
2. Weaponization:  In the second  step, attackers  break  into the network,  
delivering  targeted malware , vulnerable  to systems  and people.  Often  happens without  
the user being  aware that  they are a target. In this attack, it was needed to access 
specific infrastructure. The attackers weaponized  Microsoft  Office  documents  (Excel  
and Word)  by embedding  Black  Energy 3 within the documents.28  
3. Deliver, exploit, and install: Delivery, the malicious office document was 
sent via emails to the individua ls in companies. Exploit, when these documents were 
opened, there was a popup display to the users to encourage them for enabling 
macro document. Install, this malicious macro document allowed the macro -office 
to install the malicious program Black Energy 3 on the victims’ system.29 
4. After the malware was installed, the Black Energy 3 malware connected with 
the IP command and control system to enable communication between adversary and 
affected systems. Then the attackers harvest credentials, privileges, a nd move laterally 
throughout the environment (e.g., target directory service infrastructure to manipulate 
and control the authorization and authentication system directly). At this point, the 
attackers completed all the necessary actions to establish persi stent access to the 
                                                      
26  KONSTANTINOU , C. – SAZOS , M. – MANIATAKOS , M.: Attacking the smart grid using 
public information; 2016 17th Latin -American Test Symposium (LATS); IEEE, 2016. pp. 
105-110. 
27  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  
28  Ibid. 
29  Ibid. 233 targets. With this information, the adversaries would identify VPN connections and 
avenues from the business network into the ICS network. Using native commands and 
connections allows the adversaries to discover the remainder of the sys tems and 
extract the data necessary to formulate a plan.30  
5. Using the stolen credentials, the adversary could pivot into the network 
segments where SCADA dispatch workstations and servers existed. Upon entry into 
the network, the actions of the adversari es were consistent in theme but different in 
technical minutia. Then the attackers discovered a network connected to a UPS and 
reconfigured it. The attackers would have needed to conduct some network 
reconnaissance against these systems and then find speci fic targets to execute their 
coordinated attack.31 
6. The available information indicates that the malicious firmware was 
consistent amongst devices and uploaded within short time between each other to 
multiple sites, which means the malicious uploads of fi rmware were probably 
developed before the attack for quick and predictable execution.32  
7. During the ICS Attack Stage, the adversaries used native software to deliver 
themselves into the environment for direct interaction with the ICS components. They 
achieved this using existing remote administration tools on the operator workstations. 
The threat actors also continued to use VPN access into the IT environment.33  
8. During the same time, the attackers leveraged a remote telephone denial of 
service on the e nergy company’s call center with thousands of calls to ensure that 
impacted customers could not report outages.34 
 
 
5. Protect and  recommendation  
 
The emerging  cyber  threats  targeting  electricity  systems  highlighted  the need  to 
integrate  advanced security to protect critical assets without impacting operations. 
Steps should take for protecting  cybersecurity:  
1. Foster  awareness -raising  and training  initiatives  for staff:  Initial  
recommendations  would point to end -user awareness training and ongoing phishing 
testing. Specific training initiatives should also be created for manufacturers on how 
to build secure devices and  applications,  for grid operators  on the threats  and risks  
affecting  the resiliency  and security of the grid, and for service providers and end-
consumers on fraud prevention, privacy, etc.35,36  
As the social engineering components of attacks, targeted email, and internet 
accessible cyber  assets.  Therefore,  these  areas  should  be considered  untrusted,  and the 
communication with these areas should  be controlled, segmented, and monitored.37  
 
                                                      
30  Ibid. 
31  Ibid. 
32  Ibid. 
33  Ibid. 
34  Ibid. 
35  MATTIOLI  – MOULINOS  2015 op. cit.  
36  PAUL – NI 2017. op. cit.  
37  MATTIOLI  – MOULINOS  2015 op. cit.  234 2. Improve the regulatory and policy framework: Policies and regulations 
should at least contain:38  
• considering privacy and cybersecurity as two intrinsically interdependent  
topics;  
• defining  security  measures  to be considered  in current  smart  grid 
deployments  (e.g., smart meter  rollouts);  
• demanding grid operators for mandatory risk  assessments;  
• demanding  manufacturers,  integrators,  services  providers,  and grid operators  
to comply with specific security  certifications;  
• establishing regulatory pressures (e.g., fines) for not complying with  
companies;  
• making public the compliance  results;  
• demanding operators to report on cybersecurity related incidents to a 
national or supranational  entity.  
3. Foster the creation of a Public -Private Partnership (PPP) entity to coordinate 
smart grid cybersecurity initiatives.39 
4. Develop a minimum set of reference standards and guidelines.40,41  
5. Promote the development of security certification schemes for products and 
organizat ional security.42  
6. Foster the creation of testbeds and security assessments.43  
7. Foster  research  in smart  grid cybersecurity  leveraging  existing  research  
programmes.44  
8. Using  the YARA  tool and antimalware  can search,  detect,  and remove  the 
malware  from the infected systems.45  
9. Monitor the users’ behavior on network and communication, throughout the 
environment  and should  be focused  on the directory  (e.g.,  Active  Directory,  Domain,  
eDirectory, and LDAP).46,47 
10. Disable remote management of field devices when they are not required.48  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
38  Ibid. 
39  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  
40  MATTIOLI  – MOULINOS  2015 op. cit.  
41  PAUL – NI 2017. op. cit.  
42  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  
43  PAUL – NI 2017. op. cit.  
44  MATTIOLI  – MOULINOS  2015 op. cit.  
45  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  
46  Ibid. 
47  PAUL – NI 2017. op. cit.  
48  ZHOU – HE – LI – CAO – LIU – GENG 2013. op. cit.  235 6 Conclusion  
 
To conclude, the cybersecurity of infrastructure is important for the future 
because it is the type of war in the future that affects the country, such as malfunction 
of the production, essential service, and data of  the citizen. However, it is impossible 
to stop the attacks, but the correct response, good protection system, the strict standard 
and policy can mitigate the effect of these attacks.  
 
 
 
Bibliography:  
 
 ALOUL , F. – AL-ALI, A. – AL-DALKY , R. – AL-MARDINI , M. – EL-HAJJ, W.: 
Smart grid security: Threats, vulnerabilities and solutions; International Journal 
of Smart Grid and Clean Energy, 2012/1, pp. 1 -6. 
 ANJANA , K. – SHAJI, R.: A  review  on the features  and technologies  for energy  
efficiency of smart grid; I nternational Journal of Energy Research, 2018/3, pp. 
936–952. 
 BENDOVSCHI , A.: Cyber -attacks –trends,  patterns  and security  countermeasures;  
Procedia Economics and Finance, 2015. vol. 28, pp. 24 -31. 
 CASE, D. U.: Analysis  of the cyber -attack  on the Ukrainian  power  grid; 2016;  
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center, vol. 388,  2016.  
 CUNJIANG , Y. – HUAXUN , Z. – LEI, Z.: Architecture  design  for smart  grid;  
Energy  Procedia, 2012. vol. 17, p. 1524 -1528.  
 EGOZCUE , E. – RODRÍGUEZ , D. H., – ORTIZ, J. A. – VILLAR , V. F. – 
TARRAFETA , L.: Smart Grid Security: Recommendations for Europe and 
Member States; European Union Agency For Network And Information 
Security (ENISA),  2012.  
 GHOSAL , A. – CONTI , M.: Key management systems for smart grid advanced 
metering infr astructure: A survey; IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 
2019/3, pp. 2831 -2848.   
 GKATZIKIS , L. – KOUTSOPOULOS , I. – SALONIDIS , T.: The role of aggregators 
in smart grid demand  response  markets;  IEEE  Journal  on Selected  Areas  in 
Communications,  2013/7. pp. 1247 -1257.  
 GREER , C. – WOLLMAN , D. A. – PROCHASKA , D. E. – BOYNTON , P. A. – 
MAZER , J. A. – NGUYEN , C. T. FITZPATRICK , G. J. – NELSON , T. L. – KOEPKE , 
G. H. – HEFNER  Jr, A.  R., et al.: Nist framework  and roadmap for smart grid 
interoperability standards, release 3.0;  2014.  
 HAHN, A. – GOVINDARASU , M.: Cyber  attack  exposure  evaluation  framework  
for the smart grid; IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2011/4, pp. 835 -843.  
 ISLAM , S. N. – BAIG, Z. – ZEADALLY , S.: Physical layer security for the smart 
grid: Vulnerabilities,  threats,  and countermeasures;  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Industrial  Informatics, 2019/12, pp. 6522 -6530.   236  KHAN, R. – MAYNARD , P. – MCLAUGHLIN , K. – LAVERTY , D. – SEZER , S.: 
Threat analysis of blackenergy malware for synchrophasor based real-time 
control and monitoring in smart grid; 4th International Symposium for ICS & 
SCADA Cyber Security Research 2016,  pp. 53 -63. 
 KONSTANTINOU , C. – SAZOS , M. – MANIATAKOS , M.: Attacking the smart grid 
using public information; 2016 17th Latin -American Test Symposium (LATS); 
IEEE, 2016. pp. 105 -110.  
 LIANG , G. – WELLER , S. R. – ZHAO, J. – LUO, F. – DONG, Z. Y.: The 2015  
Ukraine  blackout:  Implications  for false  data injection  attacks;  IEEE  
Transactions  on Power  Systems,  vol. 2016/4, pp. 3317 -3318.   
 MATTIOLI , R. – MOULINOS , K.: Communication network interdependencies in 
smart grids; European Union Agency For Network And Information Security 
(ENISA),  2015.  
 PAUL, S. – NI, Z.: Vulnerability  analysis  for simultaneous  attack  in smart  grid 
security; in 2017  IEEE Power&Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies Conference,  ISGT, 2017. pp. 1 -5.  
 SGOURAS , K. I. – BIRDA , A. D. – LABRIDIS , D. P.: Cyber  attack  impact  on 
critical  smart  grid infrastructures; IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies Confere nce, ISGT, 2014, pp. 1 -5. 
 YAN, J. – HE, H. – ZHONG , X. – TANG, Y.: Q -learning -based  vulnerability  
analysis  of smart grid against sequential topology attacks; IEEE Transactions 
on Information Forensics and Security, 2016/1, pp. 200 -210.  
 YAN, Y. –QIAN, Y. – SHARIF , H. – TIPPER , D.: A survey on cyber security for 
smart grid communications;  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  Tutorials,  2012/4,  
pp. 998-1010.  
 ZHOU, J. – HE, L. – LI, C. – CAO, Y. – LIU, X. – GENG, Y.: What’s the 
difference between traditional powe r grid and smart grid? – from dispatching 
perspective; in: 2013 IEEE PES Asia -Pacific Power and Energy Engineering 
Conference (APPEEC) 2013. pp. 1 -6. 
 
 237 EVENTS  
ZOLTÁN NYIKES PHD  – TÜNDE ANNA KOVÁCS PHD  
ICCECIP 2021 INTERNATIONAL SCIENT IFIC CONFERENCE   
 
 
The ICCECIP 2021  - 3rd International Conference on Central European Critical 
Infrastructure Protection was held this year on 15th November. This year conference 
was the third after the 2019and 2020 ones. This event as  part of the Hungarian Science 
Festival was organized by the Bánki Donát Faculty of Mechanical and Safety 
Engineering of the Óbuda University, Milton Friedman University and Batthyány 
Lajos Foundation in a historical place of the Castle, in the Villa of Ló nyai-Hatvany. 
The motto of this year’s conference is “ Kinetic and cyber tools in the critical 
infrastructure protection ”. 
 
The conference chief patron in this year and also the years before was Szilárd 
Németh  Deputy Minister of Ministry of Defence, Hungary . The conference scientific 
patron was Prof. Dr Miklós Maróth  the President of the Eötvös Loránd Research 
Network who supported the conference series continuously in the last few years. The 
conference was organized in English, in a hybrid form in accordanc e with the 
recommendation of the COVID situation. In the place of the chief patron Dr Ferenc 
Attila Varga colonel, Head of Department of the MOD Department of Defense 
Administration, Hungary held a welcome speech in the opening ceremony. Dr Ferenc 
Attila V arga  colonel, Head of Department of the MOD Department of Defense 
Administration, Hungary held a welcome speech in the opening ceremony and 
welcomed the participants of the conference, instead of the chief patron. Prof. Dr 
Zoltán Rajnai Honorary chair of the conference, dean of the Bánki Donát Faculty of 
Mechanical and Safety Engineering had greeted the conference participants in his 
opening remark. After it the rector of the Milton Friedman University, Dr János 
Perényi delivered his opening speech. The fi nal remark of the opening ceremony was 
interpreted by István Pócza on behalf of the host, Batthyány Lajos Foundation.  
 
The event was persisted by plenary speakers presentations. The first plenary 
speaker was Prof. Dr Alexis Rusinek Attaché of the French Em bassy in Budapest. 
He was followed by Prof. Dr Tibor Kovács  associate professor of Óbuda University 
and after by Dr Kostiantyn Afanasenko associate professor of the National 
University of Civil Defence of Ukraine, Ukraine and Dr Robert C. Castel the 
scient ific associate of the Israel National Parks Authority, Israel. The final plenary 
speaker was Prof. Dr  Kornélia  Lazányi  professor of Óbuda University, who closed 
the plenary session with her excellent speech.  
 
This year during the one day conference was del ivered 21 presentations included 
plenary speeches too, on Individual Security, Cyber Security, Physical Security and 
Political Security of Critical Infrastructure Protection. In the poster session, it was 
displayed several different research area results o n eight posters. The success of the 
conference is confirmed by several foreign participants. Other than  the Hungarian 
participants were from Poland, Albania, Bosna -Herceg, Serbia, Romania, Ukraine, 
Marokko, France, Iraq, Algerie, Syria, Izrael, China, spea kers, represented on 16 
universities and 3 associations. The scientific results of the conference speeches and 238 posters will be published in article form in different journals, like Defence Review, 
Interior Review, Military Technique, National Security Revi ew, Military Logistic, 
Közelítések, Safety and Security Sciences Review, Aeronautical Science Bulletins are 
Hungarian scientifical journals, also the Critical Infrastructure Protection Review and 
Cyber Security Review British scientifical journals, the Sec urity Engineering of 
Anthropogenic Objects és Rzeczocnawce/Engineering Exper Polish scientifical 
journal, Transactions of the VSB – Technical University of Ostrava Safety 
Engineering Series Bohemian scientifical Journal and the European Journal of 
Material s Science and Engineering Romanian scientifical Journal.  
 
As part of the closing ceremony Prof Dr Zoltán Rajnai , dean of Bánki, 
Honorary chair of the conference in his closing speech told thanks for the speakers 
and poster presenters, the participants in t he event and told thanks for the organizer 
group and told highlighted thanks for the organizing of the event for Dr T ünde Anna 
Kovács chair of the international organization board, for Dr Zoltán Nyikes  director 
of the international organization board and István Pócza  the professional program 
director of the host.  
 
The honorary chair in addition invited the participants for the fourth event, which 
will be held in November 2022, the ICCECIP 2022 as part of the conference series.  
 
 
 239  
 
AUTHORS OF THIS ISSUE  
 
 
 
- ALBERT TORMA MD  is a police officer and a PhD student at the Faculty of Law 
Enforcement, University of Public Service of Hungary ; 
 
- ALI MIRZAZADA  is a Research Fellow at the Caucasian Center for International 
Relations and Strategic Studies , Azerbaijan;  
 
- ANDRÁS NOVÁK  is a journalist a nd the PhD student at the Facul ty of Military 
Science and Officer Training, National University of Public Service, Hungary ; 
 
- ANNA PUSKÁS  is a doctoral student  at the National University of Public Service, 
Doctoral School of Military Sciences , Hungary ; 
 
-  BERK CAN KOZAN  is a PhD Candidate of Security Studies at the National 
University of Public Service , Hungary ; 
 
- GÁBOR  BOLDIZSÁR  is an associate professor at the National Civil Service 
University and a head of department at the Ministry of Defen ce of Hungary ; 
 
- GRÉTA VANESSZA VÁRADI  is an employee of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
of Hungary and a PhD student at the National University of Public Service, 
Hungary ; 
 
- JÓZSEF HOLECZ  is a lecturer at the Faculty of Military Science and Officer 
Training, National University of Public Service, Hungary;  
 
-  ISTVÁN BANDI  is a researcher at the Historic Archise of the State Secu rity 
Services of Hungary;  
 
-  LAFEE ALSHAMAILEH  is a PhD student at the University of Óbuda, Hungary ; 
 
- LAJOS SZABÓ is a retired police  Colonel and a  Phd. candidate at the Óbuda 
University Budapest ; 
 
- NYESTE PÉTER  PhD is a police major, university lecturer at the Faculty of Law 
Enforcement, University of Public Service of Hungary ; 
 
- OLIVER ANDONOV is currently an Associate Professor at the Military Academy  
"General Mihailo Apostolski" in Skopje, North Macedonia ; 
 
- RITA BIHARI  is a PhD student  at the National University of Public Service, 
Doctoral School of Military Sciences , Hungary ; 
 
- RUDOLF NAGY is a university lecturer at the University of Óbuda, Hungary ; 240  
- TAMÁS SOMOGYI  is a PhD student at the University of Óbuda, Hungary ; 
 
- TIBOR KOVÁCS  is a university lecturer at the University of Óbuda, Hungary ; 
 
- TÜNDE ANNA KOVÁCS  PhD is an associate professor, chair of the international 
organization board , University of Óbuda, Hungary;  
 
- VIRÁG NOVÁK -VARRÓ  is a PhD student at the National University of Public 
Service , Hungary ; 
 
- ZOLTÁN NYIKES  is an associate professor, director of the international 
organization board , University of Óbuda, Hungary . 
 
 
 241 CONDITIONS FOR PUBLI SHING IN THE  
NATIONAL SECURITY RE VIEW  
 
 
Requirements to be met by the writings  
 
Ethical requirements:  
 the writing has not been published yet elsewhere in its present form;  
 it represents the author(s)’ exclusive literary property, which is verified by 
the author(s), through his signing an author’s declaration;  
 it must be annotated with correct references that can be easily checked up;  
 as well as with appropriate bibliographical information (including the 
literatures referred to, the list of Internet material, together with the date of 
downl oading);  
 it can reflect the author(s)’ own opinion, which does not need to necessarily 
coincide with the Service’s standpoint.  
 
Content requisites:  
 we publish in our reviews – in conformity with their nature – those scholarly 
writings (studies, essays and  articles) that relate to home defense, first of all 
to military science, national security, intelligence, reconnaissance, military 
security and security policy;  
 the writing must be logically worded, easy to survey, coherent, relevant and 
well-arranged;  
 the formulation of the author(s) own concept needs to be clear, his (their) 
conclusions have to be well -founded, supported by clear arguments and data.  
 
Formal requisites:  
 the size of the manuscripts cannot possibly exceed the space of one author’s 
sheet (4 0,000 characters or 20 -21 pages); written by Times New Roman 12 
letters, 1.5 spacing; the pictures and graphics prepared in an easy to be 
processed format (.jpg or .tif), on electronic data carrier (CD), accompanied 
by a printed hardcopy. All this has to b e taken into account when the 
author(s) sends his (their) writing to our address;  
 however, the manuscript can be sent also by Internet to the following E -mail 
addresses: natsecreview@ gmail.com  (National Security Review) . It is 
necessary to attach to the manuscript the author(s)’ name, rank, position, 
sphere of activity, permanent address, phone number and Internet address;  
 we pay royalty for the accepted and published writings, based on the contract 
of agency, in harmony  with the relevant HDF regulations and according to 
our available financial resources;  
 the Editorial Board has the manuscript revised in every case by the Service’s 
competent, officers (with academic degree) or other experts;  242  the Editorial Board preserves  the right – taking into consideration the 
advisers’ recommendations – to deny (without justification) the publication 
of those works that have proved to be ill -qualified to appear. However, it 
does not send back such writings and does not hold them either ; 
 everyone is entitled to publish in our periodicals, if the Editorial Board 
assesses his writing – on the basis of ethical, content and formal requirements 
– to be suitable for being published in our reviews and on the Internet. The 
Board holds until the end of the given year those writings that have been 
accepted, but not published. If the author wishes, we are ready to return his 
writing to him;  
 the author has to enclose in his work an “Abstract/Résumé” maximum in 10 -
12 lines, in Hungarian and also in En glish;  
 he also has to provide at least 3 -5 keywords in Hungarian and English;  
 we kindly ask the author to send us also the correct English title of his 
writing.  
 
Formal requirements of academic communications  
 
Our periodical publishes exclusively such stu dies that are provided with 
appropriate references and are prepared on the basis of the MSZ ISO 690 design 
standard.   
 
The author has to attach to his communication:  
 NAME OF THE AUTHOR, (his rank);  
 TITLE OF HIS WRITING (in Hungarian and English);  
 ABSTRACT/RESUME (in Hungarian and English);  
 KEYWORDS (in Hungarian and English);  
 AUTHOR’S DECLARATION.  
 
 
Bibliographical reference  
We kindly request the author to apply the usual numbered references, with the 
method to be found in “the Bibliographical references, (Bibliográfiai hivatkozások) 
MSZ ISO 690. p. 19 -20”.  
 
If the author fails to use this method, we send back his writing for  re-elaboration.  
 
Citations  
If the author has citations within the text, he has to mark them with raised 
numbers (superscripts) in the order of their appearance, immediately following a 
passage of research information. At the foot of that same page, a not e beginning with 
the corresponding number identifies the source of information.  
 
 
 
 243 First citations  
If we have a list of citations (bibliography), the first citation has to comprise at 
least: the author’s name, his full address, the page -numbers of the ci tation, in such a 
way to be easily identified in the list of biographical references.  
 
Examples:  
1. Jenő KOVÁCS: Roots of the Hungarian Military Science, ideological 
problems of its development. p. 6.  
2. Tibor ÁCS: Military culture in the reform era. p. 34.  
3. Lajos BEREK: Basic elements of research work in Military Science. p. 33.  
4. www.globalsecurity.org/army/iraq (download ed: 19 04 2012)  
 
 
List of biographical references (biography):  
We have to fill the list by arranging the authors’ name in alphabetical order.   
 
Examples:  
1. Tibor ÁCS: Military culture in the reform era. Budapest, 2005, Zrinyi 
Publishing House. ISBN 963 9276 45 6  
2. Lajos BEREK: Basic elements of research work in Military Science. In: 
Tivadar SZILÁGYI (editor): Excerptions. Budapest, 1944 Zrínyi Miklós 
Military Academy. pp. 31 -50. 
3. Jenő KOVÁCS: Roots of the Hungarian Military Science, ideological 
problems of its develo pment. In: New Defense Review, 2993. 47. vol. no. 6. 
pp. 1-7, ISSN 1216 -7436  
4. www.Globalsecurity.org/army/iraq (download ed: 19 04 2012)  
 
Requirements for pictures, sketches, illustrations, diagrams and other 
appendixes :  
 
 title of the picture or illustration;  
 source of the picture or illustration (or its drafter);  
 serial number of the picture or illustration, (e.g. 1. picture);  
 if it is possible, a Hungarian legend should be provided when the caption of 
the picture or illustration is given in a fo reign language.  
 
Requirements for abbreviations and foreign terms:  
 foreignisms and abbreviations should be explained – at their first appearance 
– in the footnote, in Hungarian and in the original foreign language;  
 e. g. WFP – World Food Program – ENSZ V ilágélelmezési Programja.  
 244 Points of Contact of the MNSS Scientific Board:  
 
Postal address:  
Katonai Nemzetbiztonsági Szolgálat Tudományos Tanácsa  
1502 Budapest, Pf. 117  
 
E-mail: natsecreview@gmail.com  
 
Editor in chief:  Colonel István Talián  
E-mail:  talian.istvan@knbsz. gov.hu  