QUANTUM 
TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, 
social impact, and cross-
sector disruptionITE TechLab 
Author: Marcos Allende López
Supervisor: Marcelo Da Silva
Design: .Puntoaparte Bookvertising
Images: WikicommonsQUANTUM 
TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, 
social impact, and cross-
sector disruptionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruption
This document is the result of the ongoing work of Marcelo Da Silva’s team at the ITE 
TechLab to present new technologies to the Inter-American Development Bank, with an 
approach that is both technological and social. It is the first issue in a series of articles and 
audio-visual materials that will be presented together with the IDB Lab, as part of our 
joint effort to study the use of new technologies to foster development and social inclusion.
In many cases, the research and the learning necessary to write this document were done 
jointly. For the technical aspects, the technological trials conducted with Oscar Vazquez, 
Emiliano Colina, Ignacio Cerrato and Mariana Gutierrez, from IDB; Pau Velando and 
Guillem Sant from Entanglement Partners; and Bruno Huttner from IDQuantique were 
of fundamental importance.
In other aspects, the support received from Marcelo Da Silva, Nuria Simo, Vanessa Colina, 
Mario Casco, Maria Weisson, Melissa Panteliou, Isabel Ferro, Andrea Ortega and Sergio 
González, from IDB; and Alejandro Pardo, from IDB Lab was invaluable. We would 
also like to acknowledge the great job done by Mateo L. Zúñiga from .Puntoaparte 
Bookvertising and Melissa Julian in the edition.
Copyright © 2019 Inter-American Development Bank This work is licensed under a 
Creative Commons IGO 3.0 Attribution- NonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO 
3.0 BY-NC-ND) (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc- nd/3.0/igo/legalcode ) 
and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any noncommercial purpose. 
No derivative work is allowed. Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that 
cannot be settled amicably shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the UNCITRAL 
rules. The use of the IDB’s name for any purpose other than for attribution, and the use 
of IDB’s logo shall be subject to a separate written license agreement between the IDB 
and the user and is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license. Note that link provided 
above includes additional terms and conditions of the license. The opinions expressed 
in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Inter-American Development Bank, its Board of Directors, or the countries they represent.INTRODUCTION    5
THE QUANTUM ERA    6
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES    7
What are quantum technologies?   7
QUANTUM COMPUTING    8
What is it?   8
How does it work?   11
What is the current state of this  
technology?   14
QUANTUM INFORMATION    16
What is it?   16
How does it work?   20
What is the current state of this  
technology?   21
IMPACT ON EMERGING 
TECHNOLOGIES    23
CYBER SECURITY    25
What is cyber security?   25
The future of cyber security in the  
quantum era   26
BLOCKCHAIN    31
What is blockchain?   31
What is blockchain’s security based on?   31
The future of blockchain in the  
quantum era   35
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE    42
What is artificial intelligence?   42
The future of AI in the quantum era   43
OTHER TECHNOLOGIES    46
Internet of things and drones   46
5G   47
3D printing   48IMPACT ON SECTORS AND 
INDUSTRIES    48
IMPACT ON MEDICINE, BIOLOGY, AND 
GENETICS    51
IMPACT ON EDUCATION AND JOBS    53
IMPACT ON ECONOMY AND  
FINANCE    54
IMPACT ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY 
AND AGRICULTURE    56
OTHER IMPACTS    56
COUNTRY PROGRAMS AND 
STRATEGIES    58
CHINA    59
EUROPEAN UNION    60
UNITED STATES    62
JAPAN    64
UNITED KINGDOM    64
GERMANY    66
LATIN AMERICA AND THE  
CARIBBEAN    67
REST OF THE WORLD    67
CONCLUSIONS    69
REFERENCES    72
APPENDICES    78
APPENDIX A: The evolution of quantum 
computing   78
APPENDIX B: Quantum cryptography   81
APPENDIX C: Evolution of Quantum 
Encrypted Communication Networks   85
APPENDIX D: Asymmetric cryptography   91TABLE OF CONTENTS5QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
 
INTRODUCTION
Quantum technologies have been around since the middle of the 20th century and, for 
the past 60 years, they have contributed to small-scale developments and improvements, 
primarily in medicine. Over the past decade, however, the field of quantum technology 
has grown significantly and its technologies are becoming increasingly relevant across 
several industries and sectors, with an immeasurable potential impact on society. We are 
at the dawn of a new era, the age of quantum technology. 
A new generation of quantum technologies will cut across most of the emerging tech-
nologies we know today, empowering many of them while threatening the security of 
others. They will disrupt current technology used in medicine, biology, genetics, education, 
economy and finance, energy, sustainable agriculture, transportation, and meteorology, 
among others, achieving a high social impact as well. Because of this, major global powers 
and the most prominent technology firms have already heavily invested in understanding, 
developing, and implementing these new technologies. 
This document is divided into four sections that explain different aspects of quantum 
technologies, including the way they work, their inevitable impact at both the techno-
logical and social level, and the actions governments and technology firms are taking to 
incorporate them into their programs and infrastructure. While we recommend reading 
the entire document, each of the four sections are self-contained so that the reader has 
an opportunity to skip sections if needed. Because of this, some definitions may become 
redundant for those reading the entire document. 
Section I aims to break down quantum computing and quantum information (including 
quantum cryptography), which are two of the most technologically disruptive quantum 
fields in the short and medium term. Section II discusses the impact of quantum tech-
nologies on existing digital technologies, such as cyber security, blockchain, artificial 
intelligence, the internet of things, drones, 5G, and 3D printing. Section III discusses 
the long-term social impact of quantum technologies for several different sectors, and 
it provides specific examples of use cases. To end on a topical note about the state of 
the quantum field, Section IV discusses some of the large programs currently being 
implemented by different international government institutions. Some more technical 
explanations have been reserved for the Appendices.
For the documentation and referencing of this publication, we have attempted to analyze 
and include the most relevant and impactful opinions, positions, and developments on 
quantum technologies. This has given way to a long list of references and recommended 
readings. However, it is possible that some might have been unintentionally left out; this 
will be corrected in future.THE 
QUANTUM 
ERA
00 01 10 11QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruptionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era7THE QUANTUM 
ERA
The digital era we are currently living in has significantly changed our lives over the past 
few decades. It has allowed technology to take on larger and larger roles in our daily lives 
and at this point, it is hard for many of us to imagine what life would be like without 
our cell phones, computers, and televisions, for example. This digital era has shifted the 
way human beings interact and communicate with one another. Additionally, technology 
companies, such as Amazon, Google, and IBM, are quickly growing and have completely 
transformed the way we purchase goods, access information, and perform professional and 
personal tasks. As we start to move into a quantum era, we will see a similarly disruptive 
impact as we have seen in the digital one. Quantum technologies will infiltrate and 
influence our lives in unforeseeable ways. The specifics of their impending disruption and 
potential impacts will be discussed throughout this document.
 QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
WHAT ARE QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES?
In the first half of the 20th century, between 1900 and 1930, the study of elusive physical 
phenomena gave way to a new physical theory: Quantum Mechanics. This theory describes 
the workings of the microscopic world, the natural habitat of molecules, atoms, and 
electrons. Quantum Mechanics made it possible to understand that subatomic reality 
works in a completely counter-intuitive way where we can observe and measure processes 
that do not take place in the macroscopic world.
Throughout history, technological development has evolved as humanity has gained an 
understanding of the way in which nature works. The theory of Quantum Mechanics has 
allowed us to design technologies that can improve people’s lives because through it, we now 
better understand the microscopic world. In particular, it has contributed to the development 
of quantum technologies, which use the quantum properties of subatomic nature such 
as quantum superposition, quantum entanglement, and quantum teleportation.
Without going into much technical detail, quantum superposition describes how a particle can 
exist within different states at the same time; quantum entanglement describes the way in which 
two separate particles can be correlated in such a way that, when one interacts with the other, the 
other becomes aware and reacts to it; and quantum teleportation uses quantum entanglement 
to send information from one place to another in space, without needing to travel through it.
Several existing technologies using quantum phenomena, including lasers and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) machines, have made a small but important impact over the past QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era8half-century. However, it is only now that fields such as quantum computing, quantum 
information, quantum simulation, quantum optics, quantum metrology, quantum clocks, 
and quantum sensors are beginning to spearhead a technological revolution. Many of 
these already have relevant applications and active use cases that will be discussed in this 
document, while others are still in their infancy. 
In this first section, we will only discuss quantum computing and quantum information; 
being the most complex and likely the most disruptive, they are worth a more detailed 
explanation. We will later discuss the social impact of the seven fields mentioned in the 
paragraph above in Section III. 
 QUANTUM COMPUTING
WHAT IS IT?
In order to understand how quantum computers work, it is convenient to explain how the 
computers we use every day -commonly referred to as digital or classical computers- work. 
Like all other electronic devices, their basic units of information are bits. This means their 
programs and applications are coded in bits, a binary language that uses 0s and 1s. Every 
time we interact with one of these devices, such as when touching a key on a keyboard, 
strings of 0s and 1s are created, destroyed, and modified inside the computer.
FIGURE 1.
Examples 
of binary 
language 
characters.Character Bits
7 111
A 01000001
$ 00100100
:) 0011101000101001
This may seem to be a fairly simple process, but the relevant question is, what exactly 
are these 0s and 1s within the computer? The 0 and 1 states of the bits correspond to an 
electrical current, which either circulates (1) or does not (0) through microscopic pieces. 
The microscopic pieces are called transistors, and act as switches. When the current is not 
circulating, the transistor is “off”, and corresponds to a 0 bit in the computer. When the 
current does circulate, the transistor is “on,” and it corresponds to a 1 bit in the computer. 
An easy way to understand the way bits work is by thinking about 0s as being empty holes 
and 1s being holes that are filled. What fills these holes are, in fact, electrons, which is why 
computers are called electronic devices. Each digital character corresponds to a specific 
string of 0s and 1s, shown in Figure 1.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era9Now that we understand better how classical computers work, we can try to understand the 
fundamentals of quantum computers. Similar to bits in classical computing, the basic 
unit of information in quantum computing is the quantum bit, or qubit. Qubits are 
defined as two-level quantum systems. They, like classical bits, can be at the lower level, 
marked by a state of low excitation or energy, defined as 0, and can also be at the higher 
level, marked by a state of higher energy or excitation, defined as 1. The fundamental 
difference here, in comparison to the binary nature of classical computing, is that qubits 
can also be at any of the infinitely many intermediate levels or states between 0 and 1 so 
that they are no longer binary as is the case with classical bits. For example, they can be in 
a state that is half 0 and half 1, or three-quarters 0 and one-quarter 1. This phenomenon 
of qubits being in intermediate states is an example of superposition, which stems from 
an important property of quantum systems known as quantum superposition.
In order to understand how qubits work in a more tangible way, we will focus on an elemen-
tary physics model for demonstration. Imagine an electron orbiting around the nucleus of 
an atom. Recall that the more energy electrons have, the more freedom they have to stray 
away from the nucleus, orbiting at increasingly further levels. The less energy the electron 
contains, the closer it orbits around the nucleus. To model an atom as a qubit, we would 
need to lessen the energy of the system, so the electron can only be in the two lowest orbits 
possible. We achieve this by cooling the temperature of the atom down. If the electron has 
access to more than two orbits, it is not a two-level quantum system, and thus, not a qubit. 
Let us call the orbit that is closest to the nucleus “state 0” and the one farthest from it “state 
1.” In order for the electron to be able to pass from orbit 0 to orbit 1, it needs to receive 
energy, and in order to go from orbit 1 to orbit 0 it needs to lose or dissipate energy.
When we look at an electron in an atom, we can only find it orbiting in one of the defined 
orbits, and not in between. Once the electron is cooled down, it is only possible to find 
it in the two lowest orbits, previously defined as either state 0, the lowest orbit, or state 
1, the next orbit. We can give electrons the exact amount of energy between state 0 and 
state 1 in order to get them to move from the lowest orbit to the next one. However, these 
orbits are not continuous, as there is a discrete energy gap between them. The key question 
here is: what happens when the electron is in its lowest state and is given an insufficient 
amount of energy to reach the next orbit? 
When an electron does not receive enough energy to get from state 0 to state 1, it can 
then be described as being in an intermediate state. This intermediate state is known as the 
superposition, which is a combination of states 0 and 1. This is an undefined state in which 
the electron cannot be observed because the laws of nature do not allow it to be in between 
orbits. The very moment we try to measure the location of an electron in this undefined 
state, the superposition dissolves and the electron shows up either in state 0 or state 1, and 
not in between. This phenomenon is known as system collapse or decoherence.1
1. The exact causes of the decoherence of quantum systems in nature still remain a topic of debate 
within the scientific community.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era10This can be difficult to understand because we are used to observing the macroscopic 
world, where there is an observer-independent reality in which things are the way they are, 
regardless of whether they are observed and measured or not. However, in the subatomic 
world, different realities coexist until an interaction causes only one of them to “survive”. 
In this case, nature only allows the electron to be in specific orbits around the atom 
which, for the purpose of this example, we have reduced to two. If we provide it with or 
withdraw from it a lower amount of energy than would allow it to go from one orbit to 
the other, the electron can be understood as being in an undefined position between the 
two orbits until we observe it.2 The sub-atomic reality often remains indeterminate —as 
a simultaneous overlap of various realities— until there is an interaction. It then chooses 
what form to assume and which reality will prevail.
2. The atomic model of circular electronic orbits was presented by N. Bohr in 1913, but with the 
advent of Quantum Mechanics, it was understood that the electrons are distributed around atomic 
nuclei in more complex orbitals. Added to that, if we analyze this example with Einstein’s classical 
Theory of the Photoelectric Effect we would say that electrons in atoms can only take and dissipate 
amounts of energy that are proportional to the gap between levels. However, we think this simple 
example is very useful to explain the fundamentals of qubits. In practice, there are multiple ways to 
obtain these two-level quantum systems such as with trapped ions, defects in solids, semiconduc -
tors, superconductors or topological nanowires.FIGURE 2.
Atom with 
two orbitals 
simulating 
the behaviour 
of a qubit.
1
0
NucleusQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era11So, how do we determine which orbit the electron will appear in when we observe, or 
interact, with it? Unfortunately, the answer is that we can never know for sure. We can 
only know the exact probability that it will appear in orbit 0 or in orbit 1. This probability 
depends on the amount of energy the electron has when we observe it and at the moment 
it is observed, it “must decide”; the more energy it was given, the more probable it will be 
to find it in orbit 1 at the time of measurement.
Physicists came to this understanding of nature through their knowledge of Quantum Me -
chanics in the 20th century after decades of research and debates. It was initially rejected by 
scientists as important as Albert Einstein, who strongly believed in observer-independent 
reality and determinism. However, years of experiments have corroborated this theory of 
the microscopic world. 
HOW DOES IT WORK?
Quantum computers allow us to use the quantum properties of qubits in order to run 
quantum algorithms. These algorithms use superposition and entanglement to offer a 
much higher processing capacity than classical computers. It is important to note that 
the real change in paradigm is not that quantum computers are simply faster than 
classical computers,  as several publications erroneously suggest, but that they allow for 
quantum algorithms that perform certain operations in a completely different, and 
importantly, much more efficient way. 
Let us look at a specific example of the efficiency of quantum computers over classical 
computers. Imagine we want to know which of the N=1,000,000 possible routes from 
Bogotá, Colombia to Lima, Perú is the fastest. To find the optimum route, a computer 
must start by digitalizing 1,000,000 options, meaning they need to be translated into 
bits for classical computers, and into qubits for quantum computers.3 While a classical 
computer would need to analyze the routes, one by one, according to a specific algorithm 
in order to find the best route, a quantum computer would use a process called quantum 
parallelism, which allows it to consider all routes at the same time. In quantifying this, 
we can see that a classical computer needs N/2 steps (500,000 attempts in this case) to 
find the optimum route, while a quantum computer can perform the entire operation in 
only √N steps (1,000 attempts in this case). 
In many cases, the advantage of using a quantum computer is not simply but exponential, 
thanks to quantum parallelism. With only n qubits, we can obtain a computing capacity 
equivalent to 2n bits. For example, with 270 qubits you could have more different and 
simultaneous combinations (base states) in a quantum computer than the number of 
atoms in the universe, estimated to be approximately 280.
3. Classical or digital computers have a multi-layered architecture, meaning our interactions with 
them take place at many layers above the logical layer of bits. However, these are common discus-
sions surrounding quantum computing as it is still in its infancy.Photograph of a chip constructed by D-Wave Systems Inc. designed to operate as a 128-qubit superconduc-
ting adiabatic quantum optimization processor, mounted in a sample holder.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era130 or 1 
(one state at the same time)
N bits  1 state of N bits (at a time)
10 bits  1 state of 10 bits (at a time)
50 bits  1 state of 50 bits (at a time)
100 bits  1 state of 100 bits (at a time)
270 qubitsQUBITS
280 bitsBITS
N qubits  2n simultaneous states
10 qubits  1024 simultaneous states
50 qubits  1125899906842624 
simultaneous states
100 qubits   
1267650600228229401496703205376 
simultaneous statesα•0 + β•1
(2 simultaneous states)
000 or 001 or 010 or 100 or 011 
or 101 or 110 or 111
(one state at the same time)α•000 + β•001 + γ•010 + δ•100 + 
ζ•011 + η•101 + ϴ•110 + σ•111
(8 simultaneous states)00 or 01 or 10 or 11
(one state at the same time)α•00 + β•01 + γ•10 + δ•11
(4 simultaneous states)QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era14FIGURE 3.
Progresses in the development 
of quantum computers in 
terms of number of qubits
* Riggeti commited to reach 128 qubits in 2019
1997 2000 2017 1998 2005 2006 2007 2018 201972128
16
12
8
2
Google
Rigetti*D-WaveWaterloo and MITInsbruckIBM, MIT Media Lab, Berkeley University3
22
IBMLos AlamosOxford University 77
Los AlamosIBM and Stanford
5050
1717
IBM
IntelIntelIBM
WHAT IS THE CURRENT STATE OF THIS TECHNOLOGY?
P . Benioff [1] and R. Feynman [2] were the first physicists to propose building computers 
based on the principles of Quantum Mechanics in the early 1980s. In the following 20 
years, theoretical models for their architecture and the algorithms that could run within 
them were created. It was not until two decades later, in 1998, that the first 2-qubit 
quantum computers [3-7] were built, and the first algorithms were run on them [8]. 
Another two decades went by before the quantum computing race really accelerated; 
after 19 years of relatively small achievements in terms of the number of qubits quantum 
computers could contain, IBM took the lead in 2017, first with a 17-qubit, and later 
with a 50-qubit quantum computer [9]. In 2018, Google announced that it had a QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era1572-qubit microprocessor [10] and Rigetti has committed to reaching 128 qubits in 2019 
[11].4 Figure 3 shows the most relevant milestones, regarding the number of qubits, that 
have been published thus far. This is discussed in more detail in Appendix A.
Qubit instability is the main challenge quantum computing is currently facing. Because 
qubits are so highly instable, controlling them is extremely difficult using current technolo-
gy and this instability translates into computing “errors”. Quantum error correction is very 
different from error correction in classical computing, which uses redundancy. Classical 
computers write or send the same sequence several times such that once all packages have 
been recovered, the errors can be identified and the message reconstructed. Given that 
quantum states cannot be cloned [14], in order to correct an error in a qubit, other qubits 
are needed to also carry the error.
The individual qubits are called physical qubits. The groups of qubits, which can take care 
of error correction and behave as a single qubit with no errors, are called logical qubits. 
For a quantum computer to function perfectly well, there needs to be error correction. 
Thus, the amount of qubits that really matter are in terms of logical, not physical qubits. 
The great leap in implementation of logical rather than physical qubits is yet to come. 
According to some experts, the number of physical qubits needed to obtain a logical one 
could be in excess of one thousand.
It is estimated that a quantum computer with 1500 to 2330 logical qubits will be capable 
of breaking all existing cyber security [12,13], which we will later discuss in more detail 
in Section II. When exactly this will happen still remains unknown. It is also worth 
noting that the number of qubits in Figure 3 correspond to physical and not logical 
qubits. Although the number of qubits is relevant, it is not the only important feature to 
determine which of two quantum computers is better.
We believe that the first quantum computing services to be provided to the general public 
will be offered by large technology companies in the form of software as a service (SaaS). 
Eventually, hybrid processors will allow the use of classical or quantum computing, de-
pending on the problem and on the computing capacity needed by the user. In the same 
way that it is currently possible to run a virtual machine in different service providers’ 
clouds, such as Amazon, Google, and Microsoft, in the future we might be able to rely 
on hybrid quantum and classical computing services in the cloud.
4. The most popular quantum computers yet (only prototypes thus far) can be divided into two 
kinds: 1) Standard quantum computers, in which the qubits are quanta of magnetic flow in 
superconducting circuits, and 2) topological quantum computers, where qubits are pairs of 
quasi-particles called anions. Without going into too much detail, the advantage of the latter 
compared to the former is that, thanks to their architecture, topological quantum computers are 
more stable in terms of errors and noise. This poses one of the greatest challenges that quantum 
computing must overcome.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era16 QUANTUM INFORMATION
WHAT IS IT?
The field of quantum information is the quantum equivalent to the field of classical 
information that studies how to quantify, store, and transfer information. Every time 
we access the Internet, make a telephone call, or pay with a credit card, we generate data 
that travels around the world at speeds close to the speed of light. Information currently 
travels primarily through one of two channels: (i) by cable, using primarily copper pairs 
and the network of fiber optics which cover the planet with more than one billion meters 
of underwater cable [15,16], or (ii) wirelessly, using the network of wireless telecommuni-
cations that employs different satellites as repeaters to send information to its destinations.
In order for the data generated in our electronic devices to be transferred either by cable or 
wirelessly, they are equipped with network cards that generate both analogue and digital 
signals that travel through the telecommunications networks in an orderly manner, follow-
ing standardized protocols that have been developed and improved for decades. Analogue 
signals have a specific form and frequency, while digital signals consist of electric pulses. 
Not only is it important to have effective and secure transmission of data, but it is also 
necessary to have effective and secure storage as well. There are several technological 
options to store data. Commonly, the hard drives of the electronic devices generating 
the data, such as computers, cell phones, and tablets, store the data themselves. Data can 
also be stored in USB memory sticks, external hard drives, or the cloud. Cloud storage, 
which involves the use of third-party storage in exchange for a fee, is being used more 
and more frequently.
There are two fundamentals in maintaining secure data transfer and storage: cryp-
tography and authentication.
• Cryptography consists of encrypting data so that only authorized users are able 
to access its contents. Whenever we place a phone call or access a website that has 
the header “https”, encryption protocols are running in the background. Signals 
containing data can be intercepted when travelling through cable, optical fibers, or 
wirelessly, and thus, encryption is necessary so that data content cannot be accessed 
through an interception.
• Authentication enables us to confirm who we are communicating with when trans-
ferring data and is essential for cryptography to succeed. If we receive an encrypted 
message but we are not able to verify the messenger’s identity, we cannot be sure that 
the message was not sent or altered by someone else.
Cryptography techniques may be classified into two groups: symmetric and asymmetric. 
Symmetric techniques use the same key to encrypt and decrypt a given message or data 
set, and asymmetric techniques use different, but complementary, keys.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era17Symmetric cryptography
Symmetric cryptography is completely secure in theory, but not very practical; it either 
has to be combined with asymmetric cryptography or is carried out inefficiently. Simply, 
symmetric cryptography processes can be described in three steps:
1. The sender and recipient agree upon and share a private key. 
2. The sender encrypts the message with the private key and sends it to the recipient.
3. The recipient receives the message and decrypts it with the same private key.
Symmetric cryptography demands the generation and exchange of a private key prior to 
the encryption, transmission, and decryption of the message. This kind of encryption 
is completely secure only if (i) the keys are completely randomly generated, (ii) the 
channel used to share the keys is completely secure, and (iii) the keys are not used 
more than once. However, using current or classical telecommunications, it is not viable to 
generate completely random keys because the algorithms that generate them always have a 
certain periodicity; they are repeated. Regarding the second requirement, the only classical 
way to have a completely secure channel to exchange these symmetric keys is to do so in 
person, which is highly inefficient. Doing it remotely implies trusting channels previously 
secured with asymmetric cryptography, which is not quantum-safe, as we will soon explain. 
With the exception of some intelligence agencies and governments that generate a large 
number of keys periodically and distribute them physically using external drives, classical 
symmetric cryptography is not typically used unless it is combined with asymmetric 
cryptography which, as we will see, will be unsafe in the future. 
One of the most famous historical examples of symmetric encryption is that of the Enigma 
machine used by the Germans in World War II. These machines had a set of rotors inside, 
allowing the machines to generate different sequences in the order of 1019 to encrypt 
messages. Each of these sequences were essentially symmetric keys. The machine’s operator 
was given instructions once a month on how to place their rotors so that all the machines 
in use encrypted and decrypted with the same key. None of the three requirements for 
secure communication presented two paragraphs above was respected and The Allies were 
able to take advantage of the third in breaking Enigma’s encryption. 
The Germans set the key (the configuration of the rotors) arbitrarily, rather than com-
pletely randomly; instructions were sent by courier and, although insecure, this was not 
the weak point; the weak point that was harnessed by The Allies was the fact that the 
same keys were being used for different messages. The Allies were able to identify repeated 
phrases on the keys, such as the header or the date, allowing them to discard many of the 
1019 possible keys, and find the right one.
Asymmetric cryptography
Given the inconveniences posed by symmetric keys, the development of asymmetric 
cryptography began in the 70s. Asymmetric cryptography allows for relatively secure Photograph of a quantum machine. The mechanical resonator which was placed in a superposition is situated 
in the bottom left of the chip. The smaller white rectangle is the coupling capacitor between the mechanical 
resonator and the qubit.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era19point-to-point data transmission. This security relies on the difficulty to reverse certain 
mathematical operations, such as the factorization of prime numbers. Despite the fact 
that multiplying two prime numbers is a computationally simple operation, factoring 
the result of its product is exponentially more difficult. This involves the simple 
generation of pairs of “complementary” keys in such a way that a message encrypted 
by one of the keys can only be decrypted by the other.
The important thing to highlight here is that it requires an enormous computing 
capacity to find the key that decrypts the message based on the one that encrypts 
it, as is shown in Figure 4. This allows us to communicate securely with someone by 
requesting them to generate a pair of keys. They share a public key used to encrypt and 
send the message, which only they can decrypt with their private key when received. It 
works like a dropbox in a video rental shop; anyone can drop the film in the box but only 
authorized personnel can open the box to retrieve the videos. These processes can generally 
be described according to the following steps:
1. The recipient uses a given algorithm to generate a pair of keys periodically, which are 
known as the public key and private key. The public key is shared openly with the 
sender, and the private key is kept secret by the recipient.
2. The sender takes the public key offered by the recipient that they intend to send the 
message to, encrypts the message using the key, and then sends it to the recipient.
3. The recipient receives the encrypted message and decrypts it using the private key, 
which only they have access to.
Among the many problems that quantum computing will be able to solve in a much more 
effective manner than current computing in the future, are those that lie in the foundation 
of all the asymmetric cryptography used today. Quantum computing will eventually break 
all current asymmetric cryptography techniques used over the Internet and phones.
The three main algorithms used to generate keys in asymmetric cryptography are (i) 
RSA (based on the factorization of prime numbers, shown in Figure 4), (ii) discreet 
logarithms, and (iii) elliptic curves, all of which are described in Appendix D. In 1994, 
P . Shor presented a quantum algorithm that effectively reverses each of these three 
algorithms and warned that there may come a time when keys used in asymmetric 
cryptography will be broken faster with a quantum computer than they can be generated 
with a digital or classical one [17].
Luckily, the field of quantum information will eventually render asymmetric cryptography 
obsolete. Quantum cryptography allows for the generation of completely random 
symmetric keys that can be shared securely and effectively without having to use 
asymmetric cryptography to secure the channel or having to communicate in person 
to exchange them. In other words, it provides a secure channel to send completely 
random keys. This can be done by means of two processes: quantum random number 
generation (QRNG) and quantum key distribution (QKD).QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era20FIGURE 4. Example of the prime factorization problem, the basis of many 
current encryption protocols. All the computational capacity in the entire world 
could not factor extremely large numbers within a reasonable amount of time.
HOW DOES IT WORK?
The success of these processes, described in more detail in Appendix B, lies in the fact 
that they are implemented at the hardware level -in the physical structure of computers 
and channels- rather than at the software level -by means of programs- as is the case with 
classical random number generation and classical cryptography algorithms. This allows us 
to benefit from the advantages of physical processes with quantum properties which 
a) have complete uncertainty and are not deterministic, allowing for the generation of 
truly random keys,5 and b) exploit the fact that interception affects the result of the key 
5. A simple example is that of a semi-reflective mirror which lets through half of the light it receives, 
so that each particle of light that reaches it has a 50% chance of passing through. If we write 1 every 
time a photon goes through, and 0 every time a photon is reflected, we obtain a 100% random key.DIGITAL OR CLASSICAL COMPUTING
QUANTUM COMPUTING15
153x5=?
3x5=?15=?
15=3x5Multiplication of 
prime numbers
Multiplication of 
prime numbersPrime 
factorization
Prime 
factorization
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era21measurement; keys are coded into quantum states and thus, change when observed, 
enabling us to detect eavesdroppers that may observe the key during the transmission.6
Quantum symmetric cryptography is completely secure and resistant to quantum 
computing because its security relies on the laws of nature that govern physical processes 
taking place at the hardware level, rather than the software level, where security relies on 
the difficulty of reversing mathematical algorithms. 
WHAT IS THE CURRENT STATE OF THIS TECHNOLOGY?
While quantum computing is still under development, quantum cryptography is already in use. 
IDQuantique is the world’s leading manufacturer of quantum devices and sells quantum 
random number generators that are only a few millimeters in size. In terms of key ex-
change, the first QKD protocols were conceived of and published in the 1980s. The most 
widely used QKD protocol is BB84, proposed by C. Bennett and G. Brassard in 1984 
[19]. It is described further in Appendix B. The second most relevant QKD protocol is 
E91, proposed by A. Eckert in 1991 [20].
For the implementation of these protocols, it is necessary to have quantum systems to code 
into the randomly generated 0s and 1s that constitute the symmetric keys. For practical 
reasons, mainly photons are used as the quantum systems. 
Photons, or light particles, can travel through both optical fiber and free space. However, 
optical fiber has a much higher attenuation than free space when above the densest 
layers of the atmosphere. Currently, the limit when actually transferring these keys 
through an optical fiber channel is a few hundred kilometers. The first documented 
transfer consisted of a network of six nodes which were 29 kilometers in length, 
between Harvard University and Boston University in 2004  [21,22]. A recent ex -
periment succeeded in exchanging keys via optical fiber between nodes at more than 
400 kilometers of distance [23] in very favorable conditions. The scalability of these 
networks depends on the development of quantum repeaters, [24] which require very 
sophisticated quantum memories which are still being developed [25,26]. China owns 
the longest existing network, with 32 nodes more than 2,000 km in length between the 
cities of Beijing and Shanghai [27].
6. Most frequently, the polarization of light particles, photons, are used as quantum states. If we 
think of photons as arrows, their direction of polarization can be understood as the direction of the 
arrow. We can think of a 0 as a horizontal photon, and a 1 as a vertical photon. If an eavesdropper 
observes the key when it is being transmitted, the polarization of the photon (the direction of the 
arrow) changes, and so does the key. When a piece of that key is later exchanged, and thus sacrificed 
in order to check if both have the same key, it is possible to detect potential eavesdroppers. The rest 
of the key is used to encrypt information only if no eavesdroppers are detected.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
The Quantum Era22Satellites are used as nodes in wireless communications. The first country to launch a 
satellite for Earth-to-space and space-to-Earth quantum communication purposes was 
also China. In 2016, the QUESS (Quantum Experiments at Space Scale) space mission 
launched a 600 kg satellite known as MICIUS and the estimated total cost of the mission 
was $100 million [28,29]. In communication with three Earth stations in Delingha, 
Nanshan, and Lijiang, it was possible to generate and share quantum keys for the 
first time over long distances exceeding 1,200 km [30,31].
Because of this satellite, on September 17, 2017, one of the greatest milestones in the 
field of quantum information was achieved: a successful 90-minute quantum encrypted 
videocall between China and Austria over a distance of 7,600 km. To public knowl-
edge, this was the first intercontinental communication encrypted using secure quantum 
technology. After the quantum key was successfully generated and exchanged, the videocall 
data traveled over a regular optical fiber wire, and was encrypted and decrypted in China 
and Austria with the quantum secret key [32].
AUSTRIA CHINAFirst intercontinental 
quantum encrypted 
communication (to the 
public knowledge)
In a few years, all internet-connected devices, and even some that are not connected to 
the internet, will encrypt the information they exchange using quantum keys that have 
previously been generated securely. When quantum computers are powerful and robust 
enough, any communication done without these quantum keys will no longer be secure. 
When quantum computers are ready to break classical keys, it will not only be unsafe to 
have new files which are classically encrypted, but any existing sensitive or confidential 
file which has already been downloaded or intercepted in the present time, may be 
kept until a quantum computer is able to decrypt it. This is already known as “hack 
today, crack tomorrow.” For this very alarming reason, governments and private companies 
are joining forces in the race to adapt quantum technology at an increasing speed in order 
to guarantee the safety of their data, as we will discuss in Section IV.
Appendix C contains a detailed summary of the most relevant initiatives in this area by 
governments, universities, and the private sector to date.IMPACT ON 
EMERGING 
TECHNOLOGIES
00 01 10 11QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruptionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies24IMPACT ON 
EMERGING 
TECHNOLOGIES
Emerging technologies, such as blockchain, AI, the Internet of 
Things (IoT), drones, virtual reality, 5G, 3D printing, robots, 
and self-driving vehicles are becoming increasingly relevant across 
various fields and sectors in this time of digital transformation. 
These technologies aim to improve our quality of life by acceler-
ating other technological developments and generating social impact. However, each 
of these technologies are growing in parallel for the most part. There are only a few 
companies developing products combining two or more of these technologies, such 
as blockchain and IoT or drones and AI. Eventually, these technologies will merge to 
generate an exponentially bigger impact than they would be able to alone. However, 
because they are still at a very early stage of development and because there is a shortage 
of developers and personnel with enough technical knowledge to make innovations, 
these convergences are still missing.
Quantum technologies will significantly disrupt the current progress and future develop-
ment of the emerging technologies described in the previous paragraph and will provide 
cross-cutting influence. This section will describe how quantum computers will threaten 
data authentication, exchange, and storage, having the greatest impact on areas where 
cryptography plays a fundamental role, such as cyber security and blockchain. 5G and 
IoT technologies also require secure data authentication and exchange and thus, quan-
tum computing will be significantly threatening for them as well. Despite the significant 
threats they pose, quantum computing and the other emerging technologies will allow 
for necessary technological evolution and growth. QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies25 CYBER SECURITY
FIGURE 5. OSI Model.
Layer Type Function Cyber  
security risk
7Aplication DataHigh level APIs, programs 
and applicationsVirus and trojan
6Presentation DataData representation & 
encryptionPersonal information 
theft and attacks on 
BIOS
5Session Data Interhost communication
4Transport SegmentsEnd-to-end connections 
and reliabilityIP faking, authenti-
cation, MITM, data 
decrypting, reinjection 
attacks
3Network PackagesPath determination, 
routing and logical 
addressing (IP)
2Data link InfrastructurePhysical addresing (MAC 
& LLC)Eavesdropping, 
saturation attacks, ARP 
spoofing
1Physical BitsMedial, signal and binary 
transmission (logical bits)Undue access to the 
physical layer and 
data theftWHAT IS CYBER SECURITY?
Cyber security is defined as the practice of protecting systems, networks, and pro-
grams. When the Internet appeared in the 1980s, it was necessary to develop universal 
standards and protocols so that people around the world speaking different languages and 
using different systems could communicate with one another on it in a unified way. With 
this aim, in 1984 the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) created and 
published the OSI model (Open Systems Interconnection), which defines seven theoretical 
layers [34], shown in Figure 5.
Each of these layers present the different risks that cyber security addresses. With the 
arrival of quantum computing and quantum cryptography, they will change completely.Hardware SoftwareQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies26THE FUTURE OF CYBER SECURITY IN THE QUANTUM ERA
There are a wide array of risks associated with the use of Internet-connected devices, the 
most relevant of which are presented in Figure 5 within the framework of the OSI model. 
Note that many security breaches occur because of inadequate or unsafe behaviors on the 
part of users, which will not be discussed in this document. Outside of this, the two core 
categories in regards to security issues are cryptography and authentication, as you may recall 
from Section I. If network access for users is not forged, and the information is stored and 
shared using completely secure cryptography so that no unauthorized person can access it, 
most potential security breaches do not happen. Thus, this section focuses on the significant 
changes that cryptography and authentication will need to undergo in the quantum era.
Changes in cryptography and authentication will become crucial as the advent of quantum 
computing will put cyber security in serious danger. When quantum computers are robust 
enough, they will be capable of breaking every single cryptography and authentication 
protocol that rests unconditionally on asymmetric cryptography algorithms.7 Quotes from 
two of the most reputable standards agencies, the National Institute for Standards in Technology 
(NIST) and the National Security Agency (NSA), highlight the seriousness of this issue:
“If large-scale quantum computers are ever built, they will be able to break many 
of the public-key cryptosystems currently in use” - NIST [36]
“A sufficiently large quantum computer, if built, would be capable of undermining 
all widely-deployed public key algorithms used for key establishment and digital 
signatures.” - NSA [37]
Both agencies call attention to the problems quantum computing will engender for cur-
rent cryptography and authentication, and they also propose similar solutions to these 
problems. Both agencies are still reluctant to adopt new standards that rely on symmetric 
quantum cryptography (described in Section I) probably because they believe is not yet 
mature enough and would require a massive renewal of hardware to implement. Instead, 
their recommendations focus on Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC). 
PQC proposes the use of new asymmetric mathematical algorithms that are more difficult 
to reverse than those currently in existence. This approach does not require hardware 
renewal; it only requires software updates. NIST proposes the use of lattice-based cryp-
tography, code-based cryptography, multivariate polynomial cryptography, hash-based 
signature, among other algorithms to be researched for this use [36]. They also commend 
the European initiatives, PQCrypto [38] and SAFEcrypto [39], and the Japanese initiative, 
CREST Crypto Math [40], that have already begun work in this area.
7. In 1994, P . Shor [17] published a quantum algorithm to effectively reverse cyber security protocols based 
on discrete logarithms and factorization of prime numbers. This algorithm has already been successfully 
implemented in quantum computers, and once quantum computers have a large enough number of 
qubits, it will be possible to use them to effectively break the cryptography we use currently.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies27Additionally, in 2017, NIST called for proposals on PQC algorithms [41]. Their intention 
was to involve the community in playing a leading role in their search for an international 
consensus on the standardization of secure encryption methodologies after the widespread 
implementation of quantum computing is underway.
PQCrypto has already made specific recommendations on the use of new symmetric 
cryptography algorithms known as SPHINCS and XMSS [42].
The biggest problem posed by PQC algorithms is that they will never be completely 
secure. Their security relies on the fact that classical computers are not capable of 
efficiently solving very difficult mathematical problems, which are the basis of the 
PQC algorithm. Once quantum computers become larger and more capable, algo-
rithm reversal will become much easier to achieve, threatening the security of devices 
and networks secured by PQC algorithms. Quantum algorithms that are ready to break 
today’s cryptography already exist, and are simply awaiting quantum computers that are 
robust enough to run them.
Cryptography
The PQC algorithm reversal problem described above does not exist with quantum asym-
metric cryptography because quantum cryptography protocols (QKD) simply do not use 
mathematical algorithms. Rather, they consist of physical processes whose violability go 
against the laws of nature.
“QKD as a cryptographic primitive offers security that is guaranteed by the laws 
of physics [...]. This means that even assuming an adversary to have unlimited 
computational resources, including unlimited classical and quantum computing 
resources, QKD is secure now and always will be.” – ETSI [43]
In a much more complete document than those from the NSA and NIST, the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) stated in 2015 that quantum cryptog-
raphy is the only alternative for long term secure encryption. They analyze quantum 
cryptography’s functioning, advantages, and challenges. Further, it describes use cases for 
QKD, including encryption and authentication, network infrastructure, cloud storage, 
and artificial intelligence, as well as areas of application, such as medicine and health, 
financial services, and mobile apps. [43]
Explained in Section I, the security enabled by quantum cryptography relies on the laws of 
physics because it takes place at the hardware level, rather than at the software level, which 
corresponds to layers 1 and 2 in the OSI model. The advantages afforded by the use 
of quantum processes in making quantum cryptography completely safe are that (i) 
the generation of keys is completely random, and (ii) keys are impossible to be spied 
on in an exchange without being detected. However, as mentioned before, quantum 
cryptography also has a disadvantage in that it requires hardware modifications 
and upgrades to incorporate quantum equipment, but devices are substituted and 
improved all the time so it should not be a strong barrier.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies28FIGURE 6. Alice and Bob using quantum random number generators (QRNG) 
and quantum key distribution (QKD) to generate and share keys in a secure way.
There are readily available commercial options for this type of equipment. They typically 
consist of devices connected with one another to:
• Generate quantum random keys using quantum random number generators (QRNG).
• Exchange keys coded into quantum states, such as through the polarization of photons.
• Carry out a reconciliation process to detect potential eavesdroppers and debug the key.
• T ransfer the key locally to a traditional encryptor, which is connected to the electronic 
device generating the information to be encrypted, shown in Figure 6.
IDQuantique is the current leading world manufacturer of these devices. Other compa-
nies, such as MagiQ, SeQureNet, and QuintessenceLabs, also have products; others, such 
as Toshiba, NEC, Mitsubishi, and IBM, have research programs in this area. 
Appendix C presents some of the most commonly used asymmetric cryptography tech-
niques and compares the ability of classical and quantum computers in breaking them. 
It can take from thousands or millions of years to days, hours, or minutes to break them, 
depending on the type of device being used.ALICE BOB
Encryptor EncryptorQuantum 
deviceQuantum channel
Classical channelQuantum 
device
Quantum 
random 
generation 
of the keyKey exchange 
through a 
quantum 
channelKey 
reconciliation 
and 
amplification 
Exchange of data 
and information 
encrypted with the 
quantum keys2
3
41QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies29Authentication
Through quantum processes, quantum cryptography offers security that is not possible 
to achieve with classical cryptography. However, there is still no clear solution to the 
authentication problem. In regard to information encryption, asymmetric cryptography 
is used to authenticate and perform digital or electronic signatures. Specifically, a digital 
signature is simply a pair of public-private keys. In order to sign messages, we need to 
encrypt the messages with the private key so the recipient gets it encrypted with the 
public key, allowing them to verify that it is our message, as:
• Without our private key it is impossible to generate our public key.
• A trustworthy third party has previously verified that out electronic identity matches 
with our real identity and issued a certificate stating that the public key belongs to us. 
This certificate is attached to the messages we send.
The problem here lies in the fact that quantum computing allows us to discover the 
private key using the public key, making the safety of the whole process disappear. It is 
difficult to provide a quantum solution to authentication because the authentication of 
servers, which happens at a network level (layer 3 in the OSI model) and authentication 
of users, which takes place at the application level (layer 7 of the OSI model) are not 
easily translated to the physical level (layer 2 in the OSI model).
To understand this difficulty, it is important to keep in mind that authentication involves 
(i) generating an identity, (ii) validating that identity (by a trusted party), (iii) the 
possibility of verifying that identity (checking that it was validated by a trusted party), 
(iv) the possibility of repudiating that identity, (iv) reusing that identity and (v) re-
covering that identity, among others. In order to meet all of these requirements, records 
-or the use of memory- is required. However, the nature of the microscopic world makes 
it impossible to clone quantum states and it is very challenging to record something when 
copying it is not possible. Thus, quantum memory is extremely complex and is presently 
only under development [14]. Most quantum memories that have been developed to 
date are capable of only storing the states of a few photons at a time. The current record 
is held by a research group at the University of Warsaw, with 665 simultaneous states at a 
time, accomplished in 2017 [44]. Quantum memories will also have implications for data 
storage but there is a long to go before quantum data storage becomes a reality.
Despite these difficulties, there are some floating ideas on how to develop secure quantum 
digital signatures (QDS). In 2001, D. Gottesman at the University of California, Berkeley 
and I. Chuang at the MIT Media Lab [45] proposed the first theoretical model of quantum 
digital signatures.8 The most successful experimental accomplishments in this area have 
been carried out without using memories or quantum repeaters, both of which make the 
8. Without going into too much technical detail, these signatures work similarly to Lamport signa-
tures and Merkle trees, but use (i) random number generators for private keys and (ii) quantum 
mappings instead of hash functions to generate public keys from the private keys.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies30process difficult. In 2015, the first implementation was able to transmit QDS at a distance 
of more than 2 km [46]. One year later, a transmission of over a 1.6 km distance [47,48]  
was made through the air. In the same year, the 100 km barrier was broken using a 102 km 
long optical fiber. This is the longest distance covered to date [49]. The problem posed by 
these signatures is that despite being completely secure, they are not reusable. When they 
are used, part of the private key is revealed. This makes them less practical than originally 
expected, even after overcoming their complex implementation in terms of infrastructure. 
For further information on the experimental progress of QDS we recommend referring to 
the publication, “Progress in experimental quantum digital signatures” [50].
An extremely interesting idea, whose implementation will be equally important for cryp -
tography and authentication is that of a quantum internet. Some technology firms, such 
as QuTech, are working on roadmaps to achieve interconnected quantum computer net-
works that combine all the advantages of quantum technologies, such as secure symmetric 
cryptography or synchronicity, through atomic clocks. Their working group has already 
published a paper defining six stages in the development of a quantum internet [51].
The development of quantum computer networks will require further development of 
viable and optimal quantum computer architecture that can utilize quantum properties 
in order to be secure at all levels. In 2000, D. DiVincenzo identified five criteria for the 
development of robust quantum computers, namely: (i) a scalable physical system with 
well-defined qubits, (ii) the ability to initialize the state of the qubits to a simple fiducial 
state, such as, for example, state |000 … › , (iii) long enough coherence times (longer 
than the operational time of quantum gates) (iv) a universal set of quantum gates, and (v) 
a qubit-specific measurement capability [52]. In 2017, M.F . Brandl published what he 
called a Von Neumann quantum architecture, which combined Von Neumann’s classical 
architecture with DiVincenzo’s five criteria [53].
Ultimately, it is a fact that cyber security will change radically in the next few years in 
order to withstand attacks from quantum computers. The proposed solution to improve 
asymmetric cryptography algorithms that are currently widely used is either the ideation 
of new asymmetric algorithms known as PQC, or quantum symmetric cryptography, 
consisting of QRNG and QKD. While the latter has proven to be completely secure, it is 
currently only useful for cryptography purposes and requires infrastructure adaptations. 
On the other hand, PQC offers only short-term guarantees but for the time being, it 
seems to be the most viable solution in terms of authentication. In the long run, we are 
likely to witness the birth of a new concept of the Internet, consisting of a completely 
different network of interconnected quantum or hybrid computers.
In Section IV, we will discuss how the great world powers are aware of this threat and 
are implementing billion-dollar programs to dominate and fight against it. Additionally, 
universities, start-ups, and large technology firms are increasingly seeking to play an 
important role in this emerging quantum field.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies31 BLOCKCHAIN
WHAT IS BLOCKCHAIN?
Blockchain technology was initially presented in 1991 by physicists S. Haber and W.S. 
Stornetta, who introduced the idea of a ledger to digitally record audio, image, video, and 
text files in an immutable and decentralized way [54].
In 2008, blockchain rose to fame with the advent of Bitcoin [55], a cryptocurrency 
whose security and functioning are guaranteed through blockchain technology. Since 
then, blockchain has provided technological support to more than 2,000 cryptocurrencies 
and to other digital solutions outside the area of non-fiduciary money. Some examples 
of the wide range of applications in which this technology can be utilized include supply 
chains, transparent voting systems, energy supply traceability, financial inclusion, remit-
tances, digital identity, humanitarian aid, medical and property records, and academic 
certifications, among others.
Blockchain technology’s utility lies in the fact that it allows us to keep an unchangeable, 
decentralized, and consensual record of transactions. A transaction is defined as anything 
that is registered in the blockchain, including tasks such as the creation of a user, the 
updating of a document, or the sale of an asset, among many others. When blockchain is 
used as it is meant to, all participants, or nodes, of the blockchain share a synchronized 
ledger. Any information that is pushed to the shared ledger by any of the participants 
must be previously validated by the other participants according to the rules defined in 
the consensus protocol.9
For more information on blockchain technology, we recommend reading “Blockchain: 
How to develop trust in complex surroundings to generate social impact value,” a 
document we published with the ITE Tech Lab, which explains its functioning from 
a thorough, but not overly technical, point of view. This publication answers questions 
about how to best utilize blockchain in digital solutions [56]. For lighter reading, we also 
recommend two related articles published in Abierto al Público [57,58].
WHAT IS BLOCKCHAIN' S SECURITY BASED ON?
There are two outstanding elements that need to be addressed regarding blockchain 
security. The first one has to do with participant keys, and the second with the 
encryption of transactions and blocks; we will again see that security revolves around 
authentication and cryptography.
9. In practice, many blockchain networks, commonly known as private or federated, (or permis-
sioned), have one or several entities that control the network. These entities decide who can have 
access to the network and what each authorized user’s read and write rights are.A double-slit interference of the sunlight passing through two slits ~1 cm long and ~0.5 mm apart. At the 
top and the bottom of the image the interference on the edge of the slit produces noticeable variation of 
the brightness. Aleksandr Berdnikov.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies33Participant keys
In blockchain, a pair of keys is generated for the two participants involved in a transaction 
and are known as public key or wallet and private key, which define and characterize 
their identification and authentication.10
The public key or wallet is the key that each participant displays for others to see 
when signing transactions, sending information, receiving information or in any way 
interacting with the blockchain. The private key is the key with which each participant 
authenticates themselves in the system. Only the holder of a private key can issue 
signatures with the public key.
The pairs of keys are generated by the blockchain for each participant, using asymmetric 
key algorithms. As previously explained in this section, quantum computers will be able to 
run quantum algorithms -specifically, Shor’s algorithm [17]- capable of efficiently reversing 
asymmetric algorithms to effectively find a user’s private key from their public key.
Block mining, consensus protocols, and reversibility of hash functions
In terms of security, another strong point of blockchain technology is the mining process. 
Mining is the process by which transactions that are grouped to create a block are 
encrypted using a hash function, which generates an irreversible alphanumeric string 
as output. This process is done according to the rules set out in the consensus protocol, 
which varies within each blockchain network.
The blockchain will be secure as long as the hash function used for encryption meets two 
known conditions: pre-image and collision resistance.
10. To be precise, the public key and the wallet are not always the same. In fact, it is important to 
highlight the difference, which will be explained in the following section. In the most important 
networks, the public key is generated with asymmetric cryptography from the private key and then 
hashed to give way to the wallet, so that the wallet is the hashed public key. This is due to space 
limitations, not security.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies34Pre-image resistance
A hash function is said to be pre-image resistant if the message that contains a spe-
cific hash value is impossible to find within a reasonable timeframe. Hash functions 
are required to disable a hacker from having a better strategy than brute-force to 
reverse them.
Collision resistance
A hash function is said to be collision resistant if two different messages (transactions 
or blocks) cannot get the same hash within a reasonable timeframe.
Note that the number of combinations of transactions that define the content of a 
block are infinite, while the number of possible hashes resulting from the encryption 
of the blocks are finite because they are alphanumeric codes of a certain length. They 
are also restricted in that they must start with a given number of zeros. As any string 
of any size that is passed as an input to a specific hash function gives as an output 
another string of a fixed size, the input space is much bigger than the output space. 
In fact, it is infinitely bigger. Because of this, you cannot require a hash function to 
always give two different outputs for two different inputs. However, you do require 
it to be rare enough not to happen within the time you will be using that hash 
function; that is the timeframe mentioned above. FIGURE 7. Concept of pre-image.
Hash  
Function
Original image Original imageAlphanumeric 
codePre-image
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies35THE FUTURE OF BLOCKCHAIN IN THE QUANTUM ERA
Quantum technologies will affect blockchain technology in at least 4 different areas. 
The influence of quantum technologies on blockchain will primarily be related to the two 
security pillars, pre-image resistance and collision resistance, described on the previous 
page, cryptography, and to blockchain’s use of the Internet and classical servers or comput-
ers. These four areas are: (i) authentication, (ii) block mining, (iii) reversibility of hash 
functions, and (iv) the use of the Internet and its protocols for the communication 
between nodes and wallets.
Quantum technologies and authentication in blockchain
Blockchain technology uses asymmetric cryptography to generate public key - private 
key pairs for participants. Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithms (ECDSA) are the 
most widely used algorithms for blockchain asymmetric cryptography.11 As stated several 
times throughout this document, quantum computing will be able to effectively break 
this kind of encryption (thanks to the Shor algorithm [17]) with critical consequences. 
End-user level blockchain authentication is only safe if hackers are unable to find the 
end-user’s private key, which gives access to their assets stored in the wallets. 
11. Specifically, the two main public networks, Bitcoin and Ethereum, use the parameters in the 
secp256k1 ECDSA curve proposed by Certicom [60,61,62] and Hyperledge. The most widely used 
network software for private and federated (permissioned) networks uses the prime256v1 curve, 
with the authorization of Ethereum [63].FIGURE 8. Concept of collision. 
Hash 
Function
A
Original image  
AOriginal image  
BSame alphanumeric 
codeHash 
Function
B
An example of simulated data modeled for the CMS particle detector on the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. 
Here, following a collision of two protons, a Higgs boson is produced which decays into two jets of hadrons and two 
electrons. The lines represent the possible paths of particles produced by the proton-proton collision in the detector 
while the energy these particles deposit is shown in blue. Lucas Taylor / CERN. October 1997.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies37There is still no known way to reverse hash functions with quantum algorithms. Because 
wallets are not the public keys in themselves, but rather the result of hashing them, know-
ing a wallet does not allow a hacker with a quantum computer to find the blockchain user’s 
private key that gives access to the wallet. They would have to reverse a hash function to 
get the public key from the wallet and then reverse the asymmetric cryptography algorithm 
to get the private key from the public one. With digital or classical computers, none of 
these two processes are feasible, but quantum computing offers an advantageous solution 
for the latter. Quantum computers can find private keys, as public keys are disclosed in 
the blockchain network when the user makes a transaction. At the moment in which 
the public key is disclosed, a quantum computer that is powerful enough can use 
Shor’s algorithm [17] to apply reverse engineering and find a user’s private key within 
minutes, as there is no longer a hash function protecting the public key. The moment 
this happens, that user’s identity and assets in the blockchain can be stolen and sent to a 
different account without any possible way of claiming them back. 
One way to minimize the threat this poses is to regenerate the pairs of keys following each 
transaction. Even if this practice was always followed, the threat still remains while the transac-
tions are in the process of being accepted and incorporated into the synchronized copies of the 
ledger. For the transaction to be accepted by the blockchain nodes, it must be incorporated into 
a block, which must be supported by the network. In some instances, there are blocks that are 
not supported by the network, and the transactions, despite having been able to enter the block, 
have not reached the longest version of the chain and thus, are not accepted by the blockchain. 
In the Bitcoin network, one block is published every 10 minutes on average. The acceptable 
amount of time for the blockchain node pushing the transaction to wait is until the other six 
blocks have been added subsequently in order to make sure that the block and its transactions 
have been accepted by the network. This process takes close to one hour. During that period, 
the public key is disclosed to the network, and a quantum computer that is sufficiently fast 
and powerful enough could use it to find out the private key, access the account, and steal the 
property -including that which is being transferred in the intercepted transaction - before it is 
consolidated in the blockchain and the key is changed and secure again.
According to the calculations made by two studies conducted at Waterloo University 
and the Microsoft Research Center, the estimated number of logical qubits needed to 
implement quantum algorithms that are capable of breaking 256 bit-long encrypted 
digital signatures generated with ECDSA currently used in these networks, are 1500 
[12] and 2330 [13]. It remains uncertain the amount of physical qubits this is equal to, 
but experts estimate that a logical qubit could require more than a thousand physical 
qubits. According to extrapolations made by a third study conducted by researchers in 
Singapore, Australia, and France, in 2027 there will be quantum computers powerful 
enough to break private keys in less than 10 minutes [64].
Thus, there is a pressing need to change the key-generating algorithms in blockchain. There 
are three ways to do this, as we discussed in the section on cyber security:
• Using more sophisticated algorithms to generate asymmetric keys, also known as 
“post-quantum cryptography” (PQC). However, the security of PQC is temporary QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies38because eventually, they will be broken. Discussed in the previous section, the NIST is 
in the process of evaluating a public call for proposals [41] for a better solution and the 
European initiative, PQCrypto, has identified the hash-based algorithms, SPHINCS 
[65] and XMSS [66], as being the best alternative candidates so far [42].
• Using quantum symmetric cryptography. As it stands, quantum technology allows 
us to (i) generate completely random symmetric keys with quantum random number 
generators and (ii) share them in a completely secure manner by coding them into 
quantum states that change when observed. However, it is still unclear how to use 
quantum properties to develop asymmetric cryptography schemes, such as those cur-
rently used for authentication and digital signatures, as we are still at a very early stage 
in the development of quantum memories and quantum repeaters. The same is true 
in regard to quantum signature schemes, where progress is very slow, and the longest 
implementation distance for one of these protocols so far was 102 km in 2017 [49], 
discussed in the previous section.
• Developing a new digital signature methodology that can use the quantum 
symmetric cryptography that is already available to allow for completely different 
authentication and digital signature schemes, without the need for public-private  
key pairs. Although this has not yet been proposed, it would be more complex at 
the beginning because it involves a change in paradigm and the generation of new 
equipment, as quantum cryptography takes place at a hardware level. However, it would 
also be simpler in practice because it does not require the use of quantum symmetric 
cryptography to forcibly perform the asymmetric cryptography of authentication and 
digital signatures, as is the case with current quantum digital signature protocols.
So far there has not been a single documented initiative that has implemented one of 
these alternatives, or any others, to improve the lack of security surrounding authen-
tication in blockchain. The most remarkable proof of concept thus far might be one 
conducted by Russian researchers in July 2018. It reports the use of quantum digital 
signatures [67], which corresponds to the second bulleted solution described above. In 
their November 2018 issue, Nature published the same group’s analysis of the threats 
quantum computing poses for blockchain, as well as the potential quantum solutions 
that need to be developed [68].
Surprisingly, the reaction and movement from the blockchain community in response to 
warnings of these impending threats has been minimal to non-existent. In fact, a significant 
part of the blockchain community is not even interested in understanding the threat that 
quantum computing poses for blockchain. For example, at the largest blockchain event of 
the year, Consensus 2018, which gathered more than 8,500 people together in New York 
City, there were no presentations or panels about the issue. The same was true at the most 
important blockchain event in Latin America, Labitconf 2018, held in Santiago, Chile.
Despite the majority of the blockchain community’s ignorance to the threat of quantum 
computing, some blockchain community leaders have reacted. For example, one of the 
most important and well respected figures in this community, Vitalik Buterin, who estab-QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies39lished Ethereum in 2015 [69], has acknowledged the concerns surrounding the threats of 
quantum computing. He has also showed his satisfaction with Lamport signatures [70], a 
hash-based scheme, and has spoken of his intentions to include it in his digital signatures 
once quantum computers become a tangible threat [71,72].
We must note that any proposed solution will pose extra challenges to the blockchain 
community. It will be difficult to reach consensus on making major changes to the public 
networks or on updating all the digital signatures of all active accounts. However, it is very 
important that these debates become real as soon as possible because all downloaded data 
that is currently encrypted with classical asymmetric cryptography will be vulnerable 
to decryption through future quantum computers.
Quantum technologies and the reversibility of hash functions
For now, blockchain is in luck as there are no known quantum algorithms that can 
optimally reverse hash functions, even though there is no mathematical proof that they 
are not reversible [73,74]. Thus, the resistance to pre-images is safe for now but there 
is no guarantee that this will always be the case.  The day this happens, blockchain 
technology as we now know it will become obsolete.
In regard to collision resistance, the other significant security feature of hash functions, 
safety depends exclusively on the “quality” of the hash functions and therefore, the 
safety of collision resistance will not change with the advent of quantum computing.  
If the functions are good enough, and are not used for too long, it will be highly improb-
able for two different chains of data to have the same hash.
Quantum technologies and block mining
Another area that will be impacted by quantum technologies is block mining. Quantum 
computers will be able to run Grover’s quantum algorithm [75], which allows us to find 
a specific element in a disorganized list of N elements in √N number of steps. Classical 
computing needs N/2 steps on average to do the same. Mining blocks in blockchain is 
similar in a way to finding a specific element on a list. Mining involves searching for a 
random piece, called a nonce. The nonce is concatenated to the rest of the elements in 
the block (block number, transactions, hash of the previous block, etc.) and gives a valid 
hash.12 Therefore, quantum computers will be able to mine blocks by running a quantum 
algorithm a fewer number of times to find the hash.
12. In public networks, such as Bitcoin or Ethereum, there is a competition to find the hash in each 
block, for it entails a reward in the form of cryptocurrency. In Bitcoin, that reward is currently 12.5 
Bitcoins, equivalent to about $50,000, in March, 2019. At its highest point, in January of 2018, it 
reached $237,500. It is this reward that motivates the computational and energy expense undertak-
en by these miners.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies40Bitcoin, the most popular public network to date, requires the average number of hashes 
that need to be attempted in order to find the valid one and win the consensus protocol, 
or “proof of work,” to be 2256/t, where t  is a parameter that is recalculated every 2016 
blocks. It is recalculated this often so that the difficulty to hack is maintained according to 
the mining community’s guideline that, on average, it takes them 10 minutes to find the 
valid hash. The difficulty can be defined as D = 2224/t, which is the number above divided 
by the number of nonces available, which is 232 [23]. As of January 2019, the difficulty 
is D = 5 * 1012 [76], which, using the formula above, means that a classical computer 
will have to make about 4.19 * 1029 attempts on average. In theory, a quantum computer 
would only need to make approximately 6.48 * 1014.
A study conducted by institutions in Singapore, Australia, and France determined that 
quantum computing will not be capable of mining blocks faster than the classical devices 
currently used for this process (ASIC) [77] within the next decade. They establish that 
the number of logical qubits13 needed to mine blocks efficiently would be 2024, which 
they expect to become a reality between the years 2025 and 2030. They do not expect 
quantum computers to be able to do this before 2030 because ASIC devices have been 
very efficiently designed for this purpose and will continue to be better than quantum 
computers in doing so until then. Once quantum computers are able to efficiently mine 
blocks, they will do so 100 times faster than the ASIC devices [64].
Once this happens, the problem it will cause will not be critical and the solution to 
safeguarding blockchain security will remain simple. In the case that the current consensus 
protocols are maintained, it is always possible to increase the level of difficulty to make 
up for the increase in speed offered by quantum computing. Cuckoo Cycle [78] , 
Momentum [79] and Equihash [80] are proposing new consensus protocols  which 
offer a higher resistance to quantum computing. Although they continue to apply hash 
functions to the information in the blocks, the validity conditions of the blocks now apply 
not only to the nonce, but also to the header [81], in such a way that it will not be enough 
to simply iterate over a succession of elements until the valid hash is found.
Quantum technologies and the use of the Internet
In the section on cyber security, we analyzed some Internet security threats that will come 
with the rise of quantum computing. These same threats directly affect blockchain because 
it uses the Internet. T wo adverse consequences will affect blockchain in the context of 
using an unsafe Internet network:
• Node and wallet identity thefts.
• Practices known as “man in the middle” (MITM), which consist of an unauthorized 
third party that intercepts and changes information exchanged between a wallet and 
a node or between nodes.
13. Logical qubits are used for the processing. However, for error correction, each one of these qubits is 
accompanied by several other qubits, known as physical qubits.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies41For details on the possible ways to obtain a secure Internet in the era of quantum 
computing, please refer to the discussion in the cyber security section. 
Finally, it is worth briefly mentioning the existence of proposals to build entirely 
quantum blockchains that are based on the entanglement phenomenon and on the 
impossibility of copying quantum states [82]. Recall that quantum systems change when 
observed, rendering cloning impossible, as we explained in the section on quantum 
technologies [14]. Once developed, quantum blockchain technology will be significantly 
different from current blockchain technology and will offer complete security because 
it will be based on physical processes, rather than on the mathematical difficulty of 
reversing hashes or digital signatures. Recall that this is the same reason quantum 
cryptography is naturally more secure than the limited security offered by classical 
cryptography, explained in the section on quantum cryptography. In the event that 
quantum computing eventually allows for effective reversal of hash functions, a quantum 
blockchain solution seems to be the only viable one for blockchain’s future.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies42 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE?
Artificial intelligence (AI) has been defined in many ways. For the purposes of this paper, 
we will refer to AI as the ability for machines to exhibit behaviors that are similar to 
those of human beings, such as reasoning, learning, perceiving, planning, being creative, 
and solving problems.
There are certain disciplines in the field of AI such as machine learning, neuronal 
networks, language processing, image recognition, voice recognition, etc., which, 
together, provide the machine with the ability to display human behaviors. With 
increasing frequency, the algorithms behind these subcategories are designed to learn 
autonomously, as they are fed with data.
FIGURE 9. Mapping 
the different fields 
within Artificial 
Intelligence
AIImage 
processing
Robotics
Conputer 
visionSymbolic 
learning
Machine 
Learning
Computer 
SciencePattern 
Recognition
Deep 
LearningStatistical 
LearningNLPSpeech 
recognition
NN
RMNCNN
Computer 
vision
Object 
recognitionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies43The abilities of AI machines are usually classified into four levels depending on the degree 
of the machine’s behavioral sophistication:
• Reactive: Ability to respond to stimuli or input in real time without taking into account 
past experiences or memorizing processes.
• Limited memory: Ability to respond to stimuli or input by making decisions that take 
past experiences that are stored in a memory into account.
• Theory of mind: Ability to have their own thoughts and feelings which influence their 
decisions and their interaction with the world.
• Awareness of self: Ability to be aware of their own consciousness and existence, and to 
understand themselves apart from simply understanding human beings.
The last of the four levels is associated with the ideal concept of artificial intelligence, in 
which machines are capable of fully simulating an intelligence that is similar to that of human 
beings. However, thus far, it has only been possible to develop AI machines with the capacity 
for the first two levels. This has been a significant point of frustration and disappointment. 
THE FUTURE OF AI IN THE QUANTUM ERA
It is possible that the implementation of quantum computing is just what AI needs to 
reach more advanced stages [83-85]. There is currently a growing active field of research 
in quantum artificial intelligence and quantum machine learning.
Since the year 2000, research has been published on the ways in which quantum computing 
can be applied to the mapping of language expressions [86], game theory [87], image 
classification [88], coordination problems [89], natural language processing [90], economic 
strategies in the context of public goods games [91], and even quantum artificial life [92].
A study showed that the main areas in which quantum computing could be applied to AI 
in the short term with a processor of around 1,000 logical qubits are (i) problems that are 
currently hard and intractable for the ML community, for example generative models in 
unsupervised and semi-supervised learning, (ii) datasets with potentially intrinsic quan -
tum-like correlations, as in cognitive sciences (iii) hybrid algorithms where a quantum 
routine is executed in the intractable step of the classical ML algorithm pipeline [93].
The ability to address exponentially complex problems in AI rests on the premise that 
quantum computing will be able to do mathematical operations which are not yet possible. 
For instance, current social platforms collect massive amounts of data per second that cannot 
be used to make real-time recommendations because the necessary computing capacity to 
do so is not available. This also applies to traffic regulation in the transport sector and to the 
prediction of financial crashes in the financial sector, as we will discuss later in this document.
In 2014, four Chinese researchers published the first implementation of a machine-learning 
quantum algorithm in a four-qubit processor [94]. The algorithm they implemented was the 
quantum version of the support vector machine (SVM) technique, a supervised algorithm 
capable of classifying new data from existing data that have been pre-divided in groups. The QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies44technique they implemented is known as quantum support vector machine (QSVM), and 
it was applied to the problem known as optical character recognition (OCR), used for text 
digitalization. The aim of the experiment was for the quantum processor to identify the 
numbers 6 and 9 in writing. To do this, a machine was trained with images so that it could 
understand a written 6 and a written 9, and succeeded in classifying them.
There are several theoretical studies that discuss the fusion of AI and quantum computing, 
proposing algorithms in the areas of deep learning and neural networks, among others [95-107].
There are already many online quantum computer simulators that can start testing these 
kinds of algorithms. They use various existing programming languages such as C, C++, 
Java, Matlab, Maxima, Python and Octave, and new ones, such as Q# [108]. The Rigetti 
Forest [109] and the IBM QISKit [110] stand out among the most popular platforms to 
play with a virtual quantum machine.
A very interesting study [111] simulates quantum artificial life [92], which consists of 
imitating the processes of reproduction, mutation, interaction, and death. In it, pairs of 
qubits serve as individuals, with one qubit representing the genotype and the other, the 
phenotype. The information is coded in the genotype and communicated generation 
after generation.
In concluding this section, we want to highlight that although this is a very new field 
(most of the literature consists of 2018 publications), there is a growing community of 
researchers who are quickly generating large amounts of knowledge in this area. As virtual 
machines and real quantum computers introduce more qubits and become more robust, 
quantum AI will become a reality. Because of this, it is possible that machines may even-
tually develop the capacity for emotions and consciousness. The effect this development 
could have on the world is immeasurable.
FIGURE 10. Grover’s algorithm for 2 qubits running on IBM’s online quantum simulator.JILA’s three-dimensional (3-D) quantum gas atomic clock consists of a grid of light formed by three pairs 
of laser beams. A stack of two tables is used to configure optical components around a vacuum chamber. 
Shown here is the upper table, where lenses and other optics are mounted. A blue laser beam excites a 
cube-shaped cloud of strontium atoms located behind the round window in the middle of the table. Stron-
tium atoms fluorescence strongly when excited with blue light. Credit G.E. Marti/JILAQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies46 OTHER TECHNOLOGIES
THE INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT) AND DRONES
One of the fastest growing emerging technologies is the Internet of Things (IoT), which 
refers to a network of devices connected through the Internet. According to Ericsson, the 
number of these devices will exceed 25 billion in 2020 [112] and according to Bain, it 
will generate more than 300 billion US dollars per year, [113] primarily in the sectors of 
agriculture, automobiles, and infrastructure [114].
The company, QLM Technology, has developed an application combining IoT, drones, 
and quantum sensors. They mounted a quantum sensor on a drone that is capable of 
detecting natural gas leaks at a 150-meter distance, moving at a speed of up to 38 km/h. 
Quoting its founder, this provides “10 times more sensitivity than its competitors to 
detect these leaks, which cause losses between 6 and 35 billion US dollars for the natural 
gas industry per year” [115].
An article published by Telefónica in 2017 discussed the great impact that quantum 
technologies are expected to have on the IoT, highlighting the need to use quantum 
information to create quantum telecommunication channels connecting these devices 
in a secure manner, and quantum computing to make them smarter and more efficient 
[116]. Furthermore, it agreed with GrowthEnabler in the idea that Smart Cities will be 
one of the sectors that benefit the most from the IoT [117]. Articles published in Forbes 
[118] and IDQuantique’s [119] contain further information.
5G
The rapid increase in the number of devices connected to the Internet has created an 
urgency for the development of 5G, the fifth generation of mobile communications. 5G 
will offer higher speed at a lower latency in data upload, traffic, and download. The efforts 
to develop this technology are geared towards making it quantum-safe so that it is resistant 
to the threat of quantum computing in hacking communications. 
A study published by Deloitte in 2018 acknowledges 5G development efforts by several 
countries including the USA, South Korea, Japan, and Germany. They note that China 
stands out from the pack as it has made significant investments in infrastructure and towers 
and is considered to be the current leader in terms of development and implementation 
of 5G networks. For example, since 2015, China Tower, the largest telecommunications 
tower manufacturer in the world, has invested 17.7 billion US dollars in capital and added 
more than 350,000 infrastructure points in China [120].
South Korean company, SK Telecom, has made significant movements in merging 5G 
technology with quantum cryptography. In 2017, at the Mobile World Congress in 
Barcelona, they signed an agreement with the German company, Deustche Telekom, QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Emerging Technologies47to “guarantee secure telecommunications in the quantum era” [121] as well as another 
agreement with Nokia to “work jointly in quantum cryptography” [122]. One year later, 
at the same event, they announced a 65 million US dollar investment in the leading 
quantum technology manufacturer for cryptography, IDQuantique [123].
These alliances have already proven to be successful. In June 2018 Deutsche Telekom 
announced [124] that it would be running trials involving quantum cryptography systems 
(quantum random number generators and quantum symmetric cryptography protocols) 
in its test network in Germany [125,126]. A few months later, in September 2018, 
satisfactory interoperability tests were reported between IDQuantique’s asymmetric cryp-
tography systems and the Nokia Secure Optical T ransport solution [127] on SK Telecom’s 
commercial telecommunications network in Seoul, to connect real data in production in 
Korea, between the Bundang and Jung-gu districts [128].
Furthermore, in South Korea, SK Telecom, KT and LG Uplus have agreed to work 
collaboratively with one another in the development of a 5G infrastructure for the entire 
country [129]. Together, these three telecommunication companies are advising the Inter-
national Telecommunications Union (ITU), the UN agency responsible for information 
and communications technologies in the drafting of documents [130]. The ITU develops 
standards for governing the establishment of telecommunications networks, including 5G 
and quantum cryptography technologies that are interoperable across the world. These 
kinds of standards are essential to ensuring the various emerging initiatives in different 
countries are scalable and interoperable.
In the United States, Quantum Xchange is the country’s first company to develop a 
commercial network that incorporates quantum cryptography [131]. It will “connect 
the financial markets on Wall Street with back office operations in New Jersey, helping 
banks keep high-value transactions and mission-critical data safe and secure” [132]. This 
telecommunications company entered into an 8.9 million US dollar agreement with SK 
Telecom [133] for it to provide quantum cryptography systems.
3D PRINTING
The development of quantum sensors has already been empowered by 3D printing, which 
consists of building three-dimensional objects by adding material layer by layer under 
computer control. 
In the last few years, there has been significant progress in the preparation, control, and 
measurement of atomic gases. This has allowed for the development of unprecedented 
quantum sensors that provide significantly higher precision to the measurement of mag-
netic and gravitational fields. It can be used in biomedical scanners, non-invasive under-
ground mapping, or GPS navigation [134,135]. 3D printing can effectively manufacture 
portable quantum sensors for these applications. Different working groups have already 
been using additive manufacturing techniques (the industrial name for 3D printing) to 
manufacture atom traps, vacuum chambers, and magnetic shields [136,137], which are 
essential devices in the fields of quantum sensors and metrology.IMPACT ON 
SECTORS 
AND 
INDUSTRIES
00 01 10 11QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruptionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries49IMPACT ON SECTORS 
AND INDUSTRIES
In the previous sections, we discussed quantum information and quantum computing 
in detail. While these might be the two most disruptive fields for the future of quantum 
technologies, there are many others that will also be impactful across several industries and 
governments. Thus, in this section we will discuss the social impact of quantum simulators, 
quantum optics, quantum metrology, atomic clocks, and quantum sensors in addition to 
that of quantum information and quantum computing. Sectors and industries as medicine, 
biology, genetics, education, finances, economy, agriculture, transport and meteorology 
will be provided with a new set of useful quantum tools. We consider it necessary to begin 
this section with a brief description of all these emerging quantum technologies.
QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum computing is the most widely 
known quantum technology. It has the 
potential to crush the computing capacity 
currently available with classical computing 
and has potential applications in all fields 
imaginable. Since the year 2000, univer-
sities and large technology firms such as 
IBM, Google, Microsoft, and Rigetti have 
been racing to develop quantum computers 
that can hold more and more qubits. As of 
late 2018, Google holds the record, with 72 
qubits. Despite the fact that some smaller 
issues have been resolved on a case-by-
case basis, none of these new quantum 
computers have shown an advantage over 
digital or classical computing yet. Once 
they are able to surpass classical comput-
ing in their problem-solving abilities, we will 
have reached what is known as quantum 
supremacy, which is expected to happen 
very soon. Several experts have predicted 
that in only 10 years’ time, sufficiently ro-
bust quantum computers will exist that are 
capable of achieving significant milestones, 
including the breaking of all existing asym-
metric cryptography.QUANTUM INFORMATION
Quantum information is the field that studies 
quantum quantification, storage, and data 
transfer. It includes the area of quantum 
cryptography, which will offer a completely 
new way of protecting information and data 
from both classical and quantum computing 
interception efforts. Quantum cryptography 
was successfully tested for the first time 
more than 10 years ago. Switzerland, for ex -
ample, has been using quantum encryption 
to protect national election data between 
the data counting and storage centers since 
2007. Currently, China is the leader in this 
field. In 2016, it launched the first satellite 
that enabled quantum encrypted intercon-
tinental communications that eventually 
allowed for a 90-minute long videocall to 
Austria in 2017. It hosts and operates the 
largest ground-based quantum commercial 
network that is more than 2,000 km long. 
Predictions expect a quantum telecommu-
nications network between Asia and Europe 
within the next decade, and a global net-
work by 2030.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries50QUANTUM SIMULATORS
A quantum simulator is a quantum physical 
system that can be prepared or manipulat-
ed to allow for the study of the properties 
of a complex quantum or classical system. 
This is achieved either by reproducing the 
systems at a smaller scale under controlled 
conditions or by working effectively with 
the mathematical function describing the 
system’s dynamics. There are different 
types of quantum simulators that can solve 
problems that classical computing cannot, 
but unlike quantum computers, they are 
not universal. This means that they cannot 
solve “any solvable problem”. They are 
programmed to tackle specific problems 
or situations.QUANTUM METROLOGY
Quantum metrology is the study of the use 
of physical systems with quantum properties, 
such as entanglement, used to make precise 
and sensitive measurements. Again, this field 
is very important for quantum information, 
communication, and cryptography.
QUANTUM OPTICS
Quantum optics is the field that deals with 
the quantum processes and phenomena 
occurring at the microscopic level in the 
interaction of photons and matter. This 
field is essential to the fields of quantum 
information, communication, and cryptog-
raphy because it is at the very basis of un-
derstanding photons. It is also useful in the 
manufacturing of all kinds of high-precision 
light sensors that are cheaper, smaller, and 
easier to manipulate than traditional light 
sensors. Quantum sensors are becoming 
very useful in several industrial processes.ATOMIC CLOCKS
Atomic clocks measure time based on natural 
microscopic processes with extremely small 
periodicities and extremely high precision. 
In contrast, traditional clocks are based on 
the frequency of mechanical processes far 
less precise. Since 1967, a second has been 
defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 oscil -
lations of a 133Ce atom. The natural frequency 
of atoms of the same element -in this case, 
Caesium- is constant and does not depend 
on the environment surrounding it. Atomic 
clocks using this phenomenon have already 
been built. As an example of its precision, it 
is worth noting that if two atomic clocks had 
been built and synchronized during the Big 
Bang, there would not be a second’s differ-
ence between them today.QUANTUM SENSORS
Quantum sensors use quantum properties 
in physical systems to obtain high sensitiv -
ity and resolution. As we will discuss later, 
they are widely used in medicine. Quantum 
imaging is an example of a quantum sensor 
and can be used in very high sensitivity 
cameras, essential for self-driving vehicles. QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries51 IMPACT ON MEDICINE, 
BIOLOGY, AND GENETICS
The various fields within the biomedical sciences have already taken advantage of 
quantum technologies. For example, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which helps 
detect tumors and other diseases in a non-invasive manner, and lasers, which are used in 
multiple kinds of high-precision surgeries, are two types of quantum technologies that 
have been used successfully for decades in this field. Quantum technologies will open 
doors to new techniques and processes that are impossible to reach with the existing 
biomedical technology. 
Simulation and quantum computing have the potential to reproduce the biochemical 
interactions of drugs within organisms, allowing scientists to design targeted drugs. 
Currently, it is impossible to simulate even the dynamics of a simple molecular system with 
classical computers.14 In most cases, drug development involves years of clinical testing 
on animals and humans in the discovery, clinical, and pre-clinical stages [140]. The use 
of this technology would cause a disruptive leap in drug design.
Quantum optics will also offer significant biomedical applications. The branch of quan-
tum optics with surface plasmons —quasiparticles corresponding to quantum plasma 
oscillations— makes it possible to conduct very precise studies on and measurements of 
the dynamics of live cells. Not only does this allow us to make non-invasive nanospec-
troscopies, but also to disrupt, manipulate, and ultimately, control, live organisms 
at the molecular level. The use of this technology for molecular diagnostics, precision 
medicine, and nanobiology are limitless [141-143]. The Japanese National Institute 
for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology (QST) has already started 
using non-invasive techniques capable of detecting a solid tumor in 30 minutes.  
They can map out the area at molecular level, defining the size and properties of the 
nanoplatforms that must be sent to obtain the best possible treatment and predicting 
their therapeutic efficiency. [144].
In 2017, the international consulting firm, Accenture, the quantum software company, 
1Qbit, and the biotechnology firm, Biogen, started a collaboration to “design the first 
quantum molecular comparison application  with potential to significantly improve 
14. When simulating microscopic processes, such as drug interactions within an organism, current 
computers are not capable of processing the interactions between atoms and molecules efficiently. If 
we increase the number of molecules, the number of steps a digital or classical computer will have 
to process increases exponentially. The simulation of a few molecules can take several years, making 
it impossible to simulate complex processes with the goal of making actual progress in the medical 
field. With quantum computing, however, the difficulty becomes polynomial rather than expo-
nential: the amount of steps the computer must take increases at the same ratio as the number of 
molecules, allowing for these simulations to become achievable.Indium-gallium nitride is a semiconductor alloy that emits light when irradiated by energetic particles. A 
small crystal cluster has accidentally grown during the w:MOVPE process. The lightness corresponds to its 
standard w:SEM image, whereas the colour overlayers were added according to the light emitted under 
the electron beam. Blue and green channels are roughly natural colours, while red encodes the ultraviolet 
emission. The image demonstrates that InGaN/GaN structures are highly anisotropic, and so are their 
cathodoluminescence properties. FDominec. 16 October 2017.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries53advanced molecular design to accelerate the development of drugs to treat complex 
neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s or Lou 
Gehrig’s disease” [145].
Another application of quantum technologies to the medical field will be the use of 
quantum cryptography to safeguard medical data. According to IDQuantique, world 
leader in hardware manufacturing for quantum cryptography, in the first semester of 
2016, the medical records of more than 30 million patients were stolen in a total 263 
security breaches from cyberattacks, which took an average of 233 days to be discovered 
and another 111 to be communicated [146].
In sum, quantum technologies will allow for more efficient clinical drug discovery, aid in 
elucidating mechanisms of complex diseases, help to further uncover the biology and the 
genome of living beings, and support better protection against medical record breaches, 
among many other applications.
 IMPACT ON EDUCATION 
AND JOBS
As we mentioned earlier, we are witnessing an era of fast digitalization, which creates 
great demand for technological innovations in every sector. Currently, in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, most technological and computer science education in elementa-
ry, middle and high schools is either too basic or non-existent for the complexity of 
knowledge needed for a successful scientific and technical career. Undergraduate and 
graduate courses in relevant science and technology subjects seem to evolve at much 
slower speeds than the market demands, leading to an alarming number of vacancies in 
technology-related positions around the world. According to the consultancy firm Allen 
& York, the number of vacancies will reach 800,000 in 2020 in the UK alone [147]. 
Further, in “The Future of Jobs”, the World Bank highlights the need to educate and 
create technology-related jobs in Latin America and the Caribbean in order to maintain 
growing levels of productivity and prosperity and to decrease poverty levels [148].
Regarding jobs related to quantum technologies in particular, the issue is much more 
serious. While it is possible to succeed in many different technology-related jobs after 
having studied various bachelors and masters degrees, jobs in the field of quantum 
technology require an understanding of Physics that is difficult to acquire without 
studying it in depth. There is already unmet demand for personnel who understand 
quantum physics in companies supplying software and hardware services, as well as in 
start-ups and consultancy positions. Because the depth of knowledge one must have in 
order to succeed in most of these careers is so necessary, the growing demand for these 
positions will be even harder to meet than it already is for technology careers that are not 
related to quantum physics. According to a report published in 2018 by BBCReport, 
the Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) for the commercial market in quantum QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries54technologies will be 37.3% until 2022, reaching 161 million US dollars, and a 53% 
CAGR between 2022 and 2027, reaching a total of 1.3 billion US dollars [149].
 IMPACT ON ECONOMY 
AND FINANCE
Economics and finance will also change in the era of quantum technologies. The capacity 
of quantum computers and simulators to solve complex problems and process large 
numbers of possibilities quickly and effectively will allow us to build, simulate, and 
improve financial models using quantum algorithms. As we mentioned in Section I, 
quantum computing does not operate in the same way as classical computing. By exploit-
ing quantum parallelism, quantum computers can evaluate various options simultaneously, 
rather than in sequence, cutting time and efficiently processing resources significantly. 
Those who build financial models can also benefit from quantum randomness.
Simulators, such as quantum annealers, are already operating in the market, effectively 
solving real problems with a large number of variables. To be able to effectively solve 
these problems, we must find the mathematical function that describes the real model. 
Then, optimization can be achieved by minimizing the function to find the optimum 
values of the variables. 
Quantum annealers can be used to predict financial crashes. A 2017 study provided 
mathematical proof that predicting a financial crash is a problem that cannot be solved 
computationally, as it belongs to the NP-complete complexity class [150]. Specifically, 
it proves that even in simple financial networks where “the regulator has complete infor-
mation about the entire structure of the financial network, and the only uncertainty is 
in which specific assets may decline in value […] calculating the number of institutions 
that can fail in a network is NP-Hard”. This year, three members of the Quantum World 
Association (QWA) -R. Orús, E. Lizaso (both researchers and partners at Entanglement 
Partners), and S. Mugel- proved that “the equilibrium market values of institutions after a 
sudden shock to the network can then be calculated via adiabatic quantum computation 
and, more generically, by quantum annealers [...] providing a potentially more efficient 
way to predict financial crashes” [151].
Atomic clocks also have important applications in this field. Currently, the timestamp 
on economic transactions, requiring extreme precision and synchronization, depends on 
the GNSS in computational networks and on local atomic clocks, according to a report 
from the European Union [152]. Because of their high precision, they recommend the 
regulation and use of this technology more widely.Algae in Scanning Electron Microscope, magnification 5000x. SecretDisc.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries56 IMPACT ON SUSTAINABLE 
ENERGY AND AGRICULTURE
One of the most relevant quantum technologies in the areas of energy and agricul-
ture can be seen in the production of ammonia, essential for the manufacturing of 
fertilizers. The ammonia production process consumes 2% of the world’s energy 
per year [153]. According to the International Fertilizer Industry Association’s annual 
report, 187 million tons of fertilizer were used in 2018. Between 2018 and 2022, growing 
demand will motivate a 98 billion US dollar investment in initiatives to build 60 new 
production units to produce 78 million tons more each year [154]. In Latin America and 
the Caribbean, the petrochemical industry is led by Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela, T rinidad 
and Tobago, Argentina [155,156].
Ammonia is essential for fertilizer production. The ammonia production process, known 
as the Haber-Bosch process, in honor of its inventors in the early 20th century, involves 
a reaction that results from the combination of hydrogen and nitrogen. It requires the 
dissociation of nitrogen, which only happens under extreme pressure and temperature 
conditions, consuming close to 2% of the world’s energy annually [157].
A new method to obtain ammonia at room temperature, using the enzyme nitrogenase, 
already exists [153]. Quantum computers allow us to simulate the process of ammonia 
synthesis using this method at a molecular level. It is impossible to do this same simu-
lation using classical computers. This new process will save 2% of the world’s energy, 
will reduce the environmental impact of the ammonia production process, and will 
potentially lower the price of food.
The energy sector will also directly benefit from quantum computers and simulators to 
process huge amounts of data and information. This will enable a much more efficient 
distribution of resources and aid in lowering the price of food.
 OTHER IMPACTS
These will not be the only sectors and fields to benefit from quantum technologies.
For example, we will eventually be able to model the circulation of vehicles and citizens by 
using the large amount of data captured by applications, such as Waze and Google Maps, in 
real time. By optimizing mathematical models to simulate real situations based on existing 
data, quantum simulators can more accurately suggest optimum routes, better coordinate 
traffic lights to provide routes for emergency vehicles, simulate catastrophes, and analyze the 
necessary improvements to avoid them or minimize their consequences, etc. The advent of 
self-driving vehicles absolutely requires this quantum processing capacity and is one of the 
many future technologies in the field of transportation that will rely on quantum processes. QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Impact on Sectors and Industries57Quantum simulation will also facilitate major changes in meteorology. It will allow us to 
address complex weather phenomena more precisely and will give us the tools necessary 
to predict natural disasters.
QUANTITATIVE TRADING
Enhanced understanding of correlated 
variables and phenomena and their 
impacts on capital marketsMACHINE LEARNING
Enhanced training processes and 
power to calculate scenarios, 
alternatives and complex math
ROUTE OPTIMIZATION
Thanks to the ability to evaluate multi-
ple scenarios with enhanced parallelism
POST-QUANTUM SECURITY
Crypto resistant to quantum computing 
thanks to the principle of non-ob-
servability and true randomness
WEATHER FORECASTING
Capacity to understand atmo-
spherical phenomena thanks to the 
enhanced parallel computationPERSONALISED DRUGS
Ability to develop new drugs based on 
the better understanding of molecules 
information formation of genomics
SINTHESYS OF NEW 
MOLECULES
Based on the enhanced capacity to understand 
chemical reactions and simulate atomic interactions
NEW MATERIALS
Development of new materials thanks 
to the ability to simulate molecule in-
teractions and physical propertiesCOUNTRY 
PROGRAMS 
AND
STRATEGIES
00 01 10 11QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruptionQUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies59COUNTRY 
PROGRAMS 
AND 
STRATEGIES
The major global powers and the most successful technology companies are aware of the 
potential of quantum technologies. Over the past few years, many have invested billions 
of dollars in the research and development of quantum technologies in hopes of leading 
the race to quantum power.
 CHINA
The Chinese government is currently the international leader in 
the field of research and development for quantum technologies. 
They have allocated a quantum technology budget that is 10 times 
higher than that of its closest competitors (United States and the 
European Union).
Mentioned in Section I and detailed in Appendix C, China has been at the forefront of 
quantum telecommunication network development both ground-based and satellite-based. 
Launching the MICIUS satellite in 2016 for Earth-to-satellite and satellite-to-Earth 
telecommunications within the QUESS (Quantum Experiments at Space Scale) program 
was a worldwide historical landmark and it allowed for the first quantum encrypted 
intercontinental video call between Chinese and Austrian Academies of Science to be 
conducted on September 17, 2017 [30]. QKDs were also conducted at a distance of 
719 km between the Tiangong-2 space laboratory and the Nanshan land station in 2017 
[158]. China foresees launching 10 additional satellites that will allow for a network of 
intercontinental communications between Europe and Asia by 2020 with plans to expand 
into a worldwide network by 2030 [48]. According to the MIT magazine, the mind 
behind all of these projections is that of Jian-Wei Pan, the quantum physicist known as 
“the Father of Chinese Quantum science” [159].
Among the ground-based initiatives mentioned in Appendix C, it is worth highlighting 
one led by the University of Science and Technology. They developed a quantum network QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies60connecting four cities from Beijing to Shanghai with 2000 km of optical fiber, making it 
the biggest quantum network for quantum telecommunications on land [160].
Additionally, in 2017, it was announced that the construction of a 37-hectare National 
Laboratory for Quantum Information Sciences in Hefei is currently underway. The bud-
get was 76 billion Yen (11.5 billion US dollars) for this 2.5 year construction project, 
estimated to be completed by 2020. [161,162].
 EUROPEAN UNION
As a result of the collaborative effort of over 3,400 representatives 
from academia and industry in Europe, The Quantum Manifesto 
was released in May 2006 [163]. This is a short document supported 
by researchers from almost every European country to raise awareness 
about the need to invest in quantum technology research, development and adoption 
in the European Union. The goals of this collaborative effort were to (i) promote a 
competitive European quantum industry to make Europe a global leader, (ii) expand 
European scientific leadership and excellence in quantum research, (iii) turn Europe into 
a dynamic, attractive region for innovative quantum technology research, and (iv) benefit 
from quantum technology improvements to promote better energy, health, safety and 
environmental solutions. Specifically, the Manifesto suggested six key activities:
• Supporting growth in scientific activities linked to quantum technologies.
• Create a favorable ecosystem of innovation and business creation for quantum technologies.
• Facilitate a new level of coordination between academia and industry to move advances 
in quantum technologies from the laboratory to industry.
• Create a new generation of quantum technology professionals in Europe through 
focused education at the intersection of science, engineering and business, and by 
strengthening public awareness of key ideas and capabilities.
• Coordinate public investments and strategies in quantum technologies at the European level. 
• Promote the involvement of member regions that do not currently have a strong 
quantum technologies research program. 
The document highlights the importance of quantum technologies and calls for the 
“launch [of] an ambitious European initiative in quantum technologies, needed to ensure 
Europe’s leading role in a technological revolution now under way.”
Because of the Manifesto, the Quantum Flagship program was launched by the European 
Union in October 2018 in Vienna [164] with a 1-billion euro budget (1.15 billion US 
dollars) to be invested over 10 years. Currently, their website presents information regard-
ing calls for proposals and conference information. It also contains informative material Simulation of the double-slit experiment with electron - Young interference with two slits. Alexandre Gon-
dran. 1 November 2001.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies62about quantum technology, including a section that explains misconceptions surrounding 
quantum technologies and promotes what they call the Second Quantum Revolution.15
The European State Agency (ESA) also has multiple initiatives. One of such initiatives, 
the Space-QUEST (Quantum Entanglement for Space Experiments), proposes to perform 
space-to-ground quantum communication tests from a transmitter on the outer wing of 
the Columbus module in the International Space Station (ISS) [165,166]. Another initia-
tive is Eutelsat Quantum, which is “a pioneering mission that will influence how telecom 
satellites are procured and manufactured in Europe.” A software-defined satellite will be 
put into orbit for ground-to-space and space-to-ground quantum telecommunications 
during the second half of 2019 [167].
 UNITED STATES
In recent years, several leaders in the United States have called for 
the establishment of a government level program that can coordinate 
the development of quantum technologies, similar to those in China 
and Europe. For example, William Hurd, a re-elected Congressman from 
Texas and director of the Information Technologies Subcommittee [168], has claimed that 
“whoever gets to true quantum computing first will be able to negate all the encryption that 
we have ever done to date. That is why China, this is why Russia is sucking up ciphertext 
that they will eventually be able to decrypt” [169]. In 2014, the MIT magazine published an 
article on the space race for quantum telecommunications, pinpointing China as the leader 
and indicating that the “U.S. plans are much less clear. This may be because the work is being 
done behind closed doors. On the other hand, the U.S. may be dragging its feet” [170].
By the end of 2018, some changes in the U.S. took place [171,172] with the publication 
of a document summarizing a national strategy for the Science of Quantum Information 
[173] and the launching of the National Quantum Initiative Act [174]. After approval 
by the Senate, President T rump signed off on December 21st, and it became Public 
Bill 115-368 [175]. This legislation proposes devoting 1.3 billion US dollars to fund 
research on quantum technologies. In particular, the Department of Energy, the NIST, 
the National Science Foundation (NSF), and NASA, among others, will participate in this 
research. According to the journal, Science, the “U.S. government is currently investing 
approximately 250 million US dollars a year, mostly through the Army Research Office, 
but the new budget will go mostly to its national laboratories”[176].
15. The Second Quantum Revolution refers to the current era that presents a high number of infant quan-
tum technologies of highly expected impact. Depending on the author, the First Quantum Revolution 
corresponds either to a) the stage between 1900 and 1930 in which Quantum Mechanics was born along 
with an understanding of its value and usefulness to describe the microscopic world, or to b) the creation 
of the first quantum technologies, such as lasers or MRI. In this document, we do not use the term First 
Quantum Revolution because we believe there is no consensus on which of these events constitutes the 
First Quantum Revolution. In addition, we believe none of them relates to the current revolution.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies63This bill “directs the President to implement a National Quantum Initiative Program 
to, among other things, establish the goals and priorities for a 10-year plan to accelerate 
the development of quantum information science and technology applications”. The 
bill defines quantum information science as “the storage, transmission, manipulation, or 
measurement of information that is encoded in systems that can only be described by the 
laws of quantum physics” [175].
There are initial plans for each of the primarily organizations involved in research under 
this bill. The NIST will conduct specific activities in quantum science and organize a 
workshop to discuss the development of a quantum information and technology indus-
try. The NSF will conduct basic research with a research program focused on quantum 
information and engineering. It will share this task with the Department of Energy. The 
NSF will also grant scholarships for Multidisciplinary Centers for Quantum Research and 
Education. The Science Agency will establish and operate Centers for National Research.
Within the private sector in the United States, movement has been much quicker. Amer -
ican companies have been at the forefront of quantum technology development since the 
beginning, especially in the field of quantum computing
In a collaboration led by renowned physicist I. Chuang, IBM and Stanford University ran 
Grover’s quantum algorithm [75] for the first time using a 3-qubit quantum computer in 
2000. Since then, the number of qubits in their processors has increased and, in 2017, the 
company managed to develop the first 50-qubit quantum computer [178]. Additionally, 
IBM has a 20-qubit quantum computer that is open to the public, so that any person 
accessing the Internet can send IBM an algorithm to run on it. They also have a quantum 
software development kit (SDK) called QISKit [179]. In 2019, IBM released the first 
20-qubit commercial quantum computer under the name Q System One [180] . Regardless 
of its limited capacity, this is a great step in the quantum computing race [181].
Google has also strongly committed to advancements in quantum computing, ending the 
year 2018 as the company with the most powerful quantum computer, with 72-qubits 
[182]. Google has made an agreement with NASA for the joint exploration of quantum 
processors [183]. They have also joined an alliance between NASA and D-wave. In 2017, 
the D-Wave 2000-qubit quantum annealer, known as D-Wave 2000Q, was installed in 
one of Google’s centers.
Rigetti, has been developing and granting access to an online platform of 8 and 19-qubit 
processors and, in August 2018, the company committed to developing a 128-qubit 
quantum computer by August 2019 [185,11]. Their platform offers the ability to “develop 
and execute quantum-classical programs in a virtual, classical compute environment that 
is side-by-side with our real quantum hardware” [186].
Intel has also played a significant role in the United States, collaborating with QuTech, 
a Dutch research institute, and developing a 17-qubit processor in 2017 and a 49-qubit 
processor in 2018 [187].QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies64Finally, Microsoft is also in search of the first robust quantum computer, but with a 
different architecture than the others. Instead of using conductive qubits used by IBM, 
Google, Intel, and Rigetti, which are harder to scale, they are opting for the development 
of a topological quantum computer. Their website also contains a Quantum Development 
Kit to start programming quantum algorithms and they promise to provide quantum 
services in their Azure cloud [188,189].
Recently, an American company, Quantum Xchange, announced that it will develop the first 
commercial network in the United States with quantum cryptography that “will connect the 
financial markets on Wall Street with back office operations in New Jersey, helping banks 
keep high-value transactions and mission-critical data safe and secure” [177].
 JAPAN
In 2017, the Japanese government launched a program to join the 
quantum computing race with a 30 billion Yen (332 million US 
dollars) budget for a 10-year plan that began in April, 2018 [190].
Japan has also shown special interest in developing a quantum neural 
network (QNN). In October 2016, a year after the official announcement by the Ja-
pan Science and Technology Agency (JSP) [191], it was revealed that the technological 
company NTT supported the development of a QNN capable of solving combinational 
optimization problems with social and medical applications, among others. The prototype 
consists of a closed circular fiber loop, a phase-sensitive amplifier (PSA), and a field-pro-
grammable gate array (FPGA). It has the capacity to solve the Max Cut problem among 
many others. The Max Cut problem involves separating people into two groups while 
avoiding, in the most efficient way possible, incompatibilities between pairs thus, creating 
the two groups in the most compatible manner. The QNN is able to solve this problem 
for 2,000 people with 20,000 incompatibilities in 5 milliseconds at an energy cost of 1kW, 
rather than the 10kW a quantum computer would consume [192-194].
Japan has also made significant progress in the field of quantum telecommunications, 
further detailed in Appendix C. The country has developed a six-node land network 
between Koganei, Otemachi, Hakuson, and Hongo with connections of over 90 km [195] . 
In 2017, the micro-satellite Small Optical T ransponder (SOTA), orbiting at an altitude of 
600 km, was able to conduct ground-to-space telecommunications [196].
 UNITED KINGDOM
In 2013, the United Kingdom announced it would invest 270 million pounds sterling 
(equivalent to 350 million US dollars) to finance the first five years of the National Quantum 
Technologies Programme to “create a coherent government, industry and academic quantum 
technology community that gives the UK a world-leading position in the emerging multi-
billion-pound new quantum technology markets” [197].NIST physicists used this apparatus to coax two beryllium ions (electrically charged atoms) into swapping 
the smallest measurable units of energy back and forth, a technique that may simplify information processing 
in a quantum computer. The ions are trapped about 40 micrometers apart above the square gold chip in the 
center. The chip is surrounded by a copper enclosure and gold wire mesh to prevent buildup of static charge. 
Credit: Y. Colombe/NIST.QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies66They will begin by developing applications in the areas of defense, safe 
communications, information technologies, and oil and gas, among 
others, and then will move on to broader market applications. 
The program foresees applications in different industries, markets 
and sectors. In particular, they note the importance of quantum 
computing devices, quantum enhanced imaging, quantum secure 
communications, quantum acceleration and navigation devices, 
quantum gravity sensing devices, and quantum timing devices [198]. 
Currently, the UK program is co-led by EPRSC, Innovate UK, BEIS, NPL, GCHQ, Dstl, 
and KTN, with a vision that is highly focused on research within academia. They have 
already invested 120 million pounds sterling (160 million US dollars) in 4 hubs that have 
been operational since 2014. These hubs tackle the areas of sensors and metrology [199], 
quantum image processing [200], quantum information technologies [201] and quantum 
telecommunications technologies [202] and are led by Birmingham, Glasgow, Oxford, and 
York, Universities, respectively, with a total of 17 universities and 132 companies involved. 
In 2015, The Quantum Technologies Strategic Advisory Board led by Prof. D. Delpy 
reported on the program. They estimated the cost of developing commercial prototypes, 
such as biological microscopes, space applications for environmental monitoring and 
earthquake prediction, and medical diagnosis between 2015 and 2025 and predicted 
that the first robust and resilient quantum computers would be available by 2025 [203].
The UK government’s chair of scientific advisory, Prof. Sir M. Walport, estimates that, 
in the long term, the quantum technology industry will be comparable to the electronic 
component industry, valued at 240 billion US dollars [204].
 GERMANY
In September 2018, Germany became the European Union country 
with the highest investment in quantum technologies at the national 
level after approving QUTEG, a national initiative comprising a 5-year 
program and 650 million US dollars in funding [205]. The QUTEG 
initiative will span from 2018 to 2020 and will attempt to (i) expand 
the research landscape of quantum technologies, (ii) create research 
networks for new applications, (iii) establish lighthouse projects for in-
dustrial competitiveness, (iv) ensure security and technological sovereignty, 
(v) shape international cooperation, and (vi) engage the people of their country [206].
This initiative has already produced two flagship documents. The first is titled, “Quan-
tum Technologies: Foundations and Applications” [207] and the second is titled, 
“Quantum Technologies: From Foundation to Market” [208].
In addition, several German agencies, including the Max Planck Institute and the German 
Aerospace Center (DLR), collaborated in 2016 with the goal of conducting an experimen-QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Country Programs and Strategies67tal study to test the transmission of photon signals between the portable space stations 
located at the Teide Observatory, Tenerife, and the Alphasat I-XL stationary satellite 
distanced 38,600 km apart [209].
 LATIN AMERICA AND 
THE CARIBBEAN
There are currently no countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) launching 
programs with direct investments in the research and development of quantum technologies.
Dr. S. Venegas, who received his doctorate in theoretical physics from Oxford University, is 
one of the fathers of quantum computing in Mexico. He created the re-
search group on quantum image processing at Monterrey Institute of 
Technology and has taught many free and open courses for students 
all over the region. He sees Brazil and Mexico as the two leading 
countries in LAC in number of researchers and publications on 
topics related to quantum technologies. He also highlights that, 
despite there being no specific funds from national programs in any 
LAC country, there are research centers and universities in some of 
them that offer MA and PhD programs on quantum technologies, such 
as the PhD program in nanotechnology at Monterrey Technology Institute.
In Brazil, the primary institution in this field is the Quantum Computing Group at the 
National Laboratory for Scientific Computing, whose mission is to “develop original 
research in the areas of quantum computing and information, supervise Doctoral and 
Masters students, to propose new techniques, to follow, and if possible to participate in 
the development of the quantum hardware” [211] . According to a study released in 2015, 
11 million euros (12.6 million US dollars) were dedicated to quantum technologies with 
104 authors publishing on the matter between 2013 and 2015 [210].
 REST OF THE WORLD
The countries described in this section are not the only ones making an effort in the race 
to explore, develop, and adopt quantum technologies. Some other countries have also 
started national programs and dedicated public funds in this disruptive field. University 
of Waterloo in Canada proudly recognizes having invested over 1.5 billion US dollars 
in quantum technologies over the last 15 years [212]; Russia has founded the Russian 
Quantum Center, where various institutions and universities are collaborating [213]; 
France has the Paris Centre for Quantum Computing (PCQC) [214] ; Denmark contains 
the Quantum Innovation Centre (Qubiz) [215]; Singapore holds the Centre for Quantum 
Technologies (CQT) [216]; Australia has Centre for Quantum Computation & Com-
munication Technology [217]; the Netherlands is being guided by QuTech [218]; and 
Israel is focusing on defense [219].PUBLIC INVESTMENTS IN QUANTUM 
TECHNOLOGIES BY GOVERNMENTS 
AROUND THE WORLD
Estimations based on recently 
press releases (in dollars)
UNITED KINGDOM
456 M
DENMARK
12 MILLION
GERMANY
650 M
NETHERLANDS
154 M
EUROPEAN UNION
1 BILLION
ISRAEL
117 M
CHINA
10 BILLION
AUSTRALIA
26 M
JAPAN
332 M
UNITED STATES
1.3 BILLION
RUSSIA
NO DATA
MEXICO
NO DATA
BRAZIL
NO DATA
SOUTH KOREA
40 M
69QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Conclusions
CONCLUSIONS
 In this document, we discussed past, present, and 
future developments of quantum technologies and 
their important social, industrial, and governmental implica-
tions. We have explained their mechanisms and functions, 
as well as the ways in which they will potentially impact 
digital technologies such as cyber security, blockchain, arti-
ficial intelligence, the Internet of things, drones, 5G, and 3D 
printing. We have also analyzed and presented examples of 
their potential impact on sectors such as medicine, biology, 
genetics, education, economy and finance, energy, transpor-
tation, and meteorology. Finally, we presented the various 
programs and strategies being adopted by countries around 
the world in the race to quantum supremacy.
 Quantum computing opens doors to the computatio-
nal treatment of processes which are simply impossi-
ble using current classical computers; this poses both threats 
and immense opportunities at the same time. On one hand, it 
threatens data authentication, exchange, and storage, having 
the greatest impact on areas where cryptography plays a fun-
damental role, such as cyber security and blockchain. Other 
technologies, such as 5G, drones, and IoT also require secure 
data authentication and exchange; thus, quantum computing 
will be a significant threat for them as well. On the other hand, 
the computational capacity it offers will be essential in spe-
eding up the development of many emerging technologies, 
especially those related to artificial intelligence. It will also 70QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Conclusions
be remarkably beneficial in the fields of medicine, biology, 
and genetics where, for example, quantum technologies will 
allow for the simulation of the effects of clinical drugs, expo-
nentially reducing time and resources. More efficient research 
can be done in the quest to find cures for cancer and other 
diseases, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and multiple 
sclerosis, among many others. In the field of finance, it will be 
possible to create much more precise mathematical models 
and to process data in real time in a more efficient manner 
for decision making. In energy and sustainable agriculture, 
it will be possible to explore new techniques for ammonia 
production at a lower energy and economic cost, replacing 
the current process that consumes 2% of the world’s energy 
and drives up the cost of food. 
 The field of quantum information offers a completely 
safe way to store and share information because its 
processes are based on the physical properties of nature, 
rather than on the complexity of mathematical problems. 
This means breaking their encryption would entail breaking 
the laws of physics. In quantum cryptography, all processes 
happen at the hardware level rather than at the software 
level. Several countries already host the quantum telecom-
munications networks that use quantum cryptography. In 
2016, China was the first country to deploy a satellite for 
quantically encrypted space telecommunications, which 
covered more than 2,000 km between Beijing and Shan-
ghai. It is likely that within a few years, all daily devices we 
use to store or share data and information will do so using 
quantum generated keys and all communications will also 
be secured using this technology. Further, the first ideas for 
a quantum Internet have already been proposed and might 
become a reality in the near future as well. 71QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Conclusions
 Within the areas of public investment, business, and 
entrepreneurial development, the possibilities quan-
tum technologies can offer are endless and the expansion 
they will create in these fields is undeniable. Emerging quan-
tum technologies will be responsible for a technological 
revolution already in process, with a 37% CAGR until 2022, 
reaching a net worth of 161 million US dollars as an industry, 
and a 53% CAGR between 2022 and 2028, when it will reach 
1.3 billion US dollars. 
 The major global powers have not overlooked the 
potential of these technologies, and some are alre -
ady investing billions of US dollars in them. China, the USA, 
and the European Union are at the forefront, with programs 
amounting to 10 billion, 1.3 billion, and 1 billion US dollars, 
respectively. In Latin America and the Caribbean, the most 
active communities of researchers are in Brazil and Mexico. 
However, there are currently no known government ini -
tiatives dedicating funds to research and development in 
quantum technologies in the region.
 Alliances between governments and large technology 
firms will become increasingly necessary in the de -
velopment and implementation of these technologies into 
various systems. Overall, the education sector will need to 
educate future professionals; the industrial and technologi-
cal sectors will need to understand, support, and develop 
new products that use quantum technologies; and gover-
nments will need to be protected and prepared. Quantum 
technologies have only begun to open the doors to a new 
era and all industries and sectors must get on board. 72QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
1. P . Benioff. The computer as a physical system: A 
microscopic quantum mechanical Hamiltonian model 
of computers as represented by Turing machines. J. 
Stat. Phys. 22, 563 (1980). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/BF01011339.
2. R.P . Feynman. Simulating physics with computers. 
International journal of theoretical physics 21 
(1982).
3. https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressre-
lease/965.wss#release
4. I.L. Chuang, N. Gershenfeld and M. Kubinec. 
Experimental implementation of fast quantum 
searching. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3408 (1998).
5. J.A. Jones y M. Mosca. Implementation of a quantum 
algorithm to solve Detsch’s problem on a nuclear 
magnetic resonance quantum computer. J. Chem. 
Phys. 109 (1998):
6. 1648.DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.476739.
7. R.J. Hughes et al. The Los Alamos trapped Ion 
quantum computer experiment. Fortschr. Phys. 46 
(1998): 329-361.
8. D.F .V. James et al. Trapped ion quantum computer 
research at Los Alamos. NASA International 
Conference on Quantum Computing and Quantum 
Communications (1998): 426-437.
9. I.L. Chuang. Experimental realization of a quantum 
algorithm. Nature 393 (1998): 143-146.
10. https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressre-
lease/52403.wss https://research.googleblog.
com/2018/03/a-preview-of-bristlecone-googles-new.
html
11. https://medium.com/rigetti/the-rigetti-128-qubit-
chip-and-what-it-means-for-quantum-df757d1b71ea
12. J. Proos y C. Zalka. Shor’s discrete logarithm quantum 
algorithm for elliptic curves. Journal Quantum 
Information & Computation 3 (2003): 317-344.
13. M. Roetteler, M. Naehrig, K.M. Svore and K. Lauter. 
Quantum resource estimates for computing elliptic 
curve discrete logarithms. Advances in Cryptology – 
ASIACRYPT 2017: 23rd International Conference 
on the Theory and Applications of Cryptology and 
Information Security, Hong Kong, China, December 
3-7, 2017, Proceedings, Part II (241-270).14. W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek. A single quantum 
cannot be cloned. Nature, 299 (1982): 802.803.
15. https://www.submarinecablemap.com
16. https://www.xataka.com/
historia-tecnologica/1-000-millones-de-metros-de-ca-
ble-submarino-son-los- responsables-de-que-ten-
gas-internet-en-casa
17. P . W. Shor. Algorithms for quantum computation: 
Discrete logarithms and factoring. Proceedings of 
the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of 
Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, 
Los Alamitos, CA (1994): 124-134.
18. https://www.idquantique.com/
random-number-generation/products/quantis-ran-
dom-number-generator/.
19. C.H. Bennett and G. Brassard, Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Computers, Systems 
and Signal Processing, Bangalore (New York, IEEE, 
1984).
20. A.K. Ekert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 661 (1991).
21. C. Eliot. The DARPA Quantum Network. arX-
iv:quant-ph/0412029v1 (2004).
22. C. Elliott et al. Current status of DARPA Quantum 
Network. arXiv:quant-ph/0503058v2 (2005).
23. A. Boaron et al. Secure quantum key distribution 
over 421 km of optical fiber. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 
190502 (2018).
24. H.J. Brieget, W. Dür, J.I. Cirac and P . Zoller. 
Quantum repeaters: The role of imperfect local 
operations in quantum communication; Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 81, 5932 (1998).
25. Y-F Pu et al. Experimental realization of a multiplexed 
quantum memory with 225 individually accessible 
memory cells. Nature Communications 8, 15259 
(2017).
26. N. Jiang et al. Experimental realization of random 
access quantum memory of 105 qubits. Am. Phys. Soc. 
F26.00004 (2018).
27. https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/chinas-
2000km-quantum-link-is-almost-complete
28. P . Jianwei. Quantum Science Satellite. Chinese Journal 
of Space Science 34, 5 (2014) pp. 547-549.
29. http://spaceflights.news/quess-launched-form-cos-
modrome-on-gobi-desert/REFERENCES73QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
30. S.K. Liao et al. Satellite-to-ground quantum key 
distribution. Nature 549 (2017): 43-47.
31. J. Yin et al. Satellite-based entanglement distribution 
over 1200 kilometers. Science 356, 6343 (2017): 
1140-1144. DOI: 10.1126/science.aan.
32. S.K. Liao et al. Satellite-relayed intercontinental 
quantum network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 030501 
(2018).
33. E. Conover. A quantum communications satellite 
proved its potential in 2017. Science News 192, 11 
(2017): 27.
34. 34. ISO-IEC 7498-1:1994
35. K. Holl. Global Information Assurance Certification 
Paper. OSI Defense in depth to increase application 
security. (2003)
36. L. Chen et al. Report on Post-Quantum Cryptography. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Internal Report 8105 (2016).
37. National Security Agency (NSA). CNSA suite and 
quantum computing FAQ. MFQ-U-OO-815099-15 
(2016).
38. https://pqcrypto.org/
39. https://www.safecrypto.eu/
40. https://cryptomath-crest.jp/english/
41. https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/
Post-Quantum-Cryptography/Post-Quantum-Cryp-
tography-Standardization
42. http://pqcrypto.eu.org/docs/initial-recommenda-
tions.pdf
43. M. Campagna et al. Quantum safe cryptography 
and security. An introduction, benefits, enablers and 
challenges. ETSI White Paper No. 8. ISBN No. 
979-10-92620-03-0.
44. https://phys.org/news/2017-12-quantum-memo-
ry-record-breaking-capacity-based.html
45. D. Gottesman and I. Chuang. arX-
iv:quant-ph/0105032v2 (2001).
46. R.J. Donaldson et al. Experimental demonstration of 
kilometer-range quantum digital signatures. Phys. Rev. 
A 93, 012329 (2016).
47. C. Croal et al. Free-space quantum signatures using 
heterodyne measurements. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 
100503 (2016).
48. C. Peuntinger et al. Distribution of squeezed states 
through an atmospheric channel. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 
060502 (2014).
49. H.L. Yin et al. Experimental quantum digital signature 
over 102 km. Phys. Rev. A 95, 032334 (2017).
50. R.J. Collins, R. J. Donaldson and G. S. Buller. 
Progress in experimental quantum digital signatures. 
Proc. SPIE 10771, Quantum Communications 
and Quantum Imaging XVI, 107710F (2018). doi: 
10.1117/12.2319015.
51. https://qutech.nl/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
Quantum-internet-A-vision.pdf
52. D. Vinzenzo. The Physical interpretation of quantum 
computation. Fortschritte der Physik 48 (2000): 9-11.53. M. F . Brandl. A quantum von Neumann 
architecture for large-scale quantum computing. 
arXiv:1702.02583v3 [quant-ph].
54. S. Haber and W.S. Stornetta. How to time-stamp a 
digital document. Journal of Cryptology 3, 2 (1991): 
99- 111.
55. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
56. M. Allende López and V. Colina Unda. Blockchain: 
Cómo desarrollar confianza en entornos complejos para 
generar valor de impacto social. Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank (IDB). DOI: 10.18235/0001139.
57. M. Allende López and V. Colina Unda. Aprende 
los tres elementos clave de blockchain con este ejemplo 
práctico. IDB Blog: Abierto al público (2018).
58. M. Allende López and V. Colina Unda. Conoce los 
distintos tipos de blockchain. IDB Blog: Abierto al 
público (2018).
59. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-
07449-z
60. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Secp256k1
61. G. Wood. Ethereum: A secure decentralized 
generalized transaction ledger. EIP-150 REVISION.
62. D.R.L. Brown. SEC 2: Recommended elliptic curve 
domain parameters. Standards for Efficient Cryptog-
raphy 2 (SEC 2).
63. http://hyperledger-fabric-ca.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
users-guide.html
64. 64. D. Aggarwal et al. Quantum attacks on Bitcoin 
and how to protect against them. arXiv:1710.10377v1 
[quant-ph].
65. 65. D.J. Bernstein et al. SPHINCS: Practical stateless 
hash-based signatures. Advances in Cryptology 
-- EUROCRYPT (2015): 368-397.
66. J. Buchmann, E. Dahmen and A. Hulsing. XMSS: 
A practical forward secure signature scheme based 
on minimal security assumptions. PQCrypto 2011: 
Post-Quantum Cryptography (2011): 117-129.
67. E.O. Kiktenko et al. Quantum-secured blockchain. 
Quantum Science and Technology 3, 3 (2018).
68. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-
07449-z#ref-CR8
69. https://www.ethereum.org/
70. https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bitcoin-is-not-
quantum-safe-and-how-we-can-fix-1375242150/
71. https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/07/05/on-abstrac-
tion/
72. https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bitcoin-is-not-
quantum-safe-and-how-we-can-fix-1375242150/
73. L. Tessler and T. Byrnes. Bitcoin and quantum 
computing. arXiv:1711.04235v2 [quant-ph].
74. M. Amy et al. Estimating the cost of generic quantum 
pre-image attacks on SHA-2 and SHA-3. Selected 
Areas in Cryptography – SAC (2016): 317-337.
75. L.K Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm 
for database search. Proceedings of the twenty-eigth 
anual ACM symposium on Theory of computing 
(1996): 212-219.74QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
76. https://www.blockchain.com/charts/difficulty?time-
span=30days
77. https://asicminermarket.com/product/antminer-s9-
14t-1600w-psu-14ths-2-fan-2/
78. J. T romp. Cuckoo cycle: A memory bound graph-the-
oretic proof-of-work. Financial Cryptography and 
Data Security: FC 2015 International Workshops, 
BITCOIN, WAHC, and Wearable, San Juan, Puerto 
Rico, January 30 (2015). Revised Selected Papers pp. 
49-62. DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-48051-9_4.
79. D. Larimer. Momentum – A memory-hard proof-of-
work via finding birthday collisions.
80. A. Birykov and D. Khovratovich. Equihash: 
Asymmetric proof-of-work based on the generalized 
birthday problem.
81. https://www.cryptocompare.com/coins/guides/what-
is-a-block-header-in-bitcoin
82. https://www.technologyreview.es/s/10211/
blockchain-se-vuelve-cuantico-para-sobrevivir-al-or-
denador-del- futuro
83. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/610624/
ibms-dario-gil-says-quantum-computing-promises-
to- accelerate-ai/
84. https://www.wired.com/story/job-one-for-quan-
tum-computers-boost-artificial-intelligence/
85. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
bernardmarr/2017/09/05/how-quantum-comput-
ers-will-revolutionize- artificial-intelligence-ma-
chine-learning-and-big-data/#54faca725609
86. P . Benioff. Languaje is physical. Quantum informa-
tion processing 1, 6 (2002) pp. 495-509. https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1024074616373.
87. E.W. Piotrowski and J. Sladkowski. The next stage: 
quantum game theory. arXiv:quant-ph/0308027v1.
88. Y. Dang et al. Image classification based on quantum 
KNN algorithm. arXiv:1805.06260v1 [cs.CV].
89. B.A. Huberman and T. Hogg. Quantum solution 
of coordination problems. Quantum Information 
Processing 2, 421 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1023/
B:QINP .0000042201.34328.61.
90. W. Zeng and B. Coecke. Quantum algorithms for 
compositional natural language processing. SLPCS@
QPL (2016). DOI:10.4204/EPTCS.221.8
91. KY. Chen, T. Hogg and R. Beausoleil. Quantum 
Information Processing 1, 449 (2002). https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1024070415465.
92. U. Alvarez Rodriguez, M. Sanz, L. Malata and En-
rique Solano. Artificial Life in Quantum T echnologies. 
Scientific Reports 6, 20956 (2016).
93. Perdomo-Ortiz, M. Benedetti, J. Realpe-Gómez and 
R. Biswas. Opportunities and challeges for quantum- 
assisted machine learning in near-term quantum 
computers. Quantum Science and Technology 3, 3 
(2018).
94. L. Zhaokai, L, Xiaomei, X. Nanyang and D. Juan-
geng. Experimental realization of quantum artificial 
intelligence. Phys. Rev. Lett 114, 140504 (2015).95. V. Dungjo and H. J Briegel. Machine learning 7 
artificial intelligence in the quantum domain. Rep. 
Prog. Phys. 7, 074001 (2018).
96. S. Dernbach et al. Quantum walk inspired neural 
networks for graph-structured data. Proceedings the 
7th international conference on complex networks 
and their applications VII (2018): 182-193.
97. G. Verdon, J. Pye and Michal Broughton. A universal 
training algorithm for quantum deep learning. arX-
iv:1806.09729v1 [quant-ph].
98. M.V. Altaisky, N.E. Kaputkina and V.A. Krylov. 
Symmetry and decoherence-free subspaces in 
quantum neural networks. arXiv:1802.05710v1 
[quant-ph].
99. E. Farhi and Harmut Neven. Classification with 
quantum neural networks or near term processors. 
arXiv:1802.06002v1 [quant-ph].
100. J. Bausch and Felix Leditzky. Quantum codes from 
neural networks. arXiv:1806.08781v1 [quant-ph].
101. H. Chen et al. Universal discriminative quantum 
neural networks. arXiv:1805.08654v1 [quant-ph].
102. Z. Zhao et al. A note on state preparation for quantum 
machine learning. arXiv:1804.00281v1 [quant-ph].
103. W. Huggins, P . Patel, B. Whaley y E.M Stoudenmire. 
Towards quantum machine learning with tensor 
networks. Quantum Science and technology 4, 2 
(2019).
104. B. Huang, N.O. Symonds and O.A. Von lilienfeld. 
The fundamentals of quantum machine learning. 
arXiv:1807.04259v2 [physics.chem-ph].
105. J. Biamonte. Quantum machine learning matrix 
product states. arXiv:1804.02398v1 [quant-ph].
106. M. Schuld y Nathan Killoran. Quantum machine 
learning in feature Hilbert spaces. arXiv:1803.07128v1 
[quant-ph].
107. J. Biamonte et al. Quantum machine learning. Nature 
549 (2017): 195-202.
108. https://quantiki.org/wiki/list-qc-simulators
109. https://www.rigetti.com/products
110. https://qiskit.org/
111. U. Alvarez Rodriguez, M. Sanz, L. Lamata and E. 
Solano. Quantum artificial life in an IBM quantum 
computer. Scientific Reports 8, 14793 (2018).
112. https://www.ericsson.com/en/mobility-report/
internet-of-things-forecast
113. http://www.bain.com/publications/articles/choosing-
the-right-platform-for-the-industrial-iot.aspx
114. https://www.rvo.nl/sites/default/files/2017/11/
Matrix_Final%20report_20042017.pdf
115. https://iot.telefonica.com/es/node/6646
116. https://growthenabler.com/flipbook/pdf/IOT%20
Report.pdf
117. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
louiscolumbus/2017/12/10/2017-roundup-of-inter-
net-of-things-forecasts/#649469391480
118. https://marketing.idquantique.com/acton/
attachment/11868/f-025f/1/-/-/-/-/2017%2011%20
DefTech_IDQ%20paper.pdf75QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
119. https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
us/Documents/technology-media-telecommunica-
tions/us-tmt-5g-deployment-imperative.pdf
120. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
sk-telecom-and-deutsche-telekom-establish-quan-
tum-alliance- for-worldwide-quantum-safe-net-
work-ecosystem-300413853.html
121. https://www.netmanias.com/en/post/ko-
rea_ict_news/11572/5g-nokia-sk-telecom-security/
sk-telecom-and- nokia-sign-cooperation-agree-
ment-for-quantum-cryptography
122. https://www.idquantique.com/id-quantique-sk-
telecom-join-forces/
123. http://www.ajudaily.com/view/20180726104931947
124. http://www.ajudaily.com/view/20180726104931947
125. https://www.zdnet.com/article/sk-telecom-applies-
quantum-key-to-deutsche-telekom-network/
126. https://networks.nokia.com/solutions/secure-opti-
cal-transport
127. https://www.idquantique.com/idq-sk-telecom-nokia-
secure-optical-transport-system-using-qkd
128. https://www.zdnet.com/article/south-korean-telcos-
agree-to-launch-5g-at-the-same-time/
129. https://www.itu.int/ITU-T/workprog/wp_item.
aspx?isn=14600
130. https://quantumxc.com/quantum-safe-security-in-a-
5g-world/
131. https://www.businesswire.com/
news/home/20180626005289/en/
Quantum-Xchange-Launches-Quantum- Net-
work-United-States
132. https://www.zdnet.com/article/sk-telecom-applies-
quantum-key-to-deutsche-telekom-network/
133. https://quantic.ac.uk/
quantic-researcher-spins-off-quantum-technolo-
gies-for-gas-detection/, https://www.qlmtec.com/
technology/
134. Keil, M. et al. Fifteen years of cold matter on the atom 
chip: promise, realizations, and prospects. Journal 
of Modern Optics 63 (2016): 1840-1885. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09500340.2016.1178820
(2016).
135. Barrett, B. et al. Mobile and remote inertial sensing 
with atom interferometers. In IOS Press (ed.) 
Proceedings of the International School of Physics 
“Enrico Fermi” 188 (2014): 492-555.
136. 136.https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-
26455-9
137. 137.J. Vovrosh et al. Additive manufacturing for 
quantum technologies. Scientific Reports 8, 2023 
(2018).
138. https://www.nibib.nih.gov/science-education/
science-topics/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri
139. https://spie.org/membership/spie-profes-
sional-magazine/archives/2011jan-archive/
lasers-in-medicine?SSO=1140. https://www.msdsalud.es/recursos-de-salud/
guias-para-pacientes/proceso-investigacion-desarrol-
lo- aprobacion-farmaco.html
141. L. P . Lee. Quantum bionanophotonics for life science 
and medicine. International Conference on optical 
NEMS and nanophotonics (2015).
142. G. L. Lio et all. Quantized plasmon quenching dips 
nanospestroscopy via plasmon resonance energy transfer. 
Nature Methods 4, 1015-1017 (2017).
143. K. Lee, Y. Cui and L. P Lee. Quantitative imaging 
of single MRNA splice variants in living cells. Nature 
Nanotechnology 9, 474-480 (2014).
144. https://www.nature.com/articles/d42473-018-
00265-z
145. https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/accenture-
labs-and-1qbit-work-with-biogen-to-apply-quantum-
computing-to-accelerate-drug-discovery.htm
146. https://www.idquantique.com/protecting-health-
care-data-motion/
147. https://www.allen-york.com/blog/2018/04/uk-will-
have-800000-unfilled-it-jobs-by-2020
148. M.A. Dutz, K. R. Almeida and T.G. Packard. 
The jobs of tomorrow: T echnology, Productivity, and 
Prosperity in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Directions in Development;; Directions in 
Development--Information and Communication 
Technology;. Washington, DC: World Bank. © 
World Bank.
149. A. McWilliams. Quantum computing: T echnologies 
and global markets to 2022. Icc Research (2018).
150. B. Hemenway and S. Khanna. Sensitivity and 
computacional complexity in financial networks. 
Algorithmic Finance 5, 3-4 (2016): 95-110.
151. R. Orús, S. Mugel and E. Lizaso. Forecasting 
financial crashes with quantum computing. arX-
iv:1810.07690v1 [q-fin.GN]
152. A. M. Lewis. The impact of quantum technologies on 
the EU’s future policies. European Commission: JRS 
Science for policy report. Part 1: Quantum time 
(2018).
153. M. Reiher et. al. Elucidating reaction mechanisms 
on quantum computers. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences (2017).
154. https://www.ifastat.org/market-outlooks
155. http://www.eldiario.net/noticias/2016/2016_01/
nt160124/principal.php?n=92&-produccion-de-
amoniaco-y-urea-en-manos-de-seis-paises
156. http://www.ssecoconsulting.com/industria-petroqui-
acutemica-en-ameacutericalatina.html
157. M. Kitano et. al. Electride support boosts nitrogen 
dissociation over ruthenium catalyst and shifts the 
bottleneck in ammonia synthesis. Nature Communica-
tions 6, 6731 (2015). DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7731.
158. Sk. Liao et al. Space-to-ground quantum key 
distribution using a small-sized payload on Tiangong-2 
Space Lab. Chin. Phys. Lett. 34, 090302 (2017). 
DOI: 10.1088/0256-307X/34/9/090302.76QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
159. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/612596/
the-man-turning-china-into-a-quantum-superpower/
160. https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/chinas-
2000km-quantum-link-is-almost-complete
161. https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/
article/2110563/china-building-worlds-biggest-quan-
tum-research-facility
162. https://superposition.com/2017/10/31/china-goes-
big-92-acre-10-billion-quantum-research-center/
163. Quantum Manifesto. A new era of technology (2016).
164. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
quantum-flagship-kickoff
165. Ursin et al. Space-QUEST. Experiments with 
quantum entanglement in space. Europhysics News 
40, 3 (2009): 26-29.
166. S.K. Joshi et al. Space QUEST mission proposal. 
Experimentally testing decoherence due to gravity. New 
Journal of Physics 20 (2018).
167. https://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Telecommunica-
tions_Integrated_Applications/Quantum
168. https://hurd.house.gov/about/committees-and-cau-
cuses
169. https://hurd.house.gov/media-center/in-the-news/
best-piece-legislation-dc-about-quantum-computing
170. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/528671/the-
space-based-quantum-cryptography-race
171. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
arthurherman/2018/08/20/at-last-america-is-mov-
ing-on-quantum/#23cbc4f45327
172. https://www.forbes.com/sites/astanley/2018/06/26/
is-the-u-s-getting-its-act-together-on-quantum- com-
puting/#638d553b704f
173. https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2018/09/National-Strate-
gic-Overview-for-Quantum- Information-Science.
pdf
174. https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-
bill/6227/related-bills
175. https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/
house-bill/6227
176. https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2018/01/
after-years-avoidance-department-ener-
gy-joins-quest-develop-quantum-computer
177. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/609451/ibm-
raises-the-bar-with-a-50-qubit-quantum-computer/
178. https://quantumexperience.ng.bluemix.net/qx/
experience
179. https://newsroom.ibm.com/2019-01-08-IBM-Un-
veils-Worlds-First-Integrated-Quantum-Computing-
System- for-Commercial-Use#assets_all
180. https://www.research.ibm.com/ibm-q/system-one/ 
181. https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/03/a-preview-of-
bristlecone-googles-new.html
182. https://www.nasa.gov/saa/domestic/27787_Fully_Ex-
ecuted_NRSAA_Google_Quantum_Computing.pdf
183. https://www.dwavesys.com/
press-releases/d-wave-2000q-system-be-installed-
quantum-artificial-intelligence-lab-run-google-nasa184. M. Reagor et. Al. Demonstration of universal 
parametric entangling gates on a multi-qubit lattice. 
Science Advances 4, 2 (2018).
185. https://www.rigetti.com/qcs
186. https://newsroom.intel.com/news/
intel-delivers-17-qubit-superconducting-chip-ad-
vanced-packaging- qutech/#gs.pYDbT mrp
187. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/quantum/
technology 
188. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/quantum/
development-kit
189. https://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20180626005289/en/Quantum 
-Xchange-Launches-Quantum- Network-Unit-
ed-States
190. https://www.thedailystar.net/world/asia/
japan-launches-its-first-quantum-computer-proto-
type-nii-ntt- university-of-tokyo-1494877
191. http://www.jst.go.jp/pr/announce/20161021/index.
html
192. https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/news/
japanese-govt-and-ntt-announce-quantum-neural-
network/
193. https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/
Japan-enters-quantum-computing-race-and-offers-
free-test-drive
194. https://www.hpcwire.com/2017/11/22/japan-un-
veils-first-quantum-computer-prototype/
195. M. Sasaki et al. Field test of quantum key distribution 
in the Tokyo QKD Network. Optics Express 19, 11 
(2011): 10387-10409.
196. H. Takenaka et al. Satellite-to-ground quantum-lim-
ited communication using a 50-kg-class microsatellite. 
Nature photonics 11 (2017): 502-508.
197. http://uknqt.epsrc.ac.uk/about/overview-of-pro-
gramme
198. http://uknqt.epsrc.ac.uk/applications/
199. https://www.quantumsensors.org/
200. https://quantic.ac.uk/
201. http://nqit.ox.ac.uk/
202. https://www.quantumcommshub.net/
203. https://epsrc.ukri.org/newsevents/pubs/quantum-
techstrategy/
204. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/564946/gs- 16-18-quantum-technologies-report.
pdf
205. http://www.qutega.de/en/home/
206. https://www.laserfocusworld.com/
articles/2018/09/650-million-for-quantum-re-
search-in-germany.html
207. http://www.qutega.de/fileadmin/qutega/Qute-
ga_Grundlagenpapier.pdf
208. https://www.bmbf.de/pub/Quantentechnologien.pdf
209. K. Gunther et al. Quantum-limited measurements of 
optical signals from a geostationary satellite. Optica 4, 
6 (2017): 611-616.77QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
References
210. http://colnal.mx/events/
correlaciones-cuanticas-escuela-latinoameri-
cana-de-fisica-marcos-moshinsky-2017-6 
211. F . Heijman-te Paske. Global developments in 
Quantum T echnology. Netherlands Ministry of 
Economic Affairs (2015).
212. https://uwaterloo.ca/global-impact/cana-
das-stake-quantum-race
213. http://www.rqc.ru/
214. http://www.pcqc.fr/
215. http://qubiz.dk/
216. https://www.quantumlah.org/page/key/whatwedo 
217. http://www.cqc2t.org/
218. https://www.nwo.nl/en/news-and-events/
news/2015/135-million-euros-for-develop-
ment-of-quantum- computers.html
219. https://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Israel-joins-the-
race-to-become-a-quantum-superpower-574510 
220. https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressre-
lease/965.wss#release
221. L.M.K. Vandersypen et al. Experimental realization 
of Shor’s quantum factoring algorithm using nuclear 
magnetic resonance. Nature 414 (2001): 883-887
222. H.Häffner et al. Scalable multiparticle entanglement of 
trapped ions. Nature 438 (2005): 643-646.
223. C. Negrevergne et al. Benchmarking quantum control 
machine methods on a 12-qubit system. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 96, 170501 (2006).
224. https://www.nature.com/news/2007/070215/full/
news070212-8.html 
225. https://physicsworld.com/a/ibm-offers-20-qubit-
quantum-computer-to-clients/ 
226. .https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/05/the-ques-
tion-of-quantum-supremacy.html 
227. https://www.idquantique.com/idq-cele-
brates-10-year-anniversary-of-the-worlds-first-re-
al-life-quantum-cryptography-installation/
228. https://www.newscientist.com/
article/dn12786-quantum-cryptography-to-pro-
tect-swiss-election/
229. R. Alleaume et. al. SECOQC. White paper on 
quantum key distribution and cryptography. arX-
iv:quant- ph/0701168v1
230. M. Peev et al. The SECOQC quantum key distribution 
network in Vienna. New Journal of Physics 11, 
075001 (2009).
231. A. Mirza and F . Petruccione. Realizing long term 
quantum cryptography. Society of America B 27, 6 
(2010). DOI: 10.1364/JOSAB.27.00A185.
232. T.Y. Chen. Metropolitan all-pass and inter-city 
quantum communication network. Optical Express 
18, 26 (2010): 27217-27225.
233. W. Chen et al. Field experimental “star type” 
metropolitan quantum key distribution network. IEEE 
Photonics Technology Letters 21, 9 (2009): 575-577.
234. Y. Pu et al. Experimental entanglement of 25 
individually accessible atomic quantum interfaces. 
Science Advances 4, 4 (2018).235. D. Dequal et al. Experimental single photon exchange 
along a space link of 7000 km. Phys. Rev. A 93, 
010301 (2016).
236. L. Calderaro. Towards quantum communication from 
global navigation satellite system. Quantum Science 
and Technology 4, 1 (2018).
237. Teunissen, Peter J. G. and Oliver Montenbruck. 
Springer Handbook of Global Navigation Satellite 
Systems. Springer International Publishing (2017).
238. E. Kerstel. Nanobob. A cubesat mission concept for 
quantum communication experiments in an uplink 
configuration. EPJ Quantum Technology 5:6 (2018).
239. R. Bedington, J.M. Arrazola and A. Ling. Progress 
in satellite quantum key distribution. Quantum 
Information 3, 30 (2017).
240. R.C. Merkle. Secure communications over insecure 
channels. Communications of the ACM 21, 4 
(1978).
241. W. Diffie and M.E. Hellman. New directions in 
cryptography. IEEE T ransactions on information 
theory 22, 6 (1976).
242. J. Ellis. The possibility of secure non-secret digital 
encryption. CESG Communications-electronics 
security group Research Report No. 3006.
243. W. Diffie. The first ten years of public key cryptography. 
Proceedings of the IEEE 72, 5 (1988).
244. R.L. Rivest, A. Shamir and L. Adleman. A method for 
obtaining digital signatures and public key cryptosys-
tems. Communications of the ACM 21, 2 (1978): 
120-126.
245. http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-gloucester-
shire-11475101
246. http://unsolvedproblems.org/index_files/RSA.htm
247. T. Kleinjung et al. Factorization of a 768-bit RSA 
modulus. In: Rabin T. (eds) Advances in Cryptology 
– CRYPTO 2010. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science 6223 (2010). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
248. T. Elgamal. A public key cryptosystem and a signature 
scheme based on discrete logarithms. IEEE T ransactions 
on information theory 31, 4 (1985).
249. https://www.certicom.com/content/certicom/en/
code-and-cipher/development-of-core-ecc-standards-
by- ansi.html
250. NIST. Digital signature standards. FIPS Publication 
186-2 (2000).
251. A.I. Ali. Comparison and evaluation of digital signa-
ture schemes employed in NDN network. International 
journal of embedded systems and applications 
(IJESA) 5, 2 (2015).78
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesAPPENDICES
 APPENDIX A
THE EVOLUTION OF QUANTUM COMPUTING
In the early 1980s, P . Benioff [1] and R. Feynman [2] first proposed the idea of using 
computers to simulate physical phenomena. For the next 20 years, several researchers 
published on the potential ways these computers could be built and proposed algorithms 
that could run on them, giving birth to the field now known as quantum computing. 
In 1998, three independent research groups managed to build the first 2-qubit quantum 
computers. One was built at the University of California, Berkeley by a partnership led 
by IBM researcher, I. Chuang, between IBM, the MIT Media Lab, and UC Berkeley [3, 
4]. Another was built by J.A. Jones and M. Mosca at Oxford University [5], and the third 
one was built in Los Alamos, California by R.J. Hughes and D.F .V. James et al [6,7].
Within months of these huge accomplishments by the quantum community, a team 
again led by I. Chuang developed the first 3-qubit quantum computer and implemented 
Grover’s algorithm on it at the IBM Research Center in San Jose, CA [8]. 
The first 7-qubit quantum computer was developed between 2000 and 2001 and was 
able to implement Shor’s algorithm for the first time. This 7-qubit quantum computer 
was developed through a collaboration between IBM and Stanford University. They used 
the algorithm to factor the number 15 into its primes, 3 and 5 [221]. Researchers at the 
University of Los Alamos also achieved this milestone in 2000. 
In 2005, the first qubyte quantum computer (8-qubits) was implemented by the University 
of Insbruck [222]. A year later, researchers from Waterloo and MIT managed to increase 
the number to 12 qubits [223]. Again, it only took a year for this record to be broken; in 
2007, D-Wave managed to reach 16 qubits [224].
After these rapid breakthroughs, there were 10 years of relative frustration in this field. 
Finally, in May 2017, IBM announced a new record with the first 17-qubit quantum 
computer [9], which was promptly matched by Intel in October [188]. A few months later, 
IBM reached the 50-qubit [179] milestone and also offered online access to a 20-qubit 
computer for any user to run simulations and provide feedback on its functioning [225].
In April 2018, Google led this ongoing race with their development of a 72-qubit quan-
tum computer, the computer with the greatest capacity to date [10].
The quantum community is now racing toward quantum supremacy, defined as the 
existence of a quantum computer executing a process faster than any digital or classical 
computer. Google believes this could be done with a 50-qubit quantum computer 79
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices[226]; thus, news of a quantum computer outperforming a classical one is expected 
in the near future.
Since the first quantum processors were built in 2000, the year 2030 has been estimated 
to be the year in which quantum processors will achieve quantum supremacy. As previ-
ously stated, some believe that a quantum computer with between 1500 [12] and 2330 
[13] logical qubits would be enough to break keys currently used in cybersecurity in a 
reasonable amount of time. Another study claims that, by 2027, it will be possible to 
break digital signatures used in blockchains in less than 10 minutes [64], posing a major 
threat to the security of blockchain technology.
Figure 3 demonstrates the exponential rate at which quantum computer development 
is growing. In fact, IBM released the first commercial quantum computer under the 
IBM Q System One [181,182] program in January 2019 with a 20-qubit processor; it 
cannot yet be purchased. To date, only quantum annealers have been marketed for specific 
applications (generally for optimization issues). The 2000-qubit D-Wave 2000Q is one 
such example [185].
It is unlikely that domestic quantum computers will be in existence for several decades. 
Further, in the future, computers may not be exclusively either quantum or classical, but 
hybrid, with two processors that take on tasks based on their individual characteristics and 
required capabilities. The first contact the general public will likely have with quantum 
computing will be probably through services provided in the cloud, known as “software as 
a service” (SaaS). With varying fares, quantum hardware and software from big technology 
companies will be available for commercial use.A zooming in on a wafer of D-Wave Quantum Computers, Steve Jurvetson from Menlo 
Park, USA. 1 February 2018.81
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices APPENDIX B
QUANTUM CRYPTOGRAPHY
The greatest change in paradigm offered by quantum cryptography in comparison to 
classical cryptography is the use of processes occurring at the physical level (hardware 
level), rather than at the software level, to guarantee data safety. Quantum cryptography 
allows for completely safe transmission of data through random key generation and 
safe key exchange.
Random Number Generation
Classical random number generation is based on deterministic algorithms, originating 
from seeds. It is impossible to achieve true randomness with classical algorithms, which 
take place at the software level. However, there are random physical processes in nature 
that we can understand and control due to our understanding of Quantum Mechanics. 
These processes can be used to generate random numbers and in turn, random keys. One 
simple way of doing so is by working with light particles (photons) and semi-reflective 
mirrors. If a photon falls on a mirror with a 50% chance of being reflected and a 50% 
chance of passing through, we can agree to write 0 when the photon is reflected and write 
1 when it goes through the mirror, creating a 100% random key.
Currently, it is relatively simple to use these physical processes. The company IDQuantique 
manufactures commercial devices of millimetric dimensions that do so [18].
Quantum Symmetric Cryptography (QKD)
At present, all processes and protocols used to transfer data, including the Internet, depend 
on asymmetric cryptography to establish a safe connection between two users, frequently 
referred to as Alice and Bob. This cryptography enables Alice to send Bob a public key to 
encrypt data so that Alice can decrypt it using a private key. Bob can send her a symmetric 
encrypted key so that only Alice and Bob know such key. They can then start using this key 
to encrypt messages. This is how the Internet’s https protocol works. With the advent of 
quantum computing, however, eavesdroppers will be able to find private keys and decrypt 
them from the public key, which is explained in Section I [36,37,43].
Again, quantum cryptography allows users to create a fully secure symmetric key because 
it involves physical, rather than software, processes.
This is due to the uncertainty and no-cloning principles that apply in the microscopic 
world and make it impossible to observe without modifying or copying a quantum state 
and, as a result, the data encrypted in that state. This means that if Alice somehow codes 
a 0 or a 1 into the polarization of a photon and sends it to Bob, once Bob receives and 
measures that photon and speaks to Alice, they will know if someone has observed that 
photon along the way. That is, they will know for certain whether a key is safe or not before 82
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendicesusing it and will also be able to completely dispose of an unsafe asymmetric encryption if 
they want. This quantum process is known as quantum key distribution (QKD). 
Let us further explore QKD at the physical level. It is well known that light has the ability 
to be polarized. For example, polarized sunglasses are used to filter light, making it easier 
on our eyes. Understanding the process of polarization is easier when we think of photons 
as arrows with a determined direction, the direction of polarization. Polarizers measure, 
detect, and interact with photons and let them pass (or not) through based on their 
direction of polarization. Because all particles are quantum systems, quantum phenomena 
such as superposition and entanglement apply to light particles.
For example, if we release a photon that has diagonal polarization, one of the following 
cases can occur through the process of throwing a photon through a polarizer:
a. If the polarizer is also diagonal, the photon passes through with 100% probability. This 
happens in macroscopic cases when the object is shaped and sized like a hole. This can 
be compared to taking a couch at a diagonal angle through a diagonally faced door.
b. If the polarizer is vertical, the photon will not go through with 50% probability. If it 
does pass through, it will do so as a vertically polarized photon, so that someone who 
sees the photon coming through will not know its previous direction of polarization. 
This happens because diagonal photons are a combination (a quantum superposition) 
of a vertical and horizontal photon. Thus, when the photon reaches the polarizer, it 
is “forced” to stop being diagonal and must decide whether to become its horizontal 
“projection”,16 so that it will not go through the polarizer, or choose to be vertical, so 
that it goes through the polarizer as a vertical photon. This always happens when the 
polarizer differs by 45° in the direction of polarization. Thus, the same phenomenon 
happens when the polarizer is horizontal. This has no classical analogue, as a couch in 
a diagonal position will never go through a door with a vertical shape.
c. If the polarizer is vertical but at a 90° angle to the photon, the photon never goes through.
d. With any other polarization, the likelihood of the photon going through the polarizer 
depends on the difference between the photon and polarizer’s angles of polarization. 
The probability starts from 0% when those directions are orthogonal and up to 100% 
when they are parallel.
Cases B and D only occur within quantum systems and are the processes that underlie 
QKD to allow for the safe sharing of keys between two individuals. If the keys are inter-
cepted (measured by an eavesdropper using polarizers), they become modified from their 
original state. That modification can be detected by Alice and Bob who can confirm that 
eavesdropping took place. The most widely used QKD protocol is the BB84 [19] scheme: 
16. Referring to “projections” is wrong as it would seem that half the photon corresponds to each pro-
jection, meaning only half of the photon passes through and that is not what happens. The photon 
truly exists in a superposition of polarizations and, if decanted through the polarization of the 
polarizer, it goes through it as a whole.83
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices1. Alice and Bob agree on the polarizations that will be their 0s and 1s and on the polariz-
ers they will use to measure them. For example, they determine that photons polarized 
at 45º and 90º correspond to 0s and photons polarized at 0º and 135º correspond to 
1s. This negotiation takes place through a classical channel and does not reveal data 
about the future key to a potential eavesdropper.
2. Alice randomly sends polarized photons in one of the four predetermined directions 
through a quantum channel to Bob. If the eavesdropper intercepts the photon, they 
can be detected because 50% of the time, they use the wrong polarizer, which changes 
the polarization.
3. Bob measures the photons sent by Alice, registers the polarizer used, and if, based on 
the initial agreement, the photon polarization is polarized at 45° or 90°, he writes down 
a 1. If, on the contrary, it is polarized at 0° or 135° he writes down a 1.
Incoming 
polarization
Measured 
polarizationPolaroid
4. Alice and Bob communicate again through a classical channel and Bob tells Alice which 
polarizers he used. Because of the quantum superposition phenomena explained above, 
if Bob uses the horizontal-vertical polarizer and the photon has a diagonal polarization, 
Bob will have either a vertical or a horizontal photon with 50% likelihood for each 
option. However, in no case will he be able to know that the original photon was 
diagonal, so he loses the 1 or 0 data coded by Alice in that diagonal polarization. This 
is why Alice and Bob delete the 1s and 0s corresponding to the measurements Bob 
took with the wrong polarizer from their key.FIGURE 10. Schematic representation of polarizer action on photons.
In the two cases on the left, the photon passes through, keeping its polarization because the 
correct base (polarizer) was chosen. In the two cases on the right, the photon goes through 
with a different polarization with a 50% probability of being either vertical or horizontal.84
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices5. Once Alice and Bob have a clean key with 1s and 0s corresponding to the proper 
measurements, they use the classical channel to share part of that key. If their keys differ 
from each other by a percentage above the estimated intrinsic error percentage for that 
channel, they can then confirm that an eavesdropper has observed the key when it was 
sent and added an error with their random selection of polarizers.
6. If the key has not been observed by an eavesdropper, Alice and Bob will use the rest 
of it (which was not exchanged in Step 5) to encrypt and decrypt data. If the key has 
been observed, they can delete it or use techniques to reduce the information the 
eavesdropper has on the key.
This process’s safety lies in the fact that the eavesdropper will never be able to predict 
the key Alice sent because it is 100% random (something only quantum technology 
allows for). Further, the eavesdropper will also never be able to guess the results of Bob’s 
measurements without adding detectable errors to them. Hence, the eavesdropper will 
never have information about the key communicated through the quantum channel and 
will always be detected when spying on quantum communications. 
Polarizer
Key KeyPhoton Sequence Photon Sequence
Detection Result Detection Result
Compatibility CompatibilityBit Sequence Bit Sequence
Bases Sequence Bases Sequence0
0
00
0
-0
0
00
0
-1
1
11
1
11
1
10
1
-0
1
-1
1
10
0
01
0
-
ALICE
BOB
FIGURE 11. High level representation of the BB84 schema, the 
most used quantum key distribution (QKD) protocol.85
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices APPENDIX C
EVOLUTION OF QUANTUM ENCRYPTED 
COMMUNICATION NETWORKS
Ground-based QKD using optical fibers
The field of quantum telecommunications started making real accomplishments with 
the development of the first testnets at the beginning of the 21st Century. The DARPA 
(Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) Quantum Network was the first known 
quantum network on earth. It was developed by researchers at Harvard and Boston 
Universities in 2003. It measured 29 km long initially connecting six, and later ten 
nodes in 2005 [21,22].
According to IDQuantique, Switzerland was the first country to install a quantum network 
for a real case in 2007. They used it to protect national election data when transmitted 
from the storage room to the location in which the votes were tallied. 
Not long after, in 2008, a robust quantum network was developed in Vienna for the 
SECOQD (Secure Communication based on Quantum Cryptography) European proj-
ect. The Austrian Institute of Technology received 11 million euro in funding from the 
European Union to coordinate the project. This quantum network had six nodes. Five 
were located in the Siemens facilities and the sixth one was located in a relay station. In 
total, the network was 285 km long and was divided into optical fibers between nodes 
measuring from 6 km to 85 km [229,230].
Another interesting project in this field is Quantum City in South Africa. The Quantum 
City project is the result of a collaboration between the Center for Quantum Technology 
from KwaZulu-Natal University, the Innovation Company from that University, eThe-
kwini Municipality, and the Innovation Fund. This quantum network was developed in 
2009 with four initial nodes distributed in multiple suburbs of the eThekwini district 
and wired in a star configuration with fiber lengths between the nodes, ranging from 2.6 
km to 27 km [231].
There have also been several quantum network initiatives in China. One of those initia-
tives, in operation since 2007, comprised of a network in the metropolitan area of Beijing. 
It consisted of four operational nodes separated by 32 km and up to 42.6 km in a star 
configuration, in the areas of Wangjing, Dongxiaokou, Nanshatan, and Huangchenggen 
[232]. A network that became operational in 2009 in Heifei is also worth mentioning. 
This network also had four nodes placed in a star configuration and a fifth additional 
node, which were located in UTSC, Wan’an, Meilan, Wanxi and Feixi respectively. The 
network allowed for real-time quantum encrypted phone calls between any pair of the five 
nodes with a distance of up to 60 km [233]. A third network between the metropolitan 
areas of Heifei, Chaohu, and Wuhu was operational for over 5,000 hours from December 
2011 until July 2012. Five of the nodes were in Heifi, three more nodes were installed in 86
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesWuhu, and a ninth node was operating in Chaohu. The total length of the installed optical 
fiber was close to 200 km [234]. Other initiatives have followed, the most outstanding of 
which is led by the University of Science and Technology of China that intends to create 
a quantum connection between four cities through a 2,000 km long optical fiber from 
Beijing to Shanghai [27].
The best documented quantum network to date was developed by Tokio and struc-
tured in three layers [195]. The first layer is the quantum layer, made up of six nodes 
generating keys through different protocols, distributed between the cities of Koganei, 
Otemachi, Hakuson, and Hongo, connected point by point. The second layer is for 
administration and control. A key management agent (KMA) located in each node 
that physically corresponds to a protected server. The KMA receives a key through an 
application interface (API) developed by NEC Corporation and the National Institute 
of Information and Communications Technology of Japan (NICT). This key makes it 
possible for different systems and protocols that make up the network to interoperate. 
The servers corresponding to the KMAs are responsible for collecting quantum keys Quantum Layer Key Management Layer Communication Layer
Quantum 
DevicesKM Servers
KM Agents
Secure 
key
Secure data 
exchange
FIGURE 12. Schematic representation of the 3-layer 
quantum network in Tokio, divided into 3 layers.87
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendicesand the data on them. They can collect the quantum error ratio per qubit (QBER), 
for example, and then send it to a centralized server for key management (KMS). The 
third layer is a communication layer in which the generated quantum keys are used to 
encrypt and decrypt audio, text, video, or other types of data produced by different 
applications per the AES-256 standard. The different connections use cables ranging 
from 1 km to 90 km in length.
The United States just started testing this technology. Quantum Xchange is developing 
the country’s first commercial network with quantum cryptography [131] that “will 
connect the financial markets on Wall Street with back office operations in New Jersey, 
helping banks keep high-value transactions and mission-critical data safe and secure” 
[132]. This telecommunications giant entered into an 8.9 million US dollar agreement 
with SK Telecom [126] for Quantum Xchange to provide SK Telecom with its quantum 
cryptography systems.
Space-based QKD using satellites
As mentioned in Section I, wireless networks have a broader range than wired networks. 
Wireless networks have a lower attenuation because keys are able to be transmitted 
travelling above the atmosphere most of the time and up there, there are only a few 
particles to interact with. Orbiting satellites are needed to enable these wired networks 
and because of this, the first space-based test was under way for a while longer than the 
first ground-based networks.
China was the first country to place satellites in orbit for Earth-to-space and space-to-Earth 
quantum communication purposes. In 2016, the QUESS (Quantum Experiments at Space 
Scale) space mission launched a 600 kg satellite, known as MICIUS. The estimated overall 
cost of the mission was 100 million US dollars [28,29]. With communication between 
Earth stations in Delingha, Nanshan, and Lijiang, MICIUS was able to generate and share 
the first quantum keys over long distances that exceeded 1200 km [30,31].
Because of MICIUS, the greatest milestone in the field of quantum information was 
achieved on September 17, 2017: a quantically encrypted 90-minute videocall was 
placed between China and Austria at a distance of 7,600 km. It was the first instance 
of encrypted intercontinental communication using secure quantum technology. After 
the key was generated using the MICIUS satellite, it was used by China and Austria to 
encrypt and decrypt a videocall that traveled through regular optical fibers belonging to 
classical networks [32].
China foresees launching 10 additional satellites that are expected to allow for a quantum 
network of intercontinental communications between Europe and Asia by 2020 that 
would be worldwide by 2030 [33].
China is also focused on studying the feasibility of conducting Earth-to-space and space-
to-Earth communications using devices in space stations, rather than satellites, in order to 88
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesIn April 2018, the group announced they were able to surpass the 20,000 km threshold 
in photons exchanged [236]. They established communication between two satellites 
from the GLANOASS constellation, which has over 20 satellites, operates in three orbital 
planes, and was developed during the second half of the 20th Century for Russian satellite 
geo-localization [237].Low Earth 
orbitMedium 
Earth orbitGeostationary 
orbitFIGURE 13.
Some of the many initiatives carried out by 
different countries and academia [238] . 
Tiangong-2, 
China MICIUS, ChinaISS Space 
Quest, Germany 
and Canada QUBE, 
GermanyNANOBOB, 
France and Austria
SPEQS, 
SingaporeQEYSSat, CanadaSOCRATES, 
Japan
IQC, 
CanadaLMU, 
GarmanyUSTC, ChinaLAGEOS, ItalyAlphasat I-XL, 
United States
Origin Receptor
NICT, 
JapanIQC, 
CanadaMLRO, ItalyDLR, 
GermanyIQOQI, 
AustriaUSTC, 
ChinaTESAT, TAOGS, 
ESA OGS, Spainavoid generating a satellite constellation. Thus, in 2017, QKDs were conducted between the 
Tiangong-2 space laboratory and the Nanshan land station, which are 719 km apart [159].
Likewise, in 2017, Japan managed to conduct QKDs using a micro-satellite called Small 
Optical T ransponder (SOTA). SOTA weighs 6 kg, is 17.8 cm long, 11.4 cm wide, and 
26.8 cm tall, and orbits at an altitude of 600 km [196].
In 2016, a collaboration between academic institutions and Italian observatories carried 
out optimal photon transmissions from a 7,000 km distance between the LAGEOS-2 
satellite, orbiting at an altitude of 5,620 km, and the Matera Laser Ranging Observatory. 
This feat pave the way for the conduction of QKDs at longer distances [235].89
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesSpace-QUEST (Quantum Entanglement for Space Experiments) run by the European 
Space Agency (ESA) [53,54] is another interesting European initiative. It proposes the 
placement of a transmitter on the outer wing of the Columbus module at the International 
Space Station (ISS). The ESA is also running the Eutelsat Quantum initiative, “a pioneer-
ing mission that will influence how telecom satellites are procured and manufactured in 
Europe”. In the second half of 2019, a satellite will be launched for Earth-to-space and 
space-to-Earth quantum telecommunications [166].
Several German agencies, including the Max Planck Institute and the German Aerospace 
Center, collaborated in 2016 to conduct their own experimental study to test the trans-
missions of photon signals at a distance of 38,600 km between the portable space stations 
located at the Teide Observatory, Tenerife, and the Alphasat I-XL stationary satellite [209] .
France and Austria have also collaborated in an initiative called NanoBob, an attempt 
to offer more precise data on the optimal system arrangement for QKDs using satellites 
and to precisely synchronize two watches; one is located on a space ship and the other is 
on Earth [238].
These are only some of the many projects being conducted around the world so far 
[239]. While China is in the lead for now, several countries are eager to develop quantum 
telecommunication technology. Thus, most countries in Asia and Europe are making 
major investments in quantum technologies so as not to fall behind in the quantum 
telecommunications race led by China. While many other countries in other parts of the 
world are conducting concept tests within their governments, technology companies, and 
financial institutions, we have not been able to find sufficient data on equally ambitious 
initiatives as those described in this section. Unfortunately, we are not aware of a single 
program or concept test in Latin America and the Caribbean.A device consisting of four transmon qubits, four quantum busses, and four readout resonators fabricated at IBM 
and appearing in the paper “Building logical qubits in a superconducting quantum computing system” by Jay M. 
Gambetta, Jerry M. Chow and Matthias Steffen. Jay M. Gambetta, Jerry M. Chow & Matthias Steffen. 13 January 2017.91
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Appendices APPENDIX D
ASYMMETRIC CRYPTOGRAPHY
The idea of asymmetric cryptography, also known as public key encryption, emerged 
in the 1970s. While it was first believed that R. Merkle [240] and W. Diffie and M. 
Hellman [241] developed this method in 1976, it seems that it was actually J. Ellis, a 
cryptographer from the British Intelligence, who explored this field for the first time in 
1970 in a classified manner [242].
Among the different asymmetric cryptography techniques, the RSA algorithm, the ellip-
tic-curve cryptography, and the discrete logarithm cryptography are most important and 
will be briefly covered in this section [243]. 
RSA Algorithm
The RSA Algorithm relies on the exponential difficulty for classical computers to factor 
large integer numbers; there is a log-linear relationship between the number of steps the 
computer must conduct and the integer’s size. It is believed that R. Rivest, A. Shamir, 
and L. Adleman from MIT developed the RSA Algorithm in 1978 [244]. In fact, the 
algorithm was named in their honor. However, a document from the British intelligence 
service was declassified in 1996, proving that C. Cocks and M. Williamson had actually 
proposed a similar method in 1973 [245].
The idea behind the algorithm is that, given the integer numbers e, d and n so that for 
any integer m complying with 0 ≤ m ≤ n the following applies:
It is extremely difficult to find d given e and n, , or even m with classical algorithms. In 
the algorithm, m is the message to be encrypted, e is the public key given to the person 
sending the message to be encrypted, and d is the private key to decrypt it that only the 
receiver of the message possesses.
The classical algorithm that solves the problem most efficiently is the general number 
field sieve (GNFS). It is the fastest algorithm that can factor numbers higher than 10100. 
The problem to be solved is, given the integer n, one must find prime integers p and q 
(related to e and d) so that:
Between 1991 and 2007, RSA Laboratories ran an active challenge where they finan-
cially rewarded people that were able to factor RSA numbers of different lengths [246]. (me)d ≡ m (mod n)
n=pq92
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesRSA-768 is the longest known number to be factored, with 768 binary digits and 232 
decimal digits. The team responsible for factoring it -the team that won the challenge- 
had to perform more than 1020 operations to find the number. They used the GNFS 
algorithm and hundreds of computers with very powerful processors for two years to 
do so. In 2009, they received the 50,000 US dollar award. They said that using a single 
AMD Opteron processor at 2.2 GHz with 2 GB of RAM, it would have taken them 
1500 years to do the same thing and estimated that factoring a 1024-bit number would 
be 1,000 times more difficult [247].
In 2015, the NSA advised against continuing to use this encryption technique
Discreet Logarithms Problem (DLP) and Elliptic-
Curve Cryptography (ECC)
Given a finite cyclical group, G, and a group generator, the discreet logarithms prob-
lem on G entails finding the only d  ϵ [0, |G| -1] which, given any element of the 
group β ϵ G, fulfils:
That is, finding the logarithm of β with base α:
There are certain groups G with specific properties that allow us to develop algorithms that 
solve this problem in polynomial time. For example G=ZN . However, for other groups G, 
the difficulty is exponential or sub-exponential, so that those groups are more appropriate 
in developing cryptographic algorithms because they will be harder to reverse.
Some popular algorithms, such as the ElGamal encryption [248], known as Digital 
Signature Algorithm (DSA), or the Diffie-Hellman key exchange, propose using the 
multiplicative group module p, G=(Zp)*. Others propose using finite abelian groups 
of elliptic curves G=GF(pn), as, for example, the Diffie-Hellman version on elliptic 
curves (ECDSA).17
In 1999, ANSI sponsored the use of elliptic curves and proposed the standard ANSI 
X9.62 [249]. A year later NIST also supported the use of elliptic curves proposed by 
ANSI and proposed additional elliptic curves to be used [250].
17. The elliptic algorithm is the additive formulation for the discreet algorithm. The elliptic algorithm 
has exponents and products while the discrete algorithm has products and sums.αd=β
d=logα β93
QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
AppendicesECDSA is slightly more sophisticated than RSA. It is also safer because it achieves the same 
complexity of RSA, but with shorter keys. For those readers interested in a more detailed 
comparison, we recommend the document by Al.I. Ali [251] where more information, 
including the following chart, may be found:
RSA key length (bits) ECDSA key length (bits)
1024 192
2048 256QUANTUM TECHNOLOGIES
Digital transformation, social impact, 
and cross-sector disruption