Tackling cybercrime to unleash
developing countries’ digital potential
Dr Joanna Świątkowska
Background Paper
The Pathways for Prosperity Commission on 
Technology and Inclusive Development is proud 
to work with a talented and diverse group of 
commissioners who are global leaders from 
government, the private sector and academia. 
Hosted and managed by Oxford University’s 
Blavatnik School of Government, the Commission 
collaborates with international development 
partners, developing country governments, private 
sector leaders, emerging entrepreneurs and civil 
society. It aims to catalyse new conversations 
and to encourage the co-design of country-level 
solutions aimed at making frontier technologies 
work for the benefit of the world’s poorest and most 
marginalised men and women.
This paper is part of a series of background papers on 
technological change and inclusive development, 
bringing together evidence, ideas and research to 
feed into the commission’s thinking. The views and 
positions expressed in this paper are those of the 
author and do not represent the commission.
Citation:
Świątkowska, J. (2020) Tackling cybercrime to unleash 
developing countries’ digital potential . Pathways for 
Prosperity Commission Background Paper Series; 
no. 33. Oxford, United Kingdom.
www.pathwayscommission.bsg.ox.ac.uk
@P4PCommission
#PathwaysCommission
Cover image © ShutterstockDr Joanna Świątkowska
The European Cybersecurity Forum -
CYBERSEC and AGH University of Science 
and Technology
Background Paper 33
January 2020
Abstract
This paper provides an analysis of the cybercrime landscape in developing countries and focuses 
particularly on threats to their economic well-being. It highlights current trends in cybercrime 
activities and discusses various challenges faced by entities engaged in cybersecurity. The main 
goal of the paper is to strengthen the position of developing countries, providing multidimensional 
recommendations – especially for political leaders and policymakers – on how to build a secure 
digital future. To do this, the paper examines two approaches towards cybersecurity: ‘digital 
optimism’ and ‘digital realism’ and the lessons that can be learnt from these approaches. The 
paper suggests moving towards a new era of ‘digital pragmatism’ – an approach that can help to 
build a solid and secure foundation for the digital revolution.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Mr Michael Bem and Ms Karine Szotowski for their expert advice throughout 
the preparation of the paper. Any possible mistakes and inaccuracies are mine alone.1Table of Contents
Introduction
1. The cybercrime landscape
 1.1 Definitions of cybercrime
 1.2 The cost of cybercrime
 1.3 The main types of cybercrime
  1.3.1 Malware and ransomware
  1.3.2 Credit card fraud
  1.3.3 Data breaches
  1.3.4 Cross-cutting factors and cryptocurrencies
 1.4 New cybercrime frontiers
 1.5  Difficulties in combating cybercrime
  1.5.1 Cross-border procedural and legal issues
  1.5.2 Digital skills and resources
  1.5.3 Evolving technology
  1.5.4 Private sector role
  1.5.5 Human rights issues
2. Analysing digital vulnerabilities in developing countries
 2.1 The rolling digital snowball
 2.2 Developing countries in particular peril
  2.2.1 Technology-related security shortages
  2.2.2 Human factor – the centrepiece of cybersecurity
	 	 2.2.3	Insufficient	strategic	solutions	and	imperfect	legal 	frameworks
	 	 2.2.4	Digitalisation	of 	financial 	services
  2.2.5 Digital infrastructure evolution
	 	 2.2.6	Illicit	financial 	flows	and	cybercrime
3. Development by digital pragmatism
 3.1 From digital optimism to pragmatic actions
 3.2 National cybersecurity strategies and legal frameworks
 3.3 Combatting cybercrime with countermeasures and new technologies
 3.4 Strengthening the human factor in cybercrime prevention
  3.4.1 Education
  3.4.2 Prevention
 3.5 Technology providers’ responsibilities: secure by design and default
Conclusion: the future of cybersecurity is here
References
 2
7
7
8
11
11
12
12
13
13
15
15
16
16
16
17
18
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
26
27
30
32
32
33
34
36
37The digital revolution
Over the years, the internet has undeniably facilitated positive change for individuals, societies 
and businesses alike: by empowering people, strengthening and spreading democratic values, 
fostering innovation, and contributing to economic growth. However, the digital revolution has two 
sides, bringing both tremendous opportunities and significant threats to societies, economies and 
national security.
This paper argues that two distinct approaches to digital development have predominated since 
the invention of the internet, starting with ‘digital optimism’ and shifting into ‘digital realism’ (Schia 
2017). Each approach demonstrates a different level of trust towards new technologies, and 
different decisions about how to implement security measures. These postures have had strong 
implications for how cybercrime threats have been handled, specifically at the governance level.
Through the early years of digital adoption, in the era referred to as one of ‘digital optimism’, 
countries perceived cybersecurity mainly as a technical issue rather than a strategic challenge.¹ As 
a consequence, decisive governmental actions were missing. Fragmented, ad-hoc approaches 
were prevalent, as opposed to a holistic vision. This period was also characterised by over-optimistic 
trust in new technologies and their positive impact on the world. Their wide implementation was 
not accompanied by proper security measures. Attitudes only started to change with the advent 
of the first truly significant cyber incidents, like the 2007 cyberattacks on Estonia and the Stuxnet 
worm attack uncovered in 2010. Following such incidents, the world entered the phase of ‘digital 
realism’ – an approach characterised by the conviction that digital development must be built on 
stronger security foundations – that were technological and strategic in nature. Digital realism also 
brought greater distrust in new technologies in general.
Technology and developing countries
The main thesis of this paper is that developing countries need not be encumbered by limitations 
and mistakes that early adopters of technology fell prey to. These countries can better design and 
build their digital futures, greatly enhancing their economic growth. To achieve this, they will need 
to transition to an attitude of ‘digital pragmatism’, which constitutes an enhanced version of digital 
realism. Digital pragmatism is characterised by the implementation of ‘secure by design’ decisions 
and actions, at both the technical level and the strategic level. This approach allows for effective 
management of the risks inherent in digitalisation. It requires better situational awareness of both the 
threats and the opportunities related to digitalisation, which in turn allows for the implementation 
of targeted and efficient solutions. The effectiveness of cybersecurity countermeasures can be 
significantly increased and amplified by new technologies – for instance, artificial intelligence (AI) 
may be used to help solve many cybersecurity problems. The ‘digital pragmatism’ approach also Introduction
2¹   Rough assessments can be made to provide a time frame for these two areas: digital optimism started with the wide -
spread	use	of 	the	internet	(mid-90s)	and	lasted	until 	the	end	of 	the	first	decade	of 	the	21st	century.	Digital 	realism	started	at	
that point and continues.3calls for more co-ordinated and more effective international efforts to deal with the cybercrime 
problem, and for greater support for developing countries that are starting to develop digitalisation. 
Implementing such an approach may help to maintain trust in new technologies and therefore 
support the global digital revolution.²
The Digital Single Market
This introduction provides a brief overview of the evolution of security approaches and the 
history of widespread internet adoption to help improve understanding of these concepts. It is 
difficult to assess the impact of new technologies on the global economy, as ICT is no longer a 
specific sector, but pervades all modern economic systems (European Commission 2015, p. 3). 
Nevertheless, selected estimates provide interesting insights. In some economies, the internet is 
thought to contribute up to 8% of GDP, powering growth and creating jobs (BCG 2012, p. 3). The 
Digital Single Market completion in the EU could amount to €415 billion per year to the EU’s GDP 
(McKinsey Global Institute 2016). Gartner Research experts anticipate that product and service 
providers for the Internet of Things (IoT) will produce incremental revenue exceeding US$300 
billion in 2020, translating into US$1.9 trillion in global economic value-add through sales to end 
markets (Middleton, Tully, and Kjeldsen 2013).
The economic benefits are undeniable. Yet, for years, in the era of ‘digital optimism’, governments, 
public entities, technology users, vendors, developers and other stakeholders were virtually blinded 
by the opportunities that ICT yields. Focusing mostly on the advantages behind the inventions, 
the importance of implementing appropriate safeguards was disproportionately downplayed.³ 
While ICT systems have become omnipresent and indispensable across almost all spheres of 
daily life – critical infrastructures included – cyberthreats and their plausible consequences were 
underestimated. The following examples illustrate the problem and show the overly light approach 
taken by technology and governance entities in the cybersecurity area.
As ICT systems – predominantly the internet – became widespread, vendors and service providers 
were driven by the desire to feed the market with new products, solutions and functionalities as 
fast as possible. ‘Technical debt’, a term introduced by software programmer Ward Cunningham, 
describes the shipment of rough products to clients, with the intent to make amendments at 
a later stage (Chong 2013; Hoog 2015). Digital optimism introduced a problem that some label 
as ‘technical security debt’ – meaning that developers and vendors have often put unsecure 
products on the market, posing significant risks (Hoog 2015). According to estimations given by 
Carnegie Mellon University’s CyLab Sustainable Computing Consortium, the average commercial 
off-the-shelf software contains 20 to 30 bugs for every 1,000 lines of code (Wired 2004).⁴ At the 
same time, having processed data from 40 million security scans, cloud security and compliance 
company Qualys found that just 10% of vulnerabilities are responsible for 90% of all cybersecurity 
exposures (2006). This means that, very often, individuals, companies and governments adopt 
²   Chapter 3 includes recommendations on how to pragmatically introduce cybersecurity in developing countries.
³   Understood broadly: technological, organisational, institutional, and so on.
⁴			To	gain	a	sense	of 	perspective,	 Windows	 XP	contains	at	least	40	million	lines	of 	code.4flawed technologies, entrusting them with essential aspects of their activity. Moreover, they tend 
to ignore basic security measures, such as updating software and operating systems, which would 
significantly strengthen their security posture and mitigate potential risks. Alarming discoveries 
confirm this thesis: in a 2015 study, hackers relied on flaws that have been known since 2002 in 
nearly 90% of cases (Harrison, Pagliery 2015). 
The need for cybersecurity
The presumption that digital development brings mostly advantages was not only reflected in 
poor technical security standards – similar mistakes were made by governments and international 
organisations at the strategic level. National cybersecurity strategies only started to be widely 
implemented at the turn of the first and second decade of the 21st century. Before this date, such 
legal frameworks were only a sporadic phenomenon, developed by pioneer countries.⁵  
For years, the ‘dark side’ of the internet manifested itself in multiple shapes and forms: from seemingly 
harmless cases of unauthorised access, to disinformation spread through digital communications 
channels, online fraud, scams, and illegal trade, as well as other forms of organised crime, attacks 
on critical infrastructure aimed at causing massive disruption, political and industrial espionage,  
and terrorist activity co-ordinated through the internet –  to list just a few examples. Over the years, 
such crimes became the new norm. An increasing proliferation of hostile actors has also been 
noticed: from individual hackers to organised crime groups, terrorists and state actors.⁶  Each was 
driven by different motives and made use of different strategies and methods – all of which makes 
cybersecurity an even more difficult and challenging domain.
Cyberthreats eventually became so severe that the international community could no longer 
ignore the consequences. Incidents such as the massive cyberattacks targeting Estonia in 2007 
– the infamous Stuxnet malicious computer worm which crippled the Iranian nuclear facilities – 
and the 2015 cyberattack on the Ukrainian power grid all served as wake-up calls for the general 
population and decision-makers in particular. Today, even the World Wide Web inventor, Sir 
Timothy Berners-Lee, calls for fixing the internet, stating that ‘it has been hijacked for nefarious 
purposes’ (Phys.org 2019). The international community finally ceased naively trusting technologies, 
entering a period of more prudent ‘digital realism’. Characterised by the growing conviction that 
cybersecurity must be treated as an important element of  all digital endeavours, this approach 
has been associated with governance, regulatory, technological, institutional, and organisational 
actions at both domestic and international levels. Key global actors such as Interpol, NATO, the 
⁵			In	2003,	only 	two	countries	had	a	National 	Cybersecurity 	Strategy 	(NCSS),	in	2010–11,	in	2011–21.	Now 	97	countries	have	
an	NCSS.	Disclaimer 	about	calculation:	 To	prepare	this	calculation,	data	from	the	indicated	sources	(ITU,	National 	Cyberse -
curity	Strategies	Repository;	ENISA,	NCSSs	Map;		CCDCOE	Cybersecurity 	strategies)	as	 well	as	the	author’s	research,	 were	
used. It is important to notice that sometimes a subjective assessment was made of whether the particular documents 
qualified	as	a	NCSS.	It	happened	that	general 	national	security	strategies	 were	qualified	as	NCSS,	 which,	according	to	the	
author,	was	not	justified.	Since	the	sources	and	the	research	may 	not	be	exhaustive,	it	is	likely 	that	the	actual 	numbers	of 	
strategies deviate from those mentioned above.
⁶			More	on	the	evolution	of 	cybercrime	can	be	found	in	the	article	 written	by 	Criminal 	Lawyer	Group,	available	from:	https://
www.criminallawyergroup.com/the-evolution-of-cybercrime-from-past-to-the-present5UN, the EU, the African Union and others put cybersecurity at the top of their agenda. Countries 
extensively built their cybersecurity ecosystems.⁷ Groundbreaking legislation such as the Network 
and Information Security (NIS) Directive are being adopted. Some of them, like the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the EU Cybersecurity Act, even have the ambition to influence 
technical standards (by introducing certification of ICT products and services).
All those processes have the potential to strategically change the cybersecurity landscape, yet 
seem collectively insufficient. This is why another distinctive feature of digital realism manifests in 
diminished trust in digital technologies. This distrust may, in the most radical scenario, negatively 
impact on further digital revolution – slowing it down, and leading to the fragmentation of digital 
economies. For instance, cybersecurity concerns were given as justification to propose barriers 
and limitations on the deployment of 5G networks using Chinese infrastructure components. Such 
actions have a huge impact on global supply chains and may even lead to the ‘decoupling’ of tech 
ecosystems (Woo, Volz 2019). Discussions about more advanced actions, such as national and 
international governance and regulations to improve cybersecurity, are triggered by eroding trust 
and the insufficient positive outcomes of cybersecurity measures. This has the potential to bring 
structural changes to the technological and geopolitical state of play, influencing developing 
states (Świątkowska, Albrycht 2019).
In other words, much has changed since the early days of the internet. The American essayist, 
philosopher, and poet Ralph Waldo Emerson once said that ‘our distrust is very expensive’. This is 
not necessarily obvious in the context of cyberspace. On the one hand, trust is indeed essential 
for developing a digital economy, making life-changing inventions, and ultimately, changing the 
world. In that sense, missed opportunity costs associated with lack of trust can be significant. 
Trust, however, requires solid foundations, as otherwise losses may quickly outweigh benefits. It 
is therefore crucial to discuss and establish an adequate level of trust when taking actions that 
will enable further digital innovation – an undertaking in which governments and the international 
multi-stakeholder community must play an active role. Digital pragmatism is needed to overcome 
many of those challenges. 
Research covered by this report
This report’s analysis is limited to discussing cybercrime and its impact on economic development. 
The first chapter looks at general trends and statistics related to the cybercrime landscape, but 
also examines the difficulties in combating threats. 
The second chapter analyses digital vulnerabilities across developing countries. It takes a closer 
look at selected structural factors present in developing countries that strongly impact on the 
cybercrime landscape and the ways of addressing these factors. This chapter provides context 
to improve decision-makers’ understanding of the actions that must be taken to increase their 
cybersecurity. 
⁷   Involving such bodies as Computer Emergency Response Teams, dedicated public authorities (even in the rank of 
Ministries), law enforcement agencies, military units and so forth.6The third chapter considers governance decisions taken at national and international level and 
sets out recommendations on how to deal with the cybercrime problem in developing countries. 
Future action and pragmatic solutions are proposed in light of the lessons learnt by early adopters 
in the eras of ‘digital optimism’ and ‘digital realism’.7For many years, cybersecurity was perceived as mostly a technical problem. This approach 
imposed tech-orientated language, with early definitions explaining cybersecurity through 
the three key security attributes: confidentiality, availability, and integrity of data and services 
provided by network and information systems.⁸ Yet, over time, various actors came to realise 
that cybersecurity is not just a topic of ICT conversation. As cyberspace increasingly pervades 
everyday life, business, and national security, the understanding of the phenomenon must be 
broader, and encompass wider areas of intervention  with governance actions, institutional set-up 
and regulatory decisions at its core. This paper proposes the following definition: 
Cybersecurity is the optimal state where users can function securely and achieve 
their goals in the cyberspace domain by effectively managing risks posed by 
multidimensional threats.
As cyberthreats pose different challenges to different actors, countermeasures must be tailored 
accordingly. Therefore, to achieve optimal results, actors must play distinct roles and fulfil various 
responsibilities.⁹ Governments and state apparatus ought to co-ordinate many key endeavours – 
for example, providing strategic objectives and priorities on cybersecurity at a national level, and 
building a favourable environment for other actors’ engagement. In most cases, actions designed 
to protect technical components (devices, systems, networks, and so on) will undeniably serve as 
a foundation for broader cybersecurity. However, plenty of additional capabilities will be required 
to holistically ensure cybersecurity. 
There are many ingredients essential to the enhancement of cybersecurity: goal-derived strategies, 
executive sponsorship, risk management, legal and compliance frameworks, organisational 
architectures, human resources and others. Fundamentally, all actions aimed at tackling 
cybercrime should constitute a subset of wider cybersecurity-relevant activities. Implementation 
of those elements is very complicated and often requires significant financial resources, therefore 
the process can cause difficulties.
We also need to consider the meaning of ‘cybercrime’ itself. Unsurprisingly, there is no single, 
universally accepted definition. From a close analysis of proposed approaches, however, several 
common denominators can be extrapolated. First and foremost, technology is at the core of 
most cybercrime definitions, for instance: the EU defines the phenomenon as ‘a broad range of 
different criminal activities where computers and information systems are involved either as a 
primary tool or as a primary target’ (European Commission 2013, p. 3). Second, a specific duality in 
understandings of cybercrime can be observed. This boils down to the differentiation between two 1. The cybercrime landscape
1.1 Definition of cybercrime
⁸			Or	‘security 	of	network	and	information	systems’ 	–	terms	often	used	interchangeably 	(EU	Directive	2016/1148,	3).
⁹			With	differing	tasks	 while	combating	different	hostile	activities,	eg	cyberespionage,	cybercrime,	etc.¹⁰			Another	way	to	understand	the	magnitude	of 	cybercrime	is	to	compare	it	to	the	internet	economy 	as	a	whole.	Boston	
Consulting	Group	estimated	that	the	 value	of	the	latter 	was	approximately 	US$4.2	trillion	(BCG	2012).	 This	essentially 	means	
that	cybercrime	can	be	 viewed	as	a	14%	tax	on	growth	(CSIS,	McAfee	2018,	19).	Other 	estimates	claim	that	cybercrime	costs	
the	global 	economy 	US$2.9	million	per 	minute	(RiskIQ	2019).
¹¹   Even computing losses caused by cybercrime may be difficult to calculate. The methodology used in Table 1 offers a 
good	example	of 	how	to	deal	with	this	issue.	 Aspects	considered	included:	the	loss	of 	intellectual 	property 	and	business	
confidential information, online fraud and financial crimes, financial manipulation (using stolen sensitive information on 
potential mergers, among others), the cost of securing networks, buying cyberinsurance, paying for recovery from cyber -
attack, reputational damage and liability risk for the hacked company and its brand (including temporary damage to stock 
value),	opportunity 	costs	(including	disruption	in	production	or 	services),	and	reduced	trust	for 	online	activities.	 All	these	
issues	could	be	examined	in	detail 	while	assessing	cybercrime	consequences	in	developing	countries.
8– often interrelated – forms of criminal activity: cyber-dependent  crimes – which can be committed 
only with the use of ICT systems, for example, Distributed-Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks – and 
cyber-enabled crimes (traditional illegal acts that are transformed and scaled up by ICT, such as 
online fraud and data theft) (Interpol, HM Government 2016, p. 17). Currently, most ‘offline’ crimes 
at some point also include ‘cyber’ components.
1.2 The cost of cybercrime
It is difficult to accurately estimate the cost of cybercrime. With so many variables, unknowns, 
and complexities (Scott 2016), all approximations must be taken with scepticism. Nevertheless, 
estimations reflect the severity of the problem. One of the best-known calculations is provided by 
McAfee and CSIS; the latest edition of their report asserts that cyber incidents may cost the global 
economy as much as US$600 billion, or 0.8% of global GDP (CSIS, McAfee 2018, p. 6).¹⁰ʼ¹¹
Table 1 provides estimates of financial losses related to cybercrime, broken down by region. This 
shows the potential of cybercrime’s negative impact on economic growth.9RegionIncome 
levelNo. of countriesRegion GDP  (US$, trillions)Cybercrime cost 
 
(US$, billions)Cybercrime loss (% GDP)
East Asia & Paciﬁc   36 22.5 120 to 2000.53 to 0.89%
thereof High income 12
  Developing 24
Europe & Central Asia   55 20.3 160 to 1800.79 to 
0.89%
thereof High income 35
 
Developing 20
Latin America & 
Caribbean   38 5.3 15 to 300.28 to 0.57%
thereof High income 13
  Developing 25
Middle East & North Africa   21 3.1 2 to 5 0.06 to 0.16%
thereof High income 8
  Developing 13
North America 3 20.2 140 to 1750.69 to 0.87%
thereof High income 3
South Asia   8 2.9 7 to 150.24 to 0.52%
thereof Developing 8
Sub-Saharan Africa   48 1.5 1 to 3 0.07 to 0.20%
thereof High income 1
  Developing 47
Total   209Table 1. Regional Distribution of Cybercrime 2017
Source:	Own	elaboration	based	on	CSIS,	McAfee	2018	and	the	 World	Bank’s	countries	classification	2019.
As Table 1 shows, developing countries lose much less money to cybercrime than developed 
countries. At first glance, this may downplay the importance of the problem. However, in societies 
very often touched by abject poverty, every efflux of money is tremendously notable; it can be a 
truly burning problem for economic well-being at an individual level. Table 1 also suggests that 
cybercrime losses increase alongside income levels and internet penetration. Given the increase 
of internet use in developing countries, the cybercrime landscape may quickly expand and 
broaden its impact.10Economic consequences, as indicated, are not limited to the losses directly sustained by 
developing countries. At times, additional and more severe consequences manifest: these tend 
to be long term and much more difficult to resolve. Poorly secured infrastructure that weakens 
the entire global system, skillset shortages, untrustworthy strategic and legal systems, and the 
growing strength of organized criminal groups  – to name a few – significantly impede economic 
conditions and the relative position of developing countries in the international arena. A lack of 
confidence that developing countries are reliable business partners often hinders investments 
and knowledge exchange, leading to their partial exclusion from the global economic system. All 
of this has an obvious impact on economic growth. 
There are several reasons why cybercrime is on the rise. Some of them – such as relative 
anonymity (which decreases the chance of being caught) – derive strictly from the architecture of 
the internet. Others, like scalability, are related to different circumstances – for instance, they may 
be the result of new technology development and automation. In general, cybercrime is low-cost, 
highly profitable, and increasingly easy to commit. Cyberattacks-as-a-service, enabled by illegal 
marketplaces hosted within the Darknet,¹² contribute to the easy accessibility of tools that enable 
hostile actors to commit cybercrimes, even where they lack technical knowledge. Offenders 
no longer need sophisticated knowledge or skills to commit crimes, as they can purchase the 
necessary tools and tutorials online. Ransomware toolkits, for instance, cost only a few dollars, 
with more sophisticated versions available for US$3,000 (McAfee 2018, p. 11). 
Automation exponentially increases the scale of the problem, as it allows the same illicit activities 
to be repeatedly carried out with minimal effort. Malware development itself has also been 
automated: systems can identify vulnerable devices and prepare appropriate payloads.¹³ According 
to McAfee, one major internet service provider reported observing 80 billion malicious scans a 
day (McAfee 2018, p. 4). All of this makes cybercrime an attractive and lucrative type of illegal 
businesses. Cybercrime has evolved into a complex economy, a system composed of various 
intertwined economic actors, which generate and maintain large criminal revenues (McGuire 2018, 
p. 12). 
Cybercrime is no longer the domain of individual actors or ‘lone wolves’. It is a complex undertaking, 
conducted to a large extent by organized criminal groups . Upwards of 80% of cybercrime acts are 
estimated to originate in some form of organised activity (UNODC 2013, p. XVII). As the complexity 
of cybercrime increases, advanced governance actions co-ordinated between national and 
international partners are increasingly necessary.
¹²			Darknet	can	be	defined	as	‘a	network	built	on	top	of 	the	internet	—	 which	has	been	designed	specifically 	for	anonymity’ 	
(Sabarinath	2019).	Darknet	is	often	used	for 	illegal	activities.
¹³	A	payload	is	the	component	of 	the	cyberattack	 which	causes	harm	to	the	 victim	(Cloudflare).Countless types of cybercrime contribute to these losses. It would be impossible to discuss in 
detail all the methods adopted by criminals to commit offences, especially as they constantly 
evolve and adapt. Yet, analysing the trends and factors that have led to the unprecedented scale 
of the problem can help to understand the cybercrime landscape. 
This section summarises several prominent categories of hostile and illegal activities in cyberspace, 
as emphasised in recent reports by specialised agencies and private security companies. Due to 
the scope of this paper, the selection has been limited to those types of cybercrime that have 
a significant economic impact and are important in the context of developing countries – being 
either financially driven or generating noteworthy financial consequences.1.3 The main types of cybercrime
111.3.1 Malware and ransomware
With its destructive nature and potential for real financial impact, ransomware is one of the key 
types of cybercrime. The term refers to a type of malware that surreptitiously encrypts victim data 
and demands payment be made – usually in cryptocurrency¹⁴ – to restore access (Fruhlinger 
2018). The potential for ransomware to hamper the economy and financial well-being of a victim 
is significant. For example, in May 2017, WannaCry ransomware affected around 300,000 victims 
(Europol 2018, p. 16), shutting down computers with outdated Windows operating systems.¹⁵ The 
UK health sector was particularly adversely affected – a report from the UK Department of Health 
stated that it had cost the British National Health Service £92 million (Field 2018) – but the attack 
had impacts on a range of sectors in more than 150 countries. Overall, the global economy lost 
approximately US$4 billion due to the attack (Berr 2017). 
A month later, NotPetya ransomware paralysed some of the largest businesses in the world. One 
of its victims, the Danish shipping company Maersk, which moves about one-fifth of the world’s 
freight, lost between US$200 and US$300 million (Mathews 2017). The Maersk case is particularly 
interesting, as it captures the comprehensive nature of cyberattacks and their cascading impact on 
the economy: the malware interrupted operations at Maersk’s terminals in four different countries, 
causing week-long delays, with repercussions for other industries that relied on timely delivery of 
their products and manufacturing components. In total, the global damages caused by NotPetya 
amounted to more than US$10 billion (Greenberg 2018). 
The effects of ransomware and attacks are not only confined to the economy: they can also 
cripple critical infrastructure. For example, in South Africa, some residents of Johannesburg were 
cut off from electrical power due to a ransomware attack (BBC 2019). Chapter 2 will discuss the 
cyberthreats landscape in developing countries in more detail. 
¹⁴			Making	law 	enforcement	attempts	to	trace	the	funds	more	difficult.
¹⁵			It	is	important	to	highlight	that	patches	for 	affected	systems	existed	but	 were	not	applied.	Microsoft	had	originally 	re-
leased them in March – almost two months before the incident, and again on the day of the attack.12Banking malware represents another specific type of cyberthreat. The rise of online banking 
has rendered this threat increasingly substantial (Europol 2018, p. 18). Banking Trojans – types of 
software designed to illegally access banking details – are gaining the most traction in this arena 
(Batt 2018). It is suggested that one of the key reasons is the increased use of mobile banking 
applications. The software provider Check Point  found that the number of threats against mobile 
devices in the first half of 2019 had risen by 50% compared to the previous year (Palmer 2019).
1.3.2 Credit card fraud
Online transactions – the backbone of e-commerce industry – have seen a rise in ‘card-not-
present’ (CNP) fraud, in line with the general growth of digital commerce (Europol 2018, p. 43). CNP 
scams occur because the buyer is not required to physically present the card to the retailer to 
complete the purchase, allowing criminals to make a fraudulent transaction. These crimes require 
the victim’s information (names, card numbers and passwords) that can be acquired in a number 
of ways, including ‘phishing’ and purchasing data on the online black market. For instance, the 
amount of credit card data available on the Darknet has increased by 153% over the past year 
(Stuppy 2019).
1.3.3 Data breaches
Data breaches are closely tied to malware and fraud. A breach is defined as: ‘an incident that 
results in the confirmed disclosure… of data to an unauthorized party’ (Verizon 2018, p. 2). There are 
numerous reasons why acquiring access to individual and organisational data is at the forefront 
of criminal activities. Attaining information can be an end in itself – for example, as part of a 
cyberespionage campaign, which can give the instigator valuable, strategic knowledge and an 
associated advantage over the competitor. Such data can also be monetised, for instance, through 
sale on the Darknet, or through extortion (such as blackmailing the victim). The data can be used 
to commit further illicit activities, for instance to steal financial resources. Some assessments have 
shown that 76% of analysed breaches were financially motivated (Verizon 2018, p. 5).
Data breaches may lead to further, indirect consequences. For example, the breach that affected 
more than three billion Yahoo! customers, compromised names, dates of birth, email addresses 
and passwords. The incident introduced severe risk for the direct victims, but also reduced Yahoo’s 
sale price by an estimated US$350 million (Armerding 2018), as it was in the process of being 
acquired by Verizon.131.3.4 Cross-cutting factors and cryptocurrencies
Cross-cutting crime factors are those that impact, facilitate, or otherwise contribute to multiple 
crimes (Europol 2018, p. 54). Social engineering – particularly phishing – is by far the most prevalent 
in this group.¹⁶ Conducted at a large scale, it can have significant financial consequences. In 2018, 
for example, an international organized crime group stole the credentials of hundreds of banking 
institutions’ customers, and subsequently stole €1 million in funds (Europol 2018, p. 55).
While not a direct cyberthreat, cryptocurrencies bring intriguing novelties to an analysis of 
cybercrime and play a pivotal role in many digital crimes. They have been used as a ‘cross-
cutting factor’ (see above) and also as a target for cybercrime. Due to their pseudonymisation 
and decentralised infrastructure, cryptocurrencies continue to be the mainstay of illicit online 
transactions and enable the commissioning, perpetration, and monetisation of cybercrime (Europol 
2018, p. 58, p. 59). As the value of Bitcoin, Ethereum, or Monero increases, their users and facilitators 
– for instance, currency exchangers, mining services, and wallet holders – are becoming common 
targets of crime (Europol 2018, p. 63). Two new growing trends are worth noting: cryptojacking 
– exploiting internet users’ bandwidth and processing power to mine cryptocurrencies (Europol 
2018) – and  initial coin-offering scams.
1.4 New cybercrime frontiers
Implementing successful cybercrime countermeasures requires us to consider current threats, 
and also to anticipate what the future will bring. Several technologies and methods are expected 
to significantly influence the cybersecurity landscape (in negative and positive ways). Debates on 
cybersecurity measures should also consider the broader trends related to digitalisation, as they 
bring new circumstances that change the cybersecurity landscape. Some selected examples 
include:
Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR):  4IR will transform many forms of cybercrime, mostly by 
increasing the gravity of their consequences. As digital solutions begin to ‘blur the lines between 
the physical, digital, and biological spheres’ (Schwab 2016), more components of everyday 
life will increasingly rely on digital technologies. As a result, current paradigms of production, 
management, and governance will be revolutionised. In this new environment, new avenues 
for cybercrime will appear. For example, 5G will serve as an important building block for 4IR. Its 
capacity for increased data transfer rate, lower latency, and higher throughput may herald a new 
era of artificial intelligence (AI), telemedicine, autonomous transport, and the Internet of Things 
(IoT), to name but a few technologies. At the same time, it may hinder law enforcement activities, 
making it harder to identify and locate users. As Europol warned, it will allow users ‘to download 
¹⁶			Social 	engineering	is	understood	in	this	context	as	psychological 	manipulation	to	trick	users	into	making	security 	mis-
takes	or	giving	away 	sensitive	information,	 which	enables	criminals	to,	for 	instance,	overtake	the	 victim’s	device.¹⁷			Attribution	is	understood	here	as	the	process	of 	ascertaining	and	assigning	responsibility 	for	malicious	cyber 	activity	(for	
more,	see	Lin	2016).	
¹⁸			Botnets	can	be	used	for 	numerous	hostile	activities:	DDoS	attacks,	sending	spam,	stealing	personal 	information,	hosting	
malicious	sites,	and	delivering	‘payloads’ 	of	other	malicious	etc.	(Hogben	cited	in	UNODC	2013).
14data from multiple sources simultaneously, making the investigation of communication events 
increasingly complex’ (Europol 2018). Also, while previous generations of mobile networks made 
use of unique identifiers assigned to each individual device, 5G will rely on temporary identifiers, 
further complicating the attribution process (Europol 2018).¹⁷
Internet of Things (IoT):  In the era of 4IR, the IoT is likely to become omnipresent. The avenues 
for cyberattacks will exponentially increase, and the cyberattacks themselves will undoubtedly 
evolve. Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks contextualise the potential importance of 
the problem. Some predict that, in 2020, there will be 20 billion connected devices worldwide. 
If as poorly secured as they are today (Hung 2017), they will serve as powerful tools, supporting 
criminal activities. Weak passwords, poor configuration, and unpatched technical vulnerabilities 
will allow criminals to control devices to carry out unprecedented DDoS attacks. Examples of such 
attacks have already been seen. For example, in October 2016, the world witnessed one of the 
most infamous DDoS attacks, which leveraged malware dubbed Mirai. Offenders used automated 
tools to scan the internet for connected devices and used 60 default usernames and password 
combinations to gain access (Batt 2019). The machines were then infected with the malware and 
became part of a remotely controlled botnet – a network of hundreds of thousands of hijacked IoT 
devices, used to launch large-scale attacks – that brought down the domain registration services 
provider, Dyn, for several hours.¹⁸ As a consequence, a large number of services and websites 
in the US and Western Europe were also suspended. In the age of countless, omnipresent, 
interconnected devices, similar attacks will pose a great challenge.
Artificial Intelligence (AI):  The benefits associated with the development of AI are widely 
discussed, but AI will also revolutionise the cybercrime scene. The core of the problem lies in 
AI’s enabling power, which will significantly enhance numerous hostile activities conducted in 
cyberspace – for instance, improving malware development or social engineering attacks. The 
ability of computers to communicate in natural languages may mean that automated messages 
will hardly be distinguishable from a human-authored text (Gladyshev 2018). AI can also be used 
for automated malicious payload creation, helping to adapt this process to avoid detection, and 
drastically decreasing effective anti-malware countermeasures. 
AI is also likely to be used for more sophisticated attacks, as it learns from the data it is fed and 
adjusts outcomes accordingly. Abuse of that process – for example, through data manipulation 
– may have unwanted and dangerous consequences. For instance, a bank loan approval or a self-
driving car might be manipulated (Gladyshev 2018). By manipulating data that fuels AI, people 
can influence automated decisions made by the algorithms. Consequences may be multifaceted: 
people entitled to receive loans could be rejected (influencing their economic well-being) or the 
functioning of autonomous vehicles could be impacted (leading to dangerous accidents).  15Quantum computing:  While still an issue of the future, quantum computing could be another 
potential game-changer. With its superior computing power, current encryption mechanisms will 
become obsolete. Ensuring data confidentiality might then be difficult to achieve and will require 
more advanced methods. Is has been estimated that ‘about 99% of online encryption is vulnerable 
to quantum computers’ (Gold 2019). Financial sectors worldwide must foresee challenges related 
to those issues and start thinking about the transition to quantum-safe cryptography (Ollson 2019).
1.5 Difficulties in combating cybercrime
The challenges associated with designing, implementing and operating successful cybercrime 
countermeasures are multidimensional. Here we divide them into the main categories.
1.5.1 Cross-border procedural and legal issues
To sufficiently prevent and combat cybercrime, states must have substantive and procedural legal 
provisions in place. This is one of the most important tasks that governments must fulfil. It is often 
a struggle to establish and maintain effective criminalisation.¹⁹ Legal frameworks must remain 
adaptive and flexible, but putting domestic mechanisms in order is merely a first step. The biggest 
obstacles and underlying difficulties in combating cybercrime are related to its cross-border 
nature.²⁰
International legal interoperability and effective collaboration lie at the heart of the challenge.²¹ 
In most cases, victims and offenders are located in different legal jurisdictions. Consequently, 
those cases can be solved only if legal regimes are aligned between countries and effective 
mechanisms for co-operation exist. Therefore, an intensive international collaboration against 
cybercrime requires harmonising elements of the domestic criminal laws that refer to cybercrime  
and building effective procedural powers (World Bank 2017, p. 26). To complicate the issue of co-
operation even further, it is becoming obvious that ‘traditional’ instruments of co-operation, like 
mutual legal assistance regimes, are ineffective in the digital era, and the international community 
must therefore look for new assistance mechanisms.
¹⁹			Different	strategies	 were	deployed	to	deal 	with	that.	One	is	to	adjust	already 	existing	provisions	to	be	applicable	to	
cyberspace. The other is to provide some new measures.
²⁰			Cybercriminals	tend	to	search	for 	a	safe	haven	and	operate	from	that	territory.
²¹   International operability derives from cohesive legal frameworks dedicated to cybercrime issues that are adopted in 
various	countries	(World	Bank	2017,	36).161.5.2 Digital skills and resources
Countering cybercrime often requires skills and resources that national law enforcement agencies 
do not have. The architecture of the internet – in so far as it enables anonymity, and criminals 
can often operate behind multiple layers of fake identifies – promotes clandestine actions, as 
it complicates even basic actions to identify the offender (World Bank 2017, p. 34). The digital 
environment brings challenges even to the most fundamental procedures such as the collection, 
preservation, and evaluation of evidence (Grimes 2016).²² Obstacles related to those processes 
emerge from the necessity of advanced technical knowledge, but also from the fact that access 
to evidence will not be possible without co-ordinated international operations (often with the 
participation of the private sector).
1.5.3 Evolving technology
Technological innovation offers countless, constantly evolving tools to commit cybercrime. To 
keep up with technological changes, law enforcement and the judiciary must constantly perfect 
their methods and invest in knowledge, equipment, and skills – all of which require the time 
and resources public bodies often lack – particularly in developing countries. Keeping up with 
technological advancements causes operational issues and difficulties solving fundamental 
security problems. Very often the technologies that bring innovation and benefits for society 
also hamper the efforts of law enforcement agencies. Encryption is a good example – it brings 
enormous benefits for users, enhancing privacy and confidentiality of data and communication. 
It serves as an essential element of cybersecurity and a building block for secure solutions that 
enable the digital economy to thrive (Kelly 2018). At the same time, it creates significant obstacles 
and challenges for entities responsible for combating cybercrime, as often they are not able to 
track criminals and have access to important evidence or information. There is currently a vivid 
global debate on whether or not to introduce ‘backdoors’ into systems to enable more efficient 
work of law enforcement agencies. Backdoors are a double-edged sword: while helping police 
action, they can significantly weaken the security and cause hard-to-predict damages to the 
security ecosystem.
1.5.4 Private sector role
Another barrier to combating cybercrime is linked to the increasing role of the private sector 
(without whom many cases cannot be solved). In the digital realm, private companies predominate: 
they own and operate infrastructure, provide products and services to end users, and maintain 
databases. They often have sole access to the potential evidence and information necessary for 
an investigation. Law enforcement authorities therefore rely on co-operation with private sector 
organisations, often of foreign origin. Governments must therefore establish efficient mechanisms 
for public–private co-operation by instigating, supporting and enhancing international initiatives. 
²²   The need for education applies also to prosecutors, judges, and juries.17This is of utmost importance as new technological advancements, applications and emerging 
technologies bring more complex challenges. Fast and streamlined access to cloud-based digital 
evidence is an area where public–private co-operation is needed (UNODC 2013, p. XXII; World Bank 
2017, p. 105). This issue is currently at the top of the political agenda. For example, the Clarifying 
Lawful Overseas Use of Data (CLOUD) Act) – the US federal law enacted in 2018 – aims to solve 
difficulties with data access across borders, where the use of traditional mutual assistance is often 
not feasible. The key element of the legislation obliges US-based tech companies to provide data 
to federal law enforcement, even if the servers are located on foreign soil.²³ Several tech giants, 
including Microsoft, Facebook, Apple and Google supported the creation of the CLOUD Act (Foley 
2018).
1.5.5 Human rights issues
Most of the issues described in this chapter are multiplied by the need to balance security with 
the rights and freedoms of citizens, especially the right to privacy and freedom of expression. 
This domain must be dealt with through solid legal safeguards and standards established and 
executed by governments (World Bank 2017, p171-177). It is important to underline that, despite 
popular belief, security measures do not necessarily invade personal freedoms. On the contrary, 
when implemented properly and with respect to legal safeguards, they may significantly 
contribute to the protection of those rights. Examples include the implementation of encryption, 
pseudonymisation, and other elements related to the protection of the confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of the data and systems. Indeed, although it is difficult to reconcile security and 
human rights and freedoms, it is not impossible. 
²³			The	CLOUD	 Act	applies	only 		to	the	most	severe	crimes.182. Analysing digital vulnerabilities in developing countries
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that more than half of the global 
population were online at the end of 2018 (ITU 2018).²⁴ And, in the last 15 years, the demography of 
internet users has changed dramatically: in 2000, developed countries (17% of world population) 
represented 82% of the world’s internet users; by 2017, developing countries were the biggest 
group of internet users (73%) and the majority of the world’s population (84%).²⁵ While developed 
countries are still over-represented among internet users, the gap is closing very fast (World Bank 
2019).
Figure 1: Changes in the global distribution of the internet2.1 The rolling digital snowball
Source:	Own	elaboration	based	on	the	 World	Bank’s	countries	classification	(2019),	the	 World	Bank’s	 World
Development Indicators, ITU Country ICT Data.
Internet penetration in developing countries is still relatively low (amounting to 45.3% at the end 
of 2018), it faces various obstacles (Kshetri 2010, p. 1058), and is unevenly distributed (Pathways 
for Prosperity Commission 2018). However, it is growing at a rampant rate (ITU 2018). Africa has 
the lowest number of internet users, but is making the most dynamic progress. The percentage of 
Africans using the internet has increased from 2% in 2005 to almost 25% in 2018 (ITU 2018). Other 
regions are also experiencing growth. In the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), 71.3% of 
the population use the internet, while in the Arab States it is 54.7%, and in the Asia-Pacific region, 
47% (ITU 2018).²⁶
²⁴			51.2%	of 	the	global 	population	(3.9	billion	people).
²⁵			Upper-middle-income,	lower-middle-income	and	low-income	categories	are	considered	for 	the	World	Bank’s	
definition	of 	developing	countries.
²⁶			The	CIS	consists	of 	Armenia,	 Azerbaijan,	Belarus,	Georgia,	Kazakhstan,	Kyrgyzstan,	Moldova,	Russia,	 Tajikistan,	
Turkmenistan,	Ukraine,	and	Uzbekistan19Developing countries are also characterised by the significant growth of the number of mobile 
broadband subscriptions, which is likely to accelerate further. The largest expansion of broadband 
subscriptions has been observed in the Asia-Pacific region, the Arab States, and Africa (ITU 2018). 
Notably, countries of the Global South often bypassed fixed-phone infrastructure and invested 
directly in wireless technology (Schia 2017, p. 4). Dominant mobile digital infrastructure brings 
specific issues that influence security conditions.
Much has been written about the positive aspects of digitalisation. Indeed, as a precondition of 
economic well-being, it is an underlying factor for attaining the UN’s Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). Globally, political and business leaders strive to create favourable conditions to 
make sure that the related benefits, especially in the economic arena, will materialise. National, 
regional and international mechanisms have sprung up to facilitate the process, due to the 
widely accepted presumption that only through digitalisation will the global economy be able to 
achieve its full potential. The Digital African Market was set up with the main goal of unleashing 
entrepreneurial energy, innovation and economic capabilities of the continent.
Along with digital transformation, developing countries have been facing various cyberthreats 
that may endanger their economic development and also perturb the global financial system. 
Even though most developing countries are at the beginning of their digital journey, significant 
security problems already exist, and these are only likely to increase. For instance, more malicious 
activities tend to be observed when a country’s internet penetration is above a threshold of 10–15% 
(Reilly 2007). Developing countries have crossed that threshold and so have become an important 
element of the global cybersecurity landscape.
2.2 Developing countries in particular peril
Structural factors in developing countries strongly influence their cybercrime position. During the 
initial phase of digitalisation, nations experience a phenomenon known as ‘hollow diffusion’ (Kshetri, 
2010, p. 1066). Digitalisation often outpaces the establishment and implementation of cybersecurity 
technical controls and – often primarily – governance frameworks.²⁷ Existing weaknesses are 
exploited by cybercriminals who target victims in developing countries, and also take advantage 
of the digital infrastructures of those countries to carry out attacks on other territories, including 
developed states.²⁸ This trend is expected to increase, and developing countries must act against 
it. To better understand this complex issue, it is important to analyse common denominators that 
typify the cybercrime scene in developing countries.
²⁷			Niels	Nagelhus	Schia	uses	the	name	‘societal 	hollowness’.	Compare	to	the	concept	of 	‘digital	optimism’ 	introduced	
earlier.
²⁸			The	US,	UK,	and	other 	European	states	have	for 	a	very	long	time	served	as	main	cyberattack	originators.	 The	last	
decade marked a noticeable shift towards emerging economies. For instance, in 2009 seven of the top ten countries for 
creating Trojans designed to steal passwords were developing countries. They accounted for 92% of such Trojans globally 
(Kshetri	2010).202.2.1 Technology-related security shortages
Poorly secured, outdated, unlicensed and unmanaged information assets, often relied on in many 
developing countries, serve as a key facilitating factor for cybercrime:²⁹
• As many as 80% of PCs on the African continent are already infected with malware 
(Akerele 2018). Windows 7, the operating system most vulnerable to the WannaCry 
attack, holds a 55% market share in Africa (Schia 2017, p. 12).
• About one quarter of African users are using Microsoft Windows XP, an operating system 
that has lacked support and patches since 2014 (Akerele 2018, p. 24).
• More than 95% of African organisations (in both the private and public sectors) are either 
operating at or below the ‘security poverty line’, which means that they cannot effectively 
manage cyberattacks – mainly because they do not have basic security measures and 
structures in place and barely invest in security solutions (Serianu 2017, p. 7).
• According to the Global Software Survey, approximately 57% of software used in Africa 
and the Middle East is unlicensed, which means that upgrades and security patches 
will not be installed (BSA 2016, p. 8). Entities and individuals from emerging economies 
often simply cannot afford the latest software and hardware versions and cannot invest 
in cybersecurity solutions, making them very susceptible to attacks.
This problem has an additional dimension, in that ICT vendors (similarly to vendors in other 
sectors) tend to adapt to the market demand by adjusting their offer to match clients’ capacities or 
expectations. For many developing countries, high-security products are unaffordable; therefore 
instead, manufacturers provide low-cost, consequently less secure versions of their products. 
Such outdated or unprotected systems are easy prey for cybercriminals (Kshetri 2010, p. 1066), 
serving as targets that can be either directly exploited or weaponised to enable further crimes. 
As a consequence, cybersecurity problems in developing countries can have significant 
implications, not only for those countries, but also globally. Taking the observed trends into 
account, immensely growing populations in developing countries will be soon be equipped with 
billions of connected devices. Poorly secured, they are cybercrime targets, but they can also be 
used as tools to commit further attacks. One possible scenario is that the proliferation of unsecured 
devices in these markets will create the potential for larger, more damaging botnets. According to 
cybersecurity author Jeffrey Carr, ‘one botnet of one million hosts could conservatively generate 
enough traffic to take most Fortune 500 companies collectively offline. A botnet of 10 million hosts 
on the other hand, could easily paralyse the network infrastructure of a major Western nation’ (Carr 
2009, p. 13). 
²⁹			Understood	broadly 	as	both	hardware	and	software	at	either 	private	or 	institutional 	level.21Technology-related problems in developing countries are an important reason why cybercrime 
is flourishing. The issue can be limited by governance interventions that may, for instance, be 
focused on enforcing security standards in the critical sectors. Governments can also build a 
dialogue with technology vendors, so they can provide more secure products and services (these 
issues are described in section 3.4).
2.2.2 Human factor – the centrepiece of cybersecurity
A lack of knowledge and skills – including basic cyberthreat awareness and ‘digital hygiene’ – is 
another reason why developing countries have poor cybersecurity (Kshetri 2010, p. 1068). Careless 
online behaviour is one of the main reasons that users fall victim to cybercrime. The problem is 
sadly broader, as many developing countries suffer from a shortage of cybersecurity specialists to 
help enhance cybersecurity.  As we move towards the 4IR, relevant skills will be crucial to safety 
and security in the digital world.
While the total population of the African continent now exceeds 1.3 billion, the number of certified 
cybersecurity professionals is merely 10,000 (Serianu 2017, p. 11). Some estimates are even lower: 
according to ISACA (an independent association of professionals involved in information security), 
as of mid-2018, Sub-Saharan Africa was home to 5,700 certified cybersecurity professionals. 
These numbers represent a mere 4% of ISACA-accredited information assurance experts globally 
(Nduati 2018). 
Often no systemic solutions are available to tackle the problem as the educational system fails 
to offer sufficient courses or research projects in the cybersecurity area (Serianu 2017, p. 19). 
And in most cases, informal education does not suffice.³⁰ Arguably, when formal cybersecurity 
education was nascent or non-existent across the well-established states, individuals gained 
their knowledge mostly through independent self-study. This strategy is not easily applicable to 
developing countries, as most people are not fluent in English, a prerequisite for understanding 
most information security content (Information Today 2008, p. 22 cited in Kshetri 2010, p. 1067). 
Education represents one of the most important avenues of governmental intervention. The 
integration of cybersecurity aspects into educational curricula is the main step. There are numerous 
examples of international standards and guidelines that can be used to create an educational 
framework. Tailored courses can be created to increase skills among targeted groups. Equally, 
non-governmental entities also need to get involved in those endeavours (see section 3.3).
A final human-related problem is associated with poor economic situations, especially where 
unemployment rates are high and wages are low, or highly unequal. Such conditions can foster 
cybercrime as a very lucrative source of quick income. Cybercriminal activities may be seen as 
an attractive occupation, and a solution to financial problems among the poor and marginalised. 
³⁰			Understood	as	self-teaching,	courses,	programmes	offered	outside	of 	the	official 	educational 	system.22Experts claim that the lack of offers within the legal ICT labour market push those who have 
acquired elementary skills – or purchased hacking tools on the Darknet – towards illegal activities 
(Sullivan 2007; World Bank 2017, p. 16). High unemployment and poverty lead to high societal 
acceptance of cybercrime engagement. In Western African countries, so-called yahooboys  
(Adeniran 2011 cited in UNODC 2013, p. 10) are university students who view online fraud as a 
means of economic subsistence. Another example is the sakawa  boys, emerging in Ghana, who 
engage in internet fraud and frequently justify their activities as the only way to survive in the 
absence of employment (Warner 2011, p. 746).
2.2.3	Insufficient	strategic	solutions	and	imperfect	legal 	frameworks
This report has underlined that effective strategic and legal frameworks play an essential role in 
combating cybercrime. Unfortunately, developing countries suffer visible shortages across those 
domains. Next to technology and human-oriented challenges, strategic and legal deficiencies 
pose futher challenges to combatting cybercrime in developing countries. 
Many developing countries are yet to adopt national cybersecurity strategies to provide a general 
governance framework for long-term actions. This hinders efforts to create a well-functioning 
cybersecurity ecosystem, or to determine key roles and responsibilities. Without strategic 
guidance, basic mechanisms for co-operation are often missing.  Similarly, crucial processes – for 
instance, related to national risk analysis, information exchange or incident management – are not 
in place.
More than two-thirds of surveyed countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia and Oceania view their 
laws related to cybercrime as only partly sufficient, or not sufficient at all (UNODC 2013, p. XVIII). 
Unrelated research confirms this, pointing out that, in 2016, 30 out of 54 African countries did not have 
specific legal provisions in force regarding cybercrime and electronic evidence (Symantec 2016, p. 
54). There is abundant evidence that organized criminal groups consider a number of factors when 
making decisions about which geographic location to operate from. One of the most important 
factors is the strength of the rule of law. Cybercriminals search for ‘safe havens’, hoping that weak 
legal frameworks and subpar enforcement will decrease the probability of their apprehension and 
conviction, as well as the expected penalty (Kshetri 2010, p. 1063). Consequently, cybercrime in 
developing countries is flourishing. For instance, Brazil is ranked as one of the largest  originators 
of attacks globally, and is the leader in Latin America and the Caribbean (Kessem, Korman 2015). 
Experts highlight inadequate legislation as a key part of this problem (CSIS, McAfee 2018, p23). 
Non-existent or insufficient regulations are not the only obstacles to combatting, investigating 
and prosecuting cybercrime. Very often, weak enforcement mechanisms are a further problem. 
This calls for immediate intervention from national governments, which must create national legal 
frameworks, including appropriate criminal laws and domestic criminal procedural powers that 
will enable them to fight cybercrime. This must be accompanied by international co-ordination 
aimed at achieving legal interoperability.Developing countries often lack capabilities when it comes to law enforcement authorities and 
jurisdiction. They have few specialised police, with around 0.2 per 100,000 national internet users 
(UNODC 2013, p. XXIII). UNODC’s survey highlights that 70% of dedicated law enforcement officers 
in emerging nations lack computer skills and equipment, while only half receive training more 
than once a year. Most countries reported requiring technical assistance, mainly in the area of 
cybercrime investigative techniques (UNODC 2013, p. XXIII). The survey also shows that unprepared 
judicial services and prosecutors represent a significant bottleneck in fighting cybercrime (UNODC 
2013, p. XXIV). 
Apart from legal issues, there is also the risk of additional collateral damage associated with 
thoughtless cybercrime legislation. Experts warn that many African countries’ newly created 
anti-cybercrime legal solutions threaten freedom of expression and other fundamental human 
rights – in particular where offences are vaguely defined and safeguards are weak or missing. This 
brings potential risks to individuals, undermines trust, and hinders international and public–private 
sector co-operation (Symantec 2016, p. 55). This must serve as a warning for all other developing 
countries: governance decisions in this area must be rational and bold, as this will be the condition 
of success for many reforms.
2.2.4	Digitalisation	of 	financial 	services
The increasing role of digital financial services is actively shaping the cybercrime scene. In 
developing countries, traditional banking and other financial activities are often expensive and 
inaccessible (especially in rural areas). As a result, most of the poorest live without access to 
basic services such as bank accounts (Instapay 2018; Pelletier, Khavul, Estrin 2014), significantly 
hampering chances for economic transformation and exacerbating social exclusion.³¹ Digital 
financial services, often based on mobile phones, however, provide a viable solution for many. 
Africa is the world leader in digital finance, with 14% of all Africans receiving money through mobile 
transfers (Akerele 2018, p. 4). However, the widespread trust in digital solutions for financial resources 
makes them attractive targets for cybercriminals, increases the threat of banking malware, and 
poses a real threat to developing countries. For example, of the top 10 countries (by share of users) 
attacked through banking Trojans, seven were in the Global South (Chebyshev 2019). Asia is one of 
the regions particularly plagued by mobile malware (Symantec 2018, p. 79), and a similar situation 
is visible in South Africa, where 47% of smartphone users fell victim to mobile cybercrime in 2013 
(Symantec 2016, p. 8). 
Cybercrime aimed at financial institutions and digital financial services is one of the greatest 
concerns in developing countries. Because of  their lower cybersecurity maturity level, banks in 
developing countries are targets, and they also create weaknesses in the global financial system. 
³¹			For	instance,	70%	of 	Latin	Americans	do	not	have	a	bank	account;	60%	of 	transactions	made	by 	SMEs	are	in	cash.
23Due to their participation in world-wide payment systems such as SWIFT, financial institutions 
operating in emerging nations can serve as gateways to banks in developed countries. Previously, 
to get to one of the major western banks, cybercriminals have penetrated institutions in Bangladesh, 
Vietnam, and Ecuador (CSIS, McAfee 2018, p. 10). 
Cyberattacks on banks in the Global South could damage the finances of the banks in question, 
their customers, and also global finance more broadly. The attacks could cause reluctance among 
large financial institutions to interoperate with developing country firms which introduce higher risk 
(Schia 2017, p. 9). Being an outcast in the global financial ecosystem would equal further aggravation 
of economic problems for a developing country. The gravity of the potential consequences 
on whole national systems necessitates changes from the respective financial institutions, but 
also systemic actions in governance to enforce the implementation of the appropriate security 
standards.
Apart from the immediate financial loss, cybercrime undermines the reputation of the targeted 
organisation. Customers may lose trust in the bank, but also in the technologies, which may 
result in slower digital transformation and development delays. Afraid of falling victim one way 
or the other, clients may choose to withdraw their assets ‘and place them under the proverbial 
mattress, thereby further hurting the global financial system and markets’ (World Bank 2017, p. 
91). Cyberattacks targeting the client information stored and processed by financial institutions 
can have an equally devastating impact on economies: for instance, this can lead to lowered 
credit scores, reduced investment rates in developing countries, and regulatory fines and litigation 
for businesses (World Bank 2017, p. 91). It can also hamper the development and use of mobile 
financial services enabled by ICT systems. This can translate into negative consequences for the 
economic inclusion of the poorest.
242.2.5 Digital infrastructure evolution
The evolution of digital infrastructure in developing countries will have a significant impact on 
security. Older generations of wireless networks, widely used across developing countries, are 
technically more susceptible to cyberattacks (Shaik; Seifert, et al. 2016).³² With the shift towards 
broadband networks, the nature and magnitude of cyberthreats will evolve, keeping pace with 
technological progression, and facilitating the growth of various forms of abuse (Kshetri 2010, p. 
1063), including increased botnet activity. Better network quality translates to more potent attacks, 
and more attractive and higher value targets, and therefore new opportunities for criminals.
As discussed earlier, technological development will soon bring a large IoT presence. In this 
context, potential attacks could be devastating for entire economies – and may even have global 
consequences. Developing countries must strengthen their systems to avoid being used as 
targets and instruments for attacks on the global digital infrastructure. Some of the problems 
³²			For	instance	according	to	the	GSMA 	in	2015,	77%	of 	Sub-Saharan	 Africa’s	mobile	connections	 were	on	2G,	22%	 were	3G	
and	just	1%	 was	made	up	of 	4G	connections	(Gilbert	2018).are surfacing today: China is the home of the highest number of botnet-forming IoT devices, by a 
large margin (Symantec 2018, p. 80). Recently, Brazil experienced significant botnet activity being 
used to hijack traffic meant for banks operating in this country (Cimpanu 2018). Challenges related 
to security standards may require governance negotiations and decisions at the highest political 
levels.
2.2.6	Illicit	financial 	flows	and	cybercrime
Developing countries’ cybercrime and economic problems are intertwined. Any analysis of the 
economic impact of cybercrime must encompass a discussion on organized criminal groups  and 
illicit financial flows (IFFs) – the phenomenon described as ‘a key development challenge’. IFFs are 
defined as ‘money illegally earned, transferred or used that crosses borders’ (World Bank 2017a). 
IFFs have negative effects on national economies, especially in developing countries. Some 
estimates say that about US$1 trillion flows out of emerging markets and developing countries 
annually, without a trace (Global Financial Integrity 2014), with corruption, crime, and tax evasion 
being key drivers. The value of IFFs into and out of developing countries represented, on average, 
more than 20% of developing countries’ trade with developed countries between 2006 and 2015. 
Financial losses are therefore direct, as for every dollar that is illegally transferred to a different 
country, a proportion could have been gained as tax revenues on imports or exports and related 
corporate income taxes. This drains public resources that could have otherwise contributed to 
sustainable economic growth. They might, for instance, have led to jobs creation and inequality 
and poverty reduction (Global Financial Integrity 2019).
New technologies can significantly influence all activities that fall into the category of IFFs. They 
are becoming a significant ‘cross-cutting factor’ that enables other illegal activities. Traditional 
organized criminal groups, in developing countries and elsewhere, progressively engage in 
cyber activities and facilitate fraud, corruption, tax evasion, and other crimes.³³ The anonymity, 
complexity and frequent lack of regulations in the digital space (as observed in the intrinsic features 
of the Darknet, cryptocurrencies, gambling services, and so on) benefit criminals, enabling money 
transfer, money laundering, and the trade of illicit goods (Tropina 2016, p. 1). IFFs are becoming 
inseparably connected with cybercrime, creating a complex and thriving illegal digital economy. 
Simple countermeasures will not be sufficient to solve such complex, multifaceted issues. Whole-
of-government and international strategies must be applied to combat these challenges.
³³			In	general,	organized	criminal 	groups		show 	increasing	interest	in	cybercrime,	and	are	also	professionalising	their 	
activities.	 West	African	criminal 	groups	have	a	long	tradition	 with	perpetrating	unsophisticated	social 	engineering	frauds	
known	as	Nigerian	email 	scams,	which	have	now 	vastly	increased	in	maturity.	Phishing	campaigns	called	BEC	(Business	
Email	Compromise)	are	on	the	rise	and,	as	they 	target	larger 	organisations,	cause	significant	financial 	losses.	At	least	
US$3	billion	have	been	lost	to	BEC	scams	in	the	past	three	 years,	with	more	than	22,000	 victims	globally 	(Trend	Micro,	
Interpol	2017).
253. Development by digital pragmatism
3.1 From digital optimism to pragmatic actions
Cybersecurity must be treated as a precondition for digital revolution; this is far easier said than 
done. Security measures, in their broader sense, include not just technical, but also organisational 
and regulatory efforts. Establishing optimal cybersecurity is a multistakeholder task, but strong 
governmental engagement is essential. Successful and effective outcomes will also rely on 
international harmonisation of cybersecurity approaches and co-ordinated actions. If developing 
countries want to avoid the mistakes made by earlier technology adopters, they need to implement 
a wide range of actions from the outset.³⁴
As discussed in the Introduction, after a period of ‘digital optimism’ in developed countries during 
the first decades of internet uptake, many moved towards ‘digital realism’ defined by increased 
interest in cybersecurity needs and solutions at a national and international level. While many 
digital realist endeavours have been successful, others were contaminated with errors and 
imperfections. 
Because developing countries often have very limited resources, cybersecurity initiatives must be 
as efficient and cost-effective as possible. These countries have a lack of funds for programmes to 
cover fundamental cybersecurity capabilities. Also, businesses show a limited interest in investing 
in and implementing cybersecurity measures (Pijnenburg Muller 2015). Security is often not the 
first choice for expense allocation. Therefore, decisions must be thought out carefully and focus 
on priority areas. Developing countries cannot afford to waste resources on mechanisms that are 
inefficient or ineffective, as often observed in developed countries’ processes.³⁵ This is one reason 
why developing countries should not simply transplant approaches that exist in Western countries, 
but instead work to tailor solutions to their needs.
An important feature of digital optimism was the almost unlimited trust in the opportunities brought 
by digital technologies. Digital realism, on the other hand, is much more sceptical and distrustful, 
which often leads to overly pessimistic assessments (see the Introduction). In the long term, this 
may slow down digital development and economic growth. In contrast, this chapter proposes a 
‘digital pragmatism’, which promotes a rational awareness of both the opportunities and threats 
stemming from cyberspace, and judicious usage of new technologies, which can strongly enhance 
the cybersecurity landscape. All states, societies and economies must make the most of existing 
and emerging technologies. This can be done if a cybersecurity-by-design approach is applied by 
all relevant stakeholders, both at the national and international level.
³⁴			Or	in	many 	cases,	as	their 	digital	revolution	has	already 	begun,	from	the	early 	stages.
³⁵			Numerous	reports,	analysis	point	out	that	choices	regarding	the	cybersecurity 	measures	should	be	based	on	better 	
analysis	and	risk	assessment.	See	for 	instance	Bradley 	2019;	Ashford	2019;	Ponemon	Institute	LLC	2017.
263.2 National cybersecurity strategies and legal frameworks
Developing countries should build their cybersecurity ecosystem and governance structures on 
effective national strategies, which put cybercrime countermeasures at the top of the agenda. 
The development of their strategy should be accelerated and formulated on the basis of the best 
practices and existing guidelines.³⁶ This will set the tone for the strategic actions and decisions 
and send a strong message of determination and decisiveness in fighting cybercrime. A well-
prepared and properly implemented strategy will also signal to business partners and international 
organisations that a country is ready to provide a safe environment for commercial projects and 
investments.³⁷
A national strategy will provide a broad framework for a cybersecurity ecosystem, including 
governance structures. It should therefore be followed by concrete legal actions and capacity-
building initiatives that will lead to actual changes. Legal measures should be established and 
implemented across criminalisation, procedural powers, jurisdiction, international co-operation, 
personal data protection. These must be treated as a priority by developing country governments.³⁸ 
Luckily, noteworthy international efforts to establish such methods are underway. These should be 
drawn from and used as valuable benchmarks. In recent years, numerous national and international 
legal mechanisms have been developed, which can operate at a global scale. UNODC points out 
five main legal frameworks to facilitate international co-operation (UNODC 2013, p. XIX):
• Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime (the Budapest Convention on Cybercrime)
• Commonwealth of Independent States’ Agreement on Cooperation in Combating 
Offences related to Computer Information
• African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data
• League of Arab States Convention on Combating Information Technology Offences
• Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of 
International Information Security. 
Even though those frameworks have common areas, significant discrepancies can be observed, 
for instance, regarding the criminalisation of various acts, such as ‘spamming’.³⁹ The distribution 
of spam emails can be treated as a criminalised act in one country but not in the other. Such 
fragmentation risks undermining governments’ ability to effectively tackle cross-border crimes. 
³⁶			For	instance,	ITU’s	Guide	to	Developing	a	National 	Cybersecurity 	Strategy,	ENISA’s	NCSS	Good	Practice	Guide.
³⁷			One	good	recommendation	for 	developing	countries	is	to	precede	strategic	actions	and	priorities	 with	a	solid	risk	
assessment process. This will allow them to deal with the most pressing problems as well as allocate resources in 
reasonable ways.
³⁸			Solid	legal 	solutions	related	to	personal 	data	protection	may 	significantly 	help	to	combat	data-related	threats
³⁹			Apart	from	fragmentation,	lack	of 	universal 	application	poses	a	significant	challenge.	Only 	82	countries	signed	one	
(or more) multilateral documents and therefore entered into international agreements.
27For this reason, developing states and the international community must have legal interoperability 
in mind when creating new solutions or amending existing ones. This is not an easy task, not 
least because different societies have distinct cultural factors that affect their legal system and 
approaches to issues such as privacy. It is in the joint interest of all parties to find a consensus 
and harmonise approaches (UNODC 2013, p. XIX). Many proposals on how to overcome such 
differences  are worth considering. For instance, one study suggests the creation of international 
model provisions on criminalising core cybercrimes, investigative powers, jurisdiction, and cross-
state co-operation for electronic evidence (UNODC 2013, pp. XIII–XV). 
As new legal challenges appear, finding a compromise will be even more important. There are 
already some burning issues that will certainly become subjects of international negotiations – 
for example, cross-border access to electronic evidence (European Commission 2018). Some 
mechanisms to harmonise policies exist in Africa, and these can be extended to cover cybercrime 
fighting. For instance, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) conducts an 
initiative that aims to collaborate on jointly agreed strategies and policies, including development 
of telecom-related decisions (AU-EU DETF 2019, p. 59). Such projects can cover cybersecurity 
and anti-crime measures, and be replicated or adapted in other regions. 
Negotiations for the alignment of existing cybersecurity solutions, their evolution, or the 
development of new ones, require a very pragmatic design process. One important factor is that 
the design should be inclusive from the outset: developing countries must be at the heart of this 
discussion, shaping outcomes alongside developed states. Involving developing countries in this 
process increases the chances of wider acceptance and better implementation. Policymakers are 
more likely to believe in the potential benefits if their country helped to shape the agreement.⁴⁰
While making international cybersecurity efforts, it will also be important to focus on small steps 
and agree on common points of interest. All-inclusive international agreements will be hard to 
achieve, so separating the issues into smaller elements may bring better results, at least in the short 
term. This approach can be applied, for instance, to achieving consensus on norms of responsible 
state behaviour in cyberspace, currently being discussed at the UN. Agreeing on basic common 
denominators can be a good starting point for other decisions. Basic ‘islands of consensus’ can 
serve as starting point for further successful achievements. That may sound less ambitious than 
aiming at a holistic solution right from the beginning, but in reality, it is more feasible and thus 
more likely to yield better results.
While setting the legal framework, neither individual states nor the international community 
should start from scratch. Actions should be guided by proven and well-functioning examples. 
Of the international frameworks, the Budapest Convention – the first anti-cybercrime instrument 
– is considered to be very comprehensive, the only truly ‘global’ (World Bank 2017, p. 196), and 
the most useful framework (UNODC 2013, p. XIII). It has had a strong impact on the cybersecurity 
landscape and can serve as an inspiration for countries seeking their own solutions.⁴¹
28⁴⁰			The	pro-inclusiveness	argument	can	be	used	as	a	political 	strategy 	to	redesign	solutions,	or 	to	open	up	discussion	for 	
new	instruments	that	are	not	necessarily 	needed	(the	case	of 	the	new 	resolution	adopted	by 	the	UN	General 	Assembly 	
which aims to create a new anti-cybercrime treaty).
⁴¹			The	Budapest	Convention	has	had	an	impact	on	legislation,	even	in	those	states	that	chose	not	to	ratify 	it.	An	example	of 	
a	regulation	concerning	personal 	data	protection	is	the	EU	GDPR.As mentioned earlier, a lack of inclusiveness while negotiating legal solutions may hamper their 
acceptance. Many developing countries have been reluctant to sign up to the Budapest Convention: 
this can be explained, at least in part, by their lack of influence over its terms, along with differing 
understandings of cybercrime challenges. However, the reluctance of some countries could be 
overcome by highlighting the benefits of a more harmonised approach, and by offering additional 
inclusive proposals. Greater inclusiveness can be achieved through wider participation in the 
evolution of the treaty – for instance, in negotiations of potential additional protocols (Seger 2016).
  
The discussion on the usability of existing solutions and their inclusiveness is more important than 
ever: we are at a pivotal moment, where voices favouring the development of new cybersecurity 
tools are gaining traction. The UN General Assembly recently approved a resolution that aims 
to create a new anti-cybercrime treaty. The resolution was backed by Russia, a country which 
– among others – has offered an ‘inclusiveness’ argument to justify the need for a global treaty. 
The resolution was supported by many developing countries. Many human rights groups and civil 
society organisations warn that the creation of a completely new legal solution may have some 
negative consequences, not least that it may enable governments to maintain stricter control over 
citizens that go online to exercise their rights, curtailing freedom of speech (Vavra 2019). Others 
argue that the development of a completely new tool is not needed, and that it would be better to 
work on existing frameworks to make them more inclusive. 
Developing countries must put human rights at the heart of the process of creating legislative 
measures.  Aside from the obvious ethical reasons, respecting human rights is also in a country’s 
interest for pragmatic reasons because developing countries must create a favourable environment 
for international businesses and investors, as well as a good public image. Solid legal safeguards 
(for instance, privacy protection) must be built in at various levels, explicitly in relation to the private 
sector, and most notably, internet service providers.⁴² Building transparent, trust-based, and trust-
inducing collaboration mechanisms is key. 
However, even the most solid legal frameworks will not be a deterrent if there are no resources to 
effectively execute the provisions. Developing countries must overcome resource and capability 
constraints among law enforcement authorities, prosecutors and the judiciary. Therefore, capacity-
building programmes must be developed and enhanced, both at multilateral and bilateral level 
(World Bank 2017, pp. 246–249). Transfer of knowledge and skills, training, and technical equipment 
are essential.⁴³ This is an area where international support for developing countries is especially 
necessary. It can have different forms, including financial and logistical support, and providing 
advice, among others. 
Building resilience 
To build resilience and thereby diminish the consequences of cybercrime, a legal framework should 
go beyond the creation of substantive and procedural legal provisions. Countries should focus 
on ensuring that the vital elements of their functioning are well protected against hostile cyber 
incidents, including cybercrime. A good practice here is to focus on critical sectors – identifying the 
29⁴²			Internet	service	providers	hold	reams	of 	data	that	can	serve	as	e-evidence	and	affect	attitudes	towards	privacy.
⁴³			Especially 	building	capabilities	in	the	field	of 	digital	forensics	should	be	treated	as	priority.most valuable entities that provide critical services or functions, and making sure that these entities 
are implementing appropriate cybersecurity measures, according to international standards.⁴⁴  This 
model is currently implemented in the EU. The NIS Directive requires member states to identify 
operators of essential services, who are obliged to introduce cybersecurity measures according to 
the outcome of the risk assessment process.⁴⁵ The main rationale behind those actions is to make 
sure that at least the most valuable entities are protecting themselves from cyberthreats. This 
usually gives public actors corrective instruments that can be used if the operator of the services 
is not compliant. This approach can be considered by developing countries.
3.3 Combatting cybercrime with countermeasures and new 
technologies
In the face of ever-evolving technological challenges, more flexible and dynamic forms of action 
must be promoted. For instance, to facilitate the work of law enforcement authorities operating in 
different countries, it would make sense to further develop and enhance existing networks of 24/7 
points of contact; they bring faster response times, greater agility, and contribute to better co-
operation and cybercrime problem-solving. Developing countries should actively participate in 
such initiatives.⁴⁶ In terms of government and private sector co-operation, the work of worldwide 
Information Sharing and Coordination Centres should be put to more extensive use by countries 
in the Global South (World Bank 2017, pp. 209-215).
Very often, effective anti-cybercrime actions can be significantly better enforced when 
accompanied by the use of new technologies. The digital pragmatism recommended in this 
paper promotes the use of smart tactics, targeted at the most pressing problems, to increase the 
effectiveness of the fight against cybercrime. As we have noted, cybercrime currently facilitates 
a whole criminal ecosystem, with organized criminal groups  and IFFs at its core. This complex 
environment consists of actors, relations, services, mechanisms, tools, and markets that interact 
and influence each other (McGuire 2018, pp. 13-14). 
For those with limited resources, interrupting critical chains of the cybercrime economy may 
be a productive route in tackling cybercrime. Eliminating these critical junctures may strongly 
affect the whole system. For instance, the three main online criminal markets taken down during 
an international operation – AlphaBay, RAMP, and Hansa (Europol 2018, p. 47) – accounted for 
30⁴⁴			Many 	examples	of 	those	can	be	given,	for 	instance:	ISO	27001,	COBIT,	NIST 	Cybersecurity 	Framework.
⁴⁵			The	NIS	Directive	covers	the	following	sectors:	energy,	transport,	 water,	banking,	financial 	market	infrastructures,	
healthcare and digital infrastructure.
⁴⁶			24/7	points	of 	contacts	are	designated	by 	various	countries	to	provide	constant	assistance	in	case	of 	investigations	
related	to	the	cybercriminal 	offences.	 They	are	operational 	24	hours	per 	day,	7	days	per 	week.	Various	international 	
initiatives	call 	for	the	establishment	of 	these	points	of 	contact,	for 	instance:		article	35	of 	the	Budapest	Convention	(see	
more:	24/7	Points	of 	Contact	under 	the	Convention	on	Cybercrime)		or 	the	G7	24/7	High	 Tech	Crime	Network	(see	
more:	Ott	2018).87% of all Darknet activity (Chainalysis 2018, p. 4).⁴⁷ Moreover, just  a few ‘mixers’ (services that 
make cryptocurrency transactions harder to track) and gambling sites accounted for 97% of 
Bitcoin laundering on these platforms (Fanusie, Robinson 2018, p. 11). These two examples of 
crime concentration confirm that, if entities involved in combatting cybercrime prioritise strategic 
avenues, the results can be significant. It is therefore important to conduct multidisciplinary 
analysis on cybercrime value chains to choose the most effective strategy and tools. This must be 
done in a co-ordinated manner, with the participation of partners from other countries, academia 
and international institutions. Having identified critical aspects of the cybercrime chains, it will be 
possible to implement purpose-built, targeted countermeasures. 
Existing and emerging technologies may be very useful in identifying these critical points within the 
cybercrime ecosystem.  For instance, big data analytics (BDA) serve as important and increasingly 
indispensable mechanisms that enable the detection and disruption of financial crime and, broadly 
speaking, IFFs (Tropina 2017, p. 47). With the exponential growth of electronic transactions and 
the increasingly high volumes of unstructured data, BDA is becoming the weapon of choice for 
those who combat financial crime (Deloitte 2014, p. 5). It provides users with an ability to process 
huge amounts of data, examine nonlinear datasets, reveal or anticipate crime patterns, and link 
together seemingly unconnected information (Tropina 2017, p. 47). It also allows users to identify 
potentially illegal behaviour, understand it better by analysing relationships between parties, and 
make predictions (Deloitte 2014, p. 5). Interestingly, BDA is also very useful in detecting new types 
of payment abuse, especially those involving blockchain-based cryptocurrencies.  Even though 
blockchain offers a great degree of anonymity, big data analysis enables tracking and matching 
of various information to better understand the transactions (Tropina 2017, p. 48). Whenever 
possible, the implementation of BDA instruments ought to be done in a co-ordinated manner, 
using international platforms and co-operation programmes, as it significantly increases the 
effectiveness of those actions.
AI and Machine Learning (ML) can be used to increase the efficiency of BDA, but they also have 
significant potential to increase other cybersecurity measures. Multimedia analytics and predictive 
policing are examples given by Europol (Europol 2019).⁴⁸ AI and ML can be very helpful in combating 
for instance spam, identifying vulnerabilities, and suggesting fixes. They can predict new threats 
and malware on the basis of existing patterns and help to spot insider threats by using behaviour 
analytics (Zinatullin 2018). In general, AI and ML can significantly contribute to better effectiveness 
of security teams. In the face of specialist staff shortages, especially in developing countries, those 
advancements may be very important.
⁴⁷			Those	successful 	operations	did	not	solve	the	problem.	Criminals	migrate	to	other 	markets,	as	new 	fora	are	cropping	
up	constantly 	and	taking	place	of 	those	seized.	Still,	this	shows	that	some	elements	 within	an	ecosystem	are	pivotal 	and	
dealing with them strongly enhances the cybercrime fight.
⁴⁸			However 	it	must	be	underlined	that	this	proactive	orientation	seems	to	be	a	matter 	of	extremely 	severe	ethical 	and	
legal	concern.	See,	for 	instance,	 The	Guardian	(2019).
31Adding to the discussion on anti-organized criminal groups measures, especially those targeting 
digital financial services, attention must be paid to the possibilities of leveraging existing aid 
programmes. International programmes for financial inclusion of developing countries should have 
cybersecurity aspects embedded into their DNA.⁴⁹ This would allow use of these programmes to 
shape the financial systems in developing countries with cybersecurity by design and by default.
⁴⁹			For	example,	the	Financial 	Inclusion	Global 	Initiative	by 	the	World	Bank	Group,	ITU,	the	Committee	on	Payments	and	
Market	Infrastructure	 with	support	of 	the	Bill	and	Melinda	Gates	Foundation.	It	is	also	 worth		paying	attention	to	the	activities	
of	the	Global 	Forum	for 	Cyber	Expertise.
⁵⁰			Various	sources	include:	Cybersecurity 	Curricula	2017	Curriculum	Guidelines	for 	Post-Secondary 	Degree	Programs	
in	Cybersecurity.	 A	Report	in	the	Computing	Curricula	Series.	Prepared	by:	 Joint	Task	Force	on	Cybersecurity 	Education;	
Cybersecurity 	Reference	Curriculum	prepared	by 	Partnership	for 	Peace	Consortium	Emerging	Security 	Challenges	
Working	Group;	Cybersecurity 	Education	 Training	Assistance	Program	funded	by 	DHS.3.4 Strengthening the human factor in cybercrime prevention
The best way to deal with cybercrime is to focus on prevention. Many of the problems that foster 
criminal activities –  for instance, social engineering – can be eliminated with human-centric efforts. 
The human factor is a key element of this strategy and requires the implementation of various 
educational efforts organised mainly at the governmental level. 
Two approaches are particularly relevant for developing countries:
• Protect cybercrime targets by enhancing their security level through knowledge and 
skills – governments must establish cybersecurity-related programmes as well as weave 
cybersecurity aspects into the educational system. 
• Eliminate the problem by preventing potential offenders from committing cybercrime.
3.4.1 Education
It is a widely held conviction that cybersecurity should be mainstreamed into general educational 
programs – this must be treated as a key task for governmental bodies responsible for setting 
up educational frameworks (European Commission 2017, p.10; Ghernaouti, Wanner 2018, p. 540). 
Creating cybersecurity curricula based on well-functioning, globally recognised standards would 
be a good start for developing countries.⁵⁰
The international community – and especially developed countries with a wealth of experience 
– should actively support such endeavours. While international expertise will be crucial, these 
programmes must be tailored to local contexts and language environments. For instance, since 
32Africa has the lowest average access to higher education, its cybersecurity programmes should 
be targeted at primary and secondary level (AU-EU DETF 2019, p. 31-33). It should be governments’ 
responsibility to build tailored educational proposals to tackle these priority areas. 
Decision-makers must anticipate  potential negative trends – for instance, related to gender 
imbalances – when deploying targeted  programmes. Finding solutions to such issues will help to 
avoid societal problems in the future. For instance, research shows that women in Africa are much 
less likely to use the internet than men (AU-EU DETF 2019, p. 30). The assumption may be that 
women should not be prioritised as recipients of cybersecurity programmes. However, the wider 
picture shows that the digital exclusion of women disrupts society and the economy (Women in 
Digital 2019; Iclaves, SL. 2018). Female digital inclusion is also important to achieving the SDGs. 
With little experience of technology, women joining the digital world may become easy targets for 
criminals. This gender-weighted issue should be addressed by designing educational programmes 
in a very inclusive way, crafted and directed specifically at target groups.⁵¹ Existing and future 
national and international educational programmes must treat such inclusive programmes as a 
priority.
Strained financial situations in developing countries may hamper educational efforts: budgetary 
limitations often do not allow for the creation of solid educational programmes. Once again, 
technology may help. Although internet access remains limited in many developing countries, 
where it is available, e-learning may be a good avenue for skills development, at least for some 
recipients, such as students living in urban areas. There are several examples of free online study 
programmes, such as Massive Open Online Courses, the Virtual University of Senegal, and the 
ITU Academy (AU-EU DETF 2019, p. 34; p. 62; p. 63). Such courses may be further enriched with 
ICT security topics and offered to local communities. Informal methods of gaining knowledge, 
for instance courses offered by non-governmental organisations (NGOs), development aid 
agencies and other initiatives also play a significant role. Cybersecurity workshops can also be 
provided with the help of private companies: special fiscal incentives offered by governments 
may help to encourage this (AU-EU DETF 2019, p. 36). While these alternative routes may be 
helpful in spreading knowledge of cybersecurity, formal educational initiatives will remain crucial 
to cybersecurity education for the wider population.
3.4.2 Prevention
The second human-oriented strategy is the implementation of pragmatic preventive policies 
designed both at the state level and through bottom-up initiatives. For example, awareness-
raising campaigns and prevention programmes are important in fighting cybercrime, to prevent 
potential offenders from engaging in online criminal activity. The key is to make these programmes 
effective, shrewdly crafting them to target well-identified and susceptible societal groups. It is 
possible to create ‘typical offender’ profiles, which consider parameters such as age, education 
level, and so on. (UNODC 2013, p. 40; p. 42). Programmes tailored to those groups may be a 
solution for desirable outcomes, and to help manage limited resources. Decision-makers may 
initiate programmes that will examine which societal groups are most likely to fall into crime, and 
prepare preventive programmes accordingly.
⁵¹			Inspirational 	examples	include	South	 Africa	(VVOB	Education	for 	Development	2016) 333.5 Technology providers’ responsibilities: secure by design and 
default
Cybersecurity issues are, to a great extent, caused by technological imperfections. Eliminating or 
reducing these can lead to very positive and effective  outcomes. ICT vendors should understand 
that building their products and services in line with the principles of security by design can 
have significant impacts on the cybersecurity landscape.⁵² National and international bodies 
must strongly call on the industry to make a much greater effort to bring secure products to 
the market. There is also room for other actors. For instance, universities may strongly contribute 
to development of new, secure-by-design technologies by specially funded research and 
development programmes.
Various instruments may be applied: some will support regulatory top-down interventions that 
would enforce higher levels of cybersecurity; some will support a more voluntary approach 
(driven from the bottom up). There are helpful precedents. In terms of governance decisions,  
the EU Cybersecurity Act deserves special attention as it establishes a voluntary EU certification 
framework for ICT digital products, services and processes, with the potential to increase 
transparency among customers. It also encourages vendors to provide more secure solutions. 
As for bottom-up, industry-led efforts, numerous international initiatives have been developed, 
including the Charter of Trust and the Cybersecurity Tech Accord.
Developing countries may actively contribute to these projects, but they can also influence their 
ecosystem by simply demanding and choosing secure solutions from their vendors – which need 
to be provided at affordable prices. Perhaps this may sound unrealistic, but paradoxically, the 
unprecedented technological rivalry between great powers may actually create a convenient 
moment for developing countries to negotiate good terms, and boost cybersecurity. As the 
main players seek to maintain or increase their technology-related influence, this can be used to 
strengthen the position of developing countries. 
Technology providers should be chosen according to their security standards.⁵³ Ensuring that 
security measures are locked in from the very beginning of the product life cycle – rather than 
retrofitting them – can vastly improve the cybersecurity landscape, both in developing countries 
and across the globe. While negotiating the terms of co-operation also other elements can be 
taken into the consideration, including important functions such as portability and interoperability. 
As many developing countries are at the start of building technological foundations, they can 
turn these nascent stages of digitalisation into an advantage. For instance, they can build digital 
infrastructure with more secure solutions from the start. For example, while encryption may 
⁵²			Security 	by	design	is	an	approach	applied	in	every 	phase	of 	the	Software	Development	Life	Cycle,	aiming	to	
significantly boost its cybersecurity. The approach minimises the number and severity of vulnerabilities and reduces the 
attack	surface.	More	information	about	the	process	can	be	found	in,	for 	example,	the	Security-by-Design	Framework	
prepared	by 	the	Cyber 	Security 	Agency	of	Singapore.	 A	variety	of	good	practices	on	the	topic	exist	–	for 	instance,	ENISA’s	
recommendations	on	a	secure-by-design	IoT 	(ENISA	2019).	
⁵³			Public	procurements	in	this	context	serve	as	a	 very	powerful 	tool.
34hamper law enforcement efforts, it can upgrade cybersecurity for legitimate users, increasing 
the confidentiality of valuable personal and business data. Encryption protocols may be included 
as obligatory standards during the upcoming 5G standardisation process (Europol 2019, p.12). 
For developing countries, these issues can bring opportunities. When building or developing 
telecommunications infrastructure, they can choose solutions with a higher level of security 
embedded, helping to eliminate various security problems from the outset. This opportunity 
was not at the disposal of developed countries some years ago. It will, however, require decisive 
governance actions at both national and international levels.
Building a healthy digital backbone, demanding security from ICT vendors, setting the rules which 
promote responsible behaviours – all form a strategy that developing countries ought to apply and 
that the international community should support. Global determination and co-ordination oriented 
at setting high cybersecurity standards has a real chance to bring significant results.
35Conclusion: The future of cybersecurity is here
Effectively fighting cybercrime in developing countries is a global, shared responsibility for political, 
governmental, and business leaders, academia, civil society as well as NGOs. It requires bold, 
pragmatic, multidimensional decisions and strategic, innovative actions. It is crucial to understand 
that it is not only the security and well-being of developing countries that is at stake – cybersecurity 
is a global issue. 
Political leaders in developing countries and world-wide must create thriving cybersecurity 
ecosystems that will enable the efficient prevention and combatting of cybercrime. Secure, 
inclusive, and accessible cyberspace serves as a very important ingredient for the achievement 
of the SDGs. Woven into the fabric of developing countries’ digital future, cybersecurity must be 
seen as a precondition of economic success as well.
Developing countries will continue their digital journey, and they will rightly do so according 
to their own designs and trajectories. Yet, building cybersecurity will be a co-ordinated effort, 
and partnerships will be necessary. Therefore, it is the Global North’s responsibility to support 
developing countries in their efforts. All development assistance programmes that include digital 
aspects need to have firmly embedded cybersecurity elements. Moreover, projects directly 
targeted at cybersecurity must be reinforced. To significantly help to overcome skill shortages 
in developing countries, these could include cybersecurity training, educational programmes, 
best practice transfer, technological aid, and other initiatives. Those in the Global North should 
not underestimate the importance of such projects: the security of the developing world is a 
prerequisite for the security of the developed world.
The days when security was solely a responsibility of the public sector are long gone. Today, 
multistakeholder efforts are indispensable and private companies, especially ICT vendors, have 
an essential role to play. As they provide the backbone infrastructure, products and services, 
the strength of cybersecurity foundations increasingly depends on them. Their engagement 
and ‘secure-by-design’ approach is central to the challenge of enhancing cybersecurity in the 
contemporary world.
Abraham Lincoln once said, ‘you cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it 
today’. Humankind reaps enormous dividends from digital development, and the potential for 
future benefits is limitless, but to make it last, pragmatic cybersecurity responsibility must be 
taken today.
36Akerele, T. (2018). Cyber threats on African subjects. International Institute for Counter-Terrorism  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.ict.org.il/AboutUs.aspx#gsc.tab=0.  
Armerding, T. (2018). The 18 biggest data breaches of the 21st century. CSO [online] Available at:  
 https:/ /www.csoonline.com/article/2130877/the-biggest-data-breaches-of-the-21st-
 century.html.
Ashfordt, W. (2019). Businesses investing blindly in cyber security. [online] Available at: https:
 / /www.computerweekly.com/news/252464501/Businesses-investing-blindly-in-
 cyber-security. 
AU-EU Digital Economy Task Force. (2019). New Africa-Europe Digital Economy Partnership.
 [online] Available at: https:/ /ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/new-africa-
 europe-digital-economy-partnership-report-eu-au-digital-economy-task-force. 
Batt, S. (2018). What Is a “Banking Trojan?” [online] Available at: https:/ /www.maketecheasier.  
 com/what-is-banking-trojan/
Batt, S. (2019). The Rise of IoT Botnets (And How to Protect Your Smart Devices). [online]
 Available at: https:/ /www.makeuseof.com/tag/internet-of-things-botnets/
BBC. (2019). Ransomware hits Johannesburg electricity supply. [online] Available at: https:/ /
 www.bbc.com/news/technology-49125853. 
BCG. (2012). The Internet economy in the G-20. [online] Available at: http:/ /image-src.bcg.com/ 
 Images/The_Internet_Economy_G-20_tcm9-106842.pdf
Beer, J. (2018). “WannaCry” ransomware attack losses could reach $4 billion. CBS News
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.cbsnews.com/news/wannacry-ransomware-
 attacks-wannacry-virus-losses/
Bradley, T. (2019). The Standard Cybersecurity Model Is Fundamentally Broken. Forbes,
 7 October, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/tonybradley/
 2019/10/07/the-standard-cybersecurity-model-is-fundamentally-broken/
 #5160901d1189
BSA. (2016). BSA Global Software Survey. [online] Available at: http:/ /globalstudy.bsa.org/2016/ 
 index.html
Businesswire. (2019). Juniper Research: Retailers to Lose $130bn Globally in Card-not-Present  
 Fraud Over the Next 5 Years. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.businesswire.com/news/ 
 home/20190102005011/en.References
37Carr, J. (2009). Inside Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber Underworld. The United States of
 America: O’Reilly Media.
Cimpanu, C. (2018). Gigantic 100,000-strong botnet used to hijack traffic meant for
 Brazilian banks. ZDNet [online] Available at: https:/ /www.zdnet.com/article/gigantic-  
 100000-strong-botnet-used-to-hijack-traffic-meant-for-brazilian-banks/
CCDCOE. Cyber security strategies. [online] Available at: https:/ /ccdcoe.org/library/strategy- 
 and-governance/?category=cyber-security-strategies&region=europe
Chainalysis. (2018). The changing nature of cryptocrime. [online] Available at: https:/ /blog.
 chainalysis.com/reports/report-the-changing-nature-of-cryptocrime. 
Chebyshev, V. (2019). Mobile malware evolution 2018. Kaspersky [online] Available at: https:/ /
 securelist.com/mobile-malware-evolution-2018/89689/
Chong, J. (2013). Why Is Our Cybersecurity So Insecure? The New Republic [online] Available
 at: https:/ /newrepublic.com/article/115145/us-cybersecurity-why-software-so-insecure. 
Cloudflare. What Is A Malicious Payload? [online] Available at: https:/ /www.cloudflare.com/
 learning/security/glossary/malicious-payload/
Convention on Cybercrime (Art. 35) Extract: 24/7 Points of Contact under the Convention on  
 Cybercrime. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.coe.int/t/dg1/legalcooperation/
 economiccrime/cybercrime/Documents/Points%20of%20Contact/24%207%20567%
 2024-7%20text%20ets_en.pdf
Criminal Lawyer Group. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.criminallawyergroup.com/the-
 evolution-of-cybercrime-from-past-to-the-present/
CSIS., McAfee. (2018). Economic Impact of Cybercrime – No Slowing Down. CSIS [online]
 Available at: https:/ /www.csis.org/analysis/economic-impact-cybercrime
 
Cyber Security Agency of Singapore. (2017). Security-by-Design Framework. Version: 1.0.
 Singapore: Cyber Security Agency of Singapore.
Deloitte. (2014). Insight on financial crime: Challenges facing financial institutions. Deloitte
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www2.deloitte.com/sg/en/pages/financial-advisory/
 articles/our-strategic-approach.html
Department of Homeland Security (2019) National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and
 Studies (NICCS), Cybersecurity in the Classroom. [online] Available at: https:/ /niccs.
 us-cert.gov/formal-education/integrating-cybersecurity-classroom
38ENISA. (2019). Good Practices for Security of IoT. Secure Software Development Lifecycle. ENISA  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/good-practices-for-
 security-of-iot-1
ENISA. National Cyber Security Strategies (NCSSs) Map. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.enisa. 
 europa.eu/topics/national-cyber-security-strategies/ncss-map
European Commission. (2013). Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the Council,
 the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions,
 Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace.
European Commission. (2015). A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe. COM(2015) 192 final
European Commission. (2017). Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council.  
 Resilience, Deterrence and Defence: Building strong cybersecurity for the EU. JOIN
 (2017) 450 final
European Commission. (2018). Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the  
 Council on  European Production and Preservation Orders for electronic evidence in   
 criminal matters. COM(2018) 225 final
European Commission. (2019). Digital Single Market, Women in Digital Policy [online] Available
 at: https:/ /ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/women-ict
Europol. (2018). IOCTA 2018. [online] Available at:  https:/ /www.europol.europa.eu/activities-
 services/main-reports/internet-organised-crime-threat-assessment-iocta-2018
Europol. (2019). Do Criminals Dream Of Electric Sheep? [online] Available at: https:/ /
 www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/do-criminals-dream-of-electric-sheep-
 how-technology-shapes-future-of-crime-and-law-enforcement
Fanusie, Y.J., and Robinson, T. (2018). Bitcoin Laundering: an analysis of illicit flaws into digital
 currency services. Foundation for Defense of Democracies [online] Available at:   
 https:/ /www.fdd.org/analysis/2018/01/10/bitcoin-laundering-an-analysis-of-illicit-
 flows-into-digital-currency-services/
Field, M. (2018). WannaCry cyber attack cost the NHS £92m as 19,000 appointments cancelled.  
 The Telegraph, 11 October, 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.telegraph.co.uk/
 technology/2018/10/11/wannacry-cyber-attack-cost-nhs-92m-19000-appointments- 
 cancelled/
Foley, M. (2018). Microsoft bullish on Congress’ inclusion of CLOUD Act in funding bill. ZDNet,
 22 March, 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.zdnet.com/article/microsoft-bullish-
 on-congress-inclusion-of-cloud-act-in-funding-bill/
39Fruhlinger, J. (2018). What is ransomware? 4 steps to prevent these file-locking attacks. CSO,
 20 December, 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.csoonline.com/article/
 3236183/what-is-ransomware-how-it-works-and-how-to-remove-it.html
Ghernaouti, S., Wanner, B. (2018). Research and Education as Key Success Factors for
 developing a Cybersecurity Culture. In: Bartsch, M., Frey, S. ed. (2018). Cybersecurity
 Best Practices: Lösungen zur Erhöhung der Cyberresilienz für Unternehmen und
 Behörden. Germany: Springer Vieweg.
Gilbert, P. (2018). 5G is coming, but 3G set to dominate in Sub-Saharan Africa. IT Web, 11 October,  
 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.itweb.co.za/content/lwrKxq3JjLbMmg1o
Gladyshev, P. Artificial Intelligence and cybercrime. Eolasmagazine, March 2018. [online]
 Available at: https:/ /www.eolasmagazine.ie/artificial-intelligence-and-cybercrime/
Global Financial Integrity. (2014). Illicit Financial Flows. Analytical Methodologies Utilized by   
 Global Financial Integrity. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.gfintegrity.org/wp-content/ 
 uploads/2014/09/GFI-Analytics.pdf
Global Financial Integrity. (2019).  Illicit Financial Flows to and from 148 Developing
 Countries: 2006-2015 Illicit Financial Flows. [online] Available at: https:/ /secure
 servercdn.net/45.40.149.159/34n.8bd.myftpupload.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/
 01/IFF-Report-2019_11.18.19.pdf?time=1579174517
Gold, J. (2019). Quantum computing will break your encryption in a few years. Network World,
 20 March, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.networkworld.com/article/3373550/ 
 quantum-computing-will-break-your-encryption-in-a-few-years.html
Goldberg, R. (2016). Lack of Trust in Internet Privacy and Security May Deter Economic and
 Other Online Activities. United States Department of Commerce, National
 Telecommunications and Information Administration [online] Available at: https:/ /
 www.ntia.doc.gov/blog/2016/lack-trust-internet-privacy-and-security-may-deter-
 economic-and-other-online-activities
Greenberg, A. (2018). The Untold Story Of Notpetya, The Most Devastating Cyberattack In
 History. WIRED, 22 August, 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.wired.com/story/
 notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-code-crashed-the-world/
Grimes, R.A. (2016). The bad guys are wreaking havoc. Why can’t they be brought to justice?
 CSO, 6 December, 2016 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.csoonline.com/article/
 3147398/why-its-so-hard-to-prosecute-cyber-criminals.html
Harrison, V., Pagliery, P. (2015). Nearly 1 million new malware threats released every day.
 CNN Business, 14 April, 2015 [online] Available at: https:/ /money.cnn.com/2015/04/14/ 
 technology/security/cyber-attack-hacks-security/index.html
40HM Government (2016). National Cyber Security Strategy 2016-2021. [online] Available at:
 https:/ /assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
 attachment_data/file/567242/national_cyber_security_strategy_2016.pdf
Hoog, A. (2015). Security Debt is the New Technical Debt. NowSecure [online] Available at:
 https:/ /www.nowsecure.com/blog/2015/10/08/security-debt-is-the-new-technical- 
 debt/
Hung, M. (ed) (2017). Leading the IoT. Gartner [online] Available at: https:/ /www.gartner.com/
 imagesrv/books/iot/iotEbook_digital.pdf
Iclaves, S.L. and UOC (2018). Women in the Digital Age. SMART 2016/0025. Luxembourg:
 European Commission. [online] Available at: http:/ /www.media2000.it/wp-content/
 uploads/2018/03/WomeninDigitalAgeStudy-FinalReport.pdf
Interpol. (no date) Cybercrime. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.interpol.int/Crimes/Cybercrime
ITU. (2018). ITU releases 2018 global and regional ICT estimates. Press release, 7 December,
 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/Pages/2018-PR40.aspx
ITU. (no date) ITU Country ICT Data. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
 Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx
ITU. (no date) National Cybersecurity Strategies Repository. [online] Available at: https:/ /
 www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Pages/National-Strategies-repository.aspx
Joint Task Force on Cybersecurity Education. (2017) Cybersecurity Curricula 2017 Curriculum  
 Guidelines for Post-Secondary Degree Programs in Cybersecurity. A Report in the
 Computing Curricula Series. [online] Available at: https:/ /europe.acm.org/binaries/
 content/assets/education/curricula-recommendations/csec2017.pdf
Kelly, R. (2018). Encryption Services Hampering Law Enforcement. DIGIT [online] Available at:  
 https:/ /digit.fyi/encryption-services-nca-report/
Kessem. L., Korman. M. (2015). Meet the Pezão Trojan: Brazil’s Got Malware. Security Intelligence  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /securityintelligence.com/meet-the-pezao-trojan-brazils-
 got-malware/
Khan, S., Loo, K-K., Naeem, T., Abrar Khan, M. (2008). Denial of Service Attacks and Challenges
 in Broadband Wireless Network. International Journal of Computer Science and
 Network Security. Vol. 8 No. 7
Kotadia, M. (2003). Report: a third of spam spread by RAT-infested PCs. [online] Available at:   
 https:/ /www.cnet.com/news/report-a-third-of-spam-spread-by-rat-infested-pcs/
41Kshetri, N. (2010). Diffusion and Effects of Cyber-Crime in Developing Economies. Third World  
 Quarterly. Vol. 31, Issue 7 pp.1057-1079 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.tandfonline.com/ 
 doi/abs/10.1080/01436597.2010.518752
Lin, H. (2016). Attribution of Malicious Cyber Incidents. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.hoover. 
 org/sites/default/files/research/docs/lin_webready.pdf
Marsh, S. (2019). Ethics committee raises alarm over ‘predictive policing’ tool. The Guardian,
 20 April, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2019/apr/
 20/predictive-policing-tool-could-entrench-bias-ethics-committee-warns
Mathews, L. (2017). NotPetya Ransomware Attack Cost Shipping Giant Maersk Over $200   
 Million. Forbes, 16 August, 2017 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/  
 leemathews/2017/08/16/notpetya-ransomware-attack-cost-shipping-giant-maersk- 
 over-200-million/#2a60bbf94f9a.
McGuire, M. (2018). Into The Web of Profit. [online] Available at:  https:/ /www.bromium.com/
 wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Into-the-Web-of-Profit_Bromium.pdf.
McKinsey Global Institute. (2016). Digital Europe: Pushing the Frontier, Capturing the Benefits.  
 McKinsey Digital [online] Available at: https:/ /www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/ 
 digital-mckinsey/our-insights/digital-europe-realizing-the-continents-potential
Middleton, P., Tully, J., Kjeldsen, P. (2013). Forecast: The Internet of Things, Worldwide.
 Gartner Research, 18 November, 2013 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.gartner.com/
 en/documents/2625419/forecast-the-internet-of-things-worldwide-2013
Nduati, H. (2018). Cybersecurity in Emerging Financial Markets. CCAP. [online] Available at:   
 https:/ /www.findevgateway.org/sites/default/files/publication_files/cybersecurity_
 in_emerging_markets_06-30_0.pdf
Olsson, E. (2019). Report: FIS warned to prepare for quantum threats. Bobs Guide, 5 December,  
 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.bobsguide.com/guide/news/2019/Dec/6/
 report-fis-warned-to-prepare-for-quantum-threats/
Ott, C. (2018). What You Should Know About The 24/7 Cybercrime Network. [online] Available  
 at: https:/ /www.dwt.com/files/uploads/documents/publications/What%20You%20  
 Should%20Know%20About%20The%2024.pdf
Palmer, D. (2019). Mobile malware attacks are booming in 2019: These are the most common  
 threats. ZDNet, 25 July, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.zdnet.com/article/
 mobile-malware-attacks-are-booming-in-2019-these-are-the-most-common-threats/
Panda Security. Android devices 50 times more infected with malware compared to iOS.
 14 January, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.pandasecurity.com/mediacenter/
 mobile-security/android-more-infected-than-ios/
42Partnership for Peace Consortium Emerging Security Challenges Working Group. (2016).
 Cybersecurity Reference Curriculum. [online] Available at: https:/ /pfp-consortium.org/
 index.php/item/263-new-cybersecurity-curriculum-now-available
Pathways for Prosperity Commission. (2018). Digital Lives: Meaningful Connections for the
 Next 3 Billion. Oxford, UK: Pathways for Prosperity Commission
Pelletier, A., Khavul, S., Estrin, S. (2014). Mobile payment services in developing countries,
 Policy brief 89319. IGC. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.theigc.org/wp-content/
 uploads/2017/08/Pelletier-et-al-2017-policy-brief.pdf
Phys.org. (2019). 30 years later, Berners-Lee sees mission to fix internet’s ills. 5 March, 2019
 [online] Available at: https:/ /phys.org/news/2019-03-years-berners-lee-mission-
 internet-ills.html
Pijnenburg Muller, L. (2015). Cyber Security Capacity Building in Developing Countries. Policy  
 Brief [15/20115] Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI). [online] Available at:  
 https:/ /www.files.ethz.ch/isn/190144/NUPI%20Policy%20Brief-15-15-Muller.pdf
Ponemon Institute LLC. (2017). The Cost of Insecure Endpoints. [online] Available at: https:
 / /www.absolute.com/media/1810/ponemon-cost-of-insecure-endpoints.pdf
Qualys. (2006). The Laws of Vulnerabilities: Six Axioms for Understanding Risk. [online]
 Available at: https:/ /www.qualys.com/docs/laws-of-vulnerabilities.pdf
Reilly, M. (2007). Beware, botnets have your PC in their sights. New Scientist. Volume 196,
 Issue 2634, 15 December, 2007 [online] Available at: https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/S0262-  
 4079(07)63152-2
RiskIQ. (2019). The Evil Internet Minute 2019. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.riskiq.com/
 infographic/evil-internet-minute-2019/
Sabarinath. (2019). Darknet Vs Dark Web Vs Deep Web Vs Surface Web — Different Parts Of The  
 World Wide Web. Techlog 360 [online] Available at: https:/ /techlog360.com/darknet-
 vs-dark-web-vs-deep-web-vs-surface-web/.
Schia, N.N. (2017). The cyber frontier and digital pitfalls in the Global South. Third World Quarterly.  
 Volume 39, 2018 – Issue 5, 11 December 2017
Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond. World
 Economic Forum [online] Available at: https:/ /www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/
 the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/
Scott, P. (2016). How much of a problem is cyber-crime in the UK?, Only 13% of cybercrime is  
 reported. The Telegraph, 1 November, 2016 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.telegraph. 
 co.uk/news/2016/11/01/how-much-of-a-problem-is-cyber-crime-in-the-uk/
43Seger, A. (2016). India and the Budapest Convention: why not? Contribution to CyFy 2016,
 New Delhi, 28 to 30 September 2016 [online] Available at: https:/ /rm.coe.int/16806a6698
  
Serianu. (2017). Africa Cyber Security Report 2017. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.serianu.com/ 
 downloads/AfricaCyberSecurityReport2017.pdf
Shaik, A., Seifert, J., Borgaonkar, R., Asokan, N., Niemi, V. (2016). Practical Attacks against
 Privacy and Availability in 4G/LTE Mobile Communication Systems. In Proceedings
 of the 23nd Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS 2016)  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /arxiv.org/pdf/1510.07563.pdf
Stuppy, R. (2019). Card-Not-Present Fraud is On the Rise: 5 Statistics to Prove It. BlueSnap,
 14 June, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /home.bluesnap.com/snap-center/blog/
 card-not-present-fraud-statistics/
Sullivan, B. (2007). Who’s Behind Criminal “bot” Networks? University of Nebraska- Lincoln
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.unl.edu/eskridge/cyberbot3.htm
Świątkowska, J.,  Albrycht, I. (2019). The Future of 5G or Quo Vadis, Europe? The Kosciuszko
 Institute [online] Available at: https:/ /ik.org.pl/en/publications/the-future-of-5g-or-
 quo-vadis-europe/
 
Symantec. AUC. (2016). Cyber Crime & Cyber Security Trends in Africa. [online] Available at:
 https:/ /www.thegfce.com/initiatives/cybersecurity-and-cybercrime-trends-in-africa/ 
 documents/publications/2017/03/10/report-cyber-trends-in-africa
Symantec. (2018). Facts and figures, Internet Security Threat Report. [online] Available at:
 https:/ /www.symantec.com/content/dam/symantec/docs/reports/istr-23-2018-en.pdf
Toesland, F. (2015). Will Africa take the lead in the Internet of Things? [online] Available at:
 http:/ /africanbusinessmagazine.com/sectors/infrastructure/will-africa-take-
 leadinternet-things/
Trend Micro, Interpol. (2017). Cybercrime in Western Africa: poised for an underground Market.  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /documents.trendmicro.com/assets/wp/wp-cybercrime-
 in-west-africa.pdf
Tropina, T. (2016). Do Digital Technologies Facilitate Illicit Financial Flows? The World
 Development Report 2016. Digital Dividends. Background Paper. [online] Available at:  
 http:/ /pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/396751453906608518/WDR16-BP-Do-Digital-
 Technologies-Facilitate-Illicit-Financial-Flows-Tropina.pdf
Tropina, T. (2017). Big Data: Tackling Illicit Financial flows. In Atlantic Council & Thomson Reuters  
 (Ed.). Big Data: A Twenty-First Century Arms Race. [online] Available at: https:/ /www.
 atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Big_Data_A_Twenty-First_Century_ 
 Arms_Race_web_0627_Chapter_4.pdf
44UNODC. (2013). Comprehensive Study on Cybercrime. New York: UN
Vavra, S. (2019). The U.N. passed a resolution that gives Russia greater influence over internet  
 norms. Cyberscoop, 18 November, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.cyberscoop. 
 com/un-resolution-internet-cybercrime-global-norms/
Verizon. (2018). Data Breach Investigations Report. [online] Available at: https:/ /enterprise.
 verizon.com/resources/reports/DBIR_2018_Report.pdf. VVOB Education for
 development. (2016). Gender is an integral part of inclusive education in South Africa.  
 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.vvob.org/en/news/gender-integral-part-inclusive-
 education-south-africa
Warner, J. (2011). Understanding Cyber-crime in Ghana: A view from Below. International
 Journal of Cyber Criminology. Vol 5 (1)
Wired. (2014). Linux: Fewer Bugs Than Rivals. WIRED, 14 December, 2004 [online] Available at:  
 https:/ /www.wired.com/2004/12/linux-fewer-bugs-than-rivals/
Woo, S., Volz, S. (2019). U.S. Considers Requiring 5G Equipment for Domestic Use Be Made   
 Outside China. Wall Street Journal, 23 June, 2019 [online] Available at: https:/ /
 www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-considers-requiring-5g-equipment-for-domestic-use-
 be-made-outside-china-11561313072
World Bank. (2017). Combatting Cybercrime: Tools and Capacity Building for Emerging
 Economies. DC: World Bank and United Nations
World Bank. (2017a). Illicit Financial Flows (IFFs). Brief, 7 July, 2017 [online] Available at: https:/ / 
 www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialsector/brief/illicit-financial-flows-iffs
World Bank. (2019). World Bank Country and Lending Groups. [online] Available at: https:/ /
 datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519
World Economic Forum. (2017). Executive Briefing: The future of jobs and skills in Africa.
 Place: Publisher
Zinatullin, L. (2018). Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity: Attacking and Defending.
 Tripwire, 10 December, 2018 [online] Available at: https:/ /www.tripwire.com/state-of-
 security/featured/artificial-intelligence-cybersecurity-attacking-defending/
45