Vol.:(0123456789)SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-021-00664-y
SN Computer Science
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A Strategic Approach to Onsite Learning in the Era of SARS‑Cov‑2
Michael Agyemang Adarkwah1 
Received: 18 February 2021 / Accepted: 26 April 2021 / Published online: 7 May 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd 2021
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted all forms of social life, including the education sector. As part of the efforts to keep 
the virus at bay, onsite instruction was suspended in 188 countries across the globe, jeopardizing the educational goals of 
over 91% of the world’s student population. Online learning emerged as an ultimate solution to the disruption caused by 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The main challenge of most developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, is to ensure 
effective online learning across all levels of education. The lack of funds, infrastructure, effective e-learning systems, ICT 
gadgets, and other challenges hindered the online learning in most developing countries from achieving its intended goal. 
With the realization that the COVID-19 may not die out soon and the prospect of a vaccine, Ghana, like many countries, 
resumed onsite instruction in early 2021. The study employed a phenomenological approach through personal interviews to 
explore the experiences of 20 tertiary students who were the first batch of students to be part of the temporal resumption of 
tertiary education in Ghana. From the analysis, it was observed that universities educated their staff and students on COVID-
19. Nonetheless, there were contextual challenges with; the provision of personal protective equipment (PPEs), engagement 
in digital learning, parent–teacher collaboration, psychological health service, and course completion. The study discusses 
school preparedness plan of universities for resumption and draws from the literature to outline ten strategic ways to reopen 
schools.
Keywords Online learning · Onsite learning · COVID-19 · Distance education · Ghana education
Introduction
The novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2), also known as the 
COVID-19 pandemic is still unfolding nearly after a year 
of its discovery in the city of Wuhan [22, 67, 92]. The 
World Health Organization on January 30, 2020 announced 
that the SARS-Cov-2 “now meets the criteria for a Public 
Health Emergency of International Concern”, and officially 
declared it as a global pandemic on March 11, 2020 [92]. 
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, social distancing 
and stay-at-home guidelines were advocated as primary key 
measures in battling the pandemic [93] against the back -
ground of persistent education inequality and crisis [70]. 
Recognized as perhaps the biggest blow to the world’s econ-
omy, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprece-
dented disruption in all spheres of education, especially with the introduction of social-distancing norms [74]. Notably, 
in-person teaching, simulation laboratories, and conferences 
were cancelled [21].
In 188 countries across the globe, education institutions 
across all levels (preprimary, primary, secondary, and higher 
education) have shut down, affecting the education careers 
of more than 91% of the student population in the world 
[87]. The educational challenges created by the COVID-
19 pandemic has made it difficult for courses that thrive 
on in-person laboratory teaching to be delivered [53]. The 
crisis resulting from the COVID-19 triggered an outbreak 
of online learning [98]. However, the usage of e-learning 
systems, a web-based software platform for online learning 
[85], has become the main challenge of most institutions 
both in developed and developing countries [5 ]. Almaiah 
et al. added that the challenges by educational institutions 
are a result of the digital divide in developing countries. 
They further stated that developing countries experience 
a 45% failure in e-learning projects, with 40% partial fail-
ures, and only 15% success rate. In this pandemic era, many  * Michael Agyemang Adarkwah 
 adarkwahmichael1@gmail.com
1 Southwest University, Tianzhu Street, Beibei District No. 2, 
Chongqing, China SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 2 of 15
SN Computer Science
universities transitioned to an online learning modality with-
out necessarily focusing on online pedagogy [26].
In Ghana, the emergent transition to online learning has 
not been smooth [1 ]. The e-learning approach demands a 
quality internet connection and mobile/computer gadgets 
[36], which are inadequate in Ghana [9 ]. Institutions which 
are poorly managed, and with socially disadvantaged stu-
dents who have limited access to internet and technology 
find it difficult to respond to student’s needs, and their ina-
bility to engage in the e-learning process [15]. Although 
Ghana is still wary of lifting the bans on school operations 
to control the spread of the virus, it has partially resumed 
schools for final year students at the Junior High School 
(JHS) and Senior High School (SHS) to complete their 
statewide exams, and hope to resume tertiary education in 
early 2021 [16, 60]. There are many educational institutions 
in the world that also plans to resume the traditional mode 
of instruction in classrooms. Thus, onsite learning across 
many countries is on the brink of realization with promising 
vaccine development [55, 57]. But the greatest questions to 
answer are,“Are vaccines going to be effective and safe?”, 
and “how long is immunity through such vaccine going to 
be effective?” [14], p. 357). Major [57] calls for educators 
to prepare fully for both onsite and online learning. Every -
one’s goal is to make a quick and safe reopening of schools 
a priority because of the benefits of in-person learning [20]. 
To date, there are limited studies [2 , 5, 8] that address stra-
tegic approaches to onsite learning in the era of COVID-19 
pandemic, especially in the context of a developing country 
like Ghana. In this paper, an appropriate strategic approach 
to resume onsite learning is discussed using Ghana as a case 
study. The study discusses onsite learning in Ghana in the 
pre-pandemic period, the challenges of the online learning 
post COVID-19, and provides a COVID-19 comeback model 
for onsite learning.
Background Context
Ghana recorded its first case of the SARS-Cov-2 on March 
12, and the government has since then announced a series 
of sweeping measures to combat the virus, such as closing 
of borders and banning of mass gatherings [61]. As of 15th 
June 2020, Ghana was only second to Nigeria in terms of 
West African countries greatly impacted by the COVID-19, 
remaining third in WHO African regions in terms of the 
number of cumulative cases [88]. In light of the COVID-
19 pandemic, Ghana, like many countries, also suspended 
onsite instruction. The lockdown of schools affected 9.2 
million learners in Ghana from kindergarten (KG) to SHS, 
and 500,000 tertiary students [60]. During the pre-pan-
demic period in Ghana, students were being instructed in 
classrooms across all levels of education with few adults, workers, and some students enrolled in Distance Educa-
tion (DE). The discontinuity in learning put the educational 
careers of students in jeopardy, especially final year students 
at the secondary and tertiary level. Under this circumstance, 
the education sector was faced with myriad of challenges 
which were never anticipated. To enable teaching and learn-
ing to continue, the Ministry of Education was forced to 
replace the traditional mode of instruction with online learn-
ing and DE methods. Nonetheless, the education system of 
Ghana was stagnant in terms of online learning until it was 
prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic [1 ]. Hence, the online 
learning mode of instruction was described as a “challenge-
ridden online learning” by the National Union of Ghana Stu-
dents (NUGS). The NUGS cited the absence of a properly 
laid out framework for implementation of online learning, 
inadequate bundle incentives, and resources as some of the 
contributing factors making the online instruction difficult. 
Also, needy students who lacked ICT gadgets and money 
to buy internet bundle were left out of the online learning 
instruction [102]. Adarkwah [1 ] opined that online learning 
in Sub-Saharan Africa is a great challenge. Only a hand-
ful of teachers can instruct online in Ghana [37]. Based on 
the experiences of tertiary students, the online learning is 
fraught with myriad of challenges [1 ]. The difficulties in the 
online learning give an evidence why Ghana plans to resume 
onsite learning in early 2021 [65, 100].
The Present Study
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the inequality in Ghana 
education [61]. For a long time, the indefinite closure of 
schools has been the reality of many students in the high 
school due to lack of educational infrastructure at the north-
ern part compared to the affluent south. Aside the regional 
disparities, social class is also a determinant factor on the 
quality of education, with wealthier parents sending their 
wards to “good” schools (primary and junior high level). 
Adarkwah [1 ] opined that the online learning in Ghana is 
fraught with a lot of challenges including the inability of 
needy students to receive instruction, complete their assign-
ments and exams. The poor/needy students could not engage 
in the online learning in Ghana due to lack of funds and 
resources. High cost of bundle and ICT gadgets made it 
impossible for some students to continue their education. 
Online learning is effective in developed countries and not 
in developing countries [2 ]. With the realization that the 
COVID-19 pandemic will not die out soon, the prospect of 
a potent vaccine, and the ineffectiveness of the e-learning, 
Ghana prepares to resume onsite learning. Ghana witnessed 
a drastic drop in the number of COVID-19 in late 2020. The 
total number of confirmed cases in Ghana is 52,274, with 
325 deaths, 886 active cases, and 76 new cases on December SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 3 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
8, 2020 [33]. As at February 2021, Ghana, like many coun-
tries, are still not out of the pandemic crisis. Since it was 
projected that the COVID-19 might thrive for long, even 
in the advent of a vaccine [54], many countries and institu-
tions are gradually learning to accommodate to the “new 
normal” of living with the SARS-Cov-2. It is estimated that 
when the SARS-Cov-2 dies down, there will be pressure on 
school leaders, teachers, and students [7 ]. Thus, instructors 
and students will have limited time to recover all the time 
“lost”. Instructors would be forced to teach many topics in 
a short space of time, and students would have limited time 
to assimilate all what is being taught. Additionally, some 
universities and schools temporarily resumed school on 
January 15, 2021. Because of limited physical capacities, 
universities are operating on a “double-track” approach (first 
batch of students would complete the semester in April and 
would be replaced by a second batch who stayed at home 
since the temporal resumption). However, with the rising 
cases in Ghana and reports of students getting infected by 
the COVID-19, the Ghana National Association of Teachers 
(GNAT) has advocated for a re-closure of schools at all lev -
els [35]. This has called for the need to address suitable con-
textual approaches to onsite learning for effective instruc-
tion. The present study draws from qualitative data from 
tertiary students and extant literature to suggest ten strate -
gic ways to resume permanent onsite learning in schools, 
with a focus on tertiary level education. The study adds to 
the theoretical knowledge on the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic on education, online learning, and offer insights 
on how to come back from the COVID-19 pandemic for 
effective onsite learning. Specifically, based on respond-
ents views on resumption measures at their universities, the paper put forth ten contextual approaches to onsite learning 
as Ghana resumes all levels of education in early 2021 [16, 
65] (Fig.  1).
Style of Onsite Learning in Ghana
Traditionally, instruction of students from kindergarten to 
tertiary is onsite (face-to-face) across public and private 
schools in Ghana. At the tertiary level, there are distance 
learning programs for mature students or students who for 
some reasons cannot attend the physical class. The Ghana 
Education Service (GES) together with the National Council 
for Curriculum and Assessment (NACCA), National Council 
for Tertiary Education (NCTE), and the National Teaching 
Council (NTC) are responsible for structuring a standard-
based curriculum for schools. Instructors teach based on the 
developed curriculum for schools. At all levels, instructors 
use textbooks, self-designed handouts/pamphlets for class-
room instruction. However, at the tertiary level, Information 
Communication Technology (ICT) gadgets such as projec-
tors and simulations/PowerPoint presentations are used as 
teaching aids for students to grasp the central concept of 
what is being taught. Also, there are few exchanges of email 
conversations between lecturers and students at the univer -
sity level. In some schools, there are libraries and ICT labo-
ratories where students are supposed to spend some time for 
their self-study. Also, there are “extra classes” for students 
who can afford for additional hours of instruction in some 
educational institutions in the country. Exams and classroom 
tests are based on the textbooks used for instruction at the 
basic (primary to junior high school) and secondary level 
while this may not necessarily be the case at the tertiary 
Fig. 1  COVID-19 case progression in Ghana (worldmeters.info) SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 4 of 15
SN Computer Science
level. Tests/exams are paper-based at the basic and second-
ary level (school and national level), and in most tertiary 
institutions aside students enrolled in the distance learning 
program.
Onsite Learning
The traditional onsite learning which is also conceptualized 
as face-to-face (F2F) learning [31] is considered to be a 
teacher-centered approach to instruction which requires pas-
sive learning by students [71]. In a teacher-centered onsite 
mode of instruction, the classroom dynamics is controlled 
by the teacher through lecturing and giving comments, and 
the student listens, make notes, and also ask questions. 
Conversely, a student-centered onsite mode of instruction 
is referred to as active learning. Students control classroom 
dynamics by independently constructing questions and ask -
ing their teachers for answers or clarification. Jensen et al. 
[44] associates deep approach to learning to student-centered 
approach and surface approach to learning to teacher-cen -
tered approach. There is a real-time face-to-face instruction 
in both approaches in a traditional onsite instruction where 
content delivery is flexible and teachers are able to provide 
immediate feedback. Onsite instruction occurs in a physical 
environment between a teacher and a student [80]. Exercises 
and lectures can be found in onsite learning and that may 
occur in a class or given as a homework, discussion forums, 
as individual or team learning [8 ]. Hence, onsite learning is 
supported by school buildings such as classrooms, lecture 
halls, libraries, and laboratories. F2F instruction provides 
room for relationship building, self-awareness, reflection, 
in-person activities, and in-class-role plays [ 79]. There are 
several studies that stress the importance of maintaining 
physical connection to campus, peer-to-peer connection, 
and student-instructor connection [42].
Online Learning
Online learning is defined as a type of education that occurs 
synchronously/asynchronously over the internet and does 
not occur in a traditional onsite classroom [96]. Online 
learning is grounded in DE [46, 95] and is used as an over -
lapping concept with e-learning and blended learning [ 1]. 
Online education evolved from mere recording of lectures 
to asynchronous and synchronous mode of delivery [58], 
and is considered as an important education method today 
[105]. Asynchronous mode is when students can participate 
in the online learning process at their own time with differ -
ent digital tools while synchronous mode is when students 
participate in live audio/video conferences with immediate 
feedback [48]. In an online mode of delivery, students are 
physically distant from their teachers and the interaction 
between them and teachers is mediated by technology [3 ]. The first model of online education was initiated by the Uni-
versity of London in the 1800s [71]. Scholars believed that 
online mode of education is preferable for older students 
who have financial, familiar, and work-related responsibili-
ties [40]. Online learning makes it possible for prospective 
students to access quality education through a single internet 
connection [71]. The flexibility in online learning enables 
students to determine when and where they learn [38, 45]. 
The various online learning activities include online dis-
cussion forum, personal assignment or group projects, and 
attending exams in a virtual or physical classroom [91].
Onsite Learning and Online Learning
Onsite and online learning have similarities aside their dif-
ferences. In all the two modes of delivery, it is required of 
learners to attend class, study course material, submit their 
assignment, and also complete group projects [ 71]. The 
authors added that teachers still need to design curricu-
lum, use effective teaching methods, respond to learner’s 
questions, motivate students, and then grade them. Both 
approaches require a competent teacher and willing students.
The perceptions of students on onsite and online modali-
ties is mixed [13, 18, 51]. According to [51], some learners 
perceive both modes of instruction as equally effective, and 
some believe they are of similar quality, and others believe 
the quality of onsite learning is better than online learning. 
They added that although students would like to participate 
in online learning, they consider onsite learning as more 
preferable. There is more quality student-instructor inter -
action in onsite classrooms than online learning, although 
technology can enhance student-instructor interaction in 
online education [101]. Class discussions among twenty or 
more students can be confusing in an online class, while in 
an onsite class, it can be thought-provoking [12]. According 
to the same authors, it is obvious to detect communication 
cues in an onsite class but it is almost nonexistent in an 
online modality. In a normal F2F class, one person speaks 
at a time while it requires frequent regulation to control who 
talks at a time in an online class as all students often try to 
talk at the same time.
Summers et al. 81 examined the difference between online 
and onsite learning and found that onsite learners were more 
satisfied than online learners. Tratnik et al. [85] also found 
that onsite students are significantly satisfied than online 
students. There is inadequate feedback in online learning 
and online learners are more likely to drop out than onsite 
learners [10]. Bergeler and Read [13] mentioned that online 
undergraduate students perceived online learning as inferior 
to onsite learning, and onsite learning students enrolled in a 
linguistic course performed better than their online counter -
parts. Ferguson and Tryjankowski [30] found that students 
in an onsite course scored significantly higher than onsite SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 5 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
learners in a master’s level course. There are also numerous 
studies that have found no meaningful difference between 
onsite and online learning in terms of student success [101]. 
Chen and Jia [23] in their study found that there was no 
significant difference between onsite and online learning 
in terms of average assignment scores, learning experi-
ences, quality and usability of technology, design of learn-
ing assessment, and instructional content. In another study, 
no significant difference was found on student performance 
between onsite and online learners in terms of gender and 
class rank [71]. Smith et al. [77] found that although learners 
perceived both onsite and online education had gains in their 
levels of learning, learners perceived online instructional 
modality to be efficient than onsite instruction. Soffer and 
Nachmias [78] concludes that there is no clear understanding 
on the effectiveness of onsite and online learning in terms 
of measuring the effectiveness of learning outcomes. There 
are some nations and educational institutions who perceive 
attaining a degree through online learning as inferior to 
onsite learning [4 , 58].
Online and Onsite Learning During the Pandemic 
Era
Online instruction in most African institutions were done 
through the aid of television, radio, SMS services, e-learn-
ing and web-based platforms [11, 83]. However, the digital 
divide and limited ICT resources negatively affected the 
progress of the online learning in many institutions [1 , 
2]. For example, some institutions in Nigeria experienced 
problems with the supply of ICT hardware [68] while 
in Kenya, there was lack of digital tools such as mobile 
phones [66]. Some of the higher education institutions 
received limited funding to ensure the effective function-
ing of the online platform [62]. Some of the students who 
experienced the online learning also lamented on chal-
lenges associated with internet access. In Ethiopia, it was 
observed that the high cost of internet bundle served as a 
barrier to students accessing the e-learning platform [59]. 
In the case of Ghana, aside from limited ICT resources, 
resistance to the online modality by faculty members, and lack of social interactions, students also complained of 
lack of electric power supply [1 ]. The unique challenges of 
Ghana and other peer countries motivated the government 
of Ghana to resume onsite learning.
Presently, there are limited literature on students onsite 
learning experience after the COVID-19 crisis. Nonetheless, 
educationists in some countries have put plans in place to 
resume F2F instruction. For example, in the US, the Educa-
tions Resource Strategies (ERS) for American education has 
developed a “COVID-19 comeback model” to aid schools in 
the resumption of onsite delivery [29]. Although it is origi-
nally developed for a school-based context, the universal 
nature of its guiding principles makes it relevant for higher 
education institutions as well. The model advocates for lead-
ers to accelerate the learning of students to make up for the 
learning loss due to the COVID-19 crisis. Additionally, lead-
ers are to ensure students are able to successfully reconnect 
to school and must increase the emotional and social sup -
port for students. Leaders are to set up measures to respond 
to sanitation and physical distancing requirements. There 
should be a provision for teachers and students who do not 
feel secure attending school or have contracted the SARS-
Cov-2. Because of the varying contexts of different universi-
ties, the model specifically serves as a guideline for educa-
tors and school leaders to create concrete contextual models 
for school reopening. Firstly, leaders must work with fami-
lies, educators and other significant people to establish guid-
ing principles. These principles will inform how students 
and educators will return to school. Secondly, by engaging 
with families, educators, and community partners, leaders 
are able to identify the significant social-emotional and aca-
demic needs of students. Thirdly, leaders should act proac-
tively to determine and plan for the constraints associated 
with factors such as physical distancing, class size, transpor -
tation, entry and exit of students. Moreover, considering the 
needs for specific group of students and grade levels, leaders 
should consider prioritizing and merging alternative mod -
els. Finally, leaders should decide on designing schedules 
and staffing models such as how teachers are assigned to 
classes, assigning leading roles, appointing teaching teams, 
and usage of teacher and student time (Fig.  2).
Coun try school closur es and reopenings (data as of September 25th)
Africa EAP ECALAC and 
North 
Americ a MENA SAR Total
Closed or partly  closed 26 10 43 91 96 104
Open or Open with 
limitations2 21 54 64 22 91
Fig. 2  Country school closures and reopenings (data as of September 25th). Source: World Bank Education Team COVID-19 tracking database 
and a map; World Bank (2020) SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 6 of 15
SN Computer Science
Methods
The study employs a qualitative approach to investigate 
school preparedness towards onsite learning and current 
strategies being utilized to resume a permanent onsite learn-
ing in Ghana. The target population was all students in the 
tertiary institutions in Ghana. Data was collected using ran-
domly selected tertiary students across three universities 
in Ghana who temporarily resumed onsite studies after the 
school closures. A letter of invitation stating the purpose 
and potential benefits of the study was sent to the randomly 
selected participants to seek their consent to participate in 
the study. Twenty students (Male = 12, Female = 8) were 
recruited from different fields of study across different lev -
els. In Ghana, tertiary education is four years, ranging from 
level 100 to level 400. Detailed demographic characteristics 
of the respondents are presented in Table  1.
An interview guide was developed by the researcher after 
thorough review of extant literature. The interview guide had 
open-ended questions to enable the researcher to probe into 
the respondents’ views for a deeper insight on the subject 
matter. Initially, grammatical errors in the interview guide 
were corrected after proofreading by a colleague. The inter -
view was further assessed by another researcher for screen-
ing and validity purposes.
All interviews were conducted in English using the What-
sApp platform. The duration of the interview was between 10 and 15 min for each participant. The focus of the inter -
view was on students’ assessment of school preparedness 
after temporal resumption of studies. The researcher tran-
scribed the interviews verbatim into Microsoft Word Office 
tool. Concurrently, the interviews were replayed to check for 
accuracy of the transcription. Pseudonyms were ascribed to 
every participant to ensure confidentiality.
As of November 2020, online instruction has halted in 
most institutions in Ghana. Also, online content is not availa-
ble for basic school students, with second-year JHS and SHS 
students partially resuming school since October 5, 2020. 
The study contributes to the discussion of the impact of 
COVID-19 on education and identifies strategic approaches 
to resume F2F learning based on secondary data (data were 
already available on online journal databases and reports).
Results
Thematic analysis using yielded the following themes; 
school safety protocols, digital technologies, psycho-
logical support, parent–teacher collaboration, class size, 
course completion (Table  2). Generally, there are mixed 
experiences of students in terms of their assessment of the 
schools’ preparedness for onsite learning. Some of the stu-
dents applauded their schools’ response to the COVID-19 
since school was temporarily resumed for the first batch of 
students while some also weighed in on unique challenges 
which they perceived can be a threat to a successful com-
pletion of the semester. Based on the emerged themes and 
sub-themes from analyzing the data collected, ten strate-
gic approaches to onsite learning advocated by experts and 
researchers in education were suggested. The researcher 
assumes these methods can lead to a permanent and suc-
cessful onsite learning while at the same time ensuring the Table 1  Demographic characteristics of participants
Participants (P) Gender Program Level
P1 Male BSc. Actuarial Science 300
P2 Male BSc. Biomedical Engineering 300
P3 Male BSc. Computer Engineering 100
P4 Female B.Ed. Arts 300
P5 Male BSc. Planning and Sustainability 400
P6 Female BSc. Biological Sciences 200
P7 Male BSc. Computer Science 100
P8 Female BA. Public Relations 100
P9 Male B.Ed. Arts 300
P10 Female B.A. Anthropology 100
P11 Male BSc. Physics 200
P12 Female BSc. Nursing 400
P13 Male BSc. Computer Science 200
P14 Female BSc. Nursing 400
P15 Male BSc. Information Technology 300
P16 Female BSc. Nursing 300
P17 Male BSc. Computer Science 100
P18 Male B.Ed. Arts 300
P19 Male BSc. Nursing 200
P20 Male BSc. Mathematics 400Table 2  Qualitative themes (categories) and sub-themes (sub-catego-
ries) of interview guide responses
Themes Sub-themes
School safety protocols Provision of PPEs
COVID-19 education
Digital technologies Mobile learning
Online platform
Psychological support Student–student and stu-
dent–teacher relationship
Counselling services
Parent–teacher collaboration Health safety
Academic outcomes
Class size Social distancing
Class participation
Course completion Course curricula and contentSN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 7 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
health needs of students are cared for. Presently, there have 
been calls by the teacher association in Ghana (GNAT) to 
halt the temporal resumption of onsite learning in universi-
ties because of the second wave of the virus [35]. The results 
of the analysis are discussed below.
School Safety Protocols
Almost all the students interviewed revealed that their uni-
versities have put in place concrete plans to ensure their 
health security is assured. However, they also expressed 
concern on some issues (such as the provision of PPEs) that 
need to be addressed to ensure their maximum safety if the 
onsite learning would persist for a long time.
Provision of PPEs
A few number of the students indicated that initially, they 
were provided with some safety PPEs such as nose masks 
and sanitizers upon arrival at the university campus. Major -
ity of the students revealed that their schools did not pro-
vide them with PPEs but only apparatus for handwashing. 
Hence, there is additional cost on them in the purchase of 
nose masks and hand sanitizers.
“Well, our school has not provided any of those. But 
they did provide us with soap and water for washing 
our hands.” [P8].
“In no way has my school helped with the provision 
of PPEs, each student is required to provide for him/
herself” [P2].
COVID‑19 Education
According to the respondents, a lot of emphasis is laid rou-
tinely on preventive techniques regarding the COVID-19 
infection. Their schools gave them health talks during ori-
entation and assembly gatherings.
“The school management has consistently been dis-
seminating information about COVID-19 on notice 
boards and in our online platforms. The management 
of the school has also created security checkpoints 
to ensure every student has been checked with ther -
mometer-guns and also ensure that students wash their 
hands, wear their nose masks, and also sanitize before 
entering lecture halls. The SRC (Students Representa-
tive Council) is also doing well by releasing commu-
niques to create awareness about COVID-19” [P5].
Digital Technologies
Prior to the temporal resumption of schools, almost all the 
universities in Ghana adopted online learning to instruct students. Universities therefore used a blend of the online 
learning and onsite instruction when necessary.
Mobile Learning
Most of the interviewees responded that their handheld 
mobile devices aid them to access digital content uploaded 
by their instructors. One way universities helped students 
to engage in digital learning was the provision of bundle 
incentives. However, neither of the universities provided 
students with these gadgets. Students had to acquire their 
own ICT tools/mobile gadgets to engage in the digital 
learning process. There were few of the students who 
had problems with internet connectivity for the mobile 
learning.
“Not really. We were not provided with digital learning 
devices. However, the SRC did a wonderful job by pro-
viding students with SIM Cards which is helping stu-
dents with their online studies, and have also increased 
data bundle from 2 GB of data to 5 GB” [P5].
“There are passwords on our WIFI and the network 
connectivity here is so bad. Hence, we go to class 
always” [P4].
Online Platform
Because there are problems accessing internet at a high 
bandwidth in most areas of the country, some of the students 
lamented on their inability to access the online platform on 
time. Some of the students also reported that there are issues 
with the online platform occasionally which hinders success-
ful learning outcome.
“Sometimes you’ll be uploading your assignment and 
the online platform ‘jams’, so you are unable to com-
plete the upload on time. It can be frustrating and can 
make you anxious about your score in that course” 
[P20].
“Hmmm. Actually the network in school is poor due 
to enormous students making research and other meet-
ings making the online learning very difficult”.
Psychological Support
Students indicated there were mentally sound to pursue their 
academic goals because of the good interaction and bond 
with their peers and lecturers. Also, some of the univer -
sities were apt to provide psychological health services to 
students. Nonetheless, some students opined they did not 
experience psychological support in their schools. SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 8 of 15
SN Computer Science
Student–Student and Student–Teacher Relationships
Majority of the participants indicated that there is a warm 
affection between them, their peers, and teachers which 
makes them feel secured and at home.
“Oh yes! We’ve managed to familiarize ourselves with 
one another. Most of the lecturers are cool and easy-
going” [P6].
Counselling Services
Some of the students praised their universities for assuring 
them of counselling services while some sect of the students 
reported that they did not receive any official message from 
school authorities relating to psychological counselling.
“The school has a counselling center in each col-
lege for any issue facing student, not particularly on 
COVID-19. If you go for counselling, your problems 
would be addressed” [P1].
Parent–Teacher Collaboration
A high amount of the students expressed that they did not 
experience a collaboration or discussion between their par -
ents and teachers prior to and on resumption regarding their 
health safety and academic outcomes.
Health Safety
Aside the COVID-19 education and the provision of some 
PPEs, none of the students revealed that instructors/school 
leaders have been in touch with their parents/caregivers con-
cerning their health.
“The school has no relationship with my parents con-
cerning my safety and academic progress” [P16].
Academic Outcomes
As mentioned earlier, there seems to be no cooperation 
between the school and parents in ensuring that amidst the 
pandemic, students’ academics are still not affected.
“Not at all. There is lack of communication between 
students’ guardians and the school. There is poor inter -
action” [P2].
Class Size
The multi-track approach (double-track system) adopted by 
the universities seem to have aided in preventing overcrowd-
ing at the lecture halls. Also, the combination of online and 
onsite learning has helped in reducing class size. According to the students, their current class sizes are okay for their 
smooth studies.
Social Distancing
Although the online approach to instruction is adopted to 
reduce class size, it is not prevalent in all departments at the 
universities.
“Some colleges use the virtual platforms in their day 
to day activities. Thus, helping them in their social-
distancing protocol. Other colleges are yet to fuse the 
virtual platform in the curriculum” [P1].
Class Participation
The reduced class sizes has enhanced effective student class 
engagement.
“The space for study is quite manageable. We are all 
able to participate well in what is being taught” [P12].
Course Completion
Course Curricula and Content
In terms of the successful completion of course content, stu-
dents had differing views. Those at the level 100 felt they 
would be able to complete their course content as compared 
to their seniors. Also, because self-learning/regulation is 
common in most universities, some of the students revealed 
that instructors would not go back to the previous semester 
in case they are unable to complete the current semesters’ 
course. Students felt the curriculum is okay for their studies.
“We would not be able to cover most of the course 
contents. As we all know, we are not in normal times. 
The pandemic has really affected everything including 
our academics, we would not be able to complete most 
courses” [P5].
“I’m a level 100 student and we’ve covered much so 
far. So I think we will be able to cover everything by 
the end of the semester” [P8].
Strategies for Onsite Learning Post SARS‑Cov‑2
During the interview phase, the concerns raised by students 
served as a springboard for identifying strategic approaches 
to onsite resumption as advocated by researchers and other 
relevant bodies. Drawing from extant literature, ten (10) cur -
rent strategic approaches employed for onsite instruction are 
presented in separate paragraphs below. The summary of the 
ten approaches is presented in a tabular form at the end of 
the section (Table  3).SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 9 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
Prior to school resumption, assessment of school readi-
ness should be performed. UNESCO [88] declared that 
regardless of a country’s capacity, to ensure the provision 
of appropriate and continued access to education in the time 
of crises and closure of schools, all education system must 
put plans in place for school reopening when the time comes. 
Preparedness to resume normal operations in the wake of the 
COVID-19 has become difficult to operationalize for many 
organizations [63]. The authors added that for an institution 
such as schools to resume operations after the closure, there 
should be a prior plan in place, education, drilling, and a 
revision of the plan. Also, there should be communication 
and exchange of relevant information between public, part-
ners, and stakeholders to help them make concrete decisions 
that align with public health and promote safety especially 
in the context of school resumption. The CDC [ 20] also 
calls for schools to collaborate with local and state health 
officials for possible resumption. The report mentioned that 
schools have to implement methods that slow the spread 
of the SARS-Cov-2. Decision to reopen schools should be 
based on available data on the extent of community trans-
mission and the ability of schools to protect their students, 
teachers, administrators, and other staffs. Schools can set up 
a “Return to School Committee” which consists of parents, 
health professionals, staffs, and administrators on appro-
priate measures to put in place to ensure safe reopening of 
schools [103]. Additional set, protocols, and infrastructure 
up may be required for resuming physical school opera-
tions to observe sanitation and social-distancing guidelines 
[50]. If there a real learning loss as a result of the pandemic, 
schools should develop a curriculum framework for school reopening that will ensure effective teaching [24]. Lack of 
school readiness, safety of teachers, challenges of learners 
with disabilities, and meeting the educational needs of stu-
dents should be addressed [70]. Lessons can be acquired 
from other countries on school resumption [104].
Also safety Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) such 
as masks, respirators, shoes, face shield, head cover, gown, 
googles, and gloves play a crucial role in the prevention 
and control of the SARS-Cov-2 [56]. Educators should work 
with local and national health officials, and also donor bod-
ies to secure PPEs for students and staffs. In Ghana, the local 
production of PPEs and homemade hand sanitizers increased 
the accessibility of these products for protection against the 
virus [76, 102]. Used PPEs should also be discarded prop-
erly to prevent environmental health problems [105].
Mobile technologies can increase student–teacher and 
student–student communicative interactions, teaching prac-
tices, and enhance learning processes [6 ]. Utilizing mobile 
technologies in education is termed as “m-learning”. The 
use of mobile technologies such as smartphones and tablets 
can be incorporated into the teaching and learning than con -
ventional laptops [32]. Laptops and desktop computers can 
be expensive and mobility might be difficult as compared to 
some mobile devices that can be surf the internet and create 
new content [ 1]. Students can remain distant and access con -
tent and learn new information without necessarily visiting 
computer laboratories at school. Also, mobile technologies 
can be used after school hours to stay in touch with teachers 
and peers, and can also be used for group project works. 
The Ministry of Education and School institutions can adopt 
mobile technology as a blended approach to onsite learning Table 3  Summary of the 10 Strategies for Onsite Learning Post SARS-Cov-2
Strategy Explanation
School readiness Having a resumption plan, education of staff and students, revision of plan, communication with relevant govern-
ment agencies, stakeholders in education, and health experts
Safety PPEs Provision of safety PPEs such as masks, respirators, face shields, gloves to staff and students by local production 
and/or liaising with donor bodies
Mobile technologies Adopting cost-effective handheld mobile devices for “m-learning” during and after class hours for effective com-
munication and gamification
Blended learning Geographically distant students can access e-learning platforms from home to reduce class size and maintain 
social-distancing norms
Psychological counselling Provision of mental health hotlines and psychological handbook for students. Establishing a guidance and coun-
selling unit to render psychological support to students
Building strong relationships Redesign the school climate and culture in a manner that is conducive for learning and enhance collaboration 
among peers and tutors
Parent–Teacher collaboration Ensuring teachers work closely with parents of students engaged in home education and giving academic pro-
gress report to parents of students engaged in the onsite instruction
Leverage adequate funding Partnering with NGOs and donor bodies to fund school operations such as the provisions of PPEs
Reduce class size Splitting classes to prevent overcrowding through blended learning, adoption of a multi-year track system 
(double-track system), and employing more qualified teachers
Curricula Orienting students on classroom curriculum and assessments and giving varied assignments which are all tailored 
to students’ interest. Also, directing students to open access educational sites SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 10 of 15
SN Computer Science
instead of costly laptops. Through mobile technologies, a 
microblog can be initiated during class hours and this can 
help students who are afraid to ask questions or give oral 
feedback to teachers [ 72]. “Gamification” of learning pro -
cess can also be implemented through mobile technologies. 
Mobile technologies can by allowing richer forms of com-
munication can also generate a feeling of social presence 
to prevent the feelings of solitude when completing assign-
ments [28].
A blended mode of instruction can be adopted by uni-
versities. Blending learning is an integration of online and 
onsite learning [1 ]. A blended approach to learning can 
improve higher education in a post-pandemic situation [19]. 
To mitigate the challenge of geographical distance, those 
who are far from school premises and are capable of joining 
an online class can continue their education with blended 
learning. The blended learning can also help in reducing 
large classes in the effort to ensure social-distancing norms. 
The blended approach promotes flexibility in learning and 
also building personal learning networks. Xue et al. [99] 
opined that both onsite and blended online learning would 
be widely implemented in a post-pandemic era.
Furthermore, universities should provide mental health 
services to students and other faculty members in the school. 
The closure of schools led to psychological and medical 
damage on students, parents, and teachers [25]. Schools 
should consider the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
the mental health, behavioral, and socio-emotional wellbe-
ing of students [ 20]. There is anxiety among parents and stu -
dents about when life will return to “normal” [27]. Teachers 
and counsellors of educational institutions should make it a 
priority on how to provide reassurance to parents and stu-
dents. In order for learning to occur, the psychological safety 
of students should be guaranteed [75]. In Wuhan, China, 
special psychological and psychiatry services were imple-
mented during the COVID-19 outbreak to provide mental 
health support across the country including students [90]. 
A handbook for psychological protection of students and 
parents were provided, and also mental health hotlines were 
made available for students and others who needed support. 
It is essential to closely monitor the psychological status of 
students, provide psychological intervention, and improve 
their psychological help-seeking behavior [52].
Moreover, good student–student and student–teacher 
relationships should be fostered in the universities. 
Schools should be redesigned in a manner that builds 
stronger relationships among staffs and students [75]. 
Quality relationship between teachers and students can 
be forged by teachers communicating positive expecta-
tions to students, ensuring equity in the classroom by giv -
ing every student an opportunity to respond to questions/
express themselves, giving student adequate time to think 
through questions, giving students clues to help them answer questions, developing classroom pride, correcting 
students constructively, demonstrating caring, and reduc-
ing frustration and stress [17]. Students can benefit from 
the nurturing relationships with their teachers. Teachers 
can form teaching teams or ensure teacher collaboration to 
adopt the right approaches to instruction. A positive school 
climate/culture is needed most in this time of COVID-19.
A large body of research have shown that parent–teacher 
collaboration contributes to overall school effectiveness 
[39, 47, 82]. Parent and teacher collaboration is vital for 
the academic and personal growth of students [64]. Effec-
tive school–parent–teacher collaboration reduces absen-
teeism and dropout rates. The first teacher of a student is 
the parent [41]. Developing a Parent–Teacher Association 
with a clear direction on how to assist students to learn at 
home in this COVID-19 pandemic can help in the educa-
tion recovery process. Teachers can make a simple phone 
call to their students’ parents or text them to help continue 
education at home. Sutarto and Sari [82] added that par -
ent and teachers are considered as partners who can work 
together to ensure the success of learning. Inadequate 
cooperation between parent and teachers can affect stu-
dent academic outcomes. Home visit to student’s homes 
could be an effective strategy to develop their interest in 
education and ensure effective learning after school hours 
in this COVID-19 pandemic era [75]. The reopening of 
schools would also mean that parents would require fre-
quent monitoring of the school environment [25]. School 
leaders should collaborate with parents/caregivers on how 
to promote safety and ensure a conducive environment for 
students. The parent–teacher collaboration can reduce the 
academic stress of students [69].
School leaders can partner with stakeholders in educa-
tion/community, international donors and NGOs to gain 
funds for school operations [75]. Since the COVID-19 had 
a negative economic impact, schools in rural areas or not 
affluent may find it difficult to ensure effective function-
ing. Special arrangements for maintaining social distancing 
and sanitation norms can come at a huge cost which can be 
defrayed by partnering with governments and other bodies 
willing to invest in education. Policymakers should imple-
ment policies that provide adequate funds for schools for 
effective operation.
Onsite learning will require a reduction in the number 
of students who teachers interact with F2F [75] . Schools 
with large classes should consider splitting the classes to 
prevent overcrowding and ensure the social-distancing 
norms. Reducing large classes to make room for adequate 
space can slow the spread of the virus. In such instance, 
extra-teachers may be needed. School who may not have the 
adequate capacity/facilities for splitting classes can run on 
shifts (students come in turns from morning to afternoon) or 
adopts a double-track approach (first group of students come SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 11 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
to school for the academic year and later replaced during 
vacation by another sect of students who stayed at home).
Whether teachers would use a national curricula or use 
their discretion to choose program content for their students, 
teachers should not only orient students on classroom cur -
riculum and examinations/assessments, but also give them 
varied homework and examinations [27]. Educators should 
also formulate an appropriate plan to recover course content 
that could not be completed as a result of the pandemic. 
According to [27], there is also abundance of high-quality 
educational materials which are open access as a result of 
the pandemic, which teachers can draw from to instruct stu-
dents. A suggested website is the OpenLearn Website which 
contains over 1000 courses for students at the school and 
tertiary level. School leaders should solicit ideas from cur -
riculum designers and experts before implementing a new 
curriculum to promote students’ interest.
Theoretical and Practical Implications
Theoretically, the papers add knowledge to the myriad of 
studies that discusses the impact of the COVID-19 cri-
sis on the status quo of education. The conceptualization 
of online learning according to diverse scholars has been 
briefly discussed in the study. A clear distinction was made 
between online and onsite learning while factoring in their 
advantages and disadvantages. Based on the extant review 
of literature on these two modalities of instruction, there 
are differing views on the effectiveness, students’ prefer -
ence, and teachers’ attitude towards online and onsite 
learning. More research that applies rigorous and sophis-
ticated methods are needed for accurate conceptualization 
of these two modes of instruction. Although online learn-
ing is used interchangeably with similar concepts such as 
e-learning, flipped learning, virtual classes, and distance 
education [1 ], the concepts have differences that need to be 
accurately explored. Practically, the COVID-19 is on the 
rise as most countries are experiencing a second wave and 
thinking of re-closing schools [35]. It behoves on school 
administrators and policymakers in education to address the 
frugal needs of school, in the context of this paper, higher 
education institutions. Because the previous experience of 
students regarding the emergent online learning in Ghana 
was not the best [ 1, 9], school leaders have to address the 
challenges of the online instruction and strategically plan 
for a successful resumption of onsite instruction. First and 
foremost, as advocated by researchers reviewed earlier and 
in the COVID-19 comeback model, the government and 
educators should partner with relevant stakeholders such as 
parents and health officials before arriving at a decision to 
resume in school. In Ghana, there seems to be conflicting 
views of the Ghana Medical Association and government’s 
decision to resume temporarily school [34]. Also, parents’ opinion was not sought and the GNAT have supported the 
re-closure of schools which has become a public chorus [35]. 
Secondly, school leaders should liaise with the government 
and donor bodies in acquiring the safety PPEs for protection 
and handwashing machines (or veronica buckets which are 
less expensive and effective) to foster frequent handwash-
ing in the school environment. Thirdly, universities with no 
“guidance and counselling unit” or “psychological support” 
department should establish them to provide psychological 
health services to students and employees. Since poor psy -
chological health is linked with negative academic outcomes 
and reduced productivity [43]. To ensure social-distancing 
norms are maintained, school can use a blend of both online 
and onsite instruction to reduce class sizes. This will also 
help teachers to give special attention to individual students 
and for the students to rapidly engage in the learning pro-
cess. For example, in Wuhan University in China, multifac-
torial techniques such as in-person psychological counsel-
ling and the rapid use of online learning were employed 
for a successful resumption of activities after the COVID-
19 pandemic [73 ]. Health centers in the university setting 
should rapidly check student and faculty staffs’ temperatures 
and provide adequate healthcare. The curricula developed 
should be tailored to students’ needs and interest to engage 
them and also complete semester courses on time. Proper 
assessment techniques can be employed to identify any hur -
dle to course completion and challenges with instruction 
delivery. Overall, school resumption needs to be carefully 
planned using the suggested points as guidelines to ensure 
progressive education.
Conclusion
In recent weeks, there has been a spike in the number of 
COVID-19 cases in Ghana, raising concerns about a second 
wave [ 49, 84]. With the Ghanaian government’s decision to 
resume onsite instruction across all levels of education in 
early 2021, there is a need to discuss strategic approaches to 
resume onsite learning. The paper argued that the failure of 
the emergent online education in the country forced the hand 
of the government to resume onsite learning temporarily, 
with universities adopting a multi-track approach (double-
track system) to accommodate students because of limited 
physical space [ 1, 37]. However, school leaders and parents 
were not consulted before the decision to resume schools. 
The resumption amidst the fast rising cases of COVID-19 
has been met with resistance from parents, teachers, and 
health professionals [34, 35]. According to teachers, the 
preparedness plan of schools to resume onsite education 
is not adequate because schools lack funds, facilities, and 
PPEs. Although Ghana is used as a case study, the strate-
gies suggested is applicable to all countries across the globe  SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 12 of 15
SN Computer Science
who hopes to resume F2F instruction. Specifically, school 
readiness/preparedness, acquisition of PPEs, mobile tech-
nologies, blended learning, provision psychological coun -
selling services, building stronger relationships at school, 
school parent–teacher collaboration, leveraging adequate 
funding, reducing class size, and redesigning a curriculum 
with varied content that promotes students’ interest were 
found to be integral for resumption of onsite instruction. 
Although the COVID-19 has had a devastating effect on 
the education sector, it is a stimulus for educators across 
the globe to rethink how to improve teaching and learning 
[21], especially in the context of developing countries were 
onsite instruction is imminent and inevitable because of the 
failure of online education. Policymakers and stakeholders 
in education should prepare fully for both online and onsite 
learning activities. Although the paper presents strategic 
approaches to the resumption of onsite learning, the list is 
not exhaustive. Future researchers should explore various 
ways how onsite learning can be used to mitigate the loss in 
education as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Appendix (Interview Guide)
Section A
Background Information
a. What is your gender?
b. What is your study program?
c. What is your level at school?
Section B
 
 1.  How has your school helped you with the provision of 
PPEs such as nose masks, gloves and sanitizers?
 2.  Describe to me how your school has helped in educat-
ing you on the COVID-19 and its safety protocols?
 3.  How do you maintain the health protocols such as 
social-distancing norms and frequent handwashing in 
your school?
 4.  How well do you use digital technologies in your 
school?
   Probe:Can you briefly tell me about your experience 
with the online learning after school closure?
 5.  Did your school provide you with electronic gadgets to 
study online?
 6.  Can you access the online platform with your mobile 
devices such as smartphones and tablets and use it for 
uploading assignment and completing exercises?
 7.  How has the school dealt with your anxiety about con -
tracting the virus?   Probe: Describe your experiences with how the 
school has provided psychological counselling to stu-
dents with psychological health issues in light of the 
COVID-19.
 8. Tell me about student–student and student–teacher 
relationships in your school?
   Probe: Do you think your teacher care about your 
needs?
 9. Can you tell me about how the school has worked with 
your parents to ensure your safety and your academic 
progress?
 10. Do you get worried about your class size? Would you 
say you have enough space to study comfortably?
   Probe: How has your class size affected your aca-
demics?
 11. Do you think you’ll be able to complete the course 
content that was not covered in the previous semester 
& this current semester? Why and why not?
Declarations  
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interests.
References
 1. Adarkwah MA. “I’m not against online teaching, but what about 
us?”: ICT in Ghana post Covid-19. Educ Inf Technol. 2020. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10639- 020- 10331-z.
 2. Adnan M, Anwar K. Online learning amid the COVID-19 pan-
demic: students’. J Pedagogical Sociol Psychol. 2020;2(1):45–51. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 33902/ JPSP. 20202 61309.
 3. Aguilera-Hermida PA. College students’ use and acceptance of 
emergency online learning due to COVID-19. Int J Educ Res 
Open. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijedro. 2020. 100011.
 4. Allen EI, Seaman J. Online report card: tracking online education 
in the United States. Babson Survey Research Group; 2016.
 5. Almaiah MA, Al-Khasawneh A, Althunibat A. Exploring the 
critical challenges and factors influencing the E-learning sys-
tem usage during COVID-19 pandemic. Educ Inf Technol. 
2020;25:5261–80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10639- 020- 10219-y .
 6. Alshehri A, Cumming TM. Mobile Technologies and Knowledge 
Management in higher education institutions: students and edu-
cators’ perspectives. World J Educ. 2020;10(1):12–22. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 5430/ wje.v .
 7. Amaglo-Mensah TD. Possible ramifications of Covid-19 on the 
future of education delivery in Ghana; 2020. https:// www. ukfiet.  
org/ 2020/ possi ble- ramifi  cati ons- of- covid- 19- on- the- future- of-  
educa tion- deliv  ery- in- ghana/.
 8. Anggrawan A, Jihadil QS. Comparative analysis of online 
e-learning and face to face learning: an experimental study. In: 
2018 Third International Conference on Informatics and Com -
puting (ICIC); 2018. IEEE.
 9. Anyorigya DA. COVID-19: Halt challenge-ridden online learn-
ing in universities – NUGS to Government; 2020. https://  citin SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 13 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
ewsro om. com/ 2020/ 04/ covid- 19- halt- chall enger  idden- online-  
learn ing- in- unive rsiti es- nugs- to- gover  nment/.
 10. Atchley W, Wingenbach G, Akers C. Comparison of course 
completion and student performance through online and tradi-
tional courses. Int Rev Res Open Dist Learn. 2013;14(4):104–
16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 19173/ irrodl. v14i4. 1461.
 11. Azu OB, Adegboye O, Quadri H. Who gets to learn in a pan-
demic? Exploring the digital divide in remote learning during 
the COVID-19 pandemic in Nigeria. Int J Educ Res Open. 
2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijedro. 2020. 100022.
 12. Barnett D, Aagaard L. Online vs face-to-face instruction: simi-
larities, differences, and efficacy. Morehead State University; 
2005.
 13. Bergeler E, Read MF. Comparing learning outcomes and satis-
faction of an online algebra-based physics course with a face-
to-face course. J Sci Educ Technol. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s10956- 020- 09878-w .
 14. Berghout E. COVID and opportunities for information systems 
management research. Inf Syst Manag. 2020;37(4):357–60. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10580 530. 2020. 18206 40.
 15. Bhagat S, Kim DJ. Higher education amidst COVID-19: chal-
lenges and silver lining. Inf Syst Manag. 2020;37(4):366–71. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10580 530. 2020. 18240 40.
 16. Bosumtwi-Sam C, Kabay S. Using data and evidence to 
inform school reopening in Ghana; 2020. https:// www. pover  ty- 
action. org/ blog/ using- data- and- evide nce- inform- school- reope  
ning- ghana.
 17. Boynton M, Boynton C. Educator’s guide to preventing and 
solving discipline problems. Alexandria: ASCD; 2005. 
 18. Brown JL, Park H-S. Longitudinal student research compe-
tency: comparing online and traditional face-to-face learning 
platforms. Adv Soc Work. 2016;17(1):44–58. https:// doi. org/  
10. 18060/ 20870.
 19. Calderón A, Scanlon D, MacPhail A, Moody B. An integrated 
blended learning approach for physical education teacher edu-
cation programmes: teacher educators’ and pre-service teach-
ers’ experiences. Phys Educ Sport Pedagog. 2020. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1080/ 17408 989. 2020. 18239 61.
 20. CDC. Operating schools during COVID-19: CDC’s considera-
tions. Center for Disease Control and Prevention; 2020.
 21. Chatterjee I, Chakraborty P. Use of information communica-
tion technology by medical educators amid COVID-19 Pan -
demic and beyond. J Educ Technol Syst. 2020. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1177/ 00472 39520 966996.
 22. Chen J, Wang X, Zhang S, Lin B, Wu X, Wang Y, et al. Char -
acteristics of acute pulmonary embolism in patients with 
COVID-19 associated pneumonia from the city of Wuhan. Clin 
Appl Thromb Hemost. 2020;26:1–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/  
10760 29620 936772.
 23. Chen W, Jia J. Comparison of online and onsite students’ 
learning outcomes and experiences in a massively open online 
course in China. J Educ Technol Dev Exchange. 2016;9(1):67–
88. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18785/ jetde. 0901. 05.
 24. Coker D. The canary in the mine: remote learning in the time 
of COVID-19. J Curric Teaching. 2020;9(3):76–87. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 5430/ jct. v9n3p 76.
 25. Cooper DM, Guay-Woodford L, Blazar BR, Bowman S, Bying-
ton CL, Dome J, et al. Reopening schools safely: the case for 
collaboration, constructive disruption of pre-coronavirus 2019 
expectations, and creative solutions. J Pediatr. 2020. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jpeds. 2020. 05. 022.
 26. Crawford J, Butler-Henderson K, Rudolph J, Malkawi B, 
Glowatz M, Burton R, et al. COVID-19: 20 countries’ higher 
education intra-period digital pedagogy responses. J Appl 
Learn Teach. 2020;3(1):9–28. https:// doi. org/ 10. 37074/ jalt.  
2020.3. 1.7. 27. Daniel SJ. Education and the COVID-19 pandemic. Prospects. 
2020;49:91–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11125- 020- 09464-3.
 28. Dwivedi YK, Hughes DL, Coombs C, Constantiou I, Duan Y, 
Edwards JS, et al. Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on informa-
tion management research and practice: transforming educa -
tion, work and life. Int J Inf Manage. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1016/j. ijinf  omgt. 2020. 102211.
 29. Education Resource Strategies. Decision points for COVID 
comeback models. Education Resource Strategies; 2020.
 30. Ferguson J, Tryjankowski AM. Online versus face-to-face 
learning: looking at modes of instruction in Master’s-level 
courses. J Furth High Educ. 2009;33(3):219–28. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1080/ 03098 77090 30261 49.
 31. Fillion G, Limayem M, Laferrière T, Mantha R. Integrating 
information and communication technologies into higher 
education: investigating onsite and online students’ points of 
view. Open Learn. 2009;24(3):223–40. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
02680 51090 32016 49.
 32. France D, Lee R, Maclachlan J, Mcphee SR. Should you be 
using mobile technologies in teaching? Applying a pedagogical 
framework. J Geogr Higher Edu. 2020. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
03098 265. 2020. 17734 17.
 33. Ghana Health Service. 2020. https:// www. ghana healt  hserv ice.  
org/ covid 19/.
 34. GhanaWeba. Close schools now – Ghana Medical Association 
to govt. 2021. https:// www. ghana  web. com/ Ghana HomeP  age/ 
NewsA rchive/ Close- schoo ls- now- Ghana- Medic al-  Assoc iation-  
to- govt- 11747 74.
 35. GhanaWebb. GNAT supports re-closure of schools. 2021. 
https:// www. ghana  web. com/ Ghana HomeP  age/ NewsA rchive/  
GNAT- suppo rts- re- closu re- of- schoo ls- 11578 76.
 36. Goyal JK, Daipuria P, Jain S. An alternative structure of deliv -
ering management education in India. J Educ Technol Syst. 
2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00472 39520 958612.
 37. Gyampoh AO, Ayitey HK, Fosu-Ayarkwah C, Ntow S, Akossah 
J, Gavor M, Vlachopoulos D. Tutor perception on personal and 
institutional preparedness for online teaching-learning during 
the COVID-19 crisis: the case of Ghanaian Colleges of Edu-
cation. Afr Educ Res J. 2020;8(3):511–8. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
30918/ AERJ. 83. 20. 088.
 38. Henderikx M, Kreijns K, Muñoz JC, Kalz M. Factors influenc-
ing the pursuit of personal learning goals in MOOCs. Distance 
Educ. 2019;40(2):187–204. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01587 919.  
2019. 16003 64.
 39. Hoang A-D. Pandemic and teacher retention: empirical evi-
dence from expat teachers in Southeast Asia during COVID-
19. Int J Sociol Soc Policy. 2020;40(9/10):1141–66. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1108/ IJSSP- 07- 2020- 0269.
 40. Hussein E, Daoud S, Alrabaiah H, Badawi R. Exploring under -
graduate students’ attitudes towards emergency online learning 
during COVID-19: a case from the UAE. Child Youth Serv 
Rev. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. child youth. 2020. 105699.
 41. Iyengar R. Education as the path to a sustainable recovery from 
COVID-19. Prospects. 2020;49:77–80. https:// doi. org/ 10.  1007/  
s11125- 020- 09488-9.
 42. Jaggars SS. Choosing between online and face-to-face courses: 
community college student voices. Am J Distance Educ. 
2014;28(1):27–38. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 08923 647. 2014.  
867697.
 43. Jeffries V, Salzer MS. Mental health symptoms and academic 
achievement factors. J Am Coll Health. 2020. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1080/ 07448 481. 2020. 18653 77.
 44. Jensen L, Price L, Roxå T. Seeing through the eyes of a teacher: 
differences in perceptions of HE teaching in face-to-face and 
digital contexts. Stud High Educ. 2020;45(6):1149–59. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 03075 079. 2019. 16882 80. SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258
 258 Page 14 of 15
SN Computer Science
 45. Joosten T, Cusatis R. Online learning readiness. Am J Distance 
Educ. 2020;34(3):180–93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 08923 647.  
2020. 17261 67.
 46. Joshi O, Chapagain B, Kharel G, Poudyal NC, Murray BD, 
Mehmood SR. Benefits and challenges of online instruction in 
agriculture and natural resource education. Interact Learn Envi-
ron. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10494 820. 2020. 17258 96.
 47. Kaden U. COVID-19 school closure-related changes to the pro-
fessional Life of a K–12 teacher. Educ Sci. 2020;10(6):1–13. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ educs ci100 60165.
 48. Kim J. Learning and teaching online during Covid-19: Experi-
ences of student teachers in an early childhood education practi-
cum. Int J Early Childhood. 2020;52:145–58. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1007/ s13158- 020- 00272-6.
 49. Kokutse F. Ghana suspends parliament amid a surge in COVID-
19 cases. 2021. https:// www. washi ngton  post. com/  world/ africa/  
ghana- suspe nds- parli ament- amid-a- surge- in- covid- 19- cases/  
2021/ 02/ 10/ eed79 1f0- 6b8b- 11eb- a66e- e2704 6e9e8 98_ story.  
html.
 50. Kumar R, Mittal P. COVID-19 response toolkit for Indian higher 
education institutions: institutional resilience for academic plan-
ning and continuity. Jindal Globa University; 2020.
 51. Landrum B, Bannister J, Garza G, Rhame S. A class of one: 
students’ satisfaction with online learning. J Educ Bus. 2020. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 08832 323. 2020. 17575 92.
 52. Liang S-W, Chen R-N, Liu L-L, Li X-G, Chen J-B, Tang S-Y, 
Zhao J-B. The psychological impact of the COVID-19 Epi-
demic on Guangdong college students: the difference between 
seeking and not seeking psychological help. Front Psychol. 
2020;11:2231. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpsyg. 2020. 02231.
 53. Lorusso NS, Shumskaya M. Online laboratory exercise on com-
putational biology: phylogenetic analyses and protein modeling 
based on SARS-CoV-2 data during COVID-19 remote instruc-
tion. Biochem Mol Biol. 2020;48(5):526–7. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1002/ bmb. 21438.
 54. Lovelace BJ. WHO warns coronavirus vaccine alone won’t end 
pandemic: ‘We cannot go back to the way things were’. 2020. 
https:// www. cnbc. com/ 2020/ 08/ 21/ who- warns-a- coron avirus-  
vacci ne- alone- will- not- end- pande mic. html.
 55. Mahase E. Covid-19: Pfizer and BioNTech submit vaccine for US 
authorisation. BMJ. 2020;371:m4552. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/  
bmj. m4552.
 56. Mahmood SU, Crimbly F, Khan S, Choudry E, Mehwish S. Strat-
egies for rational use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
among healthcare providers during the COVID-19 crisis. Cureus. 
2020;12(5):1–10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7759/ cureus. 8248.
 57. Major C. Innovations in teaching and learning during a time of 
crisis. Innov High Educ. 2020;45:265–6. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s10755- 020- 09514-w .
 58. Malan M. Engaging students in a fully online accounting degree: 
an action research study. Acc Educ. 2020;29(4):321–39. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 09639 284. 2020. 17878 55.
 59. Mengistie TA. Impact of covid-19 on the Ethiopian education 
system. Sci Insigt Edu Front. 2020;6(1):569–78. https:// doi. org/  
10. 15354/ sief. 20. or011.
 60. Ministry of Education. COVID-19 coordinated education 
response plan for Ghana. Ministry of Education; 2020.
 61. Mohammed WF. What COVID-19 reveals about educational 
inequality in Ghana. 2020. https://  www.  aljaz  eera.  com/  featu  
res/ 2020/4/ 7/ what- covid- 19- revea ls- about- educa tional- inequ  
ality- in- ghana.
 62. Muftahu M. Higher education and Covid-19 pandemic: mat -
ters arising and the challenges of sustaining academic pro-
grams in developing African universities. Int J Educ Res Rev. 
2020;5(4):417–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 24331/ ijere. 776470. 63. Mwende R, Mramba C, Mutonga D, Nchogu R, Ogendo M, Nge-
chu D, et al. College conversion into Covid-19 quarantine center: 
readiness of students to go back to college. Afr J Educ Pract. 
2020;6(6):64–74.
 64. Myende PE, Nhlumayo BS. Enhancing parent–teacher collabora-
tion in rural schools: parents’ voices and implications for schools. 
Int J Leadersh Educ. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13603 124.  
2020. 17317 64.
 65. MyJoyOnline. Academic year for pre-tertiary students to resume 
in 2021- Akufo Addo. 2020. https:// www. myjoy  online. com/ news/  
natio nal/ new- acade mic- year- to- resume- in- 2021- akufo- addo/.
 66. Ngari SM, Ndung’u SW. Disaster management preparedness in 
the education sector in Kenya—a case of the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Editon Cons J Educ Manag Leadership. 2020;1(1):86–96. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 51317/ ecjeml. v1i1. 192.
 67. Nguyen MH, Gruber J, Fuchs J, Marler W, Hunsaker A, Hargit-
tai E. Changes in digital communication during the COVID-19 
global pandemic: implications for digital inequality and future 
research. Social Media + Society. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/  
20563 05120 948255.
 68. Oyediran WO, Omoare AM, Owoyemi MA, Adejobi AO, Fasasi 
RB. Prospects and limitations of e-learning application in pri-
vate tertiary institutions amidst COVID-19 lockdown in Nigeria. 
Heliyon. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy  on. 2020. e05457.
 69. Pajarianto H, Kadir A, Galugu N, Sari P, Februanti S. Study 
from home in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic: analysis of 
religiosity, teacher, and parents support against academic stress. 
Tamkang J Math. 2020;12(2):1791–807.
 70. Parker R, Morris K, Hofmeyr J. Education, inequality, and inno-
vation in the time of COVID-19. Johannesburg: JET Education 
Services; 2020. 
 71. Paul J, Jefferson F. A comparative analysis of student perfor -
mance in an online vs. face-to-face environmental science course 
from 2009 to 2016. Front Comput Sci. 2019;1(7):1–9. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 3389/ fcomp. 2019. 00007.
 72. Raelovich SA, Mikhlievich YR, Norbutaevich KF, Mamasoliev -
ich JD, Karimberdievich AF, Suyunbaevich KU. Some didactic 
opportunities of application of mobile technologies for improve-
ment in the educational process. J Crit Rev. 2020;7(11):348–52. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 31838/ jcr. 07. 11. 60.
 73. Sa Y, Lin W-S, Morton D, Huang C. Coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19): experiences and protocols from the department of 
prosthodontics at the Wuhan University. J Prosthet Dent. 2020. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. prosd ent. 2020. 06. 004.
 74. Sahoo P, Ashwani. COVID-19 and Indian economy: impact 
on growth, manufacturing, trade and MSME sector. Glob Bus 
Rev. 2020;21(5):1159–83. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 09721 50920  
945687.
 75. Schachner A, Darling-Hammond L, Martinez M. Restarting and 
reinventing school: learning in the time of COVID and beyond. 
Learning Policy Institute; 2020.
 76. Sibiri H, Prah D, Zankawah SM. Containing the impact of 
COVID-19: review of Ghana’s response approach. Health Policy 
Technol. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. hlpt. 2020. 10. 015.
 77. Smith RL, Flamez B, Vela JC, Schomaker SA, Fernandez MA, 
Armstrong SN. An exploratory investigation of levels of learning 
and learning efficiency between online and face-to-face instruc-
tion. Counsel Outcome Res Eval. 2015;6(1):47–57. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1177/ 21501 37815 572148.
 78. Soffer T, Nachmias R. Effectiveness of learning in online aca-
demic courses compared with face-to-face courses in higher edu-
cation. J Comput Assist Learn. 2018;34(5):534–43. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1111/ jcal. 12258.
 79. Stauss K, Koh E, Collie M. Comparing the effectiveness of an 
online human diversity course to face-to-face instruction. J Soc SN Computer Science (2021) 2:258 
 Page 15 of 15 258
SN Computer Science
Work Educ. 2018;54(3):492–505. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10437  
797. 2018. 14344 32.
 80. Steinbronn PE, Merideth EM. Perceived utility of methods and 
instructional strategies used in online and face-to-face teaching 
environments. Innov High Educ. 2008;32:265–78. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ s10755- 007- 9058-4.
 81. Summers JJ, Waigand A, Whittaker TA. A comparison of stu-
dent achievement and satisfaction in an online versus a tra-
ditional face-to-face statistics class. Innovative High Educ. 
2005;29(3):233–50. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10755- 005- 1938-x.
 82. Sutarto S, Sari DP. Teacher strategies in online learning to 
increase students’ interest in learning during COVID-19 pan-
demic. Jurnal Konseling dan Pendidikan. 2020;8(3):129–37. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 29210/ 147800.
 83. Tadesse S, Muluye W. The impact of COVID-19 pandemic on 
education system in developing countries: a review. Open J Soc 
Sci. 2020;8:159–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4236/ jss. 2020. 810011.
 84. Tih F. Ghana sees record spike in coronavirus cases. 2020. 
https:// www. aa. com. tr/ en/ africa/ ghana- sees- record- spike- in-  
coron avirus- cases/ 20368 28.
 85. Tratnik A, Urh M, Jereb E. Student satisfaction with an online 
and a face-to-face Business English course in a higher education 
context. Innov Educ Teach Int. 2019;56(1):36–45. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1080/ 14703 297. 2017. 13748 75.
 86. Turnbull D, Chugh R, Luck J. Learning management systems: 
an overview. Encyclopedia Educ Inf Technol. 2019. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 60013-0_ 248-1.
 87. UNESCO. Distance learning solutions. 2020. https:// en. unesco.  
org/ covid 19/ educa tionr  espon se/ solut ions.
 88. UNESCO. Prepare for school reopening: IIEP-UNESCO’s 
COVID-19 response briefs. 2020. http:// www. iiep. unesco. org/  
en/ five- steps- suppo rt- educa tion- all- time- covid- 19.
 89. UNICEF (2020) Ghana: COVID-19 situation report- #5.
 90. Wang Y, Zhao X, Feng Q, Liu L, Yao Y, Shi J. Psychologi-
cal assistance during the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak in 
China. J Health Psychol. 2020;25(6):733–7. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1177/ 13591 05320 919177.
 91. Wei H-C, Chou C. Online learning performance and satisfac -
tion: do perceptions and readiness matter? Distance Educ. 2020. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01587 919. 2020. 17247 68.
 92. WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public. 
2020. https://  www.  who.  int/ emerg  encies/  disea  ses/ novel-  coron  
avirus- 2019/ advice- for- public.
 93. WHO. Risk communication and community engagement readi-
ness and initial response for novel coronaviruses (nCoV). World 
Health Organization; 2020.
 94. WHO. Statement on the Second Meeting of the International 
Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee Regarding 
the Outbreak of Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV). 2020. https://  
www.  who.  int/ news-  room/  detail/  30- 01- 2020-  state  ment-  on- the- 
second- meeti ng- of- the- inter  natio nal- health- regul ations- (2005)-  
emerg  ency- commi ttee- regar  ding- the- outbr  eak- of- novel- coron  
avirus- (2019- ncov). 95. Woldeab D, Yawson RM. A systematic meta-analytic review 
of thinking beyond the comparison of online versus traditional 
learning. J Bus Educ Scholar Teach. 2020;14(1):1–24.
 96. Wong R. When no one can go to school: does online learning 
meet students’ basic learning needs? Interact Learn Environ. 
2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10494 820. 2020. 17896 72.
 97. World Bank (2020) Education systems’ response to COVID-19 
brief no. 15. 2020. https:// www. world bank. org/ en/ topic/ educa  
tion/ coron avirus.
 98. Wotto M. The future high education distance learning in Canada, 
the United States, and France: insights from before COVID-19 
secondary data analysis. J Educ Technol Syst. 2020;49(2):262–
81. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00472 39520 940624.
 99. Xue E, Li J, Xu L. Online education action for defeating COVID-
19 in China: an analysis of the system, mechanism and mode. 
Educ Philos Theory. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00131 857.  
2020. 18211 88.
 100. Yakubu N. Schools to reopen on January 15 – Akufo-Addo. 
2021. https://  www.  myjoy  online.  com/  schoo  ls- to- reopen-  on- janua  
ry- 15- akufo- addo/.
 101. Yen S-C, Lo Y, Lee A, Enriquez J. Learning online, offline, and 
in-between: comparing student academic outcomes and course 
satisfaction in face-to-face, online, and blended teaching modali -
ties. Educ Inf Technol. 2018;23:2141–53. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1007/ s10639- 018- 9707-5.
 102. Yendork JS, James S. COVID-19 in Ghana: changes and the way 
forward. J Comp Fam Stud. 2020;51(3–4):369–84. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 3138/ jcfs. 51.3- 4. 012.
 103. Young M. Chatfield school COVID-19 preparedness and 
response plan. Saginaw Valley State University; 2020.
 104. Zafitsara J, Velo NM. Madagascar’s responses to the COVID-19 
outbreak: educational perspectives from March to June 2020. 
Electr Res J Soc Sci Human. 2020;2(3):116–37.
 105. Zand AD, Heir AV. Emerging challenges in urban waste manage-
ment in Tehran, Iran during the COVID-19 pandemic. Resour 
Conserv Recycl. 2020;162:1–2. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. resco  
nrec. 2020. 105051.
 106. Zhou L, Li F, Wu S, Zhou M. ‘School’s out, but class’ on’, the 
largest online education in the world today: taking China’s practi-
cal exploration during the COVID-19 epidemic prevention and 
control as an example. Best Evid Chin Edu. 2020;4(2):501–19. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 15354/ bece. 20. ar023.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.