International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science  
 ISSN  (Online) : 2455 -9024  
 
 
222 
 
Ahmad Rufa i, Salisu Modi, and Buhari Wadata , “A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria ,” International Research Journal of 
Advanced Engineering and Science , Volume 5, Issue 3, pp. 222-226, 2020 . 
A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria  
 
Ahmad Rufai1, Salisu Modi2, Buhari Wadata3 
1, 2, 3Department of Computer Science, Sokoto State University, Nigeria  
Email  address : rufaiahmed5  @ gmail.com, salisumodi  @ gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract— In recent years, developing countries have experienced 
fast growth in internet usage. As a result, there has been rapid 
development in the deployment of information and communication 
technologies in these countries. Information is often exchanged 
through t hese technologies by users. Over the years, this information 
has been under attack b y those with malicious intent. While there is 
growing awareness about these threats in the Western world, aware -
ness in developing countries is poor. Nigeria is a developing country 
in Africa that has  experienced rapid growth in internet and mobile 
technology usage with a reported mobile phone teledensity of 97.47% 
and nearly 186 million active mobile internet subscriptions {NCC, 
2019, Industry Statistics}. As these advancements are new, the 
citizens o f this country may not be aware of the  threats associated 
with them. This paper examines the level of cyber -security awareness 
amongst the general public using a quantitative online survey. A 
sample size of 176 Nigerians responded to the survey. The result s 
from the survey indicate that the knowledge of cybersecurity is 
moderate although, several cases of poor practices such as choice of 
weak passwords, free anti -virus software, and password sharing 
were observed. It was also found that despite the presence  of 
ngCERT, a body tasked with the responsibility of managing the risks 
of cyber threats in Nigeria and also the first point of contact for 
victims of cyber -crime, many of the respondents (77.84%) are not 
aware of this. Thus, there is an immediate need for  concerned 
agencies to create more awareness programs to enlighten citizens on 
the dangers of poor cyber -security practices . 
I. INTRODUCTION  
The world is in the so -called Info rmation Age, characterized 
by rapid deplo yment of information and communication 
technologies. Organisations in this age rely heavily on 
information technology tools to interact with their customers 
and deliver services. Similarly, individuals utilize these tools 
to communicate with each other as well as to access services 
from both gover nment and private organizations.  Most of 
these interactions are made through the World Wide Web, 
emails and mobile applications. Thus, the use of these 
technologies has risen exponentially in recent years (Alotaibi, 
et al. 2016) . According to the recent data from the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), there are 4.1 
billion internet users worldwide, this represe nts 53.6% of the 
global population  (ITU, 2019) . Internet usage in Africa has 
also increased over the years, with data from ITU showing an 
increase from 2.1 in 2005 to 24.4% of the co ntinent's 
population using the internet in 2018 (ITUnews, 2018) . 
Nigeria’s internet pen etration rate was 27.7% in 2017 (ITU, 
2019). These figures are expected to grow given the 
proliferation of mobile phones, the fast pace of internet 
penetration and technology d eployme nt in both developed and 
developing countries.  
Due to the rapid growth in communic ation technologies 
and the advantages they provide, organizations now rely heavily on them to improve the efficiency of their pr ocesses 
and to deliver effective services, thu s further integrating 
technology in our daily lives.  Daily activities such as 
shopping, banking, and entertainment are now carried out 
online using mobile devices. However, whilst these 
technologies provide easy access to information and a chance 
to condu ct such activities anytime and anywhere, they also 
provide an avenue for those with malicious intent to misuse or 
destroy such information (Alarifi, Tootell , & Hyland, 2012) . 
Over the last few years, crimes associated with these 
technologies have risen significantly. According to Symantec 
Corporation, 978 mi llion people in 20 countries were affected 
by cybercrime in 2017 alone (Symantec, 2017) . The cost of 
cybercrimes according to a 2018 study by McAfee and a think 
tank, the Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) 
is esti mated at $600 billion, this figure is up from $500 billion 
the last time a similar study was conducted in 2014 (Lewis, 
2018) . 
Lewis believed the reasons for this growth are largely due 
to the adoption of new attack technologies, an increase in 
internet users from countries with weak cybersecurity and 
increased ease of committing cybercrime with the growth of 
Cybercrime -as-a-Service.  
Tackling cybercrimes is challenging for both developed 
and developing countries, this task is even mor e challenging 
for d eveloping countries largely due to their weak 
cybersecurity frameworks. A study by (Kshetri, 2010) , found 
that most organizations in developing economies adopt 
technologies without considering their security problems thu s 
subjecting their technological infrastructure to cyber -attacks. 
Also, many internet users in the developing world are 
inexperienced and not technically savvy. This is a big problem 
especially with the rate of growth of Smartphone usage in 
these countries  (Poushter, Bishop, & Chwe, 2018) . 
Nigeria, which is one of the fastest d eveloping countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, h as seen tremendous growth in internet 
usage and deployment of communication techno logies in 
recent years. According to the N igerian Communication 
Commission (NCC), the country's telecommunication 
regulatory agency, In January 2019, reported a mobile phone 
tele-density of 97.47% and nearly 186 million active mobile 
internet subscriptions. This shows that more than 90% of 
Nigeria's population which is currently around 195 million are 
connected to the internet. Online banking, electronic 
commerce and social me dia for communication are relatively 
new in Nigeria. The proliferation in the use of the internet in 
Nigeria began in 2008, when it was reported that for every 100 
persons, 15 are connected (Vanguard, 2010) . Therefore, it can 
be assumed that the importance of cybersecurity and the International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science  
 ISSN  (Online) : 2455 -9024  
 
 
223 
 
Ahmad Rufa i, Salisu Modi, and Buhari Wadata , “A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria ,” International Research Journal of 
Advanced Engineering and Science , Volume 5, Issue 3, pp. 222-226, 2020 . 
security measures to be taken against cyber -attacks are limited 
within the general public.  
According t o the country’s National I nformation 
Technology Development Agency (NITDA), in 2018, 60% of 
Nigerian firms suffered cyber -attacks, 43% of which are small 
and medium enterprises which are the backbone of the 
country’s economy (Osuagwu, 2019) . Thus, it is very 
important to assess the level of cyber -security awar eness in the 
country. Besides, most studies on cybersecurity awareness in 
the literature are carried out in western countries. Nigeria as a 
devel oping country is different from these countries, the 
culture, diversity and the u nderstanding of cybersecurity 
differs. Thus, this paper seeks to feel this gap by focusing on 
the information security awareness of the people of Nigeria. 
To the best of the a uthors' knowledge, this study is the first to 
be carried out at this scale.  
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
Surveys were used as the research a pproach for 
investigating and understanding the level of cybersecurity 
awareness among the people of Nigeria. This approach  was 
adopted because we aim to gather data from a large sample of 
Nigerians. Thus, surveys in the form of questionnaires are the 
most suitable. Moreover, as the study seeks to get inputs from 
all over Nigeria, we decided that online surveys would be 
most a ppropriate. The language of the questionnaire was 
English and the questions were selected from questionnaires 
of similar studies in the lite rature notably, we selected 
questions from the studies by (Alarifi et al., 2012; Alotaibi et 
al., 2016) . The questionnaire comprises of 13 questions. The 
first part of the questionnaire contains questions that aim to 
obtain general informa tion such as users' demographics, level 
of education, internet skills, devices used to access the internet 
and purpose of internet usage. The second part of the 
questionnaire targets users' cybersecurity awar eness. We used 
eSurv, a popular free online surv ey tool recommended by 
(Farmer, Oakman, & Rice, 2016)  as the most appr opriate 
when collecting non -personally ide ntifiable data. We ensured 
a high response rate by distributin g the link to the 
questionnaire on social media platforms such as Facebook, 
Twitter, and WhatsApp. As a result, we were able to obtain 
176 responses. The period of the survey was between 
February and March 2019.  
III. RESULTS  
176 Nigerians took part in the study , there was no null 
response as all questions were answered by the participants. 
The questionnaire result which is in two parts; user 
demographic/general information and cybersecurity awareness 
is presented b elow.
 
User Demographic and General Info rmation  
152 (86.6%) were male and 24 (13.6%) were female.  This 
disproportionate female response confirmed findings in earlier 
studies particularly, the study by (Poushter, 2016)  were gender 
gaps on many aspects of tec hnology use, including the internet 
was o bserved in A frican nations. The percentage of the 
participants' age group to the nearest whole number (31%) were aged 18 -29, (65%) were aged 30 -39, (4%) were aged 40 -
49 and (1%) were aged 50 and over. Out of the 176 
participants, (2%) had secondary or primary educatio n and 
(98%) had tertiary education. With regards to the participants' 
internet access, (85%) said they had access to the internet 
throughout the day and (15%) said they access the internet 
only once or twice a day. In terms of internet skills, (3%) of 
the respondent had beginner skills, (51%) had intermediate 
and (46%) had expert skills. The popular devices used by 
respondents to access the internet are; pc/laptop (5%), 
smartphone (47%),  tablet (2%). A signif icant number of the 
respondents, (46%) said they used pc/laptops, smartphones, 
and ta blets to access the internet.  
Cyber Security Practices/Awareness  
In this section, we asked respondents about their 
cybersecurity practices. The first question asked if respondents 
physically s ecure their portable devices  (e.g. laptops, mobile 
phones, etc .), (67%) of respondents indicated that they kept 
their devices in a secure place, (28%) said they sometimes 
physically secure their devices while (5%) said they do not 
physically secure their d evices making them prone to theft or 
loss. Physically securing devices specifically those with 
sensitive data is an important practice in cybersecurity, as 
access to these devices by those with malicious intent can put 
organizations and individuals at risk.  
The second question asked respondents if they secure their 
devices using passwords. Securing computing devices using 
passwords is an important practice in cybersecurity. Users are 
encouraged to do this to prevent unauthorized access, which if 
occurred can lead to data and informati on loss and som etimes 
financial loss Users' identities can also be stolen and used in 
conducting criminal activities which may put them into legal 
trouble. Thus, protecting devices using a password is an 
important practice in cybe rsecurity. The results fro m our 
survey show that most of the respondents (94.3%) use 
passwords to log into their devices. These findings are 
presented in Table I.  
 
TABLE  I: Password use  
Do you secure your devices using login passwords? (N=176)  
 percentage  count  
Yes 94.3%  166 
No 5.7%  10 
 
Though, most of the respondents said they used a 
password to protect their devices however, the strength of the 
passwords determines the level of security they can pr ovide. 
Systems protected using weak pas swords are susceptible to 
break -in attack s. Therefore, we asked the respondents their 
password creation practice, we wanted to find if they create 
passwords using personal information such as names, date of 
birth, mobile phone number, etc. Table II below shows that 
more than half of the responden ts used personal information to 
create pas swords. We believe this is a poor security practice 
and is a well -known problem in the security domain that 
including personal i nformation in passwords aids attackers in 
passwords guessing or brute -force attack (Castelluccia, 
Chaabane, Dürmuth, & Perito, 2013) . It is believed that the International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science  
 ISSN  (Online) : 2455 -9024  
 
 
224 
 
Ahmad Rufa i, Salisu Modi, and Buhari Wadata , “A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria ,” International Research Journal of 
Advanced Engineering and Science , Volume 5, Issue 3, pp. 222-226, 2020 . 
limitation of human memory is the reason why users tend to 
create passwords using personal info rmation. The idea is that 
such passwords can be easily remembered (Li, Wang, & Sun, 
2017). Nowadays, most personal information on users can be 
found online without much hassle, thanks to the exponential 
growth in social network sites such as Facebook and Twitter 
coupled with users’ open attitudes of sharing personal 
information online, pas sword cracking is now easier than ever.  
 
TABLE  II: Use of personal information to cr eate passwords  
Do you create passwords using your p ersonal information such as names, 
DoB and phone number? (N=176)  
 Percent  Count(N)  
Yes 48.86%  86 
No 51.14%  90 
 
Users can reduce their susceptibility to password guessing 
or brute -force attack by creating strong passwords. Experts 
believed strong passwo rds are those that are long, have at least 
15 characters, contain a mix of characters and letters (both 
upper - and lower -case) (Empey, 2018) . We asked the 
respondents how strong they believe their passwords were 
although we had to make sure the respondents know what is 
considered a strong password. Therefore, we i ncluded this 
explanation as part of the que stion, then we asked them to rate 
how strong they consider their passwords are based on the 
provided information. Figure 1, shows 58% of the respondents 
think their passwords were  very strong, 39% believed their 
passwords were strong and 3% believed they have very weak 
passwords.  
 
 
Figure 1: Respondents’ password strength  
 
Another important practice in cybersec urity is the regular 
change of passwords. Users are frequently advised to change 
their pas swords regularly as part of a precautionary measure to 
ensure access is ended in case of account hijack. We asked 
respondents how often they changed their passwords.  12% 
said regularly, 66% said sometimes and 22% said never. When 
asked whether they share their passwords with someone, 15 
respon dents skipped this question. We believe this may be 
attributed to the sensitive nature of the question. Nevertheless, 
Table III presents the responses of 161 respondents that 
attempted this question . 
The findings in Table III shows that 62% of the 
respondents do not share their pas swords, perhaps for security 
concerns. Ho wever, it also shows that 24% of respondents share passwords with their families, 9% with friends and 5% 
with system administrators . This raises the question of why 
people share passwords with family and friends as opp osed to 
system administrators. Our fin dings are similar to those of 
(Alarifi et al., 2012) , where it was found that a high level of 
Saudi's (130 out of 363) share their pas swords with family 
members. (Alarifi et al., 2012)  believed it is due to the cultur al 
beliefs in Saudi, where members of the family are considered 
more trustworthy than those who are not members of the 
family. We believed a similar case applies in the Nigerian 
context.  
 
TABLE  III: Password sharing  
Do you share your passwords with any of the following? (N=161)  
 Percent  Count(N)  
Family  24.31%  44 
Friends  8.84%  16 
System Admini strators  4.97%  9 
None  61.88%  112 
 
Being safe online nowadays requires knowledge of 
existing cyber threats and the protection mechanism available. 
Aside from virus es, which most of the respondents are aware 
of, there are other cybersecurity threats including phishing, 
denial of service, identity theft, etc ., that may lead to loss of 
data, co nfidentiality, and availability of services. We asked the 
respondents to ind icate if they are aware of some popular 
cyber threats. We also compare the results from this question 
with the results of similar research conducted on Saudi 
Arabians by (Alarifi et al., 2012) , Table IV presents our 
findings.  
 
TABLE  IV: Cybersecurity threats awareness  
Knowledge of existing cyber threats  
 Saudi Arabia  Nigeria  
Viruses  87.2%  92.1%  
Spam emails  57.8%  86.9%  
Phishing  29.7%  44% 
Denial of Service (DoS)  7.4%  36.9% 
Identity theft  25.5%  73.8%  
 
The findings in Table IV show that most of the 
respondents are aware of the listed threats. Specifically, 
Viruses, Spam emails, and identity theft are the most known 
threats by respondents. The results from the survey also show 
that respondents from Nigeria tend to have a better knowledge 
of these threats. However, due to the differences in sample 
size, a conclusion cannot be made.  We also found that 
Phishing, despite being a serious threat in cybersecurity is not 
widely kn own by respondents from both Nigeria and Saudi 
Arabia. Phishing which is the use of social engineering 
techniques and technical su bterfuge to lure users to fake 
websites where their sensitive information such as credit cards 
are harvested is a major proble m in cybersecurity today. 
According to a recent report by the Anti -Phishing Working 
Group (ATPWG), the total number of phishing sites detected 
rose to 266, 387 in the 3rd quarter of 2019 from 182, 465 in 
the 2nd quarter of the same year. This almost double s the 138, 
328 phishing sites detected in the 4th quarter of 2018 (APWG, 
2019) . The trend can be seen in Figure 2. The APWG also  International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science  
 ISSN  (Online) : 2455 -9024  
 
 
225 
 
Ahmad Rufa i, Salisu Modi, and Buhari Wadata , “A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria ,” International Research Journal of 
Advanced Engineering and Science , Volume 5, Issue 3, pp. 222-226, 2020 . 
keeps a record of the number of unique phishing email s it 
receives from the general public and co nsumers, this emails 
also increases to 122,359 in the 3rd quarter of 2019, from 
112,163 in the 2nd quarter of the same year. Thus, there is a 
need for internet users in these countries to be enlightened 
more abou t these attacks and ways to ensure they do not fall 
victim to such attacks.  
 
 
Figure 2: Total number of phishing sites d etected from Jan 2019 to Sep 2019 
(Source: Anti -Phishing Working Group).  
 
While being aware of the existence of security threats is 
good, however, awareness and protection are two different 
things. I nternet users are required to be both aware of the 
existing threats and to employ several defensive mechanisms 
to protect themselves. Thus, it is good to know what security 
mechanisms are used  by the respondents to safeguard 
themselves against cyber threats.  When asked this question, 
51% of the r espondents said they used Anti -virus software, 
11% said they used Anti -spam software, 9% said they used 
Anti-spyware and 29% said they used internet s ecurity 
software. The results show that most of the respondents rely 
on Anti -virus and internet security software for protection. 
From the authors' experience, one of the reasons people in 
Nigeria rely on Anti -virus and internet security software for 
prote ction is because they are free. To co nfirm this, our next 
question asked respon dents to select the category of software 
they used for protection. Majority of the r espondents (48%) 
said they used freeware -a software that is freely distributed to 
users at no  cost, (21%) said they used licensed pr otective 
software and (31%) indicated they used both free and licensed 
software as a protective mechanism. The fact that the m ajority 
of the respondents used Freeware is a big concern as software 
in this category tend  to offer only the basic protection. 
(Mediati, 2010)  compared free and paid anti -virus software in 
terms of their malware detection capability, and sp eed. 
Findings from the study found that paid antivirus products do 
slightly better than their free counterparts. Specifically, paid 
anti-virus was better at both detecting and removal of 
malware.  
Cyber -criminals nowadays are very a ctive and are 
frequently launching more s ophisticated malicious software. It 
is often a race, between those providing the defensive 
mechanisms and the cybercriminals. Thus, anti -virus software 
vendors provide frequent updates to users as a response to these i ncreasing number of th reats. Users, therefore, are 
required to update their protection sof tware regularly. In line 
with this, we asked respondents their software update practice, 
(46%) said they update their protection software regularly, 
(40%) said they do that every three mon ths or more and (14%) 
said they do not update their protective software.  
The internet today is full of threats, which can affect the 
integrity of data. Viruses and trojans do not just steal users' 
data but can also erase them. Users, therefore, are often 
advised to back -up their data regularly. There is also the 
increasing use and d eployment of ransomware; a software that 
encrypts user's data and demands a ransom before it is 
decrypted. Thus, backing up data is an essential practice in 
cyber -security. We se ek to find users' data back -up practice by 
asking them how often they back -up their data. (43%) said 
regularly, (49%) said sometimes and (8%) said never. This, 
therefore, implies that over 50% of our respon dents do not 
have a good back -up practice, making them susceptible to data 
loss. 
In an earlier question, we asked our r espondents if were 
aware of the existence of some cyber threats, we presented the 
result of this question in Table IV. Equally, we also wanted to 
know the percentage of respondents who ex perienced such 
threats. Therefore, we asked respondents if they have 
experienced any cybercrime in the last few years. Our findings 
show that (43%) of our respondents have experienced 
cybercrime, while (57%) indicated they have not exper ienced 
such attacks . This result is alarming and shows that cyber -
crimes are also prevalent in Nigeria.  In contrast to what is 
believed by many, that cybercriminals only target developed 
countries, our results show that even countries in the 
developing world are being targe ted by criminals. The 
prevalence of cyber -crime has resulted in many countries 
creating agencies and establishing dedicated lines for their 
citizens to contact in case they fall victim to such crimes. The 
idea is to provide enough information to the s ecurity agencies 
to aid in preventing future occurrences and to also lunch an 
investig ation. The Nigerian Government established the 
Nigeria Computer Emergency Response Team (ngCERT). The 
agency is tasked with the responsibility of managing the risks 
of cyber t hreats in Nigeria's cyberspace through the 
coordination of incidence response and mitigation strategies 
(ngCERT, 2020) . Unfortunately, Table V shows that 77.84% 
of the respondents were not aware of where and how to report 
security incidents. This low awareness would affect the rate at 
which cybersecurity incidences are dealt w ith, also, it would 
affect the overall function of ngCERT.  
 
TABLE  V: Incident Reporting  
Are you aware of how and where to report c ybersecurity 
incidences in Nigeria? (N=176)  
 Percent  Count(N)  
Yes 22.16%  39 
No 77.84%  137 
Information Dissemination Chann els 
Table VI shows the responses of the r espondents when 
asked to select which i nformation dissemination channel 
should be used to create more awareness of cybersec urity in International Research Journal of Advanced Engineering and Science  
 ISSN  (Online) : 2455 -9024  
 
 
226 
 
Ahmad Rufa i, Salisu Modi, and Buhari Wadata , “A Survey of Cyber -Security Practices in Nigeria ,” International Research Journal of 
Advanced Engineering and Science , Volume 5, Issue 3, pp. 222-226, 2020 . 
Nigeria. The result shows that many of the respondents prefer 
awareness to be ca rried out using web portals (67.05%) and 
Advertisement (58.52%).  
 
TABLE  VI: Preferred information dissemin ation channels.  
Which of the following do you think would be an effective mechanism to 
disseminate and create awareness of cybe rsecurity in Nigeria (N=17 6) 
 Percent  Count(N)  
Web portals  67.05%  118 
Newspapers  54.55%  96 
Documentaries  36.93%  65 
Advertisements  58.52%  103 
Seminar/Workshops  53.41%  94 
Billboards/Posters  54.55%  96 
Other  15.34%  27 
IV. CONCLUSIONS  
Over the last few years, there has been a signi ficant 
increase in internet usage and the deployment of information 
and communic ation technologies in Nigeria. While this has 
improved the overall digital outlook of the country, it has also 
increased the number of cyberattacks. The recent report by 
Nigeri a's information technology body NITDA, co nfirms this 
increasing trend. It shows that businesses specifically SMEs 
are facing i ncreasing cyber threats. We believe the lack of 
good cybersecurity practices amongst the country's general 
public as evidenced by our findings in this paper, is a 
contributing factor in the increased cybersecurity incidence in 
the country. Thus, there is a need for the country to strengthen 
its cybersecurity measures, including increasing awareness 
campaigns and programs.  
 
Conflict o f interests  
The authors declare no conflict of interest.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Alarifi, A., Tootell, H., & Hyland, P. (2012). A study of information 
security awareness and practices in Saudi Arabia.  Paper presented at the 
2012 International Confe rence on Communications and Information 
Technology (ICCIT).  
[2] Alotaibi, F., Furnell, S., Stengel, I., & Papadaki, M. (2016). A survey of 
cyber -security awareness in Saudi Arabia.  Paper presented at the 2016 
11th International Conference for Internet Technolo gy and Secured 
Transactions (ICITST).  
[3] APWG . (2019). Phishing Activity Trends Report Retrieved from https://docs.apwg.org/reports/apwg_trends_report_q3_2019.pdf  
[4] Castelluccia, C., Chaabane, A., Dürmuth, M., & Perito, D. (2013). When 
privacy meets security: Leveraging personal information for password 
cracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1304.6584 .  
[5] Empey, C. (2018). How to create a strong password. Retrieved from 
https://blog.avast.com/strong -password -ideas  
[6] Farmer, R., Oakman, P., & Rice, P. (2016). A review of free online 
survey tools for undergraduate students. MSOR Connections, 15 (1), 71 -
78.  
[7] ITU. (2019). Statistics. Retrieve d from https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -
D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx  
[8] ITUnews. (2018). New ITU statistics show more than half the world is 
now using the Internet Retrieved fr om https://news.itu.int/itu -statistics -
leaving -no-one-offline/  
[9] Kshetri, N. (2010). Diffusion and effects of cyber -crime in developing 
economies. Third World Quarterly, 31 (7), 1057 -1079.  
[10] Lewis, J. (2018). Economic Impact of Cybercrime No Slowing Down . 
Retrieved from https://csis -prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs -
public/publication/economic -impact -
cybercrime.pdf?kab1HywrewRzH17N9wuE24soo1IdhuHd&utm_source
=Press&utm_campaign=bb9303a e70-
EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2018_02_21&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0
_7623d157be -bb9303ae70 -1940938  
[11] Mediati, N. (2010). Free vs. Fee: Free and Paid Antivirus Programs 
Compared. Retrieved from 
https://www.pcworld.com/article/210589/free_versus_fee_free_and_pai
d_antivirus_programs_compared.html  
[12] NCC. (2018). Industry Statistics . Retrieved from Nigeria: 
https://www.ncc.gov.ng/stakeholder/statistics -reports/industry -
overview#view -graphs -tables  
[13] ngCERT. (2020). About Us. Retrieved from 
https://www.cert.gov.n g/about  
[14] Osuagwu, P. (2019). CYBER A TTACK: 60% of Nigerian businesses 
attacked in 2018. Retrieved from 
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2019/03/cyber -attack-60-of-nigerian -
businesses -attacked -in-2018/  
[15] Poushter, J. (2016). Smartphone ownership and internet usage continues 
to climb in emerging economies. Pew Research Center, 22 , 1-44.  
[16] Poushter, J., Bishop, C., & Chwe, H. (2018). Smartphone ownership on 
the rise in emerging economies. Retrieved from 
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2018/06/19/2 -smartphone -
ownership -on-the-rise-in-emergin g-economies/  
[17] Symantec. (2017). 2017 Norton Cyber Security Insights Report Global 
Results . Retrieved from 
https://www.symantec.com/content/dam/symante c/docs/about/2017 -
ncsir -global -results -en.pdf  
[18] Vanguard. (2010). Internet: 13 years of growth from ground zero in 
Nigeria from 1960 - 1996. Retrieved from 
https://www.vanguardngr.com/2010/10/internet -13-years -of-growth -
from -ground -zero-in-nigeria -from -1960 -1996/  
 
 